THE BENEFIT OF Christ's Death, or the glorious Riches of Gods free Grace,
which every true believer receives by Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

First compiled and printed in the Italian tongue: And afterward translated
and printed in the French tongue: And out of French into English, By A. G.

1 Cor. 2. 2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ and him crucified. Phil. 3. 8. Yea doubtless I count all things but
loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus. The third Edition.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Andrew Hebb dwelling at the sign of the Bell in
Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

To the Reader.
THou have here delivered to thee, good Reader, a little Treatise, first
written in the Italian tongue, and printed at Venice, after that, translated
into the French language, and printed at Lions, and now translated and printed
for thee to read in the English tongue. Enquire not of the Author, he is
unknown, and to know him would do thee but little good. Read the book
devoutly, regard the matter of it attentively, it may do thee much good in
these evil days. This may be counted among the greatest evils with which this
age is infected, that they which are called Christians, are miserably divided
about Christ. And yet in truth (as the Apostle says unto us,) there is but one
God, which is the Father, of 1 Cor. 8. 6
whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him. To discourse on this division and the cause thereof,
would be to some pleasing, to some it would be displeasing. For what one truth
can please minds so diversely divided? would God it could please all to become
one in that one Christ, whose name we all do carry. In this little book is
that benefit, which comes by Christ crucified, to the Christians, truly and
comfortably handled: which benefit if all Christians did truly understand and
faithfully embrace, this division would vanish away, and in Christ the
Christians should become one. To this end read this book, and much good in
Christ may it do to all them which do read it.

Amen.
The Contents of this BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Original sin, and man's wretchedness. CHAP. II. How the Law was
given by God, to the end that we knowing our sin, and not having any hope of
ability to make our selves righteous by our own works, should have recourse
to Gods mercy, and unto the Righteousness of Faith. CHAP. III. How the
forgiveness of our sins, Justification, and Salvation, depend only on Jesus
Christ. CHAP. IIII. Of the effects of lively faith, and of the union of man's
soul with Christ. CHAP. V. In what wise the Christian is clothed with Jesus
Christ. CHAP. VI. Certain remedies against distrust.


Of the benefit that Christians receive by Jesus Christ crucified.
CHAP. I. Of Original sin, and of man's wretchedness.
THe holy Scripture says, that God The state of man before and after that he
had sinned.
created man after his own Image and likeness, making him, as in respect of
his body, impassible; and as touching his Soul, righteous, true, good,
merciful, and holy. But after that, he being overcome with desire of
knowledge, had eaten of the Apple that God had forbidden him, he lost the said
Image and likeness of God, and became like the brute beasts, and like the
devil who had abused him. For as touching his Soul, he became unrighteous,
untrue, cruel, pitiless, and the enemy of God: and as touching his body, he
became passible, and subject to a thousand inconveniences and diseases: and not
only like, but also inferior to brute beasts. And even as if our forefathers
had obeyed God, they should have left us their righteousness and holiness as
an heritage: even so by being disobedient unto God, they have left us the
Inheritance of unrighteousness, wickedness, and Gods displeasure, in such
sort as it is impossible for us (through our own strength) to love God, or to
frame our selves unto his holy will. Nay we be enemies unto him, as to one that
must punish our sins, because he is a just Judge, and therefore can we not
any more trust wholly to his holy mercy. To be short, our whole nature was
corrupted by Adams sin. And like as erst it had superiority above all
creatures, so became it an underling to all, the bondslaue of Satan, sin, and
death, and condemned to the miseries of hell. Also he lost his judgment
altogether, and began to say that good was evil, and evil good: esteeming
false things to be true, and true things to be false. Which thing the Prophet
considering, says: that all men are liars, and that there is not one that
Psalm. 114.
does good, because the devil like a stout man Psalm. 14.
of Arms, rules his own palace, that is to wit, the world, whereof he became
the prince and lord. There is no tongue that can express the thousandth part
of our misery, in that we being created by Gods own hand, have lost the said
Image of God, and are become like the devil, and too like to him in nature and
condition, willing whatsoever he wills, and likewise refusing whatsoever he
misliketh. By reason whereof being given up for a prey to that wicked spirit,
there is no sin so grievous, which every one of us would not be ready to do,
if the Grace of God stay us not. And this our deprivation of righteousness,
and this forward Original sin.
inclination to all unrighteousness and nanghtinesse, is called original
sin: the which we bring with us from out of our mothers womb, so as we be
borne the children of wrath: and it has had his first spring from our first
fathers, and is the cause and fountain of all the sins and iniquities that
we commit; wherefrom if we will be delivered and return again to our first
innocence, to recover the Image of God: first of all it stands us on hand to
know our own wretchedness. For like as no man will ever A very good
comparison.
seek to the Physicion, except he know himself to be diseased, or acknowledge
the excellency of the Physicion, and how much he is bound unto him, except he
know his own disease to be pestilent and deadly: even so no man acknowledges
Jesus Christ the only Physicion of our souls, except he first know his own
soul to be diseased: neither can he perceive the excellency of him, nor how
much he is bound unto him, except he first enter into the knowledge of his own
outrageous sins, and of the incurable infirmity, which we have received
through the infection of our first fathers.

CHAP. II. How the Law was given by God, to the end that we knowing our sin,
and having not any hope of ability to make our selves righteous by our own
works, should have recourse to Gods mercy, and unto the righteousness of faith.
OUR God therefore minding of his infinite goodness and mercy to send his
only Son to set free the wretched children of Adam, and knowing that first
of all it behooued him to make them understand their own misery: chose
Abraham, (in whose seed he promised to bless all Nations,) and accepted his
offspring for his peculiar people, unto whom, (after their departure out of
Egypt, and deliverance from the bondage of Pharao,) he by the means of Moses,
gave the Law, which forbids all lusting, and commands us to love GOD with
all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, in such wise, as
our whole trust be reposed in him, and we ready to leave our life for his sake,
to suffer all torments in our members, and to be bereft of all our goods,
dignities, and honors for the love of our God, choosing to dye, rather then to
do any thing that may dislike him, be it never so little: and doing all things
in that behalf with a merry heart, and with all forwardness and
cheerfulness. Moreover, the Law commands us Who is our neighbor.
to love our neighbor as our self, meaning by the Neighbor, all manner of
men, as well friends as foes: and it wills us to do to every man as we would
be done unto, and to love other men's cases as our own. And so by looking in
this holy Law as in a clear looking glass, man does out of hand espy his own
great imperfection and unableness to obey Gods Commandments, and to render
him the honor and love which he ought to yield to his Maker. The first office
of the Law then, is to make sin known, as The first office or duty of the
Law, Romans 3. and 7.
Saint Paul affirms. And in another place he says, I had not known what
sin is, but by the Law. The second office of the Law, is to make sin
increase, forasmuch as we being quite gone from the obeying of God, The second
office of the Law.
and become bond-slaues to the devil, being full of wicked works and
inordinate affections, cannot abide that God should forbid us to lust, which
increases so much the more, as it is the more prohibited: by reason whereof
Saint Paul says, that sin was dead, but the Law came and raised it up
again, and so it became out of measure great. The third office of the Law, is
to show the The third office of the Law.
wrath and judgment of God, who threatens death and everlasting punishment,
to such as keep not the Law throughout in all points. For the holy Scripture
says, Cursed Deuteronomy. 27.
is he that performs not thoroughly all the things that are written in the
book of the Law. And therefore Saint Paul says, That 2 Cor. 3.
the Law is a ministry, and that it brings forth wrath. The Law then having
discovered sin, and increased it, and showed forth the wrath and indignation
of God who threatens death, executes his fourth office, which is to put a man
in fear, who thereupon The 4th. office of the Law.
falls into sorrowfulness, and would feign satisfy the Law: but forasmuch
as he sees clearly, that he is not able: he waxes angry against God, and
would with all his heart that there were no God, because he fears to be sore
chastised and punished by him, according as Saint Paul says, That the wisdom
of the flesh is the enemy of God: Because Romans 4.
it neither is, nor can be subject to the Law of God. The fifth office of the
Law (which is the principal end, and the most excellent The fifth office of
the Law.
and necessary office of it) is to constrain a man to go unto Jesus Christ,
in like wise as the Hebrews, being dismayed, were constrained to appeal unto
Moses, saying: Let not the Lord speak unto us, lest Exodus 20.
we dye, but speak thou unto us, and we will obey thee in all things. And the
Lord answered: Verily, they have spoken exceeding well. Yea, they were not
praised for any other thing, then for their desiring of a Mediator betwixt God
and them, which was Moses, who represented Jesus Christ, that should be the
Advocate and Mediator between God and man. In respect whereof God said unto
Moses, I will raise up a Prophet among their brethren like unto thee, and I
will put my Word in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all the things
that I shall command him, and I will punish all those that will not obey my
Word, which he shall speak in my name.

CHAP. III. How the forgiveness of our sinnaes, our justification, and our
salvation depend upon Jesus Christ.
When as our God then had sent the said great Prophet which he had promised us
(who is his only Son,) to the end that he should set us free from the curse
Coloss. 3.
of the Law, and reconcile us unto our God: that he should make our will fit
for good works, healing our free will, and repairing in us the foresaid Image
of God which we had lost through the fault of our first parents: Acts 4.
forasmuch as we know that under heaven there is none other name given unto men
whereby we may be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ: Let us run unto him
with the feet of lively faith, and cast our selves between his arms, since he
allureth us so graciously, crying: Come unto me, all you that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will refresh Matthew. 11.
you: What comfort or what joy in this life can be comparable to this his
saying there, when as a man feeling himself oppressed with the intolerable
weight of his sins, understands so sweet and amiable words of the Son of
God, who promises so graciously to refresh and rid him of his great pains?
But all the matter lies in acknowledging our own weakness and misery in
good earnest. For he shall never know what is sweet, who has not tasted of the
sour. And therefore Jesus Christ says: If any man John 7.
thirst, let him come to me and drink: as if he had meant to say, If a man
know not himself to be a sinner, nor thirst after righteousness, he cannot
taste of the sweetness of Jesus Christ, how sweet it is to talk of him, to
think of him, and to follow his most holy life. But when we once thoroughly
know our own infirmity by means of the Law: let us hearken to Saint John
Baptist, who points us to the Sovereign Physician with his finger, saying:
Behold the Lamb of God, John 8.
which takes away the sins of the world. For he it is that delivers us
from the heavy Gal. 3.
yoke of the Law, abrogating and disanulling the curses and sharp threatenings
of the same: healing all our infirmities: reforming our free will, returning us
to our ancient innocence, and repayring in us the Image of our God: insomuch
that (according to Saint Paul's saying) like as by Adam we be all 1 Cor. 15.
dead: so by Jesus Christ we are all quickened. And it is not to be believed
that the sin of Adam, which we have by inheritance from him, should be of more
force then the righteousness of Christ, that which also we inherit by faith.
It seems that man has great cause to complain, that (without any reason
why,) he is conceived and borne in Psalm. 50.
sin, and in the wickedness of his parents, by means of whom, death
reigns over all men. But now is all our sorrow taken away, inasmuch as by a
like mean (without any occasion given on our behalf) righteousness and
everlasting life are come by Jesus Christ, and by him death is slain, whereof
Saint Paul makes a very godly discourse, which I purpose to set down here
following. Wherefore (says he) like as by one Romans 5.
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: even so death went over
all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned. For until the Law, sin was in the
world: but sin was not regarded as long as there was no Law. Nevertheless
death reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over them also that sinned not after
the like manner of the transgression of Adam, who was a figure of him that was
to come. But yet the gift is not so as is the offense: for if through the
offense of one, many be dead: much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace
which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. Neither is the gift
so as that which entered in by one that sinned. For the fault came of one
offense unto condemnation, but the gift is of many offenses to justification.
For if by the offense of one, death reigned through one: much more shall they
which receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, reign
in life through one, that is, Jesus Christ. Likewise then, as by the offense of
one, that fault came on all men to condemnation, so by the righteousness of
one, the benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life. For as
by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one,
shall many be also made righteous. Moreover the Law entered thereupon, that the
offense should abound: nevertheless where sin abounded, there grace abounded
much more, that as sin had reigned unto death, so might grace also reign by
righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. By these
words of St. Paul, we manifestly perceive the thing to be true, which we have
said heretofore: that is to wit, that the Law was given to make sin known:
which sin we do also know, not to be of greater force then Christ's
righteousness, where-through we be justified before God. For even as Jesus
Christ is stronger then Adam was: so is his righteousness more mighty then
the sin of Adam. And if the sin of Adam was sufficient enough to make all
men sinners and children of wrath without any misdeed of our own: much more
shall Christ's righteousness be of greater force to make us all righteous and
the children of grace, without any of our own good works: which cannot be
good, unless that before we do them, we our selves be made good, as
Augustine also affirms. Hereby a man may know in what The greatness of sin
ought not to cause despair.
error they be, who by reason of some great offense, despair of Gods good
will, imagining that he is not willing to forgive, cover, and pardon all sin,
having already punished and chastised all our sins and iniquities in his own
only begotten and dearly beloved Son, and consequently granted a general
pardon to all mankind, which every body enjoys that believes the Gospel,
that is to say, which believes the happy tidings that the Apostles have
published through the whole world, saying: We beseech you for Jesus Christ's
sake, Be ye reconciled unto God: 1 Cor. 5.
for he that never knew sin, was made a sacrifice for our sin, that we
might become righteous in him. The Prophet Esaias foreseeing this great goodness
of God, writes these heavenly words, which do so well paint out the passion
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the cause thereof, as it is not to be found
better described, even in the writings of the Apostles. Who (says he) will
believe our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? But he shall
grow up before him as a branch and as a root out of a dry ground, he has
neither form nor beauty: when we shall see him, there shall be no form that
we should desire him: He is despised and rejected of men, he is a man full of
sorrows, and has experience of infirmities, we hid as it were our faces from
him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he has borne our
infirmities and carried our sorrows, yet we did judge him as plagued and
smitten of God, and humbled: but he was wounded for our transgressions: he was
broken for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with
his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray: we have turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us
all: he was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth.
He is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the shearer
is dumme, so he opens not his mouth. O great unkindness! O thing
abominable! that we which profess our selves Christians, and hear that the
Son of God has taken all our sins upon him, and washed them out with his
precious blood, suffering himself to be fastened to the Cross for our sakes:
should nevertheless make as though we would justify our selves, and purchase
forgiveness of our sins by our own works: as who would say, that the deserts,
righteousness and bloodshed of Jesus Christ were not enough to do it, unless
we came to put to our works and righteousness which are altogether defiled
and spotted with self-loue, selfe-liking, selfe-profit, and a thousand other
vanities, for which we have need to crave pardon at Gods hand, rather than
reward! Neither do we think of the threatenings, which S. Paul uses to the
Galatians, who having been deceived by false Preachers, believed not that the
Justification by Faith was sufficient of it self, but went about still to be
made righteous by the Law. Unto whom Saint Paul says, Jesus Christ Gal. 5.
shall nothing profit you that justify your selves by the Law: for you be
fallen from Grace, because that we through the Spirit of faith, wait for the
hope of righteousness. Now if the seeking of righteousness and forgiveness
of sins, by the keeping An excellent comparison of the inability of our own
works.
of the Law which God gave upon Mount Sinai with so great glory and majesty, be
the denying of Christ and of his Grace: what shall we say to those that will
needs justify themselves before God, by their own laws and obseruances? I
would wish that such folks should a little compare the one with the other, and
afterward give Judgment themselves. God minds not to do that honor, not to
give that glory to his own Law, and yet they will have him to give it to men's
laws and ordinances. But that honor is given only to his only begotten
Son, who alone by the sacrifice of Hebr. 7. John 12.
his death and passion, has made full amends for all our sins past, present,
and to come, as S. Paul and S. John declare. Wherefore as often as we apply
this satisfaction of Jesus Christ, unto our souls by faith: out of all doubt
we obtain forgiveness of our sins, and become good and righteous before
God, through his righteousness. And therefore after that S. Paul has said,
that as touching the righteousness of the law, he had lived Philip. 3.
unblameable: he adds, And yet whatsoever I have gained by it, I have
accounted it in all respects to be but loss, for the love of Christ. And
specially I esteem all things to be loss, for the excellent knowledge of
Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have counted all things to be loss, and deem
them but as dung, so I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine
own righteousness which is of the law, but the righteousness which is by the
faith of Jesus Christ, which righteousness is given of God, I mean the
righteousness of faith, that I may come to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. O
most notable words, which all Christians ought to have engraven in their
hearts, praying God to make them to taste it perfectly. Lo, how S. Paul
shows plainly, that whosoever knows Christ aright, esteems all the works
of the law to be hurtful, for so much as they make us to swerve from our trust
in Jesus Christ, to whom every man ought to impute his salvation, and to trust
only unto him alone. And to enforce this sentence the more, he adds further,
that he esteems all things but as dung, so he may gain Christ, and be found
incorporated in him: declaring thereby, that whosoever trusts in his own
works, and pretends to justify himself by them, gets not Jesus Christ,
neither is ingrafted into him. And forasmuch as the whole mystery of our faith
consists in the truth hereof: to the end we might the better understand what
he meant to say: he adds and repeateth oftentimes, that he had nothing to do
with all the outward justification and all the righteousness that is grounded
upon the keeping of the law, but that he would clothe himself with the
righteousness which God gives by faith, to all them that believe that all our
sins are fully chastised and punished in Jesus Christ: and that Jesus Christ
(as S. Paul says) 1 Cor. 18.
is made our wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption, to the end
(as it is written) that he which will glory, should glory in the Lord, and not
in his own works. Very true it is, that in the holy Scriptures there are some
texts to be found, which being misunderstood, seem to gainesay this holy
doctrine of S. Paul's, and to attribute justification and remission of sins
unto works, and to charity. But those authorities have already been well
expounded by some, who have showed plainly, that such as have understood them
in the sense aforesaid, understood them not aright. Wherefore my deare-beloued
brethren, let us not follow the fond opinion of the bewitched Galatians, but
rather let us follow the truth which St. Paul teaches us, and let us give the
whole glory of our justification unto Gods mercy, and to the merits of his
Son, who by his own bloodshed has set us free from the Sovereignty of the
Law, and from the tyranny of sin and death: and has brought us into the
Kingdom of God, to give us life and endless felicity. I say yet further, that
he has delivered us from the dominion of the law, insomuch as he has given us
his holy Spirit, who teaches us all truth, and that he has satisfied the Law
to the full, and given the same satisfaction unto all his members, (that is to
wit, to all true Christians) so as they may safely appear at Gods Throne,
because they be clothed with the righteousness of his How man is delivered
and set free from the curse of the Law. Gal. 3. Romans 8. Col. 2.
Christ, and by him delivered from the curse of the Law. Then can not the law
any more accuse us or condemn us, nor move our affections or appetites, nor
increase sin in us. And therefore S. Paul says, that the obligation which
was against us, is cancelled by Jesus Christ, and discharged upon the tree of
the Cross, insomuch as he has set us free from the subjection of the Law, and
consequently from the tyranny of sin and death, which can no more hold us
oppressed, because it is overcome by Jesus Christ in his resurrection, and so
consequently by us which are his members, in such manner, that we may say with
Saint Paul, and with the Prophet Osee, Death is quite vanquished and destroyed.
O death, where is thy sting! O Hell where is thy victory! The sting of Death is
1 Cor. 15.
sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But God be praised, who has
granted us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. He is Genesis 8.
the blessed Seed that has crushed the head of the venomous Serpent, that is
to wit, of the devil, insomuch that all those which believe in Jesus Christ,
reposing their whole trust in his grace, do overcome sin, death, the Devil
and hell, as Christ has done. He is that blessed Seed of Abraham, in the
which God has promised blessedness to all Nations. It behooued every
particular person to fight with the said horrible Serpent, and to deliver
himself from that curse. But that enterprise was so great, that all the force
of the whole World knit together, was not able to go through with it. Wherefore
our God the Father of mercy, being moved with compassion of our miseries, has
given us his only begotten Son, who has delivered us from the venime of the
Serpent, and is himself become our Blessedness and Righteousness,
conditionally that we accept the same, renouncing all our own outward
iustifications. Then my dear brethren, let us embrace the righteousness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and let us make it ours by means of faith: let us
assure our selves that we be righteous, not for our own works, but through
the merits of Jesus Christ, and let us live merrily and assured, that the
righteousness of Jesus Christ has utterly done away all our unrighteousness,
and made us good, righteous, and holy before God, who beholding us ingrafted
into his Son by faith, esteems us not now any more as the children of Adam,
but as his own children, and has made us heirs of all his riches, with his
own begotten Son.

CHAP. IIII. Of the effects of lively faith, and of the union of man's Soul
with Jesus Christ.
THis holy faith works after such a How we receive the likeness of God.
sort in us, that he which believes that Jesus Christ has taken all his
sins upon him, becomes like unto Christ, and overcomes sin, the devil,
death and hell. And the reason thereof is this: namely, that the Church (that
is to wit every faithful soul) is Christ's wife, and Christ is her husband.
For we know how the law of marriage is, that of two, they become one selfsame
A very good similitude, expressing the manner how our sins are taken away by
Christ.
thing, being two in one flesh, and that the goods and substance of either of
them become common to them both: by means whereof the husband says, that the
dowry of the wife is his, and likewise the wife says that her husbands house
and all his riches are hers: and of a truth so they are: for otherwise they
should not be one flesh, as the Scripture says. After the same manner has God
married his only begotten and deare-beloued Son to the faithful soul, which
has not any other thing peculiar of her own, save only sin, and yet the
Son of God has not disdained to take her for his wel-beloued Spouse,
together with her peculiar dowry, which is sin. And now by reason of the
union which is in this holy marriage, look what the one has, is also the
others. Jesus Christ therefore says thus: The dowry of man's soul my dear
wife, (that is to wit her sins and transgressings of the Law, Gods wrath
against her, the boldness of the devil over her, the prison of hell, and all
other her evils) are become mine, and are in my power to do what I list with
them. Wherefore it is at my choice to deal with them at my pleasure, and
therefore I will put out the handwriting which is against the soul my wife, I
will take it out of the way, I will fasten it to my cross in mine own body,
and in the same will I spoil principalities and powers, and make a show of
them openly, and triumph over them, and consume them utterly unto nothing.

Now when God saw his Son, who knew no sin, neither had any sin in him,
thus willingly taking on him the foulness of our iniquity, he made him to be
sin for us, even the very sacrifice for our sin: and did sharply punish our
sin in him, putting him to death, even the death of the Cross. Howbeit
forasmuch as he was his wel-beloued Matthew. 28. Phil. 2.
and obedient Son, he would not leave him to death, nor suffer his holy One
to see corruption: but raised him up from death to life, giving him all power
in heaven and earth, and set him at his right hand in glory. Now then the wife
likewise with exceeding great joy, does say: The Realms and Kingdoms of my
most dear husband and Savior are mine, by him I am an heir of Heaven, my
husbands riches (that is to wit, his holiness, his innocence, his
righteousness and his Godhead, together with all his virtue and might) are
mine and for me: and therefore in him I am holy, innocent, righteous, and
godly, and there is not any spot in me. I am well-fauoured and fair, inasmuch
as my lawful husband has not any blemish in him, but is altogether goodly and
fair. And since that he is wholly mine, and so consequently all that he has is
mine, and all that he has is pure and holy; it follows that I also am pure
and holy. Therefore to begin at his most innocent birth: he has thereby
sanctified the birth of his Spouse conceived in sin. The godly childhood and
youth of the Bridegroom, has justified the childish and youthful life of his
dearly beloved Bride. For the love and union that is betwixt the soul of a
true Christian, and the Bridegroom Jesus Christ, makes all the works of
either of them, to be common to them both. By reason whereof, when a man says,
Jesus Christ has fasted, Jesus Christ has prayed, Jesus Christ was heard of
the Father, raised the dead, drove devils out of men, healed the sick, dyed,
rose again, and ascended into Heaven: Likewise a man may say, that a Christian
man has done all the selfsame works, for so much as the works of Christ are
the works of the Christian, because has done them for him. Verily a man may
say that the Christian has bin nailed to the Cross, buried, raised again, is
gone up into heaven, become the child of God, and made partaker of the Godhead.
On the other side all the works that a Christian man does, are Christ's works,
because it is his will to take them for his. And forasmuch as they be
imperfect, and he thoroughly perfect, and cannot away with any imperfect thing:
he has made them perfect with his virtues, to the end that his wife should be
always joyful and well contented, and not be afraid of any thing, assuring
her self, that although there be yet still some default in her works, yet
notwithstanding they be acceptable to God in respect of his Son, upon whom he
has his eyes always fastened. O that unmeasurable goodness of God! How
greatly is the Christian bound unto God? there is no love of man, be it never
so great, that may be compared with the love that God bears to the soul of
every faithful Christian, whereof Christ is the Bridegroom. Whereupon S. Paul
says, that Jesus Christ has so loved his wife the Church, which is builded of
living Ephesians. 5.
stones (that is, of the souls of the believing Christians) that for to
sanctify her, he has offered himself to the death of the Cross, cleansing
her with the washing of water, by his Word, to join her to himself a glorious
Church, without spot or wrinkle or other like thing: but that she should be
holy and unblameable (that is to wit, like unto him in holiness and innocence)
and also be the true and lawful daughter of God, who has loved the world so
well, that (as Jesus Christ John 3.
himself says) he has given his only begotten Son, to the end that every
one which believed in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. For
God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world: but to the end that
the World might be saved by him, insomuch that he which believes in him,
shall not be damned. Some man How the faithful man's soul is assured of his
being married unto Christ.
might demand after what manner the union of this holy Marriage is made, and
how the Soul which is the Bride, and her Bridegroom Jesus Christ, are knit
together? What assurance can I have, that my soul is united unto Jesus Christ,
and become his Spouse? How can I assuredly glory that I am Queen and Mistress
of his great riches, as a wife may? I can easily believe that other folks
shall receive this honor and glory: but I cannot persuade my self that I am
one of those same to whom God has given so great grace: For I know mine own
wretchedness and imperfection. My deare-beloued brother, I answer thee, that
thine assurance consists in true and lively faith, wherewith (as S. Peter
says) God cleanses men's hearts: Acts 5.
And this faith is grounded in the believing of the Gospel, that is to say, in
the believing of the glad tidings which have bin published on Gods behalf
through the whole world: which tidings contains in effect, that God has used
the rigorousnesse of his justice against Matthew. 2.
Jesus Christ, chastising and punishing all our sins in him. And whosoever
receives this good tidings, and believes it steadfastly, has the true faith,
and does enjoy the forgiveness of his sins, and is also reconciled unto God:
and of the child of wrath, is become the child of Grace: and recovering the
Image of God, enters into the Kingdom of God, and is made the Temple of 2
Cor. 3.
God, who marries man's soul to his only Son, by the mean of this faith,
which faith is a work of God, and the gift of God, as S. Paul says
oftentimes. And God gives it unto those whom he calls to him, of purpose to
justify them, and to glorify them, and to give them everlasting life,
according as our Lord Jesus Christ witnesses, saying: This is the will of him
that sent me, even that every one which sees the Son and believes John 6.
in him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up again at the
latter day. And like as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness: so must
the Son John 3.
of man be lifted up, to the end that every one which believes in him, might
not perish, but have life everlasting. Also he says to Martha: He that
believes in me, shall live, John 11.
although he were dead, and every one that lives and believes in me, shall
not dye for ever. And to a company of the Jews he says: I am come a light
into the world, to the end that every man which believes in me, should 1 Ioh.
12.
not abide in darkness. And S. John in his Epistle says: Herein appeared the
love of God 1 John 4.
toward us, for that God is love, and sent his only begotten Son into this
world, that we might live through him. And herein is love known, not in that
we loved God, but in that he loved us, and sent his Son to make atonement for
our sins. And moreover he sent him to destroy our enemies. For the bringing
whereof to pass, he made him partaker of our flesh, and of our blood, as says
Saint Paul, to the end that by his death, he might destroy him that had the
dominion of Heb. 2.
death, that is to wit, the devil, and set all such at liberty, as were
subject to bondage all their life long, for fear of death. Seeing then that we
have records of the holy Scripture, concerning the promises, whereof we have
spoken heretofore, and concerning many other promises that are dispersed in
diverse places of the same: we cannot doubt of it. And for so much as the holy
Scripture speaks to all in general, none of us ought to distrust in
himself, that the selfsame thing which the Scripture says, should not
belong particularly to himself. And to the end that this point, wherein lies
and consists the whole mystery of our holy faith, may be understood the
better: let us put the case that some good and holy King cause the Proclamation
to be A very goodly similitude, and fit for the expressing of the free
forgiveness of sins for Jesus Christ's sake.
made through his whole Realm by the sound of a Trumpet, that all Rebels and
banished men shall safely return home to their houses, because that at the
suite and desert of some dear friend of theirs, it has pleased him to pardon
them: certainly none of those Rebels ought to doubt of the obtaining of true
pardon of his rebellion, but rather ought assuredly to return home to his
house, to live under the shadow of that holy King. And if he will not return,
he shall bear the penalty of it, because that through his own unbelief he
dies in exile and in the displeasure of his Prince. But this good King is the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, who for the obedience and desert of our good brother
Jesus Christ, has pardoned us all our sins, and (as we have said before) has
made open Proclamation through the whold world, that all of us may safely
return into his kingdom. Wherefore he that believes this proclamation, does
straight-wayes return into Gods kingdom (whereout we were driven by the
offense of our first parents,) and blessedly governed by Gods holy Spirit. And
he that gives no credit to the said proclamation, shall never enjoy the said
general pardon: but for his vnbeliefes fake shall abide in banishment under
the tyranny of the devil, and live and dye in extreme misery, living and dying
in the displeasure of the King of heaven and earth: and that justly. For we
cannot commit a greater offense against this good God, then to account him as a
liar and deceiuer: which verily we do, in not giving credit to his promises.
O how passing heavy is this deadly sin of unbelief? which (so far forth as
is possible) bereaueth God of his glory and perfection: besides the great harm
that it does to a man's self, which is his own damnation and the endless
torment of his soul, which the miserable conscience feels even in this life.
But on the contrary, he that comes unto GOD with assuredness of this faith,
believing him without any mistrust or doubt of his promises, and warranting
himself for a certainty, that God will perform all that ever he has
promised him: gives all the glory unto God, and lives continually in rest and
endless joy, evermore praising and thanking the Lord God, for choosing him to
the glory of 1 Cor. 1.
the eternal life. And hereof they have an assured earnest penny and gage,
that is to wit, the Son of God, whom they take for their most loving
Bridegroom, the blood of whom, has made their hearts so drunken, that through
this passing holy belief, there is in the Christian heart engendered so lively
a hope, and so certain a trust of Gods mercy toward us, and such an operation
is wrought in us, as we rest our selves wholly upon God, leaving the whole care
of us unto him in such wise, that being thoroughly assured of Gods good will,
we are not afraid, neither of the devil, nor of his ministers, nor of death.
Which holy and steadfast trust of Gods mercy, inlargeth our heart, cheereth it
up, and with certain marvelous sweet affections directs it unto GOD,
filling it and setting it on fire with an exceeding fervent love. And therefore
Paul incourageth us to Heb. 4.
go with all boldness to the Throne of grace: and he counsels us that we
should not shake it off, nor make light of our trust, which has great
recompense and reward. But this so holy and divine affiance is gendred in our
hearts by the working of the H. Ghost, who is communicated unto us by faith,
which Heb. 10.
never goes without the love of God. And hereof it comes, that we be
provoked to do good works with a certain liveliness and effectual
cheerfulness: whereby we gather such a strength and inclination to do them,
as we be thoroughly ready and forward, to do and suffer all intolerable things
for the love and glory of our most gracious and merciful Father, who has
enriched us with so abundant grace through Jesus Christ, and of his enemies
made us his most dear children. This true faith is no sooner given a man, but
he is by and by endued and imprinted with a certain violent love of good
works, to yield right sweet and amiable fruits both unto God and likewise to
his neighbor, as a very good and fruitful tree. And it is no more possible
that he should be otherwise, then it is possible that a faggot should be set on
fire, and not cast light immediately. This is the holy faith, without the which
it is impossible that any man should please Heb. 8.
God, and whereby all the holy men (as well of the old Testament as of the New)
have bin saved, according as S. Paul witnesses of Abraham: concerning whom,
the Scripture says, That Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for
righteousness. And therefore Romans 4. Genesis 15.
he says a little before: We believe that a Romans 2.
man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. And in another place
he says: So then, in that time shall the remnant be saved, according to the
election of grace: and if they be saved by grace, then is it not by works, for
then were grace no grace. And to the Galatiaus he says, It is a manifest
matter that no man becomes righteous before Gal. 3.
God by the Law, because the righteous lives by faith. And the Law consists
not in belief, Abac. 2.
but he that performs the things that the Law commands, shall live by that
performance. And further he says, that a man Gal. 3.
cannot become righteous by the deeds of the Law, but only by believing in
Jesus Christ. Again, a little after he says, that if a man can become
righteous by the Law, Jesus Christ dyed in vain. Moreover to the Romans,
making comparison between the righteousness of the Law, and the
righteousness of Romans 10.
the Gospel, he says, that the one consists in the doing of works, and the
other in believing. For if thou confess our Lord Jesus Christ with thy mouth,
and believe in thy heart that God has raised him up from death, thou shall be
saved. For the belief of the heart makes a man righteous, and the confession
of the mouth makes him safe. Lo how this good teacher Saint Paul shows
evidently, that faith makes a man righteous without any works. And not only
Saint Paul, but also the holy Doctors that came after him, have confirmed and
allowed this most holy truth of Justification by faith: among whom Saint
Augustine is the chief, S. Augustine.
who in his book of faith and works, and in his book of the Spirit and the
Letter, and in his book of fourscore and three questions, and in his book
which he did write to Boniface, and in his Treatise upon the xxxj. Psalm, and
in many other places, defends this article, showing that we become righteous
by faith without any help of good works: howbeit that good works are the
effects of righteousness, and not the cause of it. And he shows that the
words of Saint James being soundly understood, are nothing contrary to this
article. Which thing Origin does also affirm in his fourth book upon Origin.
the Epistle to the Romans, saying, that Saint Paul's meaning is, that faith
only is sufficient to make men righteous, insomuch that a man becomes
righteous, only by believing, although he have not done any good work at all.
For so it is, that the thief became righteous without the works of the Law,
forasmuch as the Lord sought not what good works he had done in time past, nor
waited until he had done any after he had believed, but having accepted him
for righteous, upon his only confession, took him for his companion, even
when he should enter into Paradise. Likewise, that so renowned a Mary Magdalen.
woman in the Gospel of S. Luke, while she was at the feet of Jesus Christ,
heard it said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. And a little after he
says unto her, Thy faith has Luke 6.
saved thee, go thy way in peace. Afterward Origin says, In many places of
the Gospel, a man may see how our Lord Jesus Christ has spoken in such wise,
as he shows that faith is the cause of the salvation of the believers. Then
is a man made righteous by faith, and the works of the Law further him nothing
at all. On the contrary, where faith is not (which faith makes the believer
righteous) although a man do the works which the Law commands: yet
notwithstanding, forasmuch as they be not builded upon the foundation of faith,
albeit that to outward appearance they seem good, yet can they not justify
him that does them, because he wants Faith is the mark of those that are
justified.
faith, which is the mark of them that are become righteous before God. And
who is he that can boast himself to be righteous, when he hears God say by
his Prophet Esaias, that all our righteousness is as a defiled Esaias. 64.
cloth of a menstruous woman? Then can we not justly glory in our selves, but
in the only faith of the cross of Jesus Christ. Saint Basil in his Homily of
humility, says that the Christian S. Basil.
ought to hold himself for righteous through belief in Jesus Christ: and his
words are these: The Apostle says, that he which glories, should glory in the
Lord, in that God has made Jesus Christ to be our wisdom, righteousness,
holiness, and redemption, to the end, that he which would glory, should glory
in the Lord, because that the perfect and sound glorying, is to glory in the
Lord. For in so doing, a man presumes not upon his own righteousness, but
acknowledges his want of the true righteousness, and that he is made righteous,
only by believing in Jesus Christ. And S. Paul gloryeth of the despising of
his own righteousness, and of his seeking of Christ's righteousness, by
faith, which comes of God. Saint Hilary, S. Hilary.
in his ninth Canon, upon the exposition of St. Matthew says these words: The
Scribes considering Jesus Christ but only as man, were troubled that a man
should forgive sins, and pardon that thing which the Law could not do, because
that only faith justifies. Saint Ambrose in expounding these words of Saint
Paul (Unto him that believes in him S. Ambr. Romans 4.
which justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness,
according to the purpose of Gods Grace: like as David also says, That the man
is blessed whom God accounts righteous without works) writes thus, Saint
Paul says, that unto him which believes in Jesus Christ (that is to wit, to
the Gentile) his faith is imputed for righteousness, as it was unto Abraham.
In what wise then think the Jews to become righteous by the works of the
Law: and yet to be righteous as Abraham was, seeing that Abraham became not
righteous by the deeds of the Law, but only by faith? Then is not the Law
needful, forasmuch as the sinner becomes righteous before God through only
faith, according to Gods gracious purpose, as David says. The Apostle
confirms that which he has said, by the Prophets example, saying: Blessed is
the man whom God Psalm. 31.
accepts for righteous without works: whereby David means, that those men
are very happy, whom GOD has determined to accept for righteous before him, by
only faith, without any paines-taking or observation of the Law on their
behalf. Thus shows he the blessedness of the time wherein Christ was borne,
insomuch as the Lord himself says; Many righteous men and Prophets have
coueted to see the things that you see, and to hear the things that you hear,
and have not heard them. The selfsame thing says St. Ambrose in expounding
the first Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, affirming openly,
that whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, is become righteous without works,
and without any desert, and receives forgiuenasse of his sins by faith
alone. Also he affirms the same thing in an Epistle which he writes to
Irenaeus, saying, Let no man boast of his own works, for no man becomes
righteous by his own works: but he that has righteousness, has it of free
gift, for so much as he is made righteous by Jesus Christ. Then is it faith that
delivers by Christ's blood: for happy is he whose sin is forgiven and
pardoned. And S. Bernard in his threescore and seventeenth Sermon upon the
Ballet of Ballets, S. Bernard.
confirms the same, saying that our own merits bear no sway at all, in
making us righteous, which thing must be attributed wholly unto grace, which
makes us righteous freely, and likewise discharges us from the bondage of
sin. And he adds, that Jesus Christ marries the soul, and coupleth it
unto himself by faith, without that, any desert of our works ought or can
come between. But because I will not be too long, I will make an end of mine
allegations, when I have uttered one very notable and good saying of Saint
Ambrose, in his book entitled of Jacob concerning the blessed life. The said
Genesis 17.
holy man says, that like as Iacoh having not on his own behalf deserved the
birthright, A very good comparison how we be clothed with the righteousness of
Jesus Christ.
shrouded himself under the apparel of his brother, and clothed himself with
his garment, which yielded a very sweet sent, and in that wise presented
himself to his father, to receive the blessing under another man's person to
his own behoof: even so is it requisite for us to clothe our selves with the
righteousness of Jesus Christ by faith, and to shroud ourselves under the
divine pureness of our eldest brother, if we will be received for righteous
before God. And certainly this is true. For if we appear before God unclothed
of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, out of all doubt we shall be judged
worthy of everlasting damnation. But contrariwise, if God see us apparelled
with the righteousness of his Son Christ: then will he surely take us for
righteous, and holy, and worthy of eternal life. And verily it is a great
rashness in such as pretend to attain to righteousness by the keeping of
Gods Commandments, which are all comprehended in loving God, with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, and our neighbor as our
self. But who is so arrogant No man can boast of the performance of Gods Law.
or so mad as to presume, that he is able to perform those Commandments to
the full? Or who sees not that Gods Law requires perfect love, and condemns
all imperfectness? Let every man consider well his own works, which partly
shall seem good unto him, and he shall find that they ought rather to be
called transgressions of that most holy Law, according also as they be
altogether unclean and imperfect, so that he must be feign to utter this saying
of David's: Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Psalm. 143.
Lord, for no man living shall be found righteous in thy sight. And Solomon
says, Who is he that may say, My heart is clean! And Job Prou. 20.
cries out, What man is he that can be undefiled, Job 15.
and what man borne of woman can show himself righteous? Behold, he found no
steadfastness among his Saints, yea the heavens are not clean in his sight.
How much more abominable and filthy is man, who drinks iniquity as it were
water? And Saint John says, If we say we be without sin, 1 John 2.
we deceive our selnes. And specially our Savior Jesus Christ teaches us to
say, as often as we pray, Forgive us all our trespasses, Matthew. 6.
as we forgive them that trespass against us. And hereby may well be gathered
the folly of those that make merchandise of their works, presuming to save by
them, not only themselves, but also their neighbors: as though our Lord Jesus
Christ had not said unto them, When ye have done all that ever Luke 17.
is commanded you, say ye, We be unprofitable servants, we have done but as we
ought to do. Ye see that although we had performed Gods Law to the full, yet
nevertheless we should esteem and call our selves unprofitable servants. Now
then, seeing that men are so far off from this full performance: who is he
that dares be so bold as to glorify himself, that he has added so great an
overplus of deseruings above the full measure, as he may have to deal abroad
unto others? But to return to our purpose, I would that the proud sinner which
bears himself in hand that he makes himself righteous before God, by doing
some works which are allowable to the world, would consider, that all the
works which proceed out of an unclean and foul heart, are also unclean and
filthy, and consequently cannot be acceptable unto God, nor have any power to
make the party righteous. Therefore we must first of all cleanse the heart, if
we mind that our works should please God. The cleansing of the heart
proceeds of faith, as the holy Ghost affirms by the mouth of St. Peter.
Then must Acts 15.
we not say that the unrighteous person and the sinner becomes righteous,
good, and acceptable unto God by his own works: but we must of necessity
conclude, that faith cleanses our hearts, and makes us good, righteous and
acceptable before God, and furthermore causes our works to please him,
notwithstanding that they be altogether unprofitable and imperfect. For inasmuch
as we be become the children of God through faith: he considers our works,
not as a severe and rigorous Judge, but as a most merciful Father, having
pity of our frailenesse, and regarding us as the members of his eldest son,
whose perfection and righteousness does supply all our uncleanness and
imperfection, which are not laid to our charge, for so much as they be covered
under the pureness and innocence of Jesus Christ, and come not to judgment
before God. And hereupon How the works of the faithful, though they be
imperfect, please God.
it comes to pass, that all our works which proceed of true faith,
(notwithstanding that they be wholly sinful and corrupt of themselves) shall
nevertheless be praised and allowed by Jesus Christ in the general judgment,
because they be the fruits and testimonies of our faith whereby we be saved.
For insomuch as we have loved the brethren of Jesus Christ, we shall show
evidently, that we have also been faithful, and brethren of Christ, and
therefore by faith, we shall be put in full possession of the everlasting
Kingdom, which our Sovereign Lord God has prepared for us before the
creating of the Math. 25.
world: not for our merits sake, but through his mercy, whereby he has chosen
us, and called us to the Grace of his Gospel, and made us righteous, to the
intent to glorify us everlastingly with his only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
who is the holiness and righteousness of us, but not of them which will not
confess that faith is sufficient of it self to make a man righteous and
acceptable to the Lord God, who through his Fatherly goodness and loving
kindness, offers and gives us Jesus Christ with his righteousness, without
any desert of our own works. What thing can work or cause a man to deserve
so great a gift and treasure as Jesus Christ is? This treasure is given only
through In what manner faith justifies.
the grace, favor, and mercifulness of God: and only faith is the thing that
receives such a gift, as to make us enjoy the forgiveness of our sins. And
therefore when S. Paul and other Doctors say, that only faith makes men
righteous, without works: they mean that it makes us to enjoy the general
forgiveness of our sins, and to receive Jesus Christ, who (as says S. Paul)
dwells Ephesians. 3.
in our hearts by faith, and ouercomming and pacifying the troubles of our
consciences, satisfies Gods justice for our sins. Furthermore it appeaseth
Gods wrath justly moved against us, quenches the fire of hell, whereinto our
natural corruption did throw us headlong, and cheerfully destroys and
overthrows the devil, together with all his power and tyranny: Which things,
all the works that all the men in the world can lay together, are not able to
deserve nor to bring to pass. That glory and that prerogative is reserved all
only to the Son of God, that is to wit, to the blessed Jesus Christ, who
has power above all the powers that are in Heaven, in Earth, and in Hell, and
gives himself and his merits, to all such as distrusting in themselves, do
set their whole hope of being saved, in him and in his merits. And therefore
let no man beguile himself when he hears it said, that only faith
justifies without works: and think as false Christians do (who draw all
things to live fleshly) that the true faith consists in believing the bare
story of Jesus Christ, after the same manner as men believe the story of
Caesar, or Alexander. Such manner of belief is but an historical belief,
grounded merely upon the report of men, and upon their writings, and lightly
imprinted in our conceit by a certain custom, and is like to the faith of the
Turks, who for the like reasons believe the fables of their Alcoran. And such a
faith is but an imagination of man, which never renueth the heart of man, nor
warmeth it with the love of God, neither do any good works ensue, or any
change of life which faith should bring forth. And therefore they falsely hold
opinion against the holy Scripture, and against the holy Doctors of the Church,
that only faith makes not men righteous, but that they must also have works.
Unto whom I answer, That this historical and fond belief, and all the works
that ensue thereof, are not only unable to make a man righteous: but also do
cast the parties headlong to the bottom of hell, like unto those that have no
oil in their lamps, that is to say, no lively faith in their hearts. Mat. 12.
The faith that makes men righteous, is a work of God in us, whereby our old
man Romans 6.
is crucified, and we being transformed in Jesus Christ, become new creatures,
and the dear beloved children of God. This heavenly faith is it that graffeth
us into the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and consequently mortifieth
our flesh with the effects and lusts thereof. For when we by the operation of
faith do know our selves to be dead with Jesus Christ, we are at a full point
with our selves and with the world, and are thoroughly resolved, how it is meet
that they which are dead with Jesus Christ, should mortify their earthly
members, that is to wit, the sinful affections of their mind, and the lusts
of the flesh: and forasmuch as we know we be raised again with Christ, we
bend our selves to the leading of a spiritual and holy life, like unto that
which we shall live in heaven, after the last resurrection. This holy faith
making us to enjoy the general pardon that is published by the Gospel,
brings us into the kingdom of our good God, and pacifieth our consciences,
maintaining us in continual joy, and holy and spiritual sweetness. This
selfsame faith knitteth us unto God, and makes him to dwell in our hearts,
and clotheth our soul with himself, so as thenceforth the holy Ghost moves
us to do the same things whereunto he moved Jesus Christ while he was in the
world, and was conversant among men, that is to wit, unto lowliness,
meekness, obedientnesse unto God, louingnesse, and other perfections,
where-through we recover the image of God. For these selfsame causes, Jesus
Christ did rightly attribute blessedness unto this inspired faith: which
blessedness cannot be without good works and holiness of life. And how can
it be that a Christian should not become holy, seeing that Jesus Christ is
become his holiness through faith? Therefore by faith we be justified and
saved, and therefore S. Paul does in a manner always Saint Paul calls them
Saints, whom we call Christians.
call those Saints, whom we call now Christians: who, if they have not Christ's
Spirit, are none of Christ's, and consequently no Christians at all. But if they
have the Spirit of Jesus Christ to rule and govern them, we must not doubt,
but that although they know well that they be made righteous through faith
only: yet for all that, they will He that believes, cannot be without good
works.
become never the more slothful to do good works. For Christ's Spirit is the
Spirit of love: and love cannot be idle, nor cease from the doing of good
works. But if we will say the truth, a man can do no good works, except he
first know himself to be become righteous by faith: for before he knows
that, his doing of good works is rather to make himself righteous, then for
the love and glory of God: and so he defiles all his works with self-love,
for the love of himself and for his own profit. But he that knows himself
to be become righteous by the merits and righteousness of Christ, (which he
makes his own by faith) labors happily, and does good works, all only for
the love and glory of Christ, and not for love of himself, nor to make
himself righteous. And thereupon it comes, that the true Christian, (that is
to wit, he that accounts himself righteous by reason of Christ's
righteousness) asks not whether good works be commanded or not: but being
wholly moved and provoked with a certain violence of godly love, he offers
himself willingly to do all the works that are holy and Christian-like, and
never cease to do well. He therefore which feels not the marvelous
effects by his faith, which we have heretofore declared, that the inspired
faith works in the heart of the Christian: Let him assure himself, that he
has not the Christian faith, and let him pray earnestly unto God to give it
him, saying: Lord help mine unbelief. And when he hears it said, that Mark
2.
only faith makes men righteous, let him not deceive himself, and say, What
need I to weary my self in doing good works, faith is enough to send me to
Paradise? To such an one I answer, that only faith sends us to Paradise: but
yet let him take good heed: for the devils do also believe and tremble, as
says Saint James: O miserable man, will thou James 2.
go with them to Paradise? By this false conclusion thou may know (my
brother) in what an error thou art: for thou weenest to have the faith that
makes men righteous, and thou have it not. Thou say thou Apoc. 3.
art rich, and have no need of any thing: and thou see not how thou art
poor, wretched, blind, and naked. I counsel to buy gold of God, that is
thoroughly fixed with fire, (that is to say, true faith set on fire with good
works) to the intent thou may become rich: and to cloth thy self with
white raiment (that is to wit, with Christ's innocence) to the end that the
shame of thy nakedness (which is the great filthiness of thy A lively
comparison.
sins) be not seen to the whole world. Then is the justifying faith as it were
a flame of fire, which cannot but cast forth brightness. And like as the flame
burns the wood without the help of the light, and yet the flame cannot be
without the light: so is it assuredly true, that faith alone consumes and
burns away sin without the help of works, and yet that the same faith
cannot be without good works. Wherefore, like as if we see a flame of fire
that gives no light, we know by and by that it is but vain and painted: even
so, when we see not some light of good works in a man, it is a token that he
has not the true inspired faith, which God gives to his chosen, to justify
and glorify them withal. And hold it for certain, that S. James meant so,
when he What S. James meant concerning works. James 2.
said, Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my
works. For his meaning was, that he which is plunged in ambitiousnesse, and
worldly pleasures, believes not (though he say he believe) forasmuch as he
shows not in himself the effects of faith. Also we may liken this holy faith
to the Godhead which is in Jesus A heavenly comparison.
Christ: who being very man (but without sin) did wonderful things, healing
the sick, giving sight to the blind, walking upon the water, and raising up
the dead unto life again: and yet these marvelous works were not the cause
that he was God. For before he did any of those things, he was God, and the
lawful and only begotten Son of God, and he need not to work those miracles
to make himself God by them, but forasmuch as he was God, therefore he did
them. And so, the miracles that Christ wrought, made him not to be God, but
showed openly that he was God. In like wise, true faith is as it were a Godhead
in the soul of a Christian, which does wondrous works, and is never weary of
well-doing, and yet those works are not the cause that a Christian is a
Christian, that is to wit, that he is righteous, good, holy, and acceptable
unto God, neither needs he to work all those good works to become such a
one. But forasmuch as he is a Christian by faith, like as Jesus Christ being a
man, was also God by his Godhead: he does all those good works, which make not
the Christian to be righteous and good, but show him to be good, righteous and
holy. So then, like as Christ's Godhead was the cause that he wrought miracies:
even so faith working through love, is the cause of the good works that a
Christian man does. And like as a man may say of Jesus Christ, that he has
done this miracle or that, and that those miracles, besides that they glorified
God, were also a great honor unto Jesus Christ as he was man, who for his
obedience even unto death, was recompensed at Gods hand in his resurrection,
and had given unto him all power both in heaven and earth, which he had not
before as in respect of his manhood, but deserved it by the union which is
betwixt the Word of God and the manhood of Christ: So does faith in a
Christian, which faith by reason of the union that it has with the soul,
attributes that thing to the one which is proper to the other: whereupon it
comes, that the holy Scripture promises the Christian everlasting life for
his good works, because good works are the fruits and testimonies of lively
faith, and proceed of it, as light proceeds from a flame of fire, according
as I have said heretofore. And by this holy faith which imbraceth Jesus Christ,
it comes to pass that our soul is joined with Christ, and is so united and
knit to him, that whatsoever Christ has merited and deserved, the same is
imputed unto the soul, as though it had merited and deserved it. And therefore
S. Austin says, that God crowns his own gifts in us. Of this union of the
soul with Jesus Christ, Christ himself bears good record, where he prays
to his Father for his Apostles and for such as should believe in him by their
preaching. I pray not (says he) for them only, Ioh. 17.
but also for all those that shall believe in me through their word, to the end
they may be all one thing, that like as thou my Father art in me, and I in
thee, so they also may be one in us, and that the world may believe that thou
have sent me, and that I have given them the glory which thou have given me, so
as they should be one selfe-fame thing like as thou and I are one. Whereby it
appears evidently, that if we believe the word of the Apostles (who preached
that Jesus Christ dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification) we
become all one thing with him: Romans 4.
and forasmuch as he is all one with God, we also become all one with God, by
the mean 2 Cor. 6.
of Jesus Christ. O wonderful glory of the Christian, to whom it is granted
through faith, to possess the unspeakable benefits which the Angels long to
behold! By this present discourse a man may plainly perceive the difference
that is betwixt us and them that defend the justification by faith and works
together. Herein we agree with the^, that we stablish works, affirming that the
faith which justifies, cannot be without good works, and that those which are
become righteous, are they that do the good works that may rightly be called
good works. But we differ from them in this, that we say, that faith 1 Pet. 2.
makes men righteous without the help of works. And the reason is ready:
namely, because that by faith we put on Christ, and make Gal. 3.
his holiness and righteousness to be ours. And seeing the case so stands,
that Christ's righteousness is given us by faith: We cannot be so thanklesse,
blind, and unhappy, as not to believe that he is of sufficient ability, Heb. 2.
to make us acceptable and right before God. Let us say with the Apostle, If
the blood of Oxen and Goats, and the Ashes of a Cow sprinkled, cleanses the
unclean, as touching the cleansing of the flesh: how much more shall that
blood of Jesus Christ, who by the everlasting spirit offered himself undefiled
unto God, to cleanse our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God?
I pray thee now, thou good and devout Christian, consider well which of these
two opinions is the truest, holiest, and worthiest to be preached: Ours, which
aduanceth the benefit of Jesus Christ, and pulls down the pride of man which
would exalt his own works against Christ's glory: or the other, which by
affirming that faith of it self justifies not, defaceth the glory and benefit
of Jesus Christ, and puffs up the pride of man, who cannot abide to be
justified freely by our Lord Jesus Christ, without some merit of his own. But
(say they) it is a great quickening up to good works, to say that a man makes
himself righteous before God by means of them. I answer, that we also
confess that good works are acceptable to God, and that he of his mere
grace and free liberality recompenseth them in Paradise. But we say moreover,
that no works are good, saving those that (S. Austin says) are done by those
that are become righteous through faith, because, that if the tree be not good,
it cannot yield good fruit. And furthermore we say that such as are become
righteous through faith, forasmuch as they know themselves to be righteous
through Gods righteousness purchased by Christ, make no bargaining with God
for their works, as though they would buy their manner of justification such
as it is with them: but being inflamed with the Love of God, and desirous to
glorify Jesus Chiist who has made them righteous, by giving them his merits
and riches, they bestow all their whole study and labor to do Gods will,
fighting manfully against the love of themselves, and against the world and the
Devil. And when they fall through frailty of the flesh, they recover
themselves by and by, and are so much the more desirous to do good, and so
much the more in love with their God, considering that he lays not their
sins to their charge, because they be ingrafted into Jesus Christ, who has
made full amends for all his members, upon the tree of his cross, and makes
continual intercession for them to the eternal Father, who for the love of
his only begotten Son, beholds them always with a gentle countenance,
governing and defending them as his most dear children, and in the end giving
them the heritage of the world, making them like fashioned to the glorious
Image of Christ. These loving motions are the spurs that prick forward the
true Christians to do good works: who considering that they are become the
children of God through faith, and made partakers of his divine nature, are
stirred up by the holy Ghost dwelling in them, to live as it becomes the
children of so great a Lord, and are greatly ashamed that they maintain not
the beauty of their heanenly Nobleness: and therefore they employ their whole
endeavor to the following of their first borne brother Jesus Christ, living in
great lowliness and meekness, in all things seeking the glory of God, giving
their lives for their brethren, doing good to their enemies, glorying in the
sufferance of reproaches, and in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Gal.
6. Luke 2.
saying with Zachary, We be delivered out of

(...) keth every of us to possess Christ and all that is his, as we possess
our own garment. And therefore to be clothed with Jesus Christ, is nothing
else but to believe for a certainty, that Christ is wholly ours: and so is he
in very deed, if we believe so, and hold our selves assured, that by the same
heavenly garment we be received into favor before God. For it is most
certain, that he as a most dear Father has given us his Son: meaning that
all his righteousness, and all that ever he is, can, or has done, should be
in our power and jurisdiction, in such wise as it should be lawful for us to
make our boast of them, as if we had done, purchased, and deserved them by our
own strength. And whosoever believes this, shall find that his belief is
good and true, as we have showed heretofore. Then must the Christian have a
steadfast faith and belief, that all the goods, all the graces, and all the
riches of Jesus Christ, are his: for since that God has given us Jesus Christ
himself, how should it be possible that he has not Romans 8.
given us all things with him? Now if this be true, as true it is in deed: the
Christian may rightly say, I am the child of God, and Jesus Christ is my
brother. I am Lord of Heaven and Earth, and of hell, and of death, and of the
law, in so much as the law cannot accuse me nor lay any curse upon me, because
the righteousness of God is become mine. And this faith is it alone that
makes a man to be called a Christian, and which cloatheth him with Jesus
Christ as we have said before. And boldly may this be called a great mystery,
whereunder are contained marvelous things, and things not heard of, concerning
that great God, which cannot enter into man's heart, except God do first soften
it with his holy grace, as he has promised to do by his holy Prophet, saying,
I will give you a new heart, and I will put a new mind into you, and I will
take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will give you a heart of
flesh. Now then, he that believes not after the said manner, that Jesus
Christ with all the goods that he possesses, is his, cannot call himself a
true Christian, nor ever have a quiet and joyful conscience, nor a good and
fervent courage to do good: but shall easily faint in doing of good works, yea
and moreover he shall never be able to do works that are truly good. This
only belief and trust that we have in the merits of Jesus Christ, makes men
true Christians, stout, cheerful, merry, lovers of God, ready to do good
works, possessors of Gods Kingdom and of God himself, and his right
deare-beloued children, in whom the holy Ghost does truly dwell. What heart is
so cowardly, cold, and vile, which considering Jesus Christ the true example of
Christians.
the inestimable greatness of the gift that God has bestowed upon him, in
giving him his own so well-beloued Son with all his perfectness, is not
inflamed with an exceeding earnest desire, to become like unto him in good
works: specially seeing that the Father has given him unto us for an example
whereon we must continually look, framing our life after such a sort, as it
may be a true counterpaine of the life of Jesus Christ, forasmuch as Christ (as
says Saint Peter) has suffered for us, leaving us an 2 Pet. 2.
ensample, to the end that we should follow his footsteps? Out of this
consideration issues another kind of clothing of a man's self with Christ,
which we may term an example clothing, for so much as the Christian must
frame his whole life after the example of Christ, fashioning himself like unto
him in all his deeds, words and thoughts, leaving his former wicked life, and
decking himself with the new life, that is to wit, with the life of Christ. By
reason Ephesians. 4. Romans 15.
whereof S. Paul says: Let us cast away the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light, not in feasting, nor in drunkenness, nor in chambring and
wantonness, nor in strife: but put upon you the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
preparation for the flesh, nor for the lusts thereof. Hereupon the true
Christian being in love with Jesus Christ, says in himself, Since that Jesus
Christ, not having any need of me, has redeemed me with his own blood, and is
become poor to enrich me: I will likewise give my good, yea and my very life,
for the love and welfare of my neighbor. And like as I am clothed with Jesus
Christ for the love he has borne to me: so will I have my neighbor in
Christ, to cloth himself with me and with my goods likewise, for the love
that I bear him for Christ's sake. He that does not so, is no true Christian,
for he cannot say that he loves Jesus Christ, if he love not the members
and brothers of him: and if we love not our neighbor, for whose sake Christ
has shed his blood, we cannot truly say that we love Jesus Christ: who
being equal with God, was obedient to his Father, Phil. 2.
even to the death of the Cross, and has loved and redeemed us, giving
himself unto us, with all that ever he has. After the same manner, we being
rich, and having (...) him forsake himself, and take us his Cross and follow
me. But the chief cause of this Luke 9.
cross is, for that our God purposes to mortify the affections of our mind
and the lusts of our flesh by that exercise: to the end we may conceive in our
selves the great perfection wherein we be comprised by our Lord Jesus Christ,
by being grafted into him. Also his will is, that our faith being fined like
gold in the furnace of troubles, John 15. Phil. 3.
should shine bright to his glory. Moreover his intent his, that we by our
infirmities, should set out his great power, which the world in despite of it,
beholds in us, in as much as our frailty becomes strong by troubles and
persecutions, and the more that it was beaten down and oppressed, so much the
more it is strong and stedfest. Whereof the Apostle S. Paul says, We carry
this treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 12.
that the excellency of the power 2 Cor. 4.
might be Gods and not ours. On all sides we suffer tribulation, but we are
not overcome: we be poor, but not overcome of poverty: we suffer persecution,
but yet are we not forsaken: we be despised, but yet we perish not: and so we
daily bear about us the dying of our Lord Jesus Christ in our body, that the
life of Jesus Christ may also be openly showed in us. And seeing the case is
so, that our Lord Jesus Christ and all his dear Disciples glorified God by
tribulations: let us also embrace them joyfully, and say with the Apostle S.
Paul, God Gal. 6.
forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
let us so deal, as the world may (whether it will or no) perceive and see with
his eyes, the wonderful effects that God works in such as sincerely embrace
the grace of his Gospel. Let us so deal, I say, as the worldlings may see
with how great quietness of mind the true Christians endure the loss of their
goods, the death of their children, slanders, the diseases of the body, and the
persecutions of false christians: and also that they may see how the only true
Christians do worship God in spirit and truth, taking in good worth at his
hand whatsoever happens, and holding all that he does, to be good, righteous
and holy, praising him always for the same, whether it be in prosperity or
adversity, thanking him as a most gracious and loving father, and acknowledging
Romans 5.
it for a right great gift of Gods goodness, to suffer any adversity, and
chiefly for the Gospel, and for following the steps of Christ, specially for
as much as we know, that tribulation ingendreth patience, and patience After
what sort patience ingendreth trial.
trial, and trial hope, and hope makes us not ashamed. I say, that patience
ingendreth trial, because that whereas God has promised help in trouble to
such as trust in him, we find it by experience, in that we continue strong and
steadfast all the while, and are vpholden by the hand of God, which thing we
could not do with all the powers that we have of our own. So then, by
patience we find that our Lord gives us the help that he has promised us at
our need, whereby our hope is confirmed. And it were an ouer-great
unthankfulness, not to trust to such an aid and favor for the time to come,
as we have found by experience to be so certain and steadfast heretofore. But
what need we so many words? It ought to suffice us to know, that the true
Christians are through tribulation clothed with the Rom 8.
Image of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified: which if we bear willingly and with
a good heart, we shall in the end be clothed with the Image of Jesus Christ
glorified. For as the passions of Jesus Christ do abound: so through him,
shall the consolations ouerabound: 2 Cor. 2.
and if we suffer with him here below for a time, we shall also reign with
him there above for ever.

CHAP. VI. Certain remedies against distrust.
But forasmuch as the devil and man's wisdom labor continually to
dispossess us of this most holy faith, wherethrough we believe that all our
sins are chastised and punished in Jesus Christ, and that through his most
precious bloodshed, we be reconciled to the Majesty of God: it is very
needful for a Christian to have his weapons always in a readiness, to defend
himself from the said most mischievous temptation, which seeks to bereave
the Mark 9.
soul of her life. Among the said weapons Four remedies against the
temptations of distrust.
(in my judgment) the mightiest and best are, Prayer, the often use of the
holy Communion, the remembering of holy Baptism, and the minding of
Predestination. In our Prayer, we may well say with the father of the Prayer.
poor Lunatike person, of whom mention is made in the Gospel of S. Mark,
Lord Jesus, help mine unbelief. Or else we may say with the Apostles, Lord,
increase our faith. And if there reign in us a continual Matthew. 9.
desire to grow in faith, hope, and love: we will continually pray, as Saint
Paul instructs 1 These. 5. True Prayer.
us. For Prayer is nothing else but a fervent mind settled upon God. By the
remembering of Baptism, we shall assure our selves, that we are at peace with
God. And Baptism
forasmuch as S. Peter says, that the Ark of Noah was a figure of Baptism:
therefore 2 Pet. 3.
like as Noe was saved from the flood by the Arc, because he believed the
promises of God: so also are we by faith saved in Baptism from Gods Wrath.
Which faith is grounded upon the Word of our Lord Jesus Christ, who says that
he which believes Mark. 16.
and is baptized, shall be saved. And good right it is: for in Baptism we put
on Jesus Christ, as the Apostle S. Paul affirms, and consequently we be made
partakers of his righteousness, and of all his Gal. 3.
goods: and under this precious robe, the sins that our frailty commits,
lie hidden and covered, and are not imputed unto us. And so, according as S.
Paul says, the Romans 4.
blessedness which the Psalmist speaks of appertains to us: namely,
Blessed are they whose misdoings are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to Psalm. 36.
whom the Lord imputes not sin. But it stands a Christian in hand, to take
good heed, that upon these words he take no liberty to sin: for this doctrine
belongs to none such as honor themselves with the name of Christians,
confessing Christ with their mouth, and yet deny him in their deeds. But it
concerns the true Christians, who though they fight manfully against the
flesh, the world, and the devil, do notwithstanding fall daily, and are
constrained to say, Lord, forgive us our offenses. These are they to whom we
speak, to comfort them and to hold them up, that they fall not into despair:
as though the blood of Christ washed us not from all sin, and that he were
not our advocate, and the atonementmaker for his members. And therefore when we
be provoked to doubt of the forgiveness of our sins, and that our own
conscience begins to trouble us: then must we furnish our selves with true
faith, and out of hand have recourse to the precious The Supper of the Lord.
blood of Jesus Christ, shed for us upon the altar of the Cross, and
distributed to his Apostles at his last Supper, under the veil of a most holy
Sacrament, which was ordained by Christ, to the end that we should celebrate
the remembrance of his death, and that by the same visible Sacrament, our
troubled consciences might be assured of our atonement with God. The blessed
Jesus Christ made his last Will, when he said, This is my body which is given
for you: Luke 22.
and, This is my blood of the New Testament, Mar. 16.
which is shed for many to the forgiveness of their sins. We know that a
Gal. 3.
Testament (says Saint Paul) although it be but a man's Testament, yet
nevertheless if it be allowed, no man despises it or adds any thing to it:
and that no Testament is of force till the Testator be dead, but has full
power after the parties decease. Then did Jesus Christ make his Testament,
wherein he promises forgiveness of sins, and the grace and good favor of
himself, and his Father, together with mercy and everlasting life. And to the
intent that the said Testament should be of full force, he has confirmed it
with his own precious blood and with his own death. By reason whereof, Saint
Paul says, that Jesus Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by his
Heb 9.
dying for the redemption of those transgressions which were in the former
Testament, they that are called might receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance. For wheresoever is a Testament, there must also be the death of
the Testator: for the Testament is confirmed by the death of the party,
insomuch as it is of no value so long as the maker of it is alive. Wherefore we
be very certain and assured by the death of Jesus Christ, that his Testament
is available, whereby all our mis-deeds are pardoned, and we made heirs of
eternal life. And for a token and faithful pledge hereof, in I renaeus. lib.
1.
stead of a Seal, he has left us this divine Sacrament, which not only
gives our souls assured hope of their everlasting Salvation, but also
warranteth unto us that immortality of our flesh, forasmuch as it is even now
quickened by that immortal flesh of his, and in a certain manner becomes
partaker of the immortality thereof, and he that is partaker of that divine
flesh by faith, shall not perish for ever. But unto him that John 6.
receives it without the said faith, it turns to a dangerous poison, because
that like as when bodily sustenance finds the stomach encumbered with evil
humors, it corrupts likewise and works great annoyance: even so if this
spiritual food light into a sinful soul that is full of malice and
mis-beliefe, it casts it headlong into some greater ruin, not through it
own default, but because that to the unclean and unbeliever all things are
unclean: notwithstanding that the things be sanctified by the Lords blessing.
For (says Saint Paul) he 1 Cor. 11.
that eats of that bread, and drinks of that cup unworthily, is guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord, and he eats and What is meant by not making a
difference of the Lords Body.
drinks his own damnation, because he makes no difference of the Lords
Body. For he makes no difference of the Lords Body, which presumes to the
Lords Supper without faith and charity. And forasmuch as he believes not that
Body to be his life, and the cleanser of all his sins: he makes Jesus Christ
a liar, and treads the He that receives this Sacrament, protests himself
to trust in none other thing then the blood of Christ.
Son of God under foot, and esteems the blood of the Testament whereby he
was sanctified, but as a common or worldly thing, and does great wrong to the
Spirit of grace, and he shall be punished very sore at Gods hand, for this his
unbelief and wicked hypocrisy. For whereas he reposeth not that trust of his
justification in the passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: yet
nevertheless he receives this most holy Sacrament, and makes protestation
that he puts not his trust in any other thing. Whereby he accuses himself,
and is a witness of his own iniquity, and condemns himself to everlasting
death, by refusing the life which God promises him in that holy Sacrament. And
in this point, when the Very comfortable counsel.
Christian feels that his enemies are like to overcome him: that is to wit,
when he begins to doubt whether he have received forgiveness of his sins
by Jesus Christ: and that he shall not be able to withstand the devil and his
temptations: and that the accusation of his own doubtful conscience comes to
press him, so as he begins to fear lest hell fire should swallow him up,
and death hold him in his everlasting bands by reason of Gods Wrath, I say,
when the good Christian feels himself in such agony: Let him get him to his
holy Sacrament with a good heart and stout courage, and receive it devoutly,
saying in his heart, and answering his enemies thus: I confess I have deserved
a thousand hels, and everlasting death, by reason of the great sins which I
have committed. But this heavenly Sacrament which I receive at that present,
assures me of the forgiveness of all my misdoings, and of mine atonement with
God. For if I have an eye to my works, there is no doubt but I acknowledge my
self a sinner, and condemn mine own self in such wise, as my conscience
should never be quiet, if I should think that my sins are pardoned me for
my works sake. But when I look to the promises and covenants of God, who
promises me forgiveness of my sins by the blood of Jesus Christ, I am as
sure that I have obtained it, and that I have his favor, as I am sure that he
which has made the promises and covenants, cannot lie nor deceive: and through
this steadfast faith I become righteous by Christ's Romans 4.
righteousness, where through I am saved, and my conscience quieted. Has he
not given his most innocent body into the hands of sinners for our sins? Has
he not shed his blood to wash away my iniquities? Why then do thou vex thy
self, O my soul? put thy trust in the Lord, who bears thee so great love,
that to deliver thee from eternal death, it has pleased him that his only
Son should suffer death and passion, who has taken upon himself our
poverty, to give us his riches: laid our weakness upon himself, to stablish
us in his strength: become mortal, to make us immortal: come down unto the
earth, to advance us up to heaven: and become the Son of man with us, to make
us the children of God with himself. Who is he then that shall accuse us? God
is he that justifies Romans 8.
us, and who shall condemn us? Jesus Christ is dead for us, yea, and risen
again for us, and he sits at the right hand of God, making Intercession for
us. Wherefore say with David, Why art thou heavy, O my soul, and why do
thou trouble me? do thou see nothing but the Law, sin, wrath, heaviness,
death, hell, and the devil? Is there not now to be seen Grace, remission of
sins, Righteousness, Consolation, Joy, Peace, Life, Heaven, Christ, and God?

Trouble me no more then, O my soul: for what is the Law? what is sin? what
is death and the devil, in comparison of these things? Therefore trust in God,
who has not spared his own dear Son, but given him to the death of the
cross for thy sins, and has given thee victory through him. This is the
sweet doctrine of the Gospel, which I desire, that all Christians could
receive with Thanksgiving and an assured faith: for then would Christ be
nothing but Joy and sweetness to them; then would they take heart in the
victory of Christ's death, who indeed was made a curse for us, subject to wrath,
putting upon him our person, and laid our sins upon his own shoulders, and
he has made with us this happy change, that is to say, he took upon him our
sinful person, and gave unto us his innocent and victorious person, wherewith
we being now clothed, are free from the curse of the Law.

And therefore may every poor sinner say, with an assured confidence, Thou
Christ, art my sin and my curse; or rather, I am thy sin, and thy curse,
and contrariwise thou art my Righteousness, my Blessing, and my Life, my Grace
of God, and my Heaven. And thus, if we by faith do behold this brazen
Serpent, Christ, hanging upon the Cross, we shall see the Law, sin, death,
the devil and hell, killed by his death: and so may with the Apostle Paul sing
that ioying heart Dittie: Thanks be to God, who has given us victory, through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

And so with these Thankesgiuings, with these or such other like thoughts must
we receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. After
this manner is all fearfulness driven out of the soul of the Christian: and
charity is increased, faith strengthened, the conscience quieted, and the
tongue never cease to praise God, and to yield him infinite thanks for so
great a benefit. This is the virtue, efficacy, and only trust of our soul.
This is the Rock whereupon if the conscience be builded, it fears neither
tempest, nor the gates of hell, nor Gods wrath, nor the Law, nor sin, nor
death, nor the devils, nor any other thing. And forasmuch as the substance of
the Lords Supper and Table consists in this divine Sacrament: When the
Christian is at it, he must hold his eyes fastened continually upon the passion
of our gracious Savior, beholding him on the one side upon the cross laden
with all our sins: and GOD on the other side punishing, chastising, and
whipping his own only begotten and dear beloved Son in stead of us. O
happy is that man that shuts his eyes from all other sights, and will
neither hear nor see any other thing then Jesus Christ crucified, in whom are
laid up and bestowed all the treasures of Gods wisdom and divine knowledge!
Blessed (say I) is he that feeds his mind with so heavenly a food, and
makes himself drunken in the love of God with so sweet and singular a liquor.
But before I make an end of this matter, I will first advertise the Christian,
that Saint Austin has ordinarily been wont to term this holy Sacrament the
bond of charity, and the mystery of unity. And he says, that whosoever
receives the mystery of unity, and regards not the bond of peace, receives
not the Sacrament to his own behoof, but as a witness against himself. Why
the holy Sacrament of thanksgiving was ordained.
Therefore we must understand, that the Lord has ordained this holy Sacrament
not only to make us sure of the forgiveness of our sins: but also to inflame
us to peace, unity, and brotherly charity. For in this Sacrament the Lord
does after such a manner make us partakers of his body, as he becomes all
one thing with us, and we with him. By reason whereof, forasmuch as he
Christian peace and union are betokened by the bread and wine.
has but one body whereof he makes us partakers: it is meet that we also
should by such partaking become all one body together among our selves. And
this union is represented by the bread of the Sacrament: which as it is made of
many grains mingled and kneaded together, in such wise as one of them cannot
be discerned from another: So also must we be joined together after such a
sort, and so united together into one agreement of mind, as no division may
creep in. And this does Saint Paul show us, when he says: Is not the cup of
blessing which we bless, the communion of the blood of Jesus Christ? is not
the bread that we break, the communion of the body of Jesus Christ? whereas
we be many, yet are He that offends one of his Christian brethren, offends
Christ himself.
we but one bread and one body, for so much as we be all partakers of one bread.
By these things we understand, that when we receive his most holy communion,
we must consider that we are all of us ingrafted into Christ, and are all
become members of one selfsame body, that is to wit, of Jesus Christ, in such
wise as we cannot offend, defame, or despise any of our brethren, but we must
therewithal offend defame, and despise our said head Jesus Christ: neither can
we be at variance with any of our brethren, but in like wise we must be at
odds with him. Also we cannot love him, except we love him in our brethren.
Look how much care we have of our own body, so much must we have of our
Christian brethren, who are the members of our body. And like as no part of our
body feels any grief, which spreads not it self into all the other parts:
so ought we to determine with our selves, that our brother feels not any
inconvenience, which should not move us to compassion. With such manner of
thoughts must we prepare our selves to this holy Sacrament, quickening up our
spirits with a fervent love to our neighbourward. For what greater spur can
we have to prick A preparation to the receuing of the holy Sacrament.
us to love one another, then to see that Jesus Christ, by giving himself unto
us, not only allureth us to give our selves one to another, but also by making
himself common to us all, makes us also to be all one selfsame thing in
him? In respect whereof, we ought to covet and procure, that in all of us there
may be but one mind, one heart, and one tongue, accorded and united together
in thoughts, words and deeds. And we must mark well, that as often as we
receive this He that receives the Sacrament, binds himself to all the
duties of charity.
holy and worthy Sacrament, we bind our selves to all the duties of charity:
as not to offend any of our brethren, nor to leave any thing undone, that may
be profitable and helpefull in their necessity. But if there come any to this
heavenly Table of the Lord, that are divided at variance with their brethren,
the same must assure themselves that they eat unworthily, and are guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord, and that they eat and drink their own
damnation: for that there wanted nothing on their behalf, but that the body of
Jesus Christ was rent and plucked in pieces again, whilst they by hatred are
divided from their brethren, that is to wit, from the members of Jesus Christ,
and have not any part with him, and yet nevertheless in receiving this holy
communion, pretended to believe that their whole salvation consists in the
participation and union with Jesus Christ. Then let us go, my The true end for
which the holy Sacrament is ordained.
brethren, to the receiving of this heavenly bread, to celebrate the
remembrance of our Lords passion, and to strengthen and fortify the belief
and assurance of the forgiveness of our sins, with the remembrance thereof,
and to quicken up our minds and tongues to praise and exalt the infinite
goodness of our God, and finally to cherrish brotherly love, and to witness
the same one to another by the straight union which all of us have in the body
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Besides The 4th. remedy against distrust.
prayer, and the remembering of Baptism, and the often resorting to the most
holy communion, there is one other very good remedy against distrust and
fearfulness, which is no less friend to Christian charity: namely, the
remembrance of our predestination and election to eternal life, grounded upon
the Word of God, which is the Sword of the H. Ghost, wherewith we may beat
back our enemies. Rejoice ye in this Ephesians. 5. Luke 10.
(says the Lord) that your names are written in heaven. There is no greater
joy in this life, nor any thing that more comfort the Christian that is
afflicted, tempted, or fallen into any sin, then the remembrance of
predestination, and the assuring of our selves that we be of the number of them
whose names are written in the Book of life, and which are chosen to be
fashioned like unto the Image of Jesus Christ. O how unspeakable is the
comfort of him that has this faith, and museth continually in his heart upon
this exceeding sweet predestination, whereby he knows that although he fall
often, yet notwithstanding, God his Father who Psalm. 36.
has foreordained him to everlasting life, holds him up, and reaches out
his hand unto him continually. And he says continually in himself, If God
have chosen me, and predestined me to the glory of his children, who can
hinder me? If God be with us (says S. Paul) who can be against us? Nay Romans
8. He that receives the Gospel, is sure that he is predestined.
rather, to the end that the Predestination may be accomplished in us, he has
sent his deare-beloued Son, who is a most sure earnest penny and pledge unto
us, that we which have received the Grace of the Gospel, are Gods Children,
chosen to eternal life. This holy Predestination maintains the true
Christian in a continual spiritual joy, The effect proceeding of the
knowledge of predestination.
increases in him the endeavor of good works, and inflameth him with the
love of God, and makes him enemy to the world and to sin. Who is so fierce
and hard-hearted, which knowing that God of his mercy has made him his child
from everlasting, will not by and by be inflamed to love God? Who is of so vile
and base courage, that he will not esteem all the pleasures, all the honors,
and all the riches of the world as filthy mire, when he knows that God has
made him a Citizen of heaven? yea these are they that worship God rightly in
spirit and truth, receiving all things (as well in prosperity as in adversity)
at the hand of God their Father, and evermore praising and thanking him for
all, as their good Father, who is righteous and holy in all his works. These
being inflamed with the Love of God, and armed with the knowledge of their
predestination, fear neither death, nor sin, nor the devil, nor hell: neither
know they what the wrath of God is: for they see none other thing in God, but
love and fatherly kindness toward them. And if they fall into any troubles,
they accept them as tokens of Gods favor, crying out with S. Paul, Who Romans 8.
is it that shall separate us from Gods love? shall tribulations, shall
anguish, shall persecution, or hunger, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as
it is written, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and counted as
sheep appointed to the slaughter. But in all these things we get the upper
hand through him that has loved us. Wherefore, it is not for naught, that
Saint John says, how the true 1 John 3.
Christians know right well, that they must be saved and glorified, and that by
reason of the same affiance, they make themselves holy as Jesus Christ is holy.
And when Saint Paul exhorts his Disciples to a good Ephesians. 1.
and holy life: he is wont to put them in remembrance of their election and
predestination, as of a thing of very great force to stir up the minds of the
true Christians to the loving of God, and to the performance of good works.
And for the same cause our good Lord Jesus Christ speaks openly of this holy
predestination, as one that knew of how great importance the knowledge thereof
is to the edifying of his elect. But perchance thou will say to me, I know well
that they whose names are written in heaven, have cause to live in continual
joy, and glorify God both in word and deed; but I know not whether I am of
that number or no, and therefore I live in continual fear; specially because
I know my self to be an exceeding weak and frail sinner, from the violence
whereof I am not able to defend my self, but that I am overcome of it daily.
And furthermore, forasmuch as I see my self continually afflicted and troubled
with diverse temptations, me thinks, I do as it were behold with mine eyes,
the wrath of God scourging me. To answer to these doubts of thine, I say, my
right dear brother, that thou must assure thy self, that all these are but
temptations of the devil, who by all means seeks to rob us of that faith
and confidence that springs of faith, and assures us of Gods good will
toward us. He labors to strip our souls out of this precious garment: for
he knows that none is a true Christian, except he believe Gods Word, which
promises forgiveness of all sins, and peace to all them, which accept the
grace of the Gospel. Verily I say, that he which upon these promises of God,
persuades not himself assuredly, that God is a merciful and loving Father
unto him, nor with steadfast confidence looks to receive the inheritance of
the heavenly Kingdom at his hand: is not faithful in deed, and makes
himself utterly unworthy of Gods Grace. In respect whereof, S. Paul says,
that we be the Temple Heb. 3.
of God, so far forth as we firmly maintain the confidence and glory of our
hope, unto the end. And in another place he exhorts that we should not give
over our trust, Heb. 10.
which has great reward of recompense. And therefore, my brethren, let us give
our whole endeavor to do the Will of God, as it becomes good children, and
beware that we sin not, as near as we can. And although we fall oftentimes
into sin through our own frailty: yet let us not by and by surmize, that we
be vessels of wrath, or that we be utterly forsaken of the holy Ghost: for we
have our Advocate Jesus Christ before Good the Father, and he is the
atonementmaker for our sins. Let us bethink us of the opinion of S. Austin,
who says that none of the Saints is righteous and without sin: and yet
notwithstanding that, he cease not to be righteous and holy, so farreforth as
he retains his holiness with affection. And therefore if we have afflictions
Afflictions are no signs of reprobation.
and tribulations, let us not think that God sends them because he is our
enemy, but because he is our most loving Father. The Lord (says Solomon)
chastises him whom he loves, and scourges every child of his whom he
receives. Wherefore if we have Prou. 5.
received the Grace of the Gospel, whereby man is received of God for his
Child, we must not doubt of Gods grace and good will toward us. And when we
perceive our selves to delight in Gods Word, and to have a desire to follow the
life of Jesus A true mark to know Gods children by.
Christ: we must steadfastly believe, that we be the children of God, and the
Temple of the holy Ghost: for those things cannot be done by the power of man's
wisdom, but are the gifts of the holy Ghost, who dwells in us by faith, and
is as it were a seal of authority, which seals up Gods promises in our
hearts, the certainety whereof is printed aforehand in our minds, and is given
us as a pledge to stablish and confirm the same. As soon as you believe
(says the Apostle S. Paul) ye be sealed by the holy Spirit Ephesians. 2. Wherefore
the Apostle calls the holy Ghost the Spirit of promise.
of promise, who is the earnest penny of our inheritance. Behold how he shows
us hereby, that the hearts of the faithful are marked with the holy Ghost, as
it were with a seal: in respect whereof, he calls the holy Ghost, The Spirit
of promise, for so much as he confirms the promise of the Gospel, the which
(as I have oftentimes told you) is a happy tidings that promises forgiveness
of sins and everlasting life, to all such as believe that all their misdoings
are blotted out in Jesus Christ. All we that believe in Jesus Christ (says
Saint Paul) are Gal. 3.
become the children of God: and because we be his children, he has sent the
Spirit of his Son into our heart, which cries, Father, Father. And to the
Romans, Those (says he) that are guided by the Spirit of God, are the
children of God: for ye have Romans 8.
not received again the spirit of bondage in fear: but the Spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Father, Father. For certainly the same Spirit
bears our spirit record, that we be the children of God. Now then, if we be
children, we be also heirs. And we must mark well, that in these two places,
the Apostle S. Paul speaks plainly, not of any special revelation, but of a
certain record which the holy Ghost does commonly yield to all such as receive
the grace of the Gospel. Then if the holy Ghost assure us that we be Gods
children and heirs: why should we doubt of our predestination? The same man
says in the same Epistle, Whom Romans 8.
he has predestined, them has he also called: and whom he has called, them
has he also made righteous: and whom he has made righteous, them also has he
glorified. What shall we then say to all these A truemarke of predestination.
things? If God be on our side, who can be against us? And therefore if I
plainly perceive, that God has called me by giving me faith and the fruits of
faith, that is to wit, Peace of conscience, mortification of the flesh, and
quickening of the spirit, whether it be in whole or in part, why should I doubt
that I am not predestined? And moreover we say with S. Paul, that all true
Christians (that is to wit, all such as believe 2 Cor. 2.
the Gospel) receive not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit that comes
from God: by the inspiration whereof they discern the things that God has
given them. What marvel then is it, if we know that God has certainly given
us everlasting life? But there are some which say, that no man ought to presume
so far, as to boast himself to have the Spirit of God. They speak in such
wise, as if the Christian should glory of the having of it for his own
deserts, and not by the only and mere mercy of God: and as though it were a
presumptuousnesse to profess himself a Christian: or as though a man could
be a Christian without the having of Christ's Spirit: or as though we could
without flat hypocrisy say that Jesus Christ is our Lord, or call God our
Father, if the holy Ghost moved not our hearts and Romans 8. 1. Cor. 12.
tongues to utter so sweet words. And yet notwithstanding, even they that count
us presumptuous for saying that God has given us his holy Spirit, with faith,
forbid us not to say every day Our Father, but rather command us. But I would
have them to tell me, how it is possible to separate faith and He that
gloryeth not that he has the holy Ghost, is no true Christian.
the holy Ghost asunder, seeing that faith is the peculiar work of the holy
Ghost? If it be presumption to believe that the holy Ghost is in us, why does
Saint Paul bid the Corinthians try themselves whether they have faith or no,
affirming them to be reprobates, if they know not that Jesus Christ is in
them? But in very deed, it is a great blindness to accuse the Christians of
presumptuousnesse for taking upon them to glory of the presence of the holy
Ghost, without which glorying, there cannot be any Christianity at all. But
Jesus Christ (who cannot lie) says, that his Spirit is unknown to the world,
and that they only do know John 14.
him, within whom he dwells. Then let them begin to become good Christians,
and put away their Jewish minds, and embrace the grace of the holy Gospel in
good earnest: and then shall they know that the good and true Christians both
have the holy Ghost, and also acknowledge themselves to have him. But some may
say to me, That the Christian cannot by any means know that he is in Gods
favor, without some special revelation: and so consequently, that he cannot
know whether he be predestined or no. And he may specially allege these
words of Solomon: A man knows Eccless. 6.
not whether he be worthy of hatred or of love: and also these words of the
Apostle S. Paul to the Corinthians: I feel not my self 1 Cor. 4.
guilty of any thing, and yet feel I not my self justified for all that. It
seems to be A man may know that he is in Gods favor.
sufficiently declared by the texts of holy Scripture, that the said opinion is
false: and now remains only to be showed briefly, that these two texts
whereupon the same opinion is chiefly grounded, ought not to be taken in that
sense. As touching Salomons sentence, although it be scarce well and
faithfully translated in the common translation: yet is there not any man so
dull, who in reading Salomons whole discourse, may not plainly perceive, that
by saying so, he By the chances of this life, no man can judge whether a man
be in Gods favor or displeasure.
meant, that if any man will take upon him to judge by the casualties that
happen in this life, who is loved or hated of God: he labors in vain,
considering that the selfsame chances which light upon the righteous, light
also upon the unrighteous: upon him that sacrifices, as well as upon him that
sacrifices not: and as soon upon the good man, as upon the sinner. Whereof it
may be gathered, that God does not always show his love toward those whom
he indueth with outward prosperities: and contrariwise, that he shows not
his displeasure toward those whom he punishes. Then, my right dear brethren
in Christ Jesus our Lord, do you think it reason to conclude, that a man
cannot be sure of Gods favor, because the same surenesse cannot be perceived
by the sundry chances, that happen every day in these transitory and temporal
things? A little before, Solomon says, That a man cannot discern any
difference between the soul of man, and the life of a beast: for it is seen
that both man and beast dye after one manner. Shall we then conclude by this
outward accident, that the persuasion which we have conceived of the
immortality of the soul, is grounded but only upon conjecture? No surely:
and it were a great folly to stand upon a thing so notably known. And as for
S. Paul's words, I say, that forasmuch as he was speaking of the administration
of the Gospel, he meant that his heart mis-giues him not of any mis-dealing
therein, and yet for all that, that he is not sure he has done his whole
duty to the full, and therein obtained the praise of righteousness to Godward,
as if he had done all that pertained and was convenient to be done by a
faithful Steward: and therefore in speaking of his office, like a just and
discreet person, he durst not justify himself, nor auow that he had
discharged his duty to the uttermost, and satisfied his Lords will, but
referred all things to the only judgment of his Lord. And verily, whosoever
reads these words of the Apostle Saint Paul, and considers the words going
before them with some judgment, and likewise the words that follow, will not
doubt, but this is the true sense of them. I know well, that some men in
expounding these words of the Apostle S. Paul, say, that, although he knew
himself to be without sin, yet he knew not whether he were righteous to
Godward or no, according as David affirms, that no man can perfectly know his
own sins. But these men perceive not that S. Paul groundeth not
righteousness Romans 3. 5.
upon works, but upon faith, and that he utterly refuses his own
righteousness, to embrace only the righteousness which God has given us,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Also they consider not, Phil. 3.
that he was most certain to be accepted for righteous, in maintaining the
soundness and pureness of the Christian faith, and that he knew well how the
Crown of that righteousness was laid up for him in Heaven: and also, that he
was fully assured, that no 2 Timothy 4.
creature in heaven, earth, nor hell, was able to separate him from the Love of
God, and that he longed to dye, because he knew for a truth, that after his
death, he should be Romans 8.
with Jesus Christ. All which things should Phil. 1.
be false, if he had not been well assured that he was righteous, (I mean) by
faith, and not by works. Therefore, my dear beloved brethren, let us cease to
speak that thing of the Apostle S. Paul, which he never once thought of
himself, but fiercely fought against it continually, in answering such as
measured righteousness by works, and not by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
But besides these two authorities of Solomon and S. Paul, a man might allege
some other places of holy Scripture, which whereas they warn and encourage men
to fear God, seem to be contrary to the assurance of this our predestination.
And if I would declare them all particularly, I should be ouer-long. But I say
generally, that the fear of punishment was proper to the Old Testament, and
childly love to the New Testament: according as S. Paul witnesses, The two
sorts of fear, childly and slavish.
when he says to the Romans, Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear: but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Father,
Father. And likewise unto Timothy he says, that God has not given us the
spirit of fearfulness, but 2 Timothy 1.
rather of power and love: which spirit Jesus Christ has given us according to
the promise made by the mouth of the holy Prophets, and brought to pass, that
we being delivered out of our enemies hands, may serve him without fear before
his holy presence, in all holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life. By these and many other places of the holy Scripture, a man may plainly
gather, that the painful and slavish fearfulness agrees not with a
Christian: and this is already confirmed by this, that such manner of
fearfulness is utterly contrary to the spiritual cheerfulness and joy,
which is peculiar to the Christian, as the Apostle S. Paul shows openly to
the Romans, saying that the Kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and
joy in Romans 14.
the holy Ghost: that is to say, that every man which enters into the
Kingdom of the grace of the Gospel, is become righteous through faith: and
afterward adds peace of conscience, which consequently breeds such a
spiritual and holy rest and gladness, in respect whereof, the same S. Paul
does oftentimes encourage the Christians Ephesians. 6. Phil. 4.
to live merrily. And S. Peter says, that all they which believe in Jesus
Christ, do 1 Pet. 1.
continually rejoice with an unspeakable and glorious joy, notwithstanding
that they be afflicted with diverse temptations. And The slavish fear
threateneth the wicked, and the childly fear encourages the chosen.
therefore when the holy Scripture threatens and frayeth the Christians, they
must understand, that it speaks to such as are so licentious, that for so much
as they keep not the thankfulness and honesty that belong to Gods children,
they must be handled as servants, and held in awe, until they come to taste
and feel how sweet and pleasant the Lord is, and until such time as faith
work his effects in them, and that they have so much childly love, as may
suffice to keep and maintain them in honesty of Christian conversation, and
in following the example of our Lord Jesus Christ. And when the selfsame
Scripture exhorts Christians to the true fear: it means not that they
should fear the judgment and wrath of God, as though it were presently ready
to condemn them: for (as I have said already) by the record which the holy
Ghost gives to their spirit, they know that God has chosen them and called
them, of his own mere mercy, and not for their deserts. By reason whereof,
they doubt not at all, but that by the self-same goodness and mercy, he will
maintain them in the happy state wherein he has placed them. And after such
manner the Scripture exhorts The effects of childly fear, Ephesians. 4.
them, not to slavish fear, but to childish fear, that is to wit, that like
good children they should be loath to offend against the Christian Religion, or
to commit any thing against the duty and honesty of Gods true children, and
likewise to grieve the holy Ghost that dwells in them: to the end that
knowing the corruptednesse of our nature, we should always be heedfull and
diligent, and never have any trust in our selves: for in our flesh and in our
minds do the appetites and affections continually dwell: which, as deadly
enemies of the soul, lay a thousand snares and baits for us, incessantly
laboring to make us proud, ambitious, lecherous, and covetous. This is the
fear whereunto the whole Scripture exhorts the Christians that have once
tasted how sweet the Lord is, and which bestow all their endeavor in following
Christ's footsteps, who cast not from them this holy fear, because they labor
to put off the old man.

And the good Christians must never bereave themselves quite and clean of this
childly fear, which is the singular friend of Christian charity, like as the
slavish fear is such an enemy unto it, as they can by no The Christian may
warrant himself the forgiveness of his sins.
means dwell together. And by the foresaid things, a man may plainly perceive,
that the good Christian ought never to doubt of the forgiveness of his sins,
nor of Gods favor. Nevertheless, for the better satisfying of the Reader, I
purpose to set down herevnder, certain authorities of the holy Doctors, which
confirm this foresaid truth. St. Hilary in his fifth Canon upon Matthew,
says, It is Gods will, that we should hope without any doubting of his
unknown will. For if the belief be doubtful, there can be no righteousness
obtained by believing. And thus we see, that according to S. Hilary, a man
obtains not forgiveness of his S. Hilary.
sins at Gods hand, except he believe undoubtedly to obtain it. And good
right it is that it should be so. For he that doubts, James 1.
is like a wave of the Sea, which is tossed and turmoyled with the wind. And
therefore let not such a one think to obtain any thing at Gods hand. But let
us hear S. Austin, S. August.
who in his Manuell counsels us to drive away the said foolish imagination,
which intends to dispossess us of the foresaid good and sage assuredness.
Let such foolish imagination (says he) murmr as much as it lists, saying,
Who are thou? how great is that glory? by what deserts hopest thou to obtain
it? I answer assuredly: I know in whom I have believed, and I know that he (of
his great love) has made me his son: I know he is true of his promise, and
able to perform his word: for he can do what he will. And when I think upon
the Lords death, the multitude of my sins cannot dismay me, for in his death
do I put all my trust. His death is my whole desert, it is my refuge, it is my
salvation, my life and resurrection, and the mercy of the Lord is my desert. I
am not poor of desert, so long as the Lord of mercy fails me not. And since
the mercies of the Lord are many, many also are my deseruings. The more that he
is of power to save, the more am I sure to be saved. The same S. Austin talking
with God in another place, says that he had despaired by reason of his great
sins and infinite negligences, if the Word of God had not become flesh. And
anon after, he says these words: All my hope, all the assurance of my trust is
settled in his precious blood, which was shed for us and for our salvation. In
him my poor heart takes breath: and putting my whole trust in him, I long to
come unto thee, O Father, not having mine own righteousness, but that
righteousness of thy Son Jesus Christ. In these two places St. Austin
shows plainly, that the Christian must not be afraid, but assure himself of
righteousness, by grounding himself, not upon his own works, but upon the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, which cleanses us from all our sins, and
makes our peace with God. Saint Bernard in his first Sermon S. Bernard.
upon the Annunciation says most evidently, that it is not enough to believe
that a man can have forgiveness of his sins, but by Gods mercy: nor any one
good desire or ability to do so much as one good work, except God give it
him: no nor that a man cannot deserve eternal life by his works, but if God
give him the gift so to believe. But besides all these things (says Saint
Bernard) (which ought rather to be counted a certain entrance and foundation
of our faith) it is needful that Each one must believe particularly, that his
sins are released and forgiven him freely.
thou believe also, that thy sins are forgiven thee for the Love of Jesus
Christ. See how this holy man confesses, that it is not enough to believe
generally the forgiveness of sins: but he must also believe particularly
that his own sins are forgiven him by Jesus Christ; and the reason is ready
at hand, namely, that forasmuch as God has promised thee to accept thee for
righteous through the merits of Jesus Christ, if thou believe not that thou art
become righteous through him, thou make God a liar, and consequently thou
make thy self unworthy of his grace and liberality. But thou will say to me,
I believe well the forgiveness of sins, and I know that God is true: but I
am afraid that I am not worthy to have so great a gift. I answer, that the
forgiveness of thy sins shall not be a gift or free grace, but a wages, if
God should give it thee for the worthynesse of thy works. But I reply upon
thee, that God accepts thee for righteous, and lays not thy sin to thy
charge, because of Christ's merits, which are given unto thee, and become thine
by faith. Therefore, following the counsel of Saint Bernard, Believe thou not
only the forgiveness of sins in general, but also apply the same belief
to thine own particular person, by believing without any doubt, that all thy
mis-doings are pardoned thee through Jesus Christ. And in so doing, thou shall
give the glory unto God, by confessing him to be merciful and true, and shall
become righteous and holy before God, for so much as by the same confession, the
holiness and righteousness of Jesus Christ, shall be communicated unto thee.
But to return to our purpose of Predestination: I say, that by the things
above mentioned, a man may evidently perceive, that the (...) how it happens,
that when they be diseased, they say not also, I will have neither Physician
nor physic: for look what God had determined upon me, cannot but come to
pass? why eat they? why drink they? why till they the ground? why plant they
Vines? and why be they so diligent in doing all things convenient for to
sustain the body? why say they not also, that all these turmoilings, policies,
and travels of ours are superfluous, forasmuch as it is not possible, but that
whatsoever God has foreseen and determined concerning our life and death,
must needs come to pass? And therefore if Gods providence make them not
negligent and idle in things pertaining to the body: why should it make them
more slothful and negligent in that which concerns the Christian
perfection, which without all comparison is far nobler then the body? But
forasmuch as we see that neither Jesus Christ, nor Saint Paul, for any doubt of
offending the reprobates, have forborne to preach the truth, which is necessary
to the edifying of the chosen, for the love of whom the everlasting Son of
God became man, and was put to death upon the Cross: we also in like wise
ought not to forbear the preaching of Predestination to the true Christians,
forasmuch as we have seen, that it imports great edification.

Now are we come to the end of our purpose, wherein our chief intent has
been (according to our small power) to magnify the wonderful benefit which
the Christian man has received by Jesus Christ crucified, and to show that
faith of her self alone iustifyeth, that is to wit, that God receives and
holds them for righteous, which believe steadfastly, that Christ has made
full amends for their sins: howbeit, that as light can not be separated from
fire, which of it self burns and deuoureth all things: even so good works
can not be separated from faith, which alone by it self justifies.

And this holy doctrine (which exalts Jesus Christ, and represseth and
abateth the pride of man) has and always shall be rejected, and fought
against, by such Christians as have Jewish minds. But happy is he, who
following the example of Saint Paul, spoyleth himself of his own
righteousness, and would have none other righteousness, then that which is of
Jesus Christ, wherewith if he be clothed and apparelled, he may most
assuredly appear before God, and shall receive his blessing and the heritage
of heaven and earth, with his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom be all
honor, praise and glory, from this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
Christ is the end of the Law.

