A GODLY SERmon: Preached at Detford in Kent, on Monday the ix. of June, in
Anno. 1572.

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Man. An. 1586.

A Godly Sermon, Preached at Detford in Kent.
The Text.
1. Cor. 7. ver. 1. NOw coneerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me. It were
good for a man not to touch a woman.

ver. 2. 2 Nevertheless to avoid fornication let every man have his wife, and
let every woman have her own Husband.


IN the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three persons and
one God, let us pray. O gracious God, and most merciful Father, by whose
goodness it comes to pass, that we have been safely preserved from our
young and tender years unto this present hour: and are now called together to
serve thee, by sin ging of Psalms, with preaching and prayer: we most humbly
beseech thee for thy son christ's sake, yt thou will not suffer our minds to be
negligentlye wandering about other matters, to make thee more and more
displeased against us: but so to order and govern the same, by the inspiration
of thy holy spirit, that we may by these virtuous excercises, learn more and
more to mortify and kill the lusts of the flesh, to sorrow and lament our
sinful wretchedness and misery, and to repent and amend our lives in such sort,
as all may redound to the kingdom of Christ, and to ye confusion of
Antichrist, to the setting up of his glory, and to the pulling down, and
clean overthrowing of al superstition, false doctrine, heresy and popery:
through the same thy son Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

IT is written in the vij. Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Paul to the
Corinthians, in the beginning of the Chapter in these words: Now concerning
the things whereof you wrote unto me, etc. For the better understanding of the
Apostles mind, we have to consider, that (after the Apostle had preached
thegospell to the Corinthians, and planted a Church amongst them, and was gone
abroad to publishe the glad tidinges of salvation to others also, for he was
not then (as Preachers at this present should be) tied to one flock: but by the
virtue of his commission he must go through all the world) false Apostles
entered into the Church, who being puffed up with vain glory, and affectate
eloquence, sought to bring into contempt, the simplicity which Paul used in
preaching the Gospel.

Here in the very entrance we have two things to learn. First, that as God is
willing, and would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth,
and therefore uses means to accomplish it, namely the preaching of his
gospel, which is yt power of god to salvation to all that believe. So our
common adversary the Devil, goes about like a roaring lion, not only seeking
in himself to devour us, but also using his instruments to deceive us, 1. Tim.
4.1. 2. Tim. 3.1. 1. Peter. 3.3. Iud. 18. Mat. 23.24
and to draw us backward into al error and superstition. Secondly we may here
see, what a gap is opened to all inconveniences, when yt Minister or Preacher
is from among his flock. Paul no sooner gone from Corinthus but by and by false
Apostles labor to destroy ye which he had planted. ^. Cor. 1.10.
He was no sooner departed from the churches of Galatia, but there craftilye
crept in false brethren, that corrupted the pure doctrine of Christ, and taught
that the ceremonies of the law must be necessarily observed. Exodus 32.2.
Moises no sooner gone up into the mountain from the people of Israel, to
receive the law at the Lords hands, but the people fall by and by to Idolatrye
and ungodliness. And Paul seems to warn the elders of Ephesus concerning
this matter also, Act. 20.28.
when he says: Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the flock,
whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my
departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock, O
that our Non residents would but consider this: O that they which give them
liberty to sin, would weigh this, then men's consciences should not be so
clogged with iniquity and ungodliness as they are. Then gods people should be
better instructed fed and looked unto, in respect of their spiritual pasture,
than either now they are, or hitherto have been. God in mercy if it be his will
and pleasure bring it to pass. But to return, these false Apostles that had
thrust in themselves, among the Corinthians after Paul's departure, did not
only as before I said, bring into disliking, Paul's plain and simple kind of
teaching, but also endeavored to entangle with vain and foolish questions,
the minds and consciences of the Corinthians, and albeit the Corinthians did
harken much unto them: yet it appears that they did not utterly shake off
that authority and credit which they had of Paul, and therefore they demanded
Paul's judgment concerning such matters, as the false Apostles and Preachers
went about to persuade the^ in: and here by the way one thing is taught to you
common people, yt you receive not as truth every thing yt every one speaks,
for all is not gold that glistereth, but try the spirits whether they be of
God, yea or no, and again: prove all things, but retain only such things as
be good, you have for your instruction in this behalf ye commandment of our
Saniour Christ, search ye scriptures: and also that notable example of ye men
of Thessalonica, who received the word with all readiness, and searched the
scriptures daily whether these things were so. The questions which the
Corinthia^s proposed, were (as may plainly be proved by the circumstances of
this chapter) concerning single life, the duly of marriage. Besides of discord
and dissentio^s in marriage, of marriage between ye faithful and unfaithful, of
vncircu^cising the circu^eised of servitude, of virginity, and second marriage.
Of all these at this present it is impossible to speak. Therefore we will deal
only with ye two first, that is concerning single life, and the duties of
married folk, of which two points the Apostle does largely entreat, in ye 9
first verses of this chapter. To deal with any other curious division of the
text, I mind not, for that I see it will be the more profitable for you, the
more simply I deal herein: I will therefore take the words as they lie, and
expound them, briefly withal: delivering unto you, such observations of
doctrine and christian instructions, as God by his spirit shall reveal unto
me. In the beginning of my text, are these words. Now concerning the things
etc. The Apostle had in some of the Chapters before going, and especially in
the latter end of the 6. Chapter, entreated of a certain disease, named
fornication: for this sickness he appoints in this Chapter a double remedy:
the one is marriage made in the fear of God: the other is the gift of
chastity: or sole life proceeding from God. The Apostle says that the
Corinthians did write unto him about certain matters. By which it may be
gathered, that it was a custom in those days, when dark and doubtful causes
did arise, by writing to demand the judgment of the disciples and apostles of
Christ: who being taken out of this life, afterward they went for counsel to
holy Bishops and learned Fathers, which custom as it was commendable, so
being abused, it engendered a certain tyranny. For the Bishop of Rome (whose
judgment was sundry times asked) began by that means, to usurp Lordshippe
and rule over the congregations of Christ, as as though nothing ought to be
accounted substantial and true without his advise, a very proud and ambitious
kind of dealing. But let that pass. It is most sure that the Corinthians did
write unto him, and we have the substance and matter of their questions: yet
concerning the manner and form thereof, there is much controversy. Lord God
what a stir Chrysostom and Hierome do in that behalf keep. It shall be
superfluous to rehearse their sayings and reasons, for that they make ado
where none needs, and besides the time may bespent in more necessary and
profitable matter. Moreover, to reason of things doubtefull, when we have
things certain and sure before our eyes, is mere vanity and smacketh
somewhat of foolishnes. Only in these words we have for our learning to mark:
first, the willingness of the people, and the desire that they had to be
instructed in matters of truth and religion, and therefore sent to Paul their
questions, requesting to have his answeares thereto. Secondly, the great care
that Paul had to do good to all manner of men by all means possible, who
beside that he had taught them in his presence, does now notwithstanding, as a
token of the continuance of his good will toward them, instruct them also in
his absence by writing. If we now apply this to our time and age, and compare
our ministers and people, with this people and their preacher, we shall find as
great odds and as much difference as is betwixt white and black. For (that I
may deal first with the people, they had some knoweledge of God:) ours
altogether want knowledge of God and godliness: they labored to increase in
all knoweledge: we remain in all ignorance and darkness: and if any would
reach us his hand, to draw us out of the filth and mire of sin, we account
him our greatest enemy, There was amongst them, by reason of discipline,
severe punishment of sin: and by that means also godliness of life and
holiness of conversation: for lack of it among us, the bridle is given to all
manner of iniquity, and all kind of ungraciousness and ungodliness, does without
punishment rule and reign amongst us. Now concerning the minister, he preached
unto them: ours read to us, and scarce that, according to knowledge: he
profits them both by preaching and writing: ours neither of those ways do
any good: be able to teach, and that which he requires of others, was in
himself, for he was able to stop the mouths of the adversaries: ours are
for the most part, blind guydes, sleepie watchmen, dumb dogs, and as the
Prophet Zachary rightly calls the^, idle shepheardes, nay rather Idols
themselves. For they have a mouth and speak not, they have eyes and see not,
they have ears and hear not, they have noses and smell not: they have hands
and touch not, they have feet and walk not, neither make they a sound with
their throat: they that make them are like unto them, and so are all that trust
in them. A lamentable case, that they that should guide other, are themselves
to be guided, because they be blind: and that they that should lead other,
are so lame, that they can not go on their feet: nay I would to God there
were not, that to the lack of knowledge in themselves, add innumerable heaps
of vices: some ruffians, some whoremo^gers and drunkards, some blasphemers, and
some spotted with this public crime, some with that, whereby they not only
purchase unto themselves an evil report and rumor to go of the^, but also
cause Gods name and his Gospel to be evil spoken of. So that you may see how
far our mintsters are off from being like Paul, who^ they ought in this case,
and other points also to follow as far forth as by Gods spirit they shall be
assessed: but as there is no agreement betwixt light and darkness: so there is
not in any respect almost any likeness betwixt him and them: again, 'where as
Paul if his judgment were asked, concerning matters of faith and religton, was
able to give sound and sincere judgment, according as Gods truth, which also
is required in every one that takes upon him the office and name of a mimster,
these in such cases are so far off from executing any part of their
function, that you were with the Romans as good go to the geese of the
Capital of Rome, or else with the Israelites ask counsel at your stocks, and
have your staff teach you. Marry in deed if you deal with them for keeping a
gelding or a hawke, for dressing a garden, orchard or bowling alley, for
tabling or carding, or any such other foolishnes and vanitye, they will and can
behave themselves most cunningly: neither would I have any to gather hereupon,
that in a generality I condemn all, For I knowle that in this realm, there
are many both godly and learned my meaning is, yt the greatest number and
common sort are such, as continual experience at this day to the great grief
and sorrow of the godly, too too plainly declares. The Lord put into the
heart of Prince and Magistrates, to remove these, and (if it be his will) to
see such placed in his vyneyard, as may hasten in his harvest. But to let this
pass, and to entreat of those matters, which specially concern the cause for
which we are at this present assembled. The Apostle says, It were good for a
man, not to touch a woman. The meaning is not, that marriage by Gods
institution is evil or wicked: for that were intolerable blasphemy if any
should so say: but that marriage, because through man's corruptions it brings
cares and troubles, is not expedient, I judge this word (good) to be taken
(not as Jerome against Iouinian takes it, for yt which is contrary and
against evil, as he too childishly and peeuishly, by the leave of so great a
father does take it, and as Tertullian (somewhat before him did take the same
also,) but for expedient and profitable, as in other places of the scripture,
it is likewise used. And this rule of Paul is to be understood of such, as upon
whom the Lord has bestowed ye gift of chastity, not only of body but also of
mind. For albeit there are some good interpreters, that apply it generally to
those three kind of Eunuchs, or chaste persons, whereof our Savior Christ
speaks, yet am not I of that mind, because that many otherwise chaste in body,
have not with standing their minds and understanding defiled with vunatural lusts
and concupiscence, which before our God is a great and a grievous sin. So then
Paul addresseth himself in this place to speak to such as have pure hearts
and clean bodies, which is either hardly or not at all found in any. For who
can say, my heart is clean before God, and this may plainly appear unto us
by that which follows. Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man
have his wife, and let every woman have her own husband, and again, if they
can not abstain, let them marry, for it is better to marry, then to burn.
To make this more plain by a similitude, If one should say after this manner:
It is good for a man neither to eat, to drink, nor to sleep: unless he were
well understood, he should appear to speak very absurdely, because he seems
to take away all such necessaries, as whereby God has appointed man's life to
be maintained: yet the party so saying, does not disprayse meat and drink,
and sleep, as things noisome and hurtful, but means yt we should live more
godly, if being freed from these prouocations, we gave our selves wholly to ye
consideration of heavenly things. For more then the competent and needful
sufficing of our nature, whatsoever is given unto these, is diminished from the
spirit. Even so the Apostle does not condemn marriage in this saying, as evil
or wicked, but because many lettes and stops are found in fleshly marriages, he
says It were good not to be married, for that does he understand by touching
of a woman, as the best and most learned expositors yt I seen take it. It
follows, Neuertholesse, for the avoiding of fornication, etc. In these words
the Apostle commands such as are unchaste, to run to the remedy yt God has
appointed: for although the sentence seem to be universal, yet it oght to be
restrained unto them, who feel themselves by a certain needfulnes to be
pricked forward. In this behalf no law can be prescribed, neither can we judge
one of another, but every man should be a sufficient witness to himself,
because in himself he feels the infirmities and pricks of the flesh. and
albeit there appeareneuer so many stops and lets in marriage, yet this must all
understand, to whom God has not given the gift of chastity (and and so by
that means not able to withstand the pricks of the flesh) that this
commandment is by the Lord laid upon their shoulders as a burden to bear,
which if it be not performed (feeing that God has appointed this as a remedy
against sin) they commit grieuos iniquity, and by that their dealing heap
unto themselves wrath against the day of the Lord. Moreover the place of the
Apostle must not be so understood, as though this were the only cause, why
marriages should be made, but this is his drift, not so much to show for what
causes marriage was orderned, as for what persons it was fit and necessary,
for if we have respect unto the time of the first institution, it could not be
a remedy for yt dose ase which yet was not (I mean sin) but it was ordained
for the procreatio^ of children, the increase of mankind, and the mutual
society yt the one should have of the other: and after man's fall the second use
was added. To stand upon the terms. fornication and adultery, and the
differences betwixt them, we shall not need, because it is more curious then
necessary, and this we see, yt the scripture does as well use yt one as the
other term, in many places, for all quchast and vnsober behavior of our
selves, either in body or mind. This is enough out of this place to be
gathered, yt though the world make little account of committing such wickedness,
yet it is a great sin before yt majesty of god, which evidently appears,
because he will have those that are his, to shun and fly from the same. If
this be not sufficient, cast but your eyes up to the latter end of the former
chapter, and see how heinous a crime the Apostle makes it: there he warns
them to flee fornication, the reason whereby he would dissuade them from that
sin, is taken from the notoriousnes and grieuousnes of the fact. For says
he, every sin that a man does, is without the body: but be that committteth
fornication, finnoth against his own body, that is to say, he more pollineth
his own body, then he that commits any other sin. If this will not serve,
have an eye unto those punishments which God has appointed unto those wicked
contemners and breakers of his ordinances, His punishments are two fold,
either temporal or perpetual. The perpetual punishment of God, is that
burning lake of fire and brimstone, which is prepared for the diuill and his
angels, where shall be weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth, without (faith
John in his revelation) shall be dogs and inchaunters, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes lies: and the
Apostle Paul says, Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. Be not deceived, neither fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor buggerers, nor thieues, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor-raylers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God: which places
are to be understood of such manner of men, as are the servants of sin, and sold
to work wickedness, and die in the same without hearty and unfeigned repentance.
His temporal punishments are also of two sorts: either in those which he
lays upon the committers of such wickedness, of himself: as war, plagues,
pestilences, sickness, poverty and such like, which bring his children to a
consideration of their faults, and a beholding of his mercy, but have in the
wicked and reprobate a contrary effect and operation. and in the 26. of
Genesis we may see that Abimelech king of Gerar, made a law concerning this
mattter, that whosoever did touch the man or his wife to the breaking of
wedlock, should die the death. Verily it may appear to all (unless they be
wilfully blind) that we in the clear light of ye Gospel, are far worse in this
matter, then they which were under the law of nature, before the law of God
written was given for the government of his people. But if such as God has
appointed his officers and ministers on earth, to execute such notorious
offenders and transgressers of his law, who ought to deal in the punishment of
this sin, as God himself appoints, and not as ye Popes canons pestilently
prescribes: that is to say, to see whoredom and adultery punished with death,
as the Lord himself wills, and not so slightly passed over and looked unto
as at this day it is. In ye law we have these words repeated twice for failing,
The man that commits adultery with an other man's wife, because he has
committed allulterie with his neighbors wife, the adulterer and adulteress
shall die the death. And how diligent executors of this law ye magistrates and
people of Israel were, it appears in that they were so ready to put to death
that innocent Susanna: yea in ye very law of nature, it has bin after that
same manner punished, as appears in Genesis, when we read that Judah
contemns his daughter in law Thamar, because she was an adulteres, (although
he himself giving sentence against her, knew not that he had committed sin
with her) to be burned. But I know this judgment will not be liked of some,
but it skilleth not, for I come not to please men, for if I should so do, I
could not be the servant of God: this I dare speak, and to all, of what sort
and condition so ever they be, in ye strength of gods spirit I dare utter it,
yt the lack of discipline is the occasion of this sin, and is in some sort by
wicked and ungodly persons eue^ as it were defended, affirming it is but a
knack of youth, a piece of good fellowship, or if not defended, yet the
punishment diminished, and the faults lessened now as in time heretofore it
has been: for the scribes and pharisees affirmed that if a man kept his body
clean from actual sin, he could not be an adulterer or fornicatour: and no
maruayle though the people were easily induced both to receive and believe this
opinion. For besides that it is plausible to flesh and blood, ye scribes and
pharisees themselves, the authors of it, were in those days men of great
countenance and estimation, even as Abbottes and Cardinals in the Papacy, or
(that I may speak more familiarly and plainly) like to our Lord Bishops
amongst us, yet notwithstanding their credit, Christ sets himself against
them, not only showing how corruptely they had expounded the law, but also
opening the true sense and meaning thereof. So that this is manifest, that
though the world account never so little of this wickedness, know you yet the
Lord esteems both the thought, wishing and the deed doing to be great and
grievous sins, and there fore so expressly has forbidden it, and appointed so
grievous punishments for it. Not that I mean that he which sins in thought,
should by the Magistrate be put to death, as well as he that does the filthy
fact in body: for that were with the Pelagians, Iouianists, and Stoiks, to make
sins equal, which opinion of theirs I utterly dislike and detest. For in
respect of circumstaunce, one sin may be greater then another, and so
deserve a sharper punishmente, but to teach you according to the truth of gods
law, that you should not think those sins small, which Gods spirit accounts
very great (and indeed, without repentance, make a perpetual separation
between the Lord and us) and also to declare, that we ought heartily to wish,
and earnestly to pray, that Gods law, according to his will, with as much
speed as might be, and in as straight a manner as he has commanded, might be
put in execution, to the punishing of the wicked, and the comfort of the godly.
Neither am I ignorant how some both have and will kick against this doctrine,
thinking that though it were so severely punished in the old law among the
Jews, yet it should not be so among us. To this I could easilye yield, if
they were able to prove, either God himself the Lawgiuer, to be mutable: which
is impossible, or else the law not to appertain to us, which I think they are
not able to doetor else if they were able to prescribe a better order of
politic government, the^ God him self, ye author of al wisdom, has already
set out, which were presumption and blasphemy intolerable, for by yt means
flesh and blood should be, if not exalted before yt majesty of God, yet made
equal unto him. But seeing yt they are not able to prove any of these points,
it remains, that unless they will be judged froward and obstinate, they
consent to this truth, and acknowledge yt same. But they are so far from
yielding to it, yt they spare not to set themselves against it, For did not
Christ say they, say to the woman taken in adultry, God thy way and sin no
more, and Paul did not kill with the sword but excommunicate by the word, the
incestuous person at Corinth. Therefore fornication, adultery etc. is not so
straightly to be punished as you would have it. I will answer breefely, and
for breuities sake I will omit many necessary points in these two examples,
which otherwise if I might stand long upon, they were worthy of the noting, and
first for Christ's example, thus I answer, ye execution of the law for
punishing adultery with death, did belong to ye civil magistrate, now Christ
was none, as plainly appears by this saying: Man who made me a judge or a
deuider over you, spoken to one that would have had him to have commanded his
brother to have divided the inheritance with him: and again by that which he
spoke to Pilate, My kingdom is not of this world. So then because Christ was
not a civil Magistrate, he would not take upon him to put yt in execution which he
had nothing to do with, withal teaching us to, yt we be content with our
vocation, and keep our selves within ye bounds thereof, and this may serve for
answer to yt example. Now concerning Paul's dealing, we have thus much to
note, that there was the^, so far as can be gathered, no Christian ruler,
that might take upon him to execute this law, in his full force, and yet
rather then sin should be unpunished, and wickedness winked at, Paul
would use the discipline of the Church, and deliver the incestuous person over
to Satan for a time. Would to God, that if so be the Magistrate neglect his
duetye in punishing this sin, in such severe manner as Gods law appoints,
yet we might have some Paul's and Elders in every Congregation, that would
use ye force of the word, and severity of Discipline Ecclesiastical, to the
beating down of this, and all other like horrible vices. But all this
notwithstanding, it is lamentable to be considered, and no godly man can
without tears behold, the fond and ridiculous punishment of this sin used in
these days. To be pricked in a sheet, or pinned in a blanquet, and to stand
in the Church, or in some Market place, or carted through the Town, is the
most grievous censure of all: and yet in my judgment, as good left undone,
for it is the best way that can be, to make such as have little shame in them,
to bes altogether past shame, I will not say altogether past grace. And yet
this kind of punishment belongs to the poorer sort. If rich ones sin, they
are punished by the purse, forty shillinges for committing such an act is
judged a great punishment. If this be not a maintaining of sin, I know not
what is. For what vicious or sensual man is there, that will leefe his devilish
pleasure, if he may achieue it for money. Beside that they which are punished
after that manner, for want of the execution of gods law, fall often into one
and the self same sin. So that sin abounds, and iniquity reigns so
much, that we in this age, are comparable herein in a manner, with all the
former ages of the world, which surely in my judgment comes to pass because
that manner of punishing sin, which God has prescribed is neglected, and an
other which man has devised, set in ye place and stead thereof. You see the
abuse hereof. Pray hartilye that God would redress this, and all other abuses
remaining yet amongst us.

It follows, Let every man have his own wife, etc. By general doctrine, is
in these words delivered unto us, plainly proving ye marriage does belong to
alstates, sorts, and kind of men, as well ministers as common people, contrary
to that doctrine of Devils, by papists defended, who forbid marriage to such
manner of me^. But as this place does plainly overthrow that their opinion, so
do many other both Examples and testimonies in holy scripture, which for
anoyding of tediousnes, I willinglye omit. Only one as general as this, I
think good to rehearse, in the Epistle to the Hebrews we have this saying:
Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled, as for whoremo^gers
and adulterers God will judge, you see by these words (beloved) that in the
Apostles judgment, marriage is honorable among all men, of what condition
soever they be, so that to forbid it in some, is great and grievous iniquitye,
seeing that God has enjoined al, yt have not the gift of chastitye or sole
life, to use marriage, as a notable remedy to put away the act of Formeation,
with the lust or concupiscence thereof. And as out of these words a general
lesson is given to all to marry, if it be in the Lord. So a man cannot
without greef consider the horrible sin, and without horror speak of the
detestable iniquitye, that those men (Papists I mean) have fallen into, that
have shunned this mean, much less by them done. What whoredom, adultry,
fornication, yea sodometrie, yea buggery and other filthiness, that ought not to
be named in the mouth of Christians) has been by them committed, their own
Chrouographers and history writers plainly declare, and this fayng when they
are made popish priests is too plain, Si non cast, tamen caute, that is, if
thou can not live chastely, yet take a whore wartly. It shall be best for us
all those iniquities being set aside, to embrace Gods council, as the only
truth, and to shun the other as proceeding from the Devil, the father of all
lies and liers. Now though the Apostle does command every one to have his own
wife for avoiding of Fornication, yet is it not his meaning that marriages
should be made in such sort, as GOD himself has forbidden, that is to
say, that young Children may marry, without consent of parents. for in such
cases, the advice, counsel, and agreement of fathers, is of necessity
required. It is wonderful to see, to what kind of ungodliness and
disobedience, the world in this behalf is grown, for marriages are made
without consent or counsel of parents, which is a plain breach of Gods
commandment. Honor thy Father and thy mother, and this wickedness is confirmed
and increased in an other respect, because young men think themselves in this
behalf more at liberty then maidens or Damsels, Indeed if they could prove
themselves not to be children, and by the commandment not to be tied to
obedyence, as the other are, I could easily be persuaded therein. But our
wickedness in both these cases, is far greater the^ that of the Gentiles. For
in Genesis we read, that Shechem after he had rauyshed Dinah Jacobs Daughter
(which fact was altogether ungodly) did desire his Father to get him that
maid to wife. If Infidels and unbelievers did this, how much more ought
Christians that profess godliness to accomplish the same? Surely Schechem
had as great privileges as any young man can now lay for himself: for besides
that he was a young man, he was a Lords son, and as it should seem, the
only son of his father, and yet would not take marriage in hand (though
otherwise he had committed a vilanous act) without his Fathers consent and
advise. Now this is further to be considered in this case on the Fathers part.
For as ye child may not marry without the parents alowing and liking of the
same: so can not the fathers or mothers either enforce their children to make
ungodly marriages, or to hinder and let marriages begun in Gods fear, As many
do at this day, that because one of the parties has not abundance of wealth,
or such like, will not give consent to the marriage of their children. But
rather they ought to labor that in the Lord, such contracts and marriages, may
as much as in them lies, be furthered. Moreover in these words, Let every man
have his own wife, etc. This is to be considered, that the Apostles mind is not
to license any to marry with Infidels, or of corrupt religion, dishonest
behauior, or so forth, but that they should have due consideration of the
parties to whom they purpose by Gods grace to join themselves, and that they
should thoroughly know their religion and co^uersatio^ because marriage is not a
ba^d for a day a week, a month, or a year only, but for term of life also.
Surely to speak my mind, I cannot without grief consider the great disorder
and confusion used in the world at this day in this behalf, for either the
beauty is one cause, and so they satisfye their eye and carnal lust, or else
money or goods another cause thinking thereby to content their insatiable minds.
Now adays neither religion nor honesty is in marriages demanded, but rather we
ask how fair and beautiful, or let me understand how much monye I shall
have. Verily for a man to have such consideratio^s in choosing of a wife is not
altogether evil, because a man must choose him such a one as with whom alone, he
can hold himself content, so long as they shall live together, but to put
those things in the first place declares to such men as we deal with in these
cases, that we like beasts rather seek things transitory and vain, I mean
beauty, substance, wealth and such like then their daughters and children, and
yt we more esteem of the one then ye other Beside that, when marriages are made
in such sort, without consideration of religion and godliness (as if a christian
or professor of the gospel, should marry with an infidel, Turk, Jew, or
Papist) we tread under our feet Gods comma^deme^ts, and wholly despise ye
example of godly and faithful men. In the law it is said to ye people of
Israel, concerning the Gentiles which inhabited the land yt they went to
posses. Thou shall make no marriages with them, neither give thy daughter to his
son, nor take his daughter unto thy son: a reason is added. For they will
cause thy son to turn away from me, and to serve other Gods. Then will the
wrath of the Lord wax hot against you, and destroy thee suddenly, wherefore
Abraham caused the eldest servant of his household to swear, that he should
not take a Wife unto his son of the daughters of the Cananits, among who^ he
dwelt, but that he should go unto his country, and to his kindred, and take
a wife unto his son Isaac. The self same care we see to be in Rebecca and
Isaac, for their son Jacob, and therefore after that she seemed to fear, least
he should take one of the Daughters of Heth to wife, and had uttered the same
grief unto her husband, Isaac plainly commands his son, not to take a
wife of the Daughters of Canaan. And in the new Testament it is said: Be not
unequally yoked with the Infidels. O but say some, I can reclayme her from
unbelief and ungodliness, to faith and virtue. Indeed if thou were as strong
as Sa^pson, and as wise as Solomon, it might peradventure sink into my brain,
but if the strongest and the wisest were not able to resist, how shall the
weakest and the simplest be able to stand. This is reckoned as one of the
greatestreasons of Sampsous ruin, for taking a wife of the Daughters of the
Philistines. And this is accounted as one of the weightiest causes of Salomons
fall, that he took him many wives of outlandishe women, and strange nations,
which turned away his heart from the service of the true God, after their false
Gods. And this is judged to be one of ye sins, for which God brought an
universal flood upon the whole earth, and the inhabitants thereof, For that the
sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, and they took
the^ wives of all that they liked. Let us therefore beware, and learn now at
ye length, to deal more warily according to Gods holy council in this and
other matters then heretofore we have done. Furthermore this is to be noted
that in that the Apostle will have every man to have his own wife, and every
wife her own husband, that he does utterly take away poligamie or multitude
of wives at one time. A doctrine not vunecessary and unfit to be treated of in
this place, because (as I hear say, and I do in part believe it) yt there be
some in Kent do defend the same. I can not speak of this and other things so
largelye as I would, because I have been hitherto somewhat long. I will say both
concerning this and other things also that follow, my mind breefely. Whosoever
does defend this as lawful and necessary, not only strives against the
doctrine of Gods spirit, in this place delivered, who says singularly every
man must have his own wife, not wives, but also quite and clean turns vpside
down the first institution of marriage, for god in Paradise in ye time of ma^s
innocency joining woman unto man as a helper, said: For this cause shall a man
forsake father and mother and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one
flesh, not they three, not they four, etc. but they two. This is also to be
considered, ye the first breach of this ordinance began, not in ye household of
the faithful, but in the wicked seed and stock of cursed Cain, for it is said
in Genesis, that Lamech (who came of Cains kindred) took ij. wives, ye name of
the one was Adah, and the name of the other was Zillah. So that it appears
that all yt either put in practice to have many wives, or defend ye same, are
of Cains progeny, yt is, a froward, adulterous, and wicked possession, neither
is there any reason, why they should to this end object the examples of ye
Patriarks, and godly me^ of the old law be fore ye coming of our savior
christ, for in the^ it was a great sin and infirmity, and had not the Lord in
mercy, and in ye death of Jesus, who was the lamb, killed from the beginning of
the world, blotted out their sin, they had felt the pain and punishment, which
is everlasting death. You see then ye poligamie or multitude of wives, cannot
stand by Gods word. Let man's wit suppose what it ca^, this only is the truth,
ye Lord give us grace to embrace and follow the same. It follows, Let the
husband give unto the wife, etc. Now ye Apostle shows how we ought to live
after we be married, and first he lays out a general doctrine of mutual
beneuole^ce, ye is of the duty of the husband toward the wife, and the wife
toward the husband, whereas some have understood by due benevolence, the debt of
marriage, ye is the satisfying of lust, it likes me not, because it is somewhat
to narrow. I indeed judge that this moved the^ so to expound the same, for that
it follows presently afterward, the wife has not power of her own body,
etc. But it will stand more agreeable with truth, if we say that to be
inferred necessarily, as a particular point out of the former, because the
Apostle here deals generally. For his meaning is that the husband should do
to the wife and the wife toward ye husband and one of the^ toward yt other, al
duties pertaining to marriage. To entreat of the^ all particularly, I can not at
this present, neither if I could would occasion serve, ye chiefest of the^ is
that, which Peter speaks of, yt there be betwixt the^ such a consent, and
unity of minds that their prayers be not interrupted, by which word, it
appears, yt private prayers were then, and should now be used in private
houses, which how much it is observed, let al judge. I fear me, yt if
householders should be called to accounts in this point, they would come very
short. For whereas they prayed morning and evening at ye least every day, it is
a great matter with us, if we pray once a week in our houses, nay I judge some
of us neither pray in our houses, nor in churches, but come thither only for
fashion sake, and this appears because there follows so little fruit of our
prayers. for if we prayed heartily God would here our prayers willingly and
grant our peticions effectually. But we ask many things, and obtain few
things, the cause is, for that we ask the^ not aright. It follows, The wife
has not power of her own body, etc. The mening is, that God has so created
man for woman, and woman for man, that they cannot well be one without the
other, unless it be such, as upon whom he has bestowed the gift of chastity:
that sentence serves also well against Poligamie, or plurality of wives. For
if the body of the man be so tied to the body of the woman, that the one is
subject to the other, it cannot be, that the man has authority to take more
wives, nor the wife to take more husbands. It follows, Defraud not one
another, except it be etc. In these words Paul shows a notable remedy
against ye feigned show of holiness, and love of ourselves For Satan many times
pricketh us with a show of weldoyng, to think our selves to be defiled by ye
company of our wives, and therefore causes us to leave our vocation, and
think of an other estate: as we read that many men, and some kings of this
realm, have forsaken their calling, left their wives and become religious
persons: so many women have forsaken the duties of marriage, and closed up
themselves in vnreligious cloisters. Besides this, man's nature is such, and it
is so much addicted to the love of it self, that at Satan's instigation, the
man dothnot only neglect his wife, but altogether loath her, and likewise the
wife the husband: for these causes does the Apostle so earnestly and diligently
reason of the mutual society and love betwixt man and wife: as if he should
say, if married persons purpose to lead a single life, either because they
suppose it to be more holy, or else are pricked thereto with sundry kinds of lust,
not contenting themselves with that ordinary mean yt God has appointed, let
the^ consider, that they are tied one to the other by a mutual band: the man
is but only the one half of his body, and so likewise the woman. Wherefore
they have not free liberty, to part asunder as they lust, and when they lust:
but rather they ought to weigh this, we cannot be one wtoutanother, we lack one
another aid, God has joined us together, to help one another, let us
therefore one aid another need. If they go so far yt they separate themselves,
the Apostle requires, first a mutual consent, which is necessary, because the
continency not of one only, but of both of the^ is hasarded. Secondly, yt it be
but for a time, for perperuall chastity is not in their power, but is ye gift
of God. Thirdly, that they do not therefore abstain from keeping company one
with another as though yt abstmence were of it self a good and holy work, or
a piece of Gods service, but yt we may give over our selves to better
exercises, to wit, fasting and prayer: in which words we have to consider, that
the Apostle speaks not of every sort of fasting, and every kind of prayer.
Sobernes and te^perancie are kinds of fasting and prayer, and should not only be
daily but also continual. He speaks therefore of such a fast as is a public
and solemn testimony of repentance, by which we turn away gods wrath and
vengeance, or by which the faithful prepare themselves to prayer when they take
in hand some earnest matter. The same may be said of prayer, as for example,
when some calamity or misery is nigh, or if some toke^ of Gods wrath appear,
or when some matter of great weight and importance is to be taken in hand, as
the ordering of ministers etc. And surely the Apostle does worthily join
these two together, not as though fasting were a piece of Gods service, but
because it is a preparation unto prayer. For the body being by fasting
subdued, the more willingly (by the assistance of Gods spirit) submits it
self unto the spirit, and being both joined, they pour forth more harti
supplications unto ye Lord. And therefore our savior Christ joins them
together in like sort, when he says, This kind of diuils is not cast forth but
by fasting and prayer, Now the^ in these words of ye Apostle, we have a plain
overthrow, of that popish doctrine of divorce, a thoro and mensa, that is to
say, from bed and board. They teach that for sundry causes and ends, a man
may be separated from his wife, at the table and the bed, and yet the Apostle
shows, that such separation cannot be made, for any end but for this, namely
that they may give over themselves to fasting and prayer. Their causes are
worldly and fleshly, but the Apostles end is spiritual and heavenly. No less
vaynely and fondly do they deal in the whole matter of Divorce: for whereas
our savior Christ makes but one cause, and that is Fornication, they make
nine or ten at the least: and whereas by the warrant of Gods word, ye faultles
party may marry, if he have not the gift of continency (for by ye law of God,
the adulterer and adulteress should both be put to death, as before I showed
in the beginning, and the woman is set free, the husband being dead, from the
law of the man, and the man from the law of ye wife, the wife being dead) by
ye popish canon law yet in this realm maintained, it comes to pass, that
neither ye sin is so grievously punished as of right it should, neither may the
faultles person marry, but as well ye guiltles as the gultie, yea though they
have not ye gift of chastity, enjoined to live a single and sole life, nay would
to god it were not a shrewd and sinful life. Now it follows, and again come
together, etc though ye Apowle will have christian me^ and women for godly
exercises sake, to separate themselves, yet he will not have that separation to
endure over long, the reason is added, that Satan tempt you not etc. As if the
Apostle should say, when ye take upon you to abstein long from the society one
of another, and occasion is proffered to Satan to oppress you, because you
take that in hand which you are not able to perform: for such is the
imbecillitie and weakness of the flesh, that ye one cannot long be without the
company of the other, and therefore you had need look to yourselues says ye
Apostle for ye adversary will leave no corner unsought, nor any stone vnrolled,
to provoke you to wickedness and incontinency. Here we have to learn that
lesson which I touched in the beginning, namely, yt God requires pure and chaste
minds, as well as clean bodies. And also we have to note the malice of satan,
who goes about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour us: if we consider his
force, he is strong as a lion, if we weigh his subtilty he is called the great
and old serpent, and can translate himself into ye likeness of an Angel of
light: he spared not Christ, but tempted him immediately after baptism, and
therefore he will not cease to assail us, we had need therefore to be sober and
watchful, and to pray continually with the disciples for the increase of our
faith, because faith is ye mean, by which we must resist, and though his power be
in ye scriptures counted great, yet this singular comfort we have in the same
scriptures revealed unto us, yt he is but a coward, and plays ye part of a
tyrant, who when he has gotten any people under him in slavery and boudage,
does miserably torment the^. But if we resist him (the diuill I mean) and set
our selves against him he will flee far from us, for his tyranie is exercised
only upon the children of unbelief: as for the faithful, he is not able to
touch the^, without gods sufferance and appointment: he cold not enterinto a few
sooine, til Christ gave him leave. He could not touch the body and goods of
Job, til God suffered him: his power is not increased, nor the strength and
arm of our Lord any whit at al abated. It remains then yt we set our selves
in conflict and skirmish against the diuil, we shrink not, for then we lie
open to be wounded. The Apostle has in the Ephesians described Panopleian,
that is to say, complet harness of a christian, he appoints every one to
have their loins girded about with verity, having on the breastplate of
righteousness, their feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, yt
shield of faith, yt helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit. Mark
how ye Apostle armeth a christian soldier in the fore parts, and appoints
him in harnes for his back to defend yt wtall: by which ye spirtt of God
teaches us, with what valiant courage we should be endued, when we come to
skirmish with the diuill: we may not in any case turn our backs to him, for then
we lie open, and easily receive his wounds, but resist him by faith, as I said
before, and he will flee far from us. The Lord indue us with force and strength
of his spirit from above, to wtstand Satan, and all his wicked temptations,
and imprint these things in our hearts which we have heard, to the amendment of
our sinful lives and conversation, to the glory of his name through Jesus
Christ, to whom with ye holy Ghost, be al honor and glory for ever and ever,
Amen. Let us pray.

FINIS.

