^ A MYRROVR or clear glass, for all estates, to look in, conteinyng briefly
in it the true knowledge and love of god, and the charity of a faithful
christian toward his neighbor.

Remember the meruailouse works that he has done, his vvo^ders also, and the
iugeme^tes of his mouth.

Psalm. 105. Make your friends with thunrightous Ma^mon, yt when you your
selves shall have need, they may receue you into the everlasting tabernacles.

Lu. l. M.D.LX.

decorative engraved border

(...) (...) dernesse of this (...) the rather pass forth, (...) hyghues
name and permission into the hands of other, you (...) faithefull subjects,
to the shore (...) virtue, godly innocen^y, and more (...) strength in the true
knowledge (...) of god: and to be (...) table after the will (...) the am^^ple
of his son (...) most lively and (...) bly beseech the high (...) remain
and abide ever in (...) heart, that ye may have will and power through his
strength, to resist all ^uyll, and joyfully with peace seek his glory in
rightousnes, and the prosperity and comfort of your commons. We your humble
servants and subjects will, as we are undoubtedly in conscience bound with
sound hearts, and with one lively faith, pray to god for your highness long
preservation: and that he will, in time, so prepare for your quiet
contentation and joy, that the blessyng of god over you may appara^tly shine,
and that all your whole dominions may also therein rejoice.

Thomas Paulfreyman unto the christen Reader.
The majesty of god has alvvaies appeared unto man, by his omnipotency mercy
and love.
AS we in time (from time to time) have always perceived and felt the great
and unspeakable mercy of god, in signifieng unto us his creatures (through his
grace) his omnipotency and power, and his infinite love and will prescribed
unto us in his heavenly and divine wourde, to the manifestation and plain
setting out before our eyes thexcellency of his most glorious majesty: and
for his virtue and great puissance to be an only God above all gods: who
straightly also respects the singularity of his own glory, and seeks
therein the only joy, comfort, strength and salvation of us his people: The
love of god toward his people.
unto whom he commends his laws, his truth, this promises: in whom he only
delights, and upon whom he gladly pretends to synisshe his most beautiful
wourke begun, as hereafter shall more largely appear: whereby we should be ye
rather more aptely enforced, and lively encouraged, The love of God requires
the knowledge of god, and to be loved again, obeyed, and followed.
worthyly to acknowledge him, even as he is, in his majesty, most dearly to
love him, to honor him, to attend alwais upon him, and reverently in all
things to follow and obey him: as virtue requires in all good things, to be
with goodness again requighted: So to the contrary, of our own rebellious
nature, and apt Inclination to sinfulnes being but bryckle and frail earth,
and not thoroughly well handled, instructed, chastised, tamed, or rightly ruled
by the diligence of our almighty creator, our Lord, our master, and ruler,
but suffer us without regard, punishemente, o^ or sharp bands, with
stretched outs necks to use the reane at lybertye, Men of his own nature
without gods government is vvilde, without (...) son, and intractable.
or raunge without restranytie: we are wild, wanton, and skyttishe, very
brutishe and be astlyke without reason: we will appear unskillful, and to
want perseuerau^ce and good understanding: we will forget by whom we live: we
will not acknowledge our maker, nor remember our master that gentelye
speaks to us, that is careful for us, that feedethe us, that comfortablye
nourishes us, The fruits that precedeth only of man's nature.
and takes pain about us: we will neither regard him nor fear him, that is
of power to strike and destroy us: we will not in any thing, be ruled by him,
nor yield to obey him, but irreverently strive with him, run from him, The
hearts of the obstin^te and ^^ylful people are (...).
^^uffe at him, or turn our heels against him: as experience with woe, has
taught throughout all generations from the beginning until this present day:
specially the headstronge and wylfulle obstinate people of this world, that
hold their only felicity upon the pleasures of this life: whose hearts are
hardened against God their maker, maliciousely in blyndenesse to repugne his
will, and fly from him: no diligence will win them, no doctrine reform
them, nor no correction amend them, so damnable is their state and great
stoutenes of will to wickedness, whereby the mighty and horrible plagues of god
has fallen for their sakes upon the earth, to the destruction of whole
nations, countries, and kyngdoms, as the scriptures and other stories
mencioneth plainly to us, to put us in fear of his omnipotency and sharpnes
of justice, and to turn us backs from our vayn and beastly foolishnes, The
exceedinge merof God, at our return to god.
whose fast following fountains also of mercy at our return, so far
haboundeth the iniquity of man, when it is at the very rypest or highest, that
he then continually calls, and as it were painfully trauaileth by certain
means, to the end he may win us, and safely deliver us from she danger of
disobedience, if we will yield to his mercy, who will joyfully receive us,
clearly remit us, and reward us with everlasting felicity. The order whereof
and thexcellency of his works is signified unto us at large, in the book of
life: Of the which, gentil reader, I have at the begyunyng of this my sclender
labor, made brefe relation, taking it for a convenient and most certain
ground to plant on my foundation: seeing that chiefly and above all things,
the virtue of christianity and holiness, consists by divine influence, in the
knowledge of the majesty of God, which can be by no means so direct, as to
note well the meruaylous order of the works of God, which are great, and
meruallous worthy to be praised and had in honor, and to be sought out of
all them that love them and have pleasure in them: by the which also we see
his omnipotente state and power, the gentleness of his most gracious and divine
nature, the myldnes of his mercy and the sharpenes of his justice: whereby we
labor with reverence, not only for the true knowledge of his will how to honor
him, or in what manner we shall live before him: Our own feeblenes drives us
to god for strength to the vvorkinge of righteousness.
but also feelyng in our selves our own great frailty and feeblenes, we sue
for his assistence and strength, that our faith, love, and obedience, may ever
be lively, constant and perfect before him: and so forth in other virtues,
that the service of rightousnes, may jointly appear right from rightuous men,
in such rightuous and most pure profession, before so rightuous and holy a
God. And so I pass forth declaryng the ground of mine intent and meaning:
how the devil (the sower of sedition and worker of all mischief) has
meruailousely preualled against us: and how he has made division amongst
us, to the rentyng and tearyng in pieces, the straight bond of our peace to
God. I have noted also our love and duty toward our neighbors: and how
greatly therein we have disobeyd the will of God: declaryng also (certain
impediments) presently reigning amongst us, that hinders much the true
charity of God etc. And wherein soever in this work of godlynes, I have
seemed to swerve from due order, not using and temperynge the matter, in
such wise as wysedom, experience, and great learning would require, to
theedifyeng and godly profytynge of the diligente and faithful reader: A
request to the reder.
I humbly beseech the charitable and loving friend, that art zealous to virtue
and godlynes to bear with my faults, to take in good part the virtue of my
good will, and contentedly ioyn thy will to the gracious good will of god, from
whom all virtue proceeds, who charge and strayghtlye commands thee, that
in whatsoever thing thy conscience shall herein judge unto thee to be good, and
agreeable to his wourde, thou do in no wise contemn it, having respect to
persons: but embrace it and prefer it, for his glory and praise sake. It is
the end of my trauail and thouly straight mark, whereunto tends the effect
of my good will. If it shall please thee of thy goodness, to join with me in
that behalf, seeing that nothing is more expedient in the the life of a
christian man, Nothing is more expedient in the life of a christen man than to
be mindful of god.
agreeable to to his profession, or ye more beautifieth his honest estimation,
then in all his doings to be myndfull of God, and in such wise to use them,
that God thereby may be always contented, and his name woorthyly praised and
magnified. So that such simplicity and faithful plainness, dedicated from
our heart to God, and agreablye among our selves to bear one with an other,
respectynge contynuallye the reward of the end: there shall not then be
seen in us any spotte of reproach, or any blemysshe of deformity, whether of
scornefulnesse, contempt, Fruits from a^ wicked heart.
or disdaynefulnesse one against an other, which are approved euylles
spryngynge from wicked hearts: from whens proceed the defamation, rash
judgment, sclaunder, detraction, and evil report, to the great hynderyng,
pluckyng back, and discouragyng of faithful and willing hearts, that are at
all times aptly bent to be seruisable for the praise of god, and to the
commodity or coumforte of his people: for whose sakes and godly edifyeng the
fruits of righteousness appears from the ryghtuous, as god shall plant in
them the plentyfulnesse of his grace: the distribution whereof, appears not
upon all men alyke. If God therefore christen reader, have poured upon thee
more abundantly the gifts of his grace, that thou see and know, to his
praise, that which I, or many others, neither yet have seen or known: whether
by great wisdom, profounde learning, or holiness of living with a mortified
or subdued body whereby the light also of thy life, more clearly shines before
the world, to the commendation of God and man: and that thou passest forth thy
time, appointed of God, with inward joy of thy conscience, as one that were
conuersaunt with god in heaven: wholly neglocting the fugitive pleasures of
this life, which seems to be of myghtie force, and annexed to joys
incomparable: consider then I humbly beseech thee, with thine accustomed
thankfulness to god, the dew office of these said virtues, now abiding in
thee, and the heavenly operation of them: which at no time or in any thing who
soever have them in possession, Neither wisdom learning, nor holienesse of
living, sleep in private idleness.
sleep in private idleness, or properlye serve for one only man's strength
and commoditye, to stay him, or wourke force in him, to his contentation and
purpose, or to the well liking only of him, self in all things, and
scornefully reprouinge others, which should seem to be the fruits of a
vain and unfriendly spirit, and greatelye dissentinge from the spyrite of
grace: but to bear charitablye with others Ignorance, baseness of knowledge,
or imperfection of holiness, tenderly taking in good part, their present
appointed talente, which god has given unto theun after the measure of his
grace: The charity of the wise and godly learned.
for thereby truly thy lernyng thy wysedom, and thy verruous living shall be the
rather approved to thvse of god, and for the great comfort and good
encouragemente of me and such other like, to be diligent by the help of God,
and to grow to further strength and godly perfection to the praise of God.
And in the mean while, where this my present doing, shall in deed seem
unto thee, to be but gross, unpleasant, dull and vnwitty, void of good order,
and barrayne of eloquencye, which are reprochefull impedimentes, in the
skillful and learned wrighter, as I contentedly herein, by thy virtue and
wisdom, bear thy pacyente and learned judgment: this co^modytie thereby
shall redounde toward thee, that through such vnseemelines, disorder, and
rudeness, of this my sleightie and sleander doings: the excellency of thy
lyuelye diligence, and profounde wisdom in thy learned trauayles, shall
appear much more beautyfull and seemelye, and more clearelye to shine to thy
glory and immortal fame, being now so rychelye possessed, adourned, and
beautified, with so precious and pearelesse treasures, planted in thee from the
God above: Who gentlye at all times of his most mylde nature, takes in good
part, such returned fruits, as he before has be gonne and set in our
hearts, according to the depth of his grace: by whose heavenly and divine
influence, his fast set root of righteousness he mercyfullye preserves,
nourishes, wat^reth, and prospers, with his celestial distillyng moisture
or dew of life: that to one or other from the highest to the lawest, from the
most perfect taster, to the most insensible creature, choice shall still
reygne to chose, that at the least some swetenes or good repast may joyfully
fall to some. This considered, I for my part am the rather encouraged, or by
Gods good motion enforced: I am bold so to term it, for as much as no
goodness proceeds from the heart of man, without his assistence and great
strength, thereby to spend in this behalf, some p^rcell of my time, to show
forth the praise of god in the works of his grace thorough the increace of
virtue by the power of his holy spirit, that the devils most vyolent and
damnable darts, woundyng our consciences to ever lastyng death, being put by
and vanquished, the life of righteousness may flow in us, to the knowledge and
love of god: and that we may in the fear of God, seek his peace and unity, to
love one an other, and not to be in any wise divided, but to be charitable,
pitiful, and frendely one to an another, and to prepare for the needful
sustentation of the poor members of Jesus Christ, who miserablye perishes
for want of succor, that the blessyng of God, the father, in his son our
Lord and savior may plentifully descend down amongst us, and upon us al, The
mercy of god toward the Queen.
to the preservation chieflye of the Queen's most royal majesty: whom god has
hitherto nourisshed, blessed, and mightily preserved through his mercy, and
according to the lyuelye faith and hope of innumerable her true friends and
obedient subjects: and contrary to the expectation of many thousands, her
maliciouse and most cruel enemies: our Lord for the greatness of his mercyes
sake wourks in them Repentance, to the tournyng of their hearts, and prepare
them to be now appliable and obedient subjects, that we may altogether in
unity, with faithful and true English hearts, be thankful unto God for
her grace, to lean to her, and with a louelye fear to obey her, to honor
her, to healpe her, and rejoice in her our chief sovereign and only high
maiestrate next under god: whom he with his stretched out arm and almyghtie
power, and without the effusion of any christen blood, or occasion minystred
to the same, has quietly stablished her, and brought her to her imperial
throne, so greatly has he vanquished the hearts of her enemies, signifienge
thereby unto us all her true english, The purpose of god toward the Queen
and christen subjects, that she is of purpose elected, raised up, and
preserved by god, to this imperial dignity, as the appointed seruaunie or high
mynyster of God, for the supportacion of peace, and to take the swourd of
authority in her own hand, to the erecting or reedifying again of his
glory, in peace and righteousness: taking his wourde of truth, to be her
assured good guide, aid, and strength: and by the virtue and Invincible power
thereof, to supplante and tread under foot, The ver^^e of gods word.
all vain devised fantasies, crastye collusions, and proud vsurpacions, to
the reioyeing of Christies faithful servants, his true friends and
ministers: and to the reformation or amendment of all other his disobedient
and blind ignorant ennemies: if the spirit of grace will so work in them, for
their happy conversion, as the new borne children of god: and by her to be
supported, preserved, and safelye defended, by the authority aforesaid,
grounded upon god and her gracious most godly laws. Without which holy
conversion and humble submission, leaving all wicked affectes, apertlye or
secreatlye repugnynge, murmuring, conspiringe, subtle dyssemblynge, or
wyckedlye rebellynge against god and his true procedynges, reveled and set
soorthe, from time to time, by his appointed and chosen mynisters, for his own
gloryes sake in righteousness, In what wise god has raised up the Queen.
not raised up with cruel rage by us most maliciouse and wretched creatures,
with spear and shseide, or with spre and swourde, but peaceablye preserue^,
and therein supported, by the only virtue of gods divine power: who will stire
up whom he su^ceth, and will have his truth to reign and flouryshe maugre our
heads, that has had, or have cursed beat hearts to the contrary, that are so
wifully and blindly addicted to our fathers old fossty customs, crepte in
amongeste us by the diuelles deuyse, and received or stablished by men, with
their consent, common cou^sails, and agreement, without true trial and
authority by the wourd of god, or preferme^t by the spirit of truth,
although we call them such holy fathers and so many in number, gathered
together at certain times and places: who sought to uphold the sweetness of
their terrestrial kingdom, through covetousness and their fair colored
wourdes, and goodly painted shows, making marcha^dise of us: whose judgment
is not far of, and their just dampnacion sleeps not: for the breath of God
I say, will confound such doings, and our stubbourne disobedience shall be
visited with the sword I shall not here need by express words to make mention
of the grievous and most terrible destruction, specially of gods peculiar
people the Jews among other nations, for their great dysobedience,
wilfulnes, pride, and unthankfulness. Consider also that god has now of late
begone again with his own church sharpelye to visit them and diuersely, for
their great unthankfulness, Willful and christinate rebellions shall be (...) 1.
The wrath of god toward his people.
in the days of his grace: and did therefore stir up his ministers of
unrighteousness diversely, most cruelly and impituouselye, to vex them, to
tormente them and most shamefully to destroy them as sheep appointed to the
slaughter: and in such wise, their mercyles crueltye did abound that the
favorers of their religion a great number of them in the days of king
Edward fled from them, they utterly forsook the^: for their hearts did
abhor them in their doings, Occasion of the peoples conversion
and were thoroughly persuaded in their consciences, that if they or their
religion had been of god, they would have been much more pitiful, and not with
such tyranny destroy the professors of Christ: so great was the wrath of god
over his people and flock, for thabusing of his grace, and not well ordryng them
selves in such holy profession. From whom he has now (ones more) withdrawn
his wrath, God hati^^ returned his mercy.
through his great mercy in Jesus Christ, and at the humble intercession (in
him) of his most grievous afflicted saints, to the clear shynyng ones again
of his glory in truth amongst them, for their further instruction, and more
reuerente obedience to his laws. If God so bytterlye vexed them, whoms he so
dearly loved the lovers of his gospel) for their disobedience sake aad
dissimulation or doublenes: how much more shall the fire of his merciles wrath
be kindled against us, that have been before obstinate, The wrath of God
against his obstinate and willful enemies.
wilful and old repugners of ryghtuousnes, hynderers, blasphemers,
consentours to blood shed, and most cruel persecutours to the death, of
his true ministers, faithefull prophets, preachers, and dearly beloved
members, although we spightfully reviled them, mocked them, and called them
seismatikes, and a thousand heretics, with rathe judgment to damnation for
ever, not taking heaven nor purgatory charitably in our way: and that
notwithstanding such things, are now called again in peace, and will yet
persevere in such wickedness, and wilfully kick against the prick? Truly
truly, we are well warned by the significations of god, What the mercyes of
God (...) us do^ signify.
according to his mercy, to be better scooled, learned, and practiced in the
doctrine and rules of Christ, and to fear the swourde of gods vengeance,
that hangs by a feeble threde, ready to fall upon us. God is the god of
salvation, to all them that will harken and turn unto him, to lean unto his
examples of mercy, to fly from tyranny, or consent to bloodshed (with such
like) according to his laws and testimonies, which shall ever rise up
against us for our condemnation: byeause we have in them so greatly disobeyed
the will of god, obstinately flyenge from him, in the true faith and
conversation of his soonne Jesus, the head corner stone, which the buylders
refused, and most shamefully contemned and abused; whom he only appointed to
be the foundation of our rest and perpetual mansion: Against which (in any
one part thereof) we may not spurn to break, God handles al things
according to hye vvil, among the powers in heaven and among the inhabitours of
the ^^^the and ther^^non^ that may resist his had. (...) say, what do thou^
Daniel. 4
nor seek by any means to spot and deface, but thankefully embrace and be
joyful of gods disposed will, considering it is his own doing, even for his
glories sake, although it appear never so marvelous in our eyes: he will have
it known that it is the only power of his right hand, and that he himself
has don it. Psalm. 10^. His works ar marvelous: his right hand brings mighty
things to pass: yea ye right hand of the Lord has ye preemine^ce: and for
the health and salvation of his people, he myghtily prevails in all his
ente^ts. Ps. 118. Therefore to conclude (without long depe^ding in admiration)
seeing that Gods determinatio^s in rightousnes (as he himself is a God of
rightousnes, must most certainly appear in brightness, and of necessity be
accomplished a mongest us: against whose will in his works no man may
without danger rebel: let us examine well our selves and try our salvation in
truth, by the assistence of the spirit of truth: and thereby know our assured
leaning stay, and which way we shall rightly walk, and not stand so fast in
assurance, to our aunciente termed customs: and because the great part of
christendom, through simple or wilful ignorance, reeleth blindelye that
ways, nor remembryng the smalnesse and myld trade of Christ's stable flock,
how pacientely they bear the cross of Christ, and suffer rather to be
persecuted then persecute: unto whom god promised strength, and to be amongst
them for their coumforte, even in the midst of the tire (although we
wickedly judge of them to dye obstinately, vain gloriouselye, desperately, and
most beastly, Wicked vvourkers judge wickedly.
like a sort of dogs, or very helhou^des, with such other malicious, rash, and
most cursed railynge judgment, contrary to god, and the hearts of all godly
men) neither regard we the example and steps of their conversation, The
conversation of the wicked
through shameless pride, ambition, stoughtnes, covetousness, outward holiness,
uncleanness, maliciousnes, cruel murder, with such like wickedness, spronge
up in the church of Christ, which are the fruits of the dyuel, and
thincensementes of a wicked spirit, and therefore refused of the perfect and
rightuous christians, because they be contrary to thexample of Christ, and his
holy Apostles: who teaches us to try spirits, and to know the tree by the
fruit: but to yield us with all humblenes both body and soul, How to
attain the grace of god.
into the hands of god, and refer with reverence (in such time of
controversy) theffect of our whole faith and salvation, to the wourkynge of
his grace, by the power of his holy spirit, to the lyghtnyng of our
understanding, and to put by doubtfulnes, all controversies, sects, and
divisions: One God
that as we have but one only God, god our heavenly Father, Christ our only
savior, and the holy spirit our comforter: all three in glory equal, all one
in substance, and in unity also all one and undivided: One faith.
So we (the professors of his name) may have but one only quick and lively
faith in one religion (the true rule of christ) to the knit tyng of our hearts
in christen unity, and to be undivided, The virtue of christen unity.
to the feclyng in our selves the true peace of God, and thexercise of gods
heavenly charity: whereby our eyes shall ber opened to see and receive his very
perfect and lovely obedience: reverently to submytie our selves to all his
holy and most godly ordinances: and with a thankful and mylde christen
spirit (according to our most bounden duty) to pray for the Queens most
excellent majesty, that God (for the greatness sake of his mercy, will
henceforth bless her, preserve her, and prepare so for her, that her reign
may be long and prosperous amongst us, with much joy, honor, wealth,
strength, and victory over her ennemies, that she may the more quietely in
the fear of God, seek above all things the glory of God in righteousness,
according to the truth of his wourde: and that his ministers also under her,
may be endued with the spirit of truth, that his truth in rightousnesse,
may beautyfully and clearly shine thoroughout her graces dominions to his
everlasting praise, and that we being also blessed under her hig^es hand
(with ready prepared hearts for the grace of God) may have sufficient of all
things, to the sustentation of our earthely bodies, subduynge always the
enemies of the common wealth, that we her humble and loving subjects, may
rejoice (through her highness) in the great mercies of God, and be
thankful; loving more perfectly one another, and apply our selves with more
pitiful and tender hearts, to see our poor neighbors and christen
brotherne better relieved and provided for, that God (in Jesus Christ may
still unto the end hold his merciful hand over us, and finishe his good
wourke upon us, newly again begun: to the exaltation, praise, and glory of
his most blessed and holy name, which alone is worthy all honor and glory.
Amen.

The peace of God the father through our lord Jesus Christ, by the workyng of
his holy spirit in you, abide in all your hearts, and kendle in you the fire of
his love. Amen.

IF we the children of Adam depely would consider, and ponder diligently from
the beginning, the majesty of thimmortall God: In beholding symply and with
all humblenes (both externely and with our inward senses) his omnipotent power
and workmanship in heaven and in earth: the merueilouse order of his doings,
Gene. 1.
and his most happy intent toward mankind in the same: what great
appearaunce there was of his most dear and syngular love, that after the
creation (first) of heaven and earth, as also the deep and bottomless seas,
and all things innumerable in them contained (and by his blessing tencreace
and multiply) for the ready use service, and pleasure of man: how he then (in
time) made man a creature among all other his louelye creatures, most
glorious, beautyfull and semely, yea, and after his own image and symilitude a
living soul, breathyng into him the breath of life: Gene. 2. Eccle. 32. 1.
Cor. 15.
how he made him lord and ruler, and to have dominion over all, and gave names
unto all manner of cattall, fowls of thaire, and beasts of the field, how he
planted a gardeyn of pleasure, and there set man, whom he had fourmed, to
dress it, to keep it, and to enjoy all the lovely pleasures thereof, only
one thing excepted, from the which (because he would there should be signified
unto him with reverence, low submission as unto God his maker, and his duty
in obedience) he streyghtned the reane of his freely vertie, and laid the
burdeyne of his grievous commandment upon his shoulders, saying unto him: Gene.
5. Eccle. 11.
Of all the trees of the gardeyn, thou shall eat, and use at liberty, for the
accomplisshement of thy full delight and pleasure: but of the tree of Knowledge
of good and evil, thou shalt not eat: and gave him further a sharp and
most bitter threate, saying: Take heed, and be well ware of this my
commandment: for the same day thou eatest of that tree, thou shalt die the
death. It is here then to be noted after this straight precept of God, what
great danger (through disobedience) man stood in: and how the most subtle
and malicious serpent the devil and onnemye to mankind (who always and by all
means possible, despightfully seeks his destruction, watched his time, and
immediately devised to work his present confusion, through his sleigh tie and
sweet sugared tale unto the weak and frail woman, Gene. 3. 2. Cor. 11.
tellyng her they should be as gods, and know both good and evil, not
withstandyng the commandment of god (if they would eat of that fruit) whereby
without fearyng god, and forgetful of his former love toward them, of their
most blyssefull and high estate, and of the place of great pleasure, where he
had planted them, neither yet remembryng his straight commandment and most
terrible threatenyng of death, their hearts were sore blinded, they were
utterly deceived, they received the foul spotte of the serpent, they were
desyled with disobedience and pride, and hastened to leave God their maker
their dear and most loving fronde, and followed the dyuell and his most cursed
suggestions, being their mortal and deadly ennemie, and to taste of that most
bitter and forbidden fruicte of death and everlasting dampnation, which by
the justice of God, and according to the doom of their own consciences,
through their most wretched disobedience) they had duly deserved: Gene 2.
for their faults were then opened unto them, they knew assuredly they had
done amiss, and therefore they sled and ran into corners, to cover and hide
themselves with leaves, and among the trees, from the face and presence of god
as (in themselves already condemned) most disobedient to the voice of god, and
wretched sinners, and durst not appear nor show their faces: so lothesome
and foul was their spotte apparent in their own eyes. And God that created
the^, not yet forsaking them, Esaias. 40. Iere. 30.
but still bearyng his tender compassion and mercy toward man, would not yet
leave him but sought him out where he had hid himself, he called unto him,
he gently talked with him, and herd the ground of that most heinous and great
offense. And so consequently according to his divine will and justice,
rewarded every of them: the malicious serpente for his part, the frail woman
for her part, Gene. 3.
and likewise the unhappy manne with the malediction of god upon thearth: and
for his part also deprived from his former and most blisseful estate, cast out
of the gardeyne of pleasure, and constrained to labor and to tylle the earth,
from whence he was taken, and so myserably with great travail and sorrow, and
with the sweat of his own brows, to get his bread. So that unto man, yt
sorrowful and rejected creature, there apered then no hope of redress, in that
his present distress and most woeful misery, but rather utter desperacion and
encreace of all forowe, continual tribulation and travail, pain and anguish
in body and soul, corporal death and eternal damnation, till God (still
renuyng his love, which is unspeakable and infinite) made promise unto man,
that Christ the second Adam, Romans 5. Colos. 1. Luc. 11.
the seed of the woman, and savior of the world, should in time be raised
up, to ou^^ come sin, and like a valyant and most puissaunt conqueror, to
destroy the anuyll, death, hell, and damnation: (...) that also by him shall be
restor^^ (...) (through a liuelye faith) the gra^^ (...) heavenly father, peace
and (...) conscience, Esaias. 53. John. 3. Act. 10.
and eternal salvation (...)che he undoubtedly did then (...) therefore
obtained grace: whole (...) also we are, and spotted impes, spryngyng out from
that old, crooked, and stoupyng tree: a stock unstable, waueryng and always
leaning, and ready with every storm and tempest of tentation to fall, such
is the feebleness thereof and corrupted nature: whose fruictes continually are
none other, but rotten and unsavory wourkes: as blind ignorance, disobedience,
pride, and stoughtnes, mistrust, contempt of god and godly things, fervent
lusting after carnal things, scornefulnes, hatred and malice, self love, with
innumerable such other odible stuff and stinkynge store, and therefore most
worthy the banishmente of all pleasure and the presence of god, to wander the
earth in misery, and to susteyn as rotten branches, the stroke of the axe,
Math. 7. Luke. 3.
and to be cast for ever into hell fire. For the which and from the danger
whereof, we also know non other remedy (if we desire the favor of God, to be
his faithful servants, his obedient children and heirs of his kingdom) but
to seek our pourgation in Jesus Christ, whose name we have professed, whom we
acknowledge to come from above, the son of God, Esaias. 7.
and very God (and to be incarnate in the womb of the virgin, Esaias. 7. Luke.
20. John. ^. Romans 8. Philip. 2.
that he here lyned perfect man amongst us in the flesh, immaculate and
unspotted, and suffered al kind of affliction in the flesh: yea even very
death: and that the most cruel and shameful death of the cross. for the
redemption and freedom of us disobediente and wretched sinners, to pourge us,
Esaias. 54,
and with the effusion of his blood, to wash and make clean our spotted and
most fylthy souls, and so to restore us again to the grace of our heavenly
father: from whom (with our synneful father, like frail and unthankful
creatures, we were sled: and through our instabilitie and lightness, like
ru^nagates, rebellious and presumptuous children, Esaias. 23. Psalm 119,
wandrynge a strate like lost sheep, and fallen eue^ into the lap or mouth of
the roryng and deuouryng lion the devil: whose tearyng teethe and insaciable
throat is always wide, strained, and firmly fixed impituously to rent,
deforme, and devour the beauty of gods creation: unto whom we were in most
bitter thraldom, his servile and very bond slaves, the children of sin, and
death, and for ever thunquenchable tyrebrandes of hell. From the which he
has mercifully delivered us, restored us unto strength, peace, and quietness of
mind, he has filled us full of joy, he has made us to be of the company of
the aungelies, John. 1. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 11.
and the sons of God, the heirs of immortality, the members of his body,
and our bodies the temples of the holy ghost: our minds the images and the
secret habitatle of the deity. 1. Cor. 1.
And therefore most worthyly we acknowledge him to be our only savior and
redemption, our righteousness and sanctification, our only iustifier and
reconciliation to god the father, and have therefore promised to reverence his
glorious and most excellent name, Pro. 18. Act. 4.
whereunto the rightuous flies, as unto a strong castle, for their strength,
safeguard, and salvation) which is most blessed and praise worthy for ever,
Amen. Thus (I say if we the spotted children of our sinful father, The
remembrance of the vvourhes of god, leadethe us to the knowledge and love of
god.
would happyly remember as we have professed the meruaylous works of GOD,
and the order of his doings in the beginning, as have been here but briefly
touched (besides the innumerable exaumples of his omnipotencye, mercy, and also
his Justice, signified unto us throughout his holy scriptures, and that we also
our selves have both felts and seen in our days, to thexaltation of his own
glory, and to the blessyng, great comfort, and reioicing of his dear,
obedient, and most loving friends: and to thutter overthrow, rooting out,
and destruction of his cursed and most malicious ennemies, Roma. 1.
we should have good cause not only to acknowlede him an omnipotent God, and
immortal, holy, rightuous, and merciful, and therefore in a certain manner,
for those his most blessed and singular graces, a far of with a stipper
love, as did our father Adam, to love him again: but rather we should have
good occasion to love him vnfeynedlye, Exodus 2^. Deute. 6.
as obedient and constant chylderne, according to his most holy
commandment, even with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all
our strength and power: and fear to offend him, because also we know him to
be a just god, and terrible in wourking his reuengement against his enemies,
for their dissimulation, unthankfulness, disobedience, coldenes, and
slippernes. Then, forasmuch as we here see, whereby tacknowledge God and his
love; and for his love to love him again, and for his justice to fear him, I
think it (at this present) convenient, some thing to touch particularly of
our love to God, Math. 2^. Eccle. 1.
which is the first and greattest commandment, as also to ours neighbors,
and then of the fear of god, that should always possess our hearts, which
is the right and true service of god: whereby we shall the better know our
selves, our lovely obedience to god, and our love also and duty toward our
neighbors, But before (herin) I proceed any further, I make mine humble suite
unto you (my dear country men, my neighbors, loving friends and christen
brethern) that the ground of your hearts being well wrought, moilified, and
soft tempered with the dew of gods grace, ye will now patiently hear, and
aptly receive this exhortation offered unto you, not from me (most wretched
sinner) but rather from him, an by his only good motion, from whom proceeds
all virtue and goodness, Philip. 2.
(which also work the in us both the will and also the deed even of his
good will and favor: that the lively seeds or plants of his heavenly and
divine spirit, being fyrmly set or deep sown in your hearts, fast root
may there be taken, that naturally in time without delay like forward impes
and fresh flourishyng branches in the gardeyn or vine yard of Christ, E^dr.
5 John. 15.
the quick and lively buddes, blossoms, leaves, and the lovely fruits of his
fatherlye increase and blessyng, may appear wourthys his gloriouse
contentation, beautifulle, large, and seemelye: and to the senses of your own
souls, sweet in taste, comfortable, delicate, and deyntie. So that the
operacion of love (that most singular and acceptable virtue to god) shall have
power and force in you: whereof I will now proceed, groundynge mine intention
only upon the enemytie and malice of mankind, how against gods will and
the law of nature our hearts are cursedly bente: Thorough small occasion our
hearts are ^endeled to mischief.
not only upon good occasion, or for great causes, as we use to term them,
but for every triflinge and light matter also we will quarrel and fall out one
with an other: one country or kingdom against another: natural countreimen
one against another (by mutanies, conspiracies, civil wars, and commotions:)
yea, natural brotherne one seek to destroy another: suporiours also and
inferiors: spiritual men, temporal men: Rich men, poor men: familiar
companions: near Neighbors and friends: And fynallye, even from the prince
to the poor plough man, or most wretched wandering beggar, we are all divided,
we are all fled from Christ, the serpent has deceived us, for we have all
rebelled, and have broken the bond of the peace of god. Heaven and earth (if
we list to know it) bear manifest witness against us of our cursednes,
hardenes of heart, and maliciousnes. Whose unnatural and rare seen signs,
signyfieth unto us the ire of god, for our chosen way of iniquity, god by his
mercy sends them unto us, and before our eyes, to admonyshe us, to put us
in fear, and to remember his justice: and that without spedye repentance his
swifte vengeance by some terrible mean shall shortly ouerrunne and consume us.
Whereof the true mynysters and preachers of the wourde of God, Strange signs
signifies unto us the coming of gods wrath.
has, and do, from time to time (before the imminence fall of the wrath of
god) thundered in our ears, our most detestable and wicked state of life, and
the terror also of his most bitter reuengement, duly thereafter ensuyng. Our
consciences condemns
Of the which also our own consciences bears witness against us: they
preach unto us: the wourme gnaweth in us: it vexes and tourmenteth us: and
describes plainly unto us our most just damnation to come. And as Satan has
seemed sleightily to compass us: and by his craftyingins to wou^d and
overthrow us, and lead us captive from the lyghtesome and lively way of
Christ, into his most lothesome hypathes of dackenes, danger, and death: So
we thunexperte soldiers in the camp of Christ, and utterly void of the
fencible armor of god (without resistance) cowardely suffer our selves to
sustain the deuyls most damnable and deadly darts, and to be used as his bond
slaves and cursed instruments, Faynte courage in christen soldiers.
to wourke in all mischieues, his most noysom appointed purposes. And for the
probation whereof, whether is this truly said or not? We fear neither god not
the feuil.
God and his laws we esteem not: of our oaths and promises we pass not: of
gods kingdom we think not: his power we regard not: his only glory we seek
not: which end go foreward we care not: No, it plainly seems in deed
amongst us, yt hell fyro also we fear not. Whereby we show our selves not only
to be of our selves very corruption, ye sede and frail flesh of our
disobedient father Adam, but rather the natural brotherne and right
companions in deed, of cursed Cayne, We are co^pa^^^ns, and natural brother^
to to Come.
the serpents seed: whose poisoned nature, cancred rebellion, wilful
disobedience, pretenced malice, murmuryng and murder break forth in time, to
the kendlyng upon him self, the heavy indignation and wrath of god: whose
vilitie also and noisome state of life, our hearts will seek to follow, to the
purchasing unto our selves the like damnable reward and assured end of
destruction. Verily, if we the children of Adam (engendered of most frail
fylthynes, and wonderfully defiled with Satha^s sleightes, were not thereby
approved and known cursed Caynites: that is to safe, the apt companyons and
unfeigned folowers of wicked Caynes affecte: and did detest utterly the unclean
steps of Cayn, but were the lively and true children of peace, and the mylde
folowers of ryghtuousnes, with blessed Abel, guyded by the good spirit of God:
we would not be as we are, so hateful, such seckers of varyaunce, kendlers of
division, wourkers of mischief, nor such mercyles committers of unnatural and
deadly murders, as the evil ympes of Satan, and the wylfull destroyers of the
christen Abelles: Namely the faithful me^bres of Jesus Christ: hindered,
conspired against, rasshely judged and murdered, by the devil, and by us his
naughty noisome members. For in stead of thalowed and true love of christ,
whereby we should bless, preserve, and succor our brother: Gene. 4.
we have the hatefule lothsom love of Cayne, whereby we curse, annoy, and
destroy our brother. And ye cause also why, we our selves do know: that is:
because our own wourkes being evil cannot abide, 1. Joan. 3.
but have in utter detestatio^ our brothers most godly and rightuous wourkes.
Therefore unto ye dear lovers and friends of god, it is nothing at al
merueilouse, that they be in such wise hated, and in danger of ye unrighteous
and most wicked worldlinges: by who^ (as I said) they are continually assaulted
and bewrapt in misery. Of whose further co^uersacio^ or vnki^dnes (namely of ye
wicked) through corruption of nature in other particular evil, to their own
great hurt, and to the utter disco^forte or hurt of gods people: shall in diverse
points hereafter, more plai^ly be manifest, neither is this here spoken
properly, in ye respect of any one man, or of a few persons, either only of ye
clergy or of ye laity, for ye due execution of justice in honest and godly
causes, nether is there here any thing spoken against the noble virtue of
magnanimitye, valiaunte stoughtnes or courageous resittynge wicked enmies, at
due times, in necessary causes, and in ye fear of god, whether only for
particular cases, or for the most needful defense of a country, or commune
wealth: Neither now of this present time, or only here of England (one
christen region so called among the rest) or otherwise solye and generally of
all barbarous nations (besides our selves) that have not known god: but
specially of the whole and universal dispersed church of all Christendom
(which should most clearelye shine in righteousness) has been and is sowly
contaminated, and the whole body thereof embrued, with these most dampnable
and dyueilishe spots, of maliciousnes, wrath, and murder: yea, they seem to
be spots (alas for pity) so depely set, dried up, and inward lie rankeled,
that they are utterly to be immundified and irradicable (as though god had
clearly withdrawn the plentyfulnes of the moisture of his grace from us) to
purge waste, and consume all fylthy affectes in us, because he has called unto
us, and we wickedly abusyng our senses, have not endeavored our selves to here
and understand his will for our christen conversion and saving health: but
have not withstandyng still with rage, hungrely hu^ted to spy our pray: and in
spyeng, we have fallen to scaterynge: and in scatterynge (without ceassyng)
have fallen to chasynge, violent strong straynyng, and short breathyng, till we
have (at the least) fore wearied, grievously pinched, piteously wounded, or
else most gredily devoured: yea, we are therefore no less known and well
tried, then very forward impes, approved swift folowers, skillful and conninge
hunters, and unfeigned lovers of this our forefixed and most merciles wicked
game. And certainly, if they (whom we have in chase) escape at our hands, a
mischeuouse or deadlye danger, as truly they seldom do: we may then say
as they have always said: Go thy ways, thou have escaped a scouringe, or
passed thorough the pykes. For in our natures, from the beginning, we have been
so mischievous, cankred, and furious, rooted in unhappiness, wedded to
wickedness, and imagining mischief as law: Psalm 94.
that if we can get them at advantage, or cote them in their raze, and that
God assist them not mightilye in their course: we will assuredlye overthrow
them, with lyngryuge pains tormente them, and gredllye gnashe (in the end)
their bones in sonder. Upon whose abominable outrage, fylthie affecte and
corruption, god looked down from heaven, to behold amongst us the state of
our understanding, our desire to know him, and our diligence in seking after
him: But he perceived playnelye that we were al out of the way: that we were
treaders of his paths: that we were altogether beco^me abominable: that there
was none of us good: that our throats were as the open sepulchers: how with
our tongues we had deceived: Psalm. 14.
that the poysone of aspes was under our lips: that our mouths were full of
cursynge, venom, and bitterness, that our feet were swyfte to shed
blonde: that destruction and unhappiness was in our ways: that the way of
peace was unknown to us, and that we had not before our eyes the reverend
fear of God. What can we say, but that all these and such other like euylles
mentioned in gods holy writ, of this generation, have been felt from time
to time, throughout christendom (generally) and in all ages? have they not
been fulfilled? It were happy for us, in these our days, if we could say,
it were not so. But we must needs say, as experience has most trewely
(with bytternesse) taught to the contrary. For we may auouche with tears, that
the souls of the ryghtuous, Psalm. 120.
and the true lovers of God has long dwelte (with woe and great myserye)
amongst them that are enemies unto the peace of god. Unto whom
notwithstanding, when dylygent suite and labor has been most most humbly
made by the rightuous, for the vpholdyng of this peace (tendyng to the glory of
god, and their own salvation) they have changed their countenaunces (with
Cayne): Genes. 4.
they have grown exceedynge wrath: they have gnashed their teeth at them:
they have stopped their ears against them and have prepared them selves
immediately to bloudye battle or murder. And have showed hatrede with cursed
Caine, against those whom god most dearly loved. But what get they at any
time thereby? Are they not therefore (with blouddy Cayne) most wourthitie
accursed? And for this their hurtful rebellion, wrathfulnes, and the breach of
gods peace, known where so ever they be scattered or intermedled in the true
church of god to be the right synagoge of Satan, and the serpents most
poisoned and noisome seed, only rooted in the rotten hearts, and stinkyng
soil of the wicked, growing up and spreadynge over the whole face of the
earth: even very duste and dross, the ofscourynge and fylthe of the earth,
the venomous slynkynge weeds, and most fylthy rotten dunge, spoylyng,
spottynge and poysonynge (where yt may) the pure and wholesome air, the
beautiful and goodlye grounds, the louelye green pastures, the sweet
smelling herbs, and the most fair flourysshynge flowers, fruictes, and
trees, enclosed with glory in the most amiable, seemelye, and precious
gardeine of Christ: yea and that by his only power also, this most pestilent
and infectuous fylthy dunge, shall be in time, as mire in the streates,
thrown out, even by that most just, most pure, most puissaunt, and almighty
prince of peace: and shall for ever sustain with the dyuell and cursed Cayne,
the violence of his wrath, the weightye stamp of confusion under his feet,
and his most fearse and furious spourne, into the botomles pit and stinking
lake of hell. God shall recompense our wyckednes and destroy us in our
malice: yea, I say, even the Lord god, he it is that shall destroy us: he
watches over us: and when we in our ungodliness, least fear him, and bear our
selves against him, and against the peace, health, and life of his people:
when we are green as the grass, and at the ripest, and that all our works
of wickedness do most abound and florishe: then shall we be destroyed, and
euerlastynglye perish with our works of wickedness, eue^ by the same Lord
that is most high, and lives in glory for ever? We are called unto by the
mylde voice of god, to attain to the knowledge and understanding of god: to
love him: to seek after him: to be a right follower of him: to keep holy his
laws and ordinances: to acknowledge our wickedness: co confess our weakness:
to call for strength: to turn from evil, and to do good, to show
obedience: to be humble and full of humility: to be merciful, charitable, and
friendly: Heb. 13. John. 12.
to embrace love: to seek peace also, and ensewe it. He cries unto us, Peace,
peace: peace be with you, and peace be amongst you: peace within, and peace
without: yea, have ioyfulnes and peace in your consciences: be charitable and
follow peace with all men and holiness: without the which, no man shall see the
Lord got: who only of himself is a god of al purity and holiness: and
seeks according to his nature, the ouelye peaceable and pure heart of man:
unto whom, as unto the faithful lovers of his testimonies, like a merciful
and loving GOD, yeldeth unto them the bountyfulnesse of his grace, and to be
their ready healpe in all necessities. And it is sygnyfyed unto us by the
spirit of god, that great is the peace of the ryghtuouse, and such as fear
God, and that they never be offended at it. It behooves you then to be wise,
peaceable, and loving: and that ye also take good heed, least ye be
destitute of the knowledge and grace of God: neither that ye refuse that, God
offers his grace freely unto al me.
which he so freelye and largelye offerethe unto all men: that ye also in his
holy peace, may not be hurtful, but favorable, plentuouse, and bountyful in
all good works, to thexaltation of his name, that is rich of grace and
plentyfull. Use freely therefore the grace of god in the way of peace, neither
respect persons therein: And know, that the peace of god may not be patched
or colorably disguysed: for all as we that be of Christ (even from the
highest to the lowest) have received but one only way (thoroughe the power of
his spirit) to enter the bond of peace: so must we, all and every of us,
indifferently have peace with all men. Romans 12.
Concord must be kept: we may not break unity: 1 Cor. 1. Romans 12.
we must be all of one mind: there may be no discention amongst us: we may
not recompense unto any man evil for evil: neither may we wickedly spend our
time in vain talking, Jacob. 4.
foolysshe babblynge, vile detractyng, or rash iudgyng one an other: for by
such things are broken our true faith, fidelity, and promise, and our
perfect love and peace that we owe to God. And he that is a back byter also
and iudger of his brother, as a most wicked and rebellious membre, backebiteth
and judges the law, which is holy and good, and deeply graue^ in the hearts
of the rightous. If true love and charity, by the good law of God, to his
praise, and to the prosyte of our neighbor, only belongs unto us: then
nothing at all verily, of our vain talkyng, We may not be rash in Judgment
or otherwise to the hurt of our neighbome.
detraction, rash and blind foolyshe judgment, or otherwise, wherbye we may
hurt our neighbors, belongs unto us. For the peace of god and unity is
our profession: and the virtue of charity, true friendship, and godly love,
should should be always our very hungre and lust, for our honest preferment
to the estimation of God: yea it is the fulfyllyng of his law. But to use
folishe babblyng, detraction, or indirect judgment, to the hurt of our
neighbor belongs not to us: for we are corrupted in our understanding: we are
carnal: our judgments are imperfect: we are wilful and effectionate: Because
we are affectionat^ and willful our judgments are imperfect.
we are either foolyshe, blind, or full of maliciousnes: by which means, we
rather (before God) seek his offense and displeasure, then the increace of
virtue, or the godly reformation of our neighbors abuse, whereof we will
talk and vaynely waste our breathe. If we will seem to busye our selves in
cases of judgment, or to look narowly upon other men's matters, let us first
paynfully and with dilygente travail, If we first examine a our selves, we
shall the better liscerne the doings of other.
examyne and judge of our selves, what reprochefull wickedness our own hearts
possesses, what venomous fylthe lies lurkyng therein, and the great blyndenes
also that is in our own eyes: that we may then the better discern the doing of
other: and so with compassion to order all things for our neyghbors comfort
and commodity. We are first required to the trial and examination of our
own state, When our eyes and hearts are clear and unspotted we shall show
forth the fruits of a good spirit, to the exaumple of other. But to the
contrary, if our eyes be wicked, and our hearts corrupted: we shevve forth
the fruits of an evil spirit, to others decay
and to judge of our selves, lest we be in deed, judged of the lord: whose
judgments are infallible, and ryghtuous altogether. When our own eyes ar
opened, clear, unspotted, and pure: and our hearts clean purged of all
impuritie, then it shall beautifully appear (in such things as we shall have
to do) that we possess a good spirit: by whose power and holiness, all our
dooinges shall be comely and well done, even according to the divine nature
thereof. But to the contrary, if our eyes be wicked, or our own hearts foul
and corrupted: we shall show forth the fruits of an evil and wicked spirit:
whether it be by hasty judgment, lyeng, detraction, falls accusation. etc.
which are notable evils, not belonging to us that have professed Christ: who by
his wourde has commanded us, to seek peace and quietness, to love one another,
and to keep our selves from murmuring, which profits nothing, and to spare
our tongs from sclaunderouse reports and backbyghtynges: for an idle word
shall not pass in vain, and the mouth that speaks lies, sleeth his own
soul. Sapi. 1.
who art thou (says saint Paul) that iudgest another man's servant? Romans 1^.
He stands or talleth unto his Lord: yea he may well stand, for god is
able to make him stand There is one law geuer and judge, Jacob 5.
which is only able to save and to destroy. What art thou then that iudgest
another? Eccle. 18.
Judge first thy self before the judgment com: so shall thou be sure to
find grace in the sight of God. Ephe. 4.
Judge not therefore (I require the) that thou be not judged again. Walk as it
becomes your calling (wherein ye ar called, Ezechi. 18 Gal. (...).
with al humblenes of mind, mekenes, and long sufferynge, forbearinge one
another in love: and be diligente to keep the unity of the spirit, thorough
the bond of peace: for every man shall bear his own burden, and receive his
reward accordingly. Therefore spend your times in the conteplacion of beue^ly
things: be friendly, love together with pacyence, and pray one for an other
that ye may all be saues. In love and peace the good soul rejoices: Jacob.
5. Romans 16. Ephe. 2.
and our hearts by love and peace, are united to the god of peace. In whom
peace abydethe, there the grace of God abundantly flows: And the possessours
thereof purchase unto them selfs to be called the sons of God. Math. 5.
Whose godly and divine minds are always bent to do well, and not to
consent to any evil: they are paciente: there is in them no desire of
reuengement: no murmuryng, no rebellion, no discord, no discention or variance
abydyng. Among many virtues, that god gives unto men (his faithful and
special good friends: in whom through Christ he delights) are chiefly
known in this life, by having in them these three principal virtues, Three
virtues..
that is, love, peace, and patience. Which comfortablye shyneth from the
hearts of the righteous, in great beauty and clearenesse before the face of
god, to the reioycyng and comfort of his people, and to the great laud and
praise of his name. Whereby also, the world for alyght and example unto it, may
well see whom they do possess, what good spirit guides them, and to what
godly end they are so guided. For by their said virtue of love, Love.
they ioyefully pass forth their time, and spend their lives with inward
travail or outewarde pain in the flesh: not proprely in any thing touching
them selves, or for their own singular gain and commodity: but first
respectynge the known will of God, they obedientely (to his praise in all
points) easily perform the only straight named bond of charity. They are so
lively possessed with the good spirit of God, that touching their inward man,
they freely with joy set forth thacceptable good wourkes of god. And as
love in all cases of necessity, is presentely apt to succor and comfort,
without respect of persons: Peace.
so peace also adjoined to love (and both derived from the love of god)
sorcibly join them selves together, to prevent dangers that inwardely bredeth
in the conscience (through thinfirmite of the flesh) or such also as
hyndereth the continuance of our natural lives in the flesh. ^acience.
And touching patience in thapproued man of God, 3. Reg. 21. 4. Reg. 14.
Esdras. 18. Psalm. 44. Roma. 8.
what friend or enemy, by word or deed can pluck him back from the bond of
love, frendeship or amity? What vexation or forment in the flesh, suffers
god to be laid upon him, but he will contentedly bear it, and that for the
love of God? so deeply in such, has he planted his grace. But we commonly,
(from whem as it seems, god for our great wickedness sake, has withdrawn his
grace) are so pufte up with the poisoned venym of the serpent, and our hearts
so strained with thanguishe of syn, that health is taken from us: our souls
are sick: we are fled from the helthfull and sweet food of lise, We have
refused the grace of god.
unto the noisome and most tart taste of death. In steds of gods heavenly love
and charity, our hearts are wickedly possessed with willful malice and enmite:
for peace war and discention: for patience in adversity, murmuringe,
detraction, lyeng, spightful reuengeme^t, and slippyng from god: or in stead
of friendly familiarity, vain contempt and strangenes. O the subtlety of ye
most sleighty and malicious serpent, and the great soly frailtye or blindenes
in our flesh. Evil are those seeds (by appeeraunce) and of poisoned nature,
Esdras. 4.
that has been sown from the beginning, in the heart of man, whose estate
doubtless is most miserable, whenne through the want of virtue and the light
of gods grace, he forsakes the pleasant and plain pathe way of piety (which
is yt reverent service, honor and obedience, Math 7. Luke. 13. Psalm. 10.
due unto god) and falls into the dangerous stonye, and hard bestubbed way
of iniquitye, the very bond slavery, and dirtye drudgerye of the dyuell. I
onsure you (loving brotherne) our ease is to manifest, that onles Satan the
prince of darkness, had thoroughly bewitched us, blinded our eyes, darkened our
understanding, and (as it were to distaine the stoughtnes and courageous estate
of christian soldiers) robbing us of our memory, and to turn and wind us,
like a sort of effemmate, feeble, and light persons, at his pleasure, where he
lusts, to our utter derogation, shame, and dishonor: we would not be so
strongly deluded, ouerrun and blindely seduced in such snarlyng and impious
paths that leads unto the lake of perpetual pain and pardition: whereunto
the very order truly and continuance of our stiffenecked wickedness, We
vvilfully walk the way of wickedness
declares plainly what paths we tread, and whose steps to the death we
will seem frankely and very wylfully follow. For the auoydyng whereof, we
cannot say to excuse our selves of ignorance, or that we know not God by the
doctrine of his wourde, to be a god of love, of unity, peace, and concord: or
that we have not abundantly (in Christ Jesus) both tasted and felt of the
lively and fast flowynge fountains of his grace, ^. Cor. 13
to the great blessyng, sustentation, and comfort of body and soul: whose
co^mandementes also we have professed and promised to obey, and whose steps
of rightousnesse we ought to embrace and follow. In consideration whereof, and
for the perfourmaunce of ryghtuousnes, have not we Christians, the rather good
occasyon well to remember, that when we were professed and consecrated with the
holy mysteries of the foun^aine of life, how we then boundo our selves unto
the good will of god, Romans 6.
and Christ, in all purity and holiness, and to forsake the devil and al his
da^pnable wourkes of darkness: and like dilygence and faithful soldiers of
Christ, to be always prepared and ready armed with the armoure of light and
righteousness, to wythstande the cruel assaults and craftye ingins of Satan,
that our most aunciente and mortal enemy? And valyauntlye to adventure our
lives, throughout the whole raze and dangerous passage of this short life
under our victoriouse prince, and most puissant captain, christ, to whom our
lives are double due: first because he ons gave life unto us, and tha^ being
lost, to restore it unto us again? Either are we forgetfulle against whom
we strive? For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule,
against power, against worldly rulers, even governors of the darkness of
this world, and against spiritual craftynesse in heavenly things.
Wherefore take unto you the whole armoure of god (says saint Paul) that ye
may be able to resist in the evil day, Ephe. 6. Luke. 18. These. 5.
and stand perfect in all things. Stand therefore, and your loins gird with ye
truth, having on the breast plate of righteousness: and having shoes on your
fete, that ye may be prepared for the gospel of peace. Above al things, take to
you the sheld of faith, where with ye may quench all the fyry darts of the
wicked. And take ye helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is
the word of god. And Job says, ^oh. (...).
That the life of man here upon thearth, is but a continual warfare or time
of resistance, and mightily touer come the stoughtnes of our enemies: and that
no man attaineth the croun of victory, except (in Christ) be strive laufully:
And yt we prepare our selves by continual prayer to prevail against our
ennemies: as the Israelites thereby prevailed against the wicked Amalachites,
Exodus 17.
or other their deadly enmies, me^ cioned in the scriptures. Wherefore for the
more strait loking to of our charge and the more spedye, fulfyllyng of our
profession and bond, as we would show our selfs faithful valiant and wise
soldiers, and thobedie^t servants of god: as we would declare our selfs to be
ye zealous children of the vprighte and most pure honourynge of god: and as we
would have any regard to the state of our souls, and to the life to come
(whose everlasting joys no tungue can express) let us have in remembrance
our said promise (...) made to any earthelye king, or other vain creature
under the son, nor to any angel in heaven, but to the Lord of heaven him self
that lives for ever, a god above al gods, a righteous god, omnipotent, and
immortal: unto whom let us acknowledge our own weakness, and apply our
selves, chieflye and above al things humbly to abase our selves, to prepare
our strength in Christ, to seek the mortification of thold man (the whole body
of sin) to seek newnes of life, and to hungre and thirst for the way of
righteousness: Prayer is the elevation of the mind to god vva^do whereby is
secluded al worldly do sires and all carnal and vain fantasies. And unto the
said prayer must be joined fasting and almose deeds. Toby. 12.
let us travel with our full force and strength, and with all fervent prayer
and bourning desire to god, to attain at his gracious and most merciful
hand, to be partakers of the depthe of his grace: whereby we may the rather
attain into our hearts, the wisdom of his son Christ: which by us must be
reverently searched for, and dug out of the hid treasures, and plentyfulle
veins of divine scriptures or wourde of god, which is the word of truth, the
touche-stone of trial, the lantern of light, the heavenly food, health,
strength, and life to our souls (wrought in us by the spirit of God, or
mynistred unto us by his divine and faithful mynisters) And by whose clearenes
and beautyfull bright shynyng beams, our souls may be pourged from all
impuritie, from the vain wisdom of the world, from darkness, and from the
foul stynkynge, and blind thycke myste of ignorance: which dymmeth in us the
perfect senses and judgment of reason, which is wonderfully corrupted:
against whom sensuality prevails: who also of it self is not able to healpe
and rule it self, but feebly yealdeth to confusion, and therefore must have
for his assured and perfect guide, a more excellent and wourthy gouernoure. For
not withstanding that Baptism (the outewarde sign and lauachre of
Regeneration) has wiped away in us, the great and foul spotte: yet the
sin, We still possess the spot of our father Ada^
partlye there remains still, of our progenitoures, and first parents:
which has not a little darkened, that so pure and clear light, of the
countenance, resemblau^ce, or similitude of god (which he has wonderfullye
showed and laid upon us) whereby our courage is greatly enfeabled, our
strength diminished, or the virtue of our wisdom, fowlye dysteyned and
spotted. For the reformacion whereof, through the lively courage omnipotencye,
and great wisdom of our Captain Christ, and by the virtue and heavenly
operacion thereof in us, our hearts by him shall be clean pourged and lyghtned,
to possess and enjoy the spirit of humilitye and mekenes. Through which
virtue also, we shall be the rather (in Jesus Christ) made more apt vessels
prepared and sanctified to honor, and meet for the use and service of our
lord god, and to the receyuinge also of his most holy spyrite: Math. 5. John.
4.
who always rejoices to rest, in the humble and meke hearted person: unto
whom Christ has promised the blessyng of god, and to en^^erite and possess
the earth. John. 14. Math. 5.
And when our mynds are thereby replenished, we shall be tha^ the more enforced
with all singlenes of heart, to mark dilygently by hearing or readyng the
wourde of god, what his good will and pleasure is, should here in this life, be
done by us, and amongst us: who has promised us for our christen obedience,
humility and mekenes, in acknowlegyng (as before) our own inhabilitie and
weakness, trustyng and only leauyng to the power and merits of Christ, that
he will mercifully hear us when we call unto him, John. 7.9.
and teustruct us in his doctrine: and to make us against our adversaries
wise, politic, and puissant: And therefore with all our possible strength and
endeavor, to apply our good minds to follow the same: that although our
flesh seeks her own, and covers with the devil and the world, to take
part against god, to the destruction of our souls: yet will he assist us, and
stre^gthen us with the armor of grace, that his holy and divine will here in
earth, may be done by us, and amongst us, Math. ^. Luc. 11.
as in the presence of his glorious majesty, among the angels and saints in
heaven: lest we be found to the contrary, very rebels in the latter day and
wilful disobedient children (vainly kickyng against the prick) which can
never be aptely atteyned unto, onles the said corruption and blyndnes be first
taken from us, Ephe. ^ John. ^. John. 8.
and our souls clean purged of the unfruitful works of darkness, wherewith we
should have no fellowship: that we may be light in the Lord, and walk as the
children of light, by thexample of Jesus Christ, the true light of the
world: whom if we follow, we shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life: whereby we may the better and the more clearly discern in our
profession, things that are evil to be refused, from things that are good
to be accepted: and so to eschew the stu^bling or the doubtful adventure at ye
election of such things as appertains in deed, to the very profession and true
religion of christen men. we shall then find thereby (to the confirmation of
our promise,) how very needefulle it shall be, Mat. 13.16 Marc. 9. Luc. 8.
John. 2. 1. Joan. 5. Faith is a lively and quick feling knowledge of the
mercy of our heavenly father: agreed, made at one, and most graciousely
reconciled unto us by the blood of our lord Jesus. Act. 5.
to have in our hearts an assured and lively faith in god our creator and
heavenly father (as his children regenerate and newborn) to rule us, to dwell
and abide in us: And whollye to dedicate our selves unto him (both heart and
soul, our mind and wit, and that all is within us) as unto a god of love,
mercy, and righteousness: whom we ever find to be our ready helper in all
necessities: by whose dyuyne power also we live, we have our beeinge, and are
moved. Of whose great mercy and goodness toward us, the prophet wrighteth:
that he like a diligente watcheman, attends ever more upon his people,
whether they wake or sleep: and is these strength and mighty defense, not
only against Satan, that old and maliciouse enemy of mankind, but also
against all other our adversaries, so that through his great mercy and godly
power: we be harmeles preserved, and are delivered from the power of darkness,
and has translated us into the kingedome of his dear son: whose eyes
contynuallye respects them that love him: for their love again is largely
required: he is their mighty protection and strong ground: a defense for the
heat, and a refuge for the hot noone day, a succor for stumvlyng, Eccle. 34.
and an healpe for falling: He lyfteth up the soul, he lyghteneth the eyes,
he gives life, health, strength, and blessyng. And the cause also why the
said prophet (who always beholds the mercies of God in Christ) brefely
declares unto us: that is, for our faithfulness, meekness, and humblenes of
spirit, for our hearts contrition, Psalm. 1 9.15.25.33.34
37.40.41.84.91.101.103.107.112.116.119 128.145.147.
for our constancy in love and obedience to his commandementes. And saint
Paul also says: That he has blessed us with all manner of spiritual
blessings in heavenly things by Christ, according as he had chosen us in him
before the foundations of the world were laid, that we should be holy and
blameless before him through love. Whereby also he has ordained us to be
heirs unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, and to
thexaltation of his glory for his grace: wherewith through our Lord Christ he
has made us accepted etc. For these his abundant mercies and innumerable
benefits and blessyngs poured upon us most wretched sinners we owe duly unto
him (by the direction of sound and clear consciences, even from ye very depth
of our hearts and souls, Deute 10. Eccle. 2.14. John. 14. Roma. 8. 1. John. 4.
John. 3 Roma. 2. 2. Cor. 5. Collos. 1.
all thanks geuyng, praise, and glory: and with no less efficacy, force, and
virtue, to love him again in wourd and deed: to love him fervently above all
things, and to keep his commandementes. Whose great love apered unto us
first: in yt he sent his only begotten son into the world, that we the
children of death, might have life, and live through him. Herein appeared the
great love of god to us ward, not that we loved him, but because he loved us,
and gave his only son to make agreement for our sins. God is love, and he
that dwells in love, dwells in god, and God in him. And hereby know we,
that we divelle in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit.
And we know and believe, the love that God has to us. If god so loved us,
then ought we also to love one an other. If we love one an another, God
dwellethe in us, and his love is perfect in us. And the perfect love of God
seekethe not it self, but frankelye appears for all others necessitye. It is
always charitable and frendelye, paciente, 1. Cor. 8.
and long sufferynge. If a mannne say, I love God, and yet hate his brother,
he is a liar. Leuit. 19. John. 13.
For how camme he that loves not his brother, whom he has s^ene, love God
whom he has not seen? And this commandment have we of hom, that he which
loves god, should love his neighbor also. Whereby (says Christ) all men
shall know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one an other. If my wourdes
abide in you, then are ye my right disciples: and ye shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make you free and deliver you. You shall be clean rydde
from all bondage of unrighteous: ye shall be possessed with the good
spirit of GOD: John. ^
and where the spirit of God is, there is freedom: And therefore abide you in
Love: Obey my precepts and commandementes. And this commandment give I unto
you, John. 15.
that ye love together, as I have loved you. As ye have found me to be unto
you, a God of mercy and loving kyndnes, and have always trained ye up, by
example and doctrine, to thexcercise of godly compassion and charity: so I
requite you, and give commandment unto you, that ye obedientely walk in my
waus, inseparably to knitte your hearts in unity, and ^^saynedly to love one
an other. And how to continue in love, Christ (in few words) signifies
unto us, that is: (...) the precepts of god. 1. Cor. 14.
by keeping his precepts and commandementes. Most precious in the sight of God
are these three virtues: Faith, Hope, and Charity: and of them all, the
last excels, and has the souerayntie. Miche. 6.
Micheas the prophet of god cries unto us, saying: I will show thee O man,
what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: namely, that thou trade thy
self in rightousnes: that thou be humble and lowly: that thou have pleasure in
mercy and ionyng kyndnes, and to walk with the Lord thy God. O the heavenly
voice and counsel of God, that sounds unto us for our saving health, and
wherein is comprehended the wholle sum of our duty. Which with all
humblenes we ought to receive: whereunto we should with reverence be obedient,
and to exalte therefore at all times his most glorious name: and being
myndefull of his mercy, to be heartily thankful, as well in all kinds of
adversity and dolor, as otherwise in any manner of prosperity or pleasure:
and then for his great mercy and loves sake, to love him again. Which can be
by no better mean, To (...) god ready is (...) be (...) a (...)
then to show our selves frendely and charitable unto all men, what soever
they be without exception, because they are of his creation and image, and
preciousely redeemed also by Christ, as we our selves hope to be. Whom the
charitable heart imbraceth indifferently, yea, even the whole kind of man:
whose state, whether it stands high or low, right or wrong, well or evil, al
must be referred to ye good will, disposition and grace of god. we must
therefore, respecting herein the will of God and the stoughtenes of our bond
and promise, devise with our selves, how, and by what mean, we might happily
do good unto all men, to the uttermost of our power: We must have fervent
love among our selves, for the said love shall cover the multitude of our
sins. 1. Pet. 4.
and by no means (no, not by thought, if it were possible, for the
clearenesse of our own conscience sake) to hurt any manne. For as the band
of charity: is to love god with all our hearts, with all our lives, and
with all our power and strength: so charity (also in Christ) does further
extend to the love of every man: poor or rich: good or badde: holy or
vnrightuouse: protestante or catholyke: french manne or spaniard: christen or
heathen: faythefull or untrue: bond or free: kynsefolkes or strangers, no
person excepted.

And as the figure of GOD is perfect and equal in all: so likewise
vncorruptelye without affection, indyfferentelye to favor all: Which is
agreeable to the example of Christ: who would all men indifferentlye without
any respect of persons, to have the benefytte of his holy life and passion,
and to be saved through faith in his blood (so great was his love toward
us,) by whose exaumple he would have us in like manner, indifferently,
gladdely, and with good will, to spread forth our affections to all man,
after the free, and most liberal distribution of charity. And what soever
cause be given to the contrary, yet nevertheless, according to the will of
God, and through the virtue of patience, to bear good heart and will unto
every man, to use our selves well, and to be favorable unto them: not only
in cherefull words, Romans 12.
and by outward familiarity and countenance (whereof otherwhyles we make very
nyce and strange) but also in other our acts and deeds, even from our
veraye hearts. If they be good men, to love them in Christ, and if they be
evil men, to love them also for Christ's sake.

And whenne they have deserved hurt or disfauoure, or that occasyon be given by
them of reuengemente and displeasure, yet we should not withdraw our
frendeshyp from them, and to hurt or hinder them, but to do good unto
them, Romans 12.
though they have not deserved it. For to overcome evil with goodness, and
malice with kindness, is truly to counterfayte the perfect charity of Jesus
Christ, the son of God, the savior of the world, and patron of all piety:
Esa. 53. Math. 26. Act. 8. Eccle. 17.
who has taught the very same doctrine for our erudition and learning, that
have earnestlye professed his name: which also to our example (in his own
person) performed in very deed: although the malicious and proud people of
this world that vainly boast of Christ, and has their whole felicity only
fixed upon earthly vanities, are the sworn servants of Satan: who was a
dissembler proud, malicious, and a murderer from the beginning: by whose
corruption and malice, is engendered in our hearts, privy hatred, open
contempt, secret murmuryng, selaunder, detraction, sedition, false accusation,
and finally wylfull consent to murder. Such among many other, are the works
of the devil, and of his maligna^t and bloody members, from the beginning upon
the earth. And like as is the minister, such are the servants. If (...)
therefore be (in deed) of Christ, and (...) unfeigned professors of his name,
we are also the true servants of Christ, and beloved of him, whom we take to
be our Lord and master, our mark, and perfect exaumple of living, and whom
we ought always to have before our eyes, as the only patron of all holy
conversation, and godly state of life: that even as he has given us exaumple,
so we should also do. John. 3. Ephe. 5. 1. Pet. 2.
Unto whom, (and before whose presence) our minds should wholly and at all
times appear uncorrupted, and our souls contynuallye occupied in the
meditation of celestyall or heavenly things: reiectynge from us violentlye
(as dross) all vain and unfruitful studies: al hatred, enmity, and malice (or
other kinds of fylthynes:) and to direct only unto him, all our enforcements:
al our pastymes and pleasures all our ententes and purposes, all our rest and
quietness, and finally also, all the whole sum of our business. For touching
proprely the perfection of the said love and charity, that we ought to have
among our selves, and each to other, in this manner, saying: Ye have heard it
taught in times paste, thou shalt love thy friend, Math. 5.
and hate thine enmy. But I say unto you: Love your enemy. Speak well of them
that defame you, Romans 12.
and speak evil of you: Bless them that curse you: do well to them that
hate you: pray for them that vex and persecute you, that ye may be the
children of your father, which is in heaven. For he makes his Sun to rise
both upon the good and badde: and sends rain to the just and unjust. For
if ye do but love them that love you, what reward shall ye have? Do not the
Publicanes likewise? And if that ye speak well of them that be your
brethren and dearly beeloued friends, what greatte mattier is that? Do not
the Heathen the same also? Math. 6.
Again, If you forgive men their faults, your heavenly father shall also
forgive you your faults. For if our fautes should trouble our consciences,
then we in this thing thoroughe Faith, ought to know as by a sure and a
most certain token of comfort, that our trespasses he forgeuen us of GOD, if
we first forgive our Neighbors their tresspasses, wherein so ever they have
offended us, how great so ever the trespass be, and much moore for
tryfelynge cases, or (as I may say) for womannelye quarellynges: I do speak
without offense to he wise. And we in our daily prayer require of GOD to be
forgeuen of him, of our dayelye and contynuall wickedness, as we forgive
other their faults committed against us.

So that before we pray, Prayer.
(which we are always bounce to do,) and of all things most needful: and
that not tediouselye, stoughtlye, faynedlye, doubtiullye, neither yet
maliciouselye: but cheerfully, reuerentlye, heartylye, faythfullye, and
charitablye, with a freendelye and loving heart:) our prayers (I say) when
we do pray, must either with the charity of God, in such wise be tempered,
that we can freely forgive if offense be committed against us, Math. 21. John.
15. 1. John 3. Jacob. 1.
or else wourthyly secke for our malice sake, and stiffenecked wickedness,
not only to sustain the loss of our present suite and desire, but also
encreace of the vengeance and wrath of god, the more abundantly to fall upon
us. For onelesse we forgive unto others their offenses, Math. 6.11.18.
god our heavenly father will not forgive us our offenses. And when there we have
offended them, or they have offended us, we must seek the unity and peace of
Christ: yea (I say again) we must seek it, except we will seem wylfully to
run headlonge to the devil and damnation: we may not be divided: we may not
break the bo^d of the fellowship of Christ: we are all members incorporate
into the body of Christ: we must thruste back stately courage and
thestimation of wealth: we must herein lay our malice and pride aparte: we
may not be quoy or nyce in these straighte cases of god, nor vaynelys
shamefaste: we may not daly with GOD: we may not think of our painted
sheathe: but all peenyshe fantasies, worldly vanities and flesshely affectes
set aside, we must symplye and wyllynglye with at diligence, prosecute the
good work which God describes unto us, and our own consciences also most
plainly directs. Before thou praye^^ therefore, Ecclesiastic. 18.
prepare thy soul (in any wise) to contence well god, and dalye not with him
as one that tempts him, but simplye or reuerentlye look to thy charge.
Humble thy self: be obedience to his voice: imprint or engraue in thine heart
his most fruitful and divine sentences We are taught to be of like affection,
Romans 12.
one toward another, and not to be high minded, proud and stought, but
humblye abasinge our selves, to be equal with them of the lower sort. We may
not be wise in our own opinions, neither recompense unto any man, evil for
evil: we may not by double minded for our love must be perfect and sound
without dissimulation. We must be feruente in the spirit, apply to the time,
and live peaceably with all men. And if we will take Christ, for our patron
and exaumple of lyse, we must reverence him, and obey him also in his wourde:
who says unto us also in this wise: Behold, I am the light of the world.
etc. Take me for your guide: Learn of me: for I am not proud: Math. 11.
I am not haute minded, disdaynfull, nor scornful: but gentle, lowely, and
meek in heart. And if we (that are the folowers of Christ,) will seek or
desire any thing at the hand of God the father for Christ's sake, we must
reverently seek to content his will: we must taste and savor of him in
goodness: we must manifest our selves to be the folowers in deed, of his
glorious and most beautifuile steps, we must rent from our hearts, and
tread (with force) under foot, these our most poisoned ragyng euylles:
namely the deadly and venomous prickyng, privy lukynge, secret annoyeng,
inward fretrynge, outward defacing, disteinyng, swelli^g disgracyng, re^ting,
tearing and choking thorns, thistles, bra^bles, burres and briers, and such
other shameless and endless noisome shrubs of our monstrous beastly pride, cancred
maliciouines, and most vain foolish stoutnes (which are thincensementes of
Satan, and his only vehement motions in us, to the stirring up of disobedience
and strife: of which more shall hereafter be sum thing touched) and seek
him simply that is simple and lowely, with al simplenes lowlynes: and mekenes
of heart: Prou. 28.
For he appears and is only found of them, that tempts him not, Sapi. 1.
but reuerentelye fears him, and believes in him; that rejoices to please
him, and loath to offend him. And if we think it a great thing to remit
thoffences committed against us by others, respectings this or that offense,
or ye baseness of ye party yt offends us, thinking thereby that our estimation
or honesty should be greatly di^^eined, if we did seks to co^ferrs with him,
If we consider the darkness and wickedness of our own lives, other men's
lives shall be fore God, seem unto us, so much the purer.
although for concord and charities sake, how much more ought we rather to
consider and remember our own notable and most vile state of life, and yt
heaps of offenses, which we daily commit against god, and in the presence of
his most glorious and excellent majesty, who respects no persons, but
knows and reproves thiniquitie and frailty of all flesh, notyng by his
justice, what is dew unto them, and that he not withstanding of his (...)
^lemency and mercy beholds (...) Christ, and does forgive us, (...) with
repentance we pray (...) unto him. Let us therefore in (...) calling examyne
well our selves, (...) men in anctoritie he, so will the people be Orce. 4.
and consider the great mercy of god, and his exaumple to charity: and the
greater we be of birth among many others, in estimacion of men, and in
anctoritie or welthy, (that ye praise of god may shine amongst us:) so much
the more to consider our estate to god-warde, we ought to submytte our selves
to his will: and in charity to apply our selves, to the good exaumple of all
men: that the peace of god and godly amity, may bountifully flourishe and
abound lyuelye amongst us.

Whose mind in his divine wourde and manifest exaumples of his mercy he has
thus (as before) sygnified unto us, touching our love and charity, that we
owe to our neighbors. And there unto saint Paul counsaileth us, satenge:
(...)
Be ye therefore folowers of God, as dear children, and walk in love, eue^
as Christ loved us, and gave himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice of a
sweet savor to god. He^. ^^. Jacob. ^^
Let brotherlye love and peace continue amongst you: for the fruits of
righteousness are sown in love and peace, of them that are the lovers and
mai^^ ^e^ers of peace. Of which peace, brotherly concord and unity, king
David, the servant and beloved proph^^, of God, had experience, and has
signified unto us the excellencye and noblenes of the same virtue: to the eno^
we should (even from the depth of ou^ hearts) be thereunto affected, and delight
to trade our selves therein joyfully, all the days of our loved: b^yng all
brotherne and sisierne, and have one father, even our heavenly father: by who^
also, we have Christ our savior, to be our lord and brother; And by him we
are the sons and heirs of god: Rom^. 8.
yea and fellow heyred with him of eternal glory: how requisite therefore is
it (seeing we have but one father, the God of heaven, and Christ to be one
brother, and are all brotherne and sisterne in Jesus Christ, to be all of one
mind: because there is nothing that more garnisheth and becomes better the
name of brothern, tha^ brotherly love, true peace, quietness, mekenes and
amiable concord. It must needs picase well God, and be an excellent treasure
in any common welthe, seeing the prophet so hyghly extolleth it, and compares
it to a most precious ointment, Psalm. (...)
and most pleasant dew, whose sweet smelles can not be expressed. Behold,
says he, how good and joyful a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in
unite: and so forsh as in ye psalm. Thexperience whereof, Where peace and
(...) abides, there is is the blessinge of God.
we also our selves ar able some thing to declare by perfect knowledge, what
benefits innumerable (by the blessing of god) has he^ poured upon those
countries and commen wealths, where it has reigned (as also among faithful
and unfeigned friends, or honest familiar companions!) And to the contrary,
where the said virtue betwixt the^, has been broken and not flouryshed: but
rather division, murmuryng, maliciousnes, war: VVher war and discen^^o^ is,
there is the curse of God.
and discention: there, by the curse of god, has appeared amongst them,
innumerable other plagues, to to their great grief in conscience, to the
confusion of their own bodies, loss of their goods, spoylyng of their
friends, defylynge their wives, Every king dome divided, must: come to
desolation.
rauishyng their daughters and maidens, destruction of insantes, and fynallye
the utter decay and subversion of the whole common wealth: whether by
division or civil wars among them selves, or by any other vile nation:
whom, above all others, their hearts does most abhorte. If our hearts therefore
be presentely yrefull, or poisoned with rancoure and malice, and suffer the
continuance thereof in us, without fearing danger, or seekynge rem die: It
is not possible to the contrary, but being wylfulle possessours of wrath,
whereby we show our selves to be the very chylderne of wrath, but also that
the just anger and wrath of GOD, shall therefore again consume and destray us.
By our sedition and wrath we deuyse and seek all manner of myscheues: Prou.
Oree. 10.
but violente and cruelle messangers shall therefore be sent against us. Such
fruits as we plant, we shall pluck and taste. If we sow iniquity, we shall
reap sorrow. Job. 1. Gala. 6.
But forasmuch as we us all of Christ and lively members also incorporate into
the body of Christ, and are al one with Christ, and in Christ: and Christ (in
no wise may amongst us) be divided: of whom also, We must^ live in love
(...) a (...) of Christ.
we received example of love and unity: we must all live in the same love, we
must still continue in the same love, we musse seek the peace of god: and as
much as in us shall lie, never to break the bond of unity. And if through
frayltie, we other whiles slip from it, and thereby break the peace of Christ:
yet because he would in no wise have any continuance thereof amongst us, being
a pestilente malady and an infection of the soul, he calls unto us, saying:
Let not the son go down upon your wrath. Christ understanding this cursed
evil to be a foul spotte and deforinitie in the soul of man: and that
thereupon also did depend great destruction and mischief, gives us this
short and sweet lesson to avoid the continuance thereof that the rather our
lives may be perfect and holy, according to the excellencye of our christen
confession, Eccle. 18.
thinkyng always upon the covenant of the rightuouse and most high god, and
so charitably, to show our selves fre^dlye, and to forgive our Neighbors
their offenses and ignoraunces, not leaving (in no point) to strife or
variaunce: whereby, god shall be well contented, and our sins also diminished.
For such as be yrefull, busye, and unquiet, they are wicked wourkers of
mischief, kendelers of variaunce, and sowers of discord, among them that be
at peace, Ecclesiastic. 25
to the increase of iniquity and heaping upon them selves the ire of god. The
more woodds there is, the more vehemente is the fire, and the longer that
strife endures, the more wyckedlye it dourneth. And therefore for thauoydyng
of evil, and that good may come unto us, saint Paul counfaileth us, saying.
Let all bitterness, Eph^. 5.
fearcenes, wrath, roryng, and cursed speaking be put away from you, with all
maliciousnes. Be courteous one to another: be charitable, lowly and merciful,
forgeuynge one another, even as god for Christ's sake, Phil. 2.
has forgeuen you. Be ye like minded unto me, having one love, being of one
accord and of one mind, that nothing be done through strife or of vain
glory, but in mekenes of mind: And let every man esteem another, better the^
him self. Phil. 4.
Again, let your softnes be known unto all men. For the Lord is even at
hand, remember therefore these divine counsayles of Christ and his Apostles,
and sleep not before thine heart be pour god of maliciousness, of the pride
and stoughtnes. And think that yt cannot be only performed of thee, with
thoughts (For so may thou still keep the serpente of maliciousnes lurkynge
within thy breaste:) but let it in deed be manifest (in the spite of the
devil) unto those, against who^ thou bear thy malice, and stoutenes of
stomach. For in yt mean while, that this rule is not thus by the observed:
truly great is thy danger and present peril by ye hand of god. O what know
thou, you gross lu^p of earth, what soever you be, ye live upon ye earth, yt
gloriest so much upon thy self, yt couchest down thy self at night upon thy
soft bed, with a mischeuous and cancred stomach, what shall chance upon thy
soul, before the day return? Or after thou risest in the morning, what
state thou shall be in er night? He that gave unto thee thy life, can also take
away from thee thy life: and is able to cast both thy body and soul into
hell fire. Math. 10. Luc. 12.
Why does thyn heart then ma^e thee so proud? Why stand thou to greatly in
thyn own conceit? Whereunto looks thy eyes, that thy mind is so puffed up
against god? Fear thou not in thy self yt huge heaps of sin that will
accuse thee, or make the more careful and lowely? Neither thy barthen of thy
conscience, that so fore oppresses thee, and whereby the justice of god hangs
over thee? Either wy^^e thou show thine heart to be hardened against him? O
fadyng flower, and erthly creature, what meanese thou vnreuarently to forget
god thy creator, or not to fear him? Think thou that the co^tinua^ce of thy
will to do wickedly shall ever endure? Or why art thou so presumptuous against
him? Art thou able (thou wretched and feeble wourm^^ to resist his omnipotence
or almyghtye power? Art thou not in his hand as a piece of clay in the hand of
the potter? Esaie. 49. Iere 18.19 Romans 9.
Or which of all the stought or puyssaunte princes of the earth, shall not
stoop at him, and obey him? He, truly) is almyghtye and terryble: yea, the
earth trembles and quaketh for fear of his great indignacion and wrath: and
the people shall not he able to abide his threatnynge. The whole power and
strength of all the earth joined to I^ther, is not able to abide one blaste of
the breathe of gods mouth. And dare thou (thou dustye stubble) persist or
stand at any time, in the state of wickedness, before the face of so great and
terrible a god? Consider therefore thy wilful malice and folishnes, and thy
careless slippyng from god, that is so just and terrible. Examine thy self, and
reuerentlye in the fear of god, try well the state of thy conscience whether
thou may iustlye say before heaven and earth: O lord, thou omnipote^t and
terrible god: Hiere. 17.
whose throne is most glorious excellent, and of most antiquity, which
dwell in ye heuens: even in the place of man's holy rest: of who^, thou art
of all gods most highely to he feared: for thou art a rightous and a just
god in pouryng thy wrath upon thine enmies: The repentant sinner.
yea I must also say that thou art a merciful and a loving god: the only
comforter and refuge of man: his immouable pillour and stay of assurance, and
the lively hope of his health, joy, strength, and salvation. Therefore O Lord,
in acknowledgynge thine omnipotency and great mercy, whereunto I appeal: I
humbly fly unto thy mercy seat for succor. for mine iniquity, O god, is
manifest unto thee: which I confess before thy divine majesty. I have, O
lord, offended against thee: I have forsaken thy law, and committed iniquity:
I have fled from thy love: I have fallen from thy word: I have broken my
fidelite: I have been rebellious against thee: For mine heart has wickedly
possessed pride and maliciousnes, whereby I have greuousely offended and hurt
my neighbor. O Lord, great therefore is mine iniquity in thy sight. Psalm.
119.
My conscience justly accuses me: my flesh tre^bleth for fear before thee:
my spirits are troubled within me: And the remembrance of thy Judgment is
terrible unto me. O Lord mine eyes therefore gushe out with water, my sight
falls me: I am greuouslye vexed: mine heart pants within me: my strength is
gone from me: my knees are weak: my flesh is dried up: my beauty is
consumed, and I am weary of my gronynge. Alas my grief, alas my fall: Alas my
great woe and myserye, for this my stroke and woeful plage, that thy grace (O
God) should thus be taken from me: whereby, I most wretched sinner, am forget
full of my truth and obedience, of my faith and promises, of thine infinyte
love and goodness toward me, and of thy great indignation and Justice for
my sin and iniquity. Ah, who shall give me water to my head, and a fountain
of tears to mine eyes, that I may wash my bed with tears of sorrow and
bewail my sins both night and day: whereby thy grace (O sweet god) may yet
be returned unto me, and thy justice against me be shortly prevented. I make
mine humble peticion in thy presence with my whole heart, ye thou wile be
merciful unto me, according to the truth in thy wourde. O heavenly father, A
Prayer.
let thy great mercy in Jesus Christ, lyghten, upon me, that thy wrathful
indignation prevail not against me. I humbly (with repentance) acknowledge
mine iniquite: I co^tesse my sickness and frailty, and appeal to thy mercy,
promised unto me in Jesus Christ. And if thou, O Lord, for his sake, wilt
assist me, Psalm. 119.
and order my steps according to thy wourd, my fete shall keep thy paths,
and no wickedness shall henseforth have dominion over me. O refourme therefore
with mercy that is amiss: Psalm. 3^.
for thy mercy recheth unto the heavens, and thy faithfulness unto the clouds.
With the is comfort and the light of life: and in thy light shall I se light,
and the works of darkness shall fly far from me. O turn thee then unto me,
Ierem. 1^.
so shall I be turned: heal thou me, and I shall be made whole: save thou
me, and I shall be saved. O be not terrible unto me after thy rightuous
judgment. Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for then shall I not be justified
in thy syghte. Yea, if thou O lord, should extremely mark what is done
amysse, who could then abide it? But thou art also a God of mercy: yea, thou
delightest in mercy, and with thee is plentuous redemption. My soul therefore
flies only unto thee: Psalm. 130.
it wayteth humbly for thee, and trusts assuredly in thee. Out of the deep
do I call unto thee (O Lord) O here mine humble voice, and let thine ears
consider well the voice of my complaynte. Benignely behold me with thine eye
of mercy, that I (I say) thine vnwourthy servant, may be joyful of thy
countenance. O let thine holy spirit possess my heart, to create in me a
clean heart. and to ^enue within my bowelles a right spirit: that I wretched
sinner may be quiet in thee, may grow in the true knowledge of thee, that I
may feruentlye desire thy kyngedome, and that I may know thy will and
reverently wourke there after. For through thine only grace (O Lord) and by
the vehement impulsion of thine holy spirit, shall mine heart and soul be
clean pourged, quiesed, quickened, strengthened, and sanctified. It is thy
spirit (O GOD) that shall convert my soul, and guide me forth in the
pleasant and plain path way of righteousness. Yea Lord, I will therefore be
bold and say: Come thou good spirit of god: comme (I beseech thee) and
assiste me with the present health of thy grace. I have affiaunce in thee. O
instruete thou me, and strengthen me: refresshe, comfort, and quiet me:
replenysshe my soul with joy and gladdenesse, and kendle in me the fire of
thy love. Th n O holy spirit, whether in body I wake or sleep, my soul shall
continuallye watch unto thee, think of thee, delight in thee, depend only
upon thee: yea, it shall be fully satisfied in thee: and evermore rejoice, love,
and please thee, even from my very heart, with all my power and strength, and
love my neighbor as my self, to thy glory O god, all the days of my life,
and for ever in the world to come Thus, I say, O thou erthly creature, and dear
christen brother, that hasardly (by due justice) abidest the hard hand of God,
let daily sorrow fasten upon: thee, and continual sadness po^^e^fe thine heart.
Offer unto God the acceptable sacrifice of a troubled spirit, of a broken,
sore vexed, and contrite heart, till grace be planted again in thee, and thy
sins through faith, clean purged and taken from thee. And always remember,
if thou love god because of his mercy, if thou fear him for his justice sake,
or if thou bear any good heart toward the counsels or voice of god, harden
not thy heart, as in the day of temptation: ke^dle not upon thy self the wrath
of god: flee from the vengeance to com, for otherwise the justice of God will
fall fast upon thee. And if thou, as before, wilfully do desire to be
mindful of wrath, reuengement, or displeasure, either of speking or of doing
wickedly, use first thy cogitation in this manner following, which shall be
rather to a godly intent and purpose, according to the counsel of the
preacher: which is, not to be yreful against thy neighbor, to wourke
reuengemente against him for any matter: or to wythhold thy charity from him
but to think upon the most terrible and bitter day, when thou (among the
rest) shall be called upon by the trompe of god, Eccle. 18.
to appear before his wrathful indignacion, and to remember the bitterness of
his vengeance, when he shall turn his face away from thee, yea, even from thee,
thou wrathful and dampnable rejected creature, if thou abide in thy wrath, and
if thou (with the rest) shalt be partaker of this terrible and most bitter
sentence. Away ye wicked, to the deuell and to hell fire for ever. If thou
otherwise have pleasure to think upon wrath, and to wourke or deuyse mischief
thereby, to the hurt of thy neighbor: be thou certain hereof and well
assured, that such a match shall be joined unto thee as will cruellye in his
wrath, vex thee, quickly consume thee, and violentlye twyne thee, even like a
rysshe, Psalm. 49.
to the sudden and short confusion. Even God him self it is, that shall
recompense thee thy wickedness, and shall destroy thee in thine own wicked
malice: yea, it is the Lord God him self (I say) that shall utterly destroy
thee. As hatrede, enemitie, and reuengement, with such other, are wyeked evils
forbidden thee, and thervppon agreed with thine own consent and promise, to a
blessed and most happy end; so if thou contemnynge this prohibition, dooest
swerve from thy promise and fidelity, and cleave unto such iniquity, they
will kendle the wrath of God against thee, Eccle. ^^
to the increace of affliction, to the wour king of an evil death and
everlasting destruction. Thou shalt worthily be compted among the number of
the cursed and ungodly people Upon whom, god (in this life) shall rain snares,
fire, brymstone, storm, and tempeste, which shall be their dew portion to
drink. Psalm. 1^.
And such as be scornful despisers without a cause, they shall be put to
confusion: Psalm. 5. Psalm. 68. Psalm. 75.
neither shall such as be mercylesse and cruel, stand in the syghte of God.
For like as ware melts at the great heat of the fyre^ so shall ^hun godly
perish at the presence of god, and come to a terrible and fearful end. Fire,
hail, wind, earthquake, tempest, and whirlewind: hungre and thirst,
pestilence, murrayn, burninge fevers, incurable botches, swellyngs, madness, and
such strange diseases, sodayn fearefulnes, strise, unquietness rigor,
oppression, sword, bloudsheddyng, death, sodayn death, destruction and
punishment: the teeth also of wild and noisome beasts: the scorpions, Eccle.
39.
serpents, and all such poisoned and venomous wourmes, are created for
vengeance, to the destruction of such malicious and wicked people. If you wylt
not therefore do and observe the will of God, and fear to offend the fearful
name of the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28. Psalm. 39.
he will send upon thee, yea and upon thy seed after thee, these foresaid
grievous and most terrible plagues and curses. O change therefore thy copy, and
turn in time. Leave of from wrath, what soever thou be, and let go
displeasure: fear god: be charitable: keep peace: abide in love: styppe not
from it: consider it well, and think what thereon depends: so shalt thou
know it: yea, thou shall gladly also exeresse it, and enjoy for ever the
delectable fruits of it. And if thou will further know of love what it is,
note saint Paul: Love says he, is pacient and courteous: 1. Cor. 4.
it enuieth not, it does not frowardly: it is not pufte up: it deals not
dishonestly: it seeks not her own: it is not provoked to anger: it thi^keth
none evil, it reioiceth not over iniquity, but in righteousness and truth: it
bears al things, 1. Tim. 1.
believes al things, hopethe all things, and suffere the all things. And this
love is the whole sum and end of the law, that shines from a pure heart
and good conscience, and out of an unfeigned faith: Romans 13.
For they that love one an other fulfilleth the law. So that the deeds the^ of
yt flesh being mortitied, Gala. 2.
we shall have our conversation in the spirit, and not live under the law.
These are the fruits of the spirit, Gala. 5.
love, joy, peace, long sufferynge, gentylnesse, goodness, faithefulnesse,
meekness, and temperaunce. These (I say) be the fruictes of the spirit.
And those that possesses them, are free, and live not under the law: whereby
our souls are in rest, and at peace with god: we content well god; we rejoice
to work his will to the helping and edifyenge of our neighbor, and to
compte of our selves, to be as before, al members of one body: to think that
we be all but one in Christ: Charity.
to rejoice in our neighbors health, wealth, and comfort, eue^ as we would do of
our own: to remedy his inco^modities, to lament his distress and mysery, to
aid him and comfort him: or if he err or go out of the right way, to
bewail (from our hearts) his great blyndnes and error: to give him
frendlye counsel and warning: to admonish him gently: to tell him of his
faults soberlye and courteousely: to give him instructions for his learning,
according to the verity of gods word (whereby our hearts are illumined, and
y^ will of ye flesh confounded:) and finally, as the redeemed jewel of Christ,
and decely beloved of him, to succor him in all necessities. Thus, if we
hereby, well regard the mind of god, his great love and mercy toward us, our
obedience unto him, and our duties toward our neighbors: we shall perceive
and easily find out, what heavenly doctrine and counsels (among many others)
these are to be attained unto, to be beloved, embraced and followed, Job. 1.
Gala. 6.
as the lively clear sparks of gods grace, to the lyghtnynge of our
darkness, to the brydlyng, repressing, and treading under foot, our rancoure,
our priuye enemitie, malice, pride, covetousness, and uncleanness: our
obstinacy and stiffeneckednes, our hearts hardenes, our rebellion, our
cankred natures and stoughtnes. Christ has taught us and left behind him,
quick sparks of his heavenly doctrine amongst us, and as it were lyuelye and
everlasting veins, of his most pure and godly mind. He has opened his
mind unto us and amongst us, by his holy word, to pourgeand cleanse our
stubburne hearts, of all contagion and filthe: if we would happily apply (with
diligence) our affections there unto: and enforce our selves by careful
travel: to know these sparks of life: to feel and put in practyse the
operacion of them (leaving the dead synders or smokinge shrubbes of
cursednesse:) whereby it shall then be manifest unto us, through the light of
gods grace, The grace of god is ready at all times to enter into us, if we
thorough obstinat ma^ice ^epe it not back it is the good gift of god, and
descends from about, eue^ from the father of light: vvhi^he shall soon
(...) coined (...) us, (...) increased in us, if we make cure (...) and fe^^e^t
praiet to god for it: yea he will (...), stablishe it in us for ever.
shinyng in us, that in the profession of a very christian, constancy in love
and godly charity, is also an high and principal virtue: whereby we forsake
the state of wickedness, embracing a godly life, and ar loosened from
darkness, and from the thraldom and bitter bondage of our slye enemy, the
prince of this world, and be frankely set at liberty in the kyngdeome of
Christ: the end of whose course in the short race of this life, was to leave
amongst us, this most preciouse and heavenly gift: without the fellowship
whereof no virtue (in any wise) from the heart of man may appear to be
vprighte, clear, and perfect. For he that lacks this singular and blessed
gift of god, it is not possible for him to do any thing well to the plealure
of god, neither is he wourthie among the godly to be had in estimation and
honest regard (how hyghelye soever of his like, or among the vaynglorious of
this world, he seem to be extolled (lifted up, and magnified) because that he
which loves not his brother with singlenes of heart, according to ye bond of
charity, which is the perfection of a christen man, but respects persons, is
not of god, nor to be co^pted among the rightuous, and therefore the less apt
to attain the preservation and blessyng of god: which he has promised to al
those that love him, and be obedient to his co^ma^deme^tes. But alas with what
great sorrow may we lament, in these our unhappy and most wretched days: If we
consider the sharpenes of gods late visitation amongst us, Gods visitation.
for our unthankfulness sake, diuersely to be laid upon us, by
withholdynge specially the light of his countenance upon us, yt w^drawi^g of
his grace from us to the darknyng of our understanding, to the plucking back of
his love and godly charity in us, to the making of us hard herted and pitiles,
to yt kendlyng amongst us, dishonorable war and disce^tion: to the
supportation also whereof, has risen throughout this common welthe, great and
marvelous charges, importable and grievous exactions, to thincrease of
poverty, great woe, and myserye, scarcity and ramine: the cursed motion, in
deed, of the dyuell, and the fruits of his malignaunte and wicked members,
whereby the christen regions are thus afflicted, an open and most manifest show
of gods wrathful indignation against us: namelye upon this our christen
church of England, whereupon the brightness of his glory for the show of his
mercy in righteousness, has heretofore most bright lie shyned: and now of late
days, thorough his just wrath, for our vnthank fulness sake, has wythdrawne
it: and by wicked and wilfulle wars (the swourds of his vengeance) not only
to sustain the loss of such pieces, VVarres.
beyond yt seas (whereof England sometime with honor greatly rejoiced) but rather
amongst us here within the realm great and intolerable miserye, and the
destruction of the people by color, Famine.
and famine. O how grievously, thorough out these whole dominions, were, and yet
are yt poor creatures of god and tender me^bres of Jesus Christ, most
greuouslye therwt afflicted? And co^m^nly also, how ye hearts of those were, and
yet be hardened against the^, which i^ their vocation and habilitye, (being
here but stewardes of gods treasures) were bound, and ought in conscience, Of
pitilesse welthy me^.
to have sought their preservation and natural comfort, soeyng we are not
only borne to our selves, and wastfully to support our vain affectes: but
also according to our duty, state, and ability, for others succor, help,
and necessite: And how they were constrained for want of natural feedyng, and
according to the use of mankind, to be converted into the state of brute
beasts, and to eat for the vpholdyng of their wretched and most woeful
lives, acornes, grayns, and draffe, the fylthy swynes refection. And how
natural and dear parents, through wretched poverty, weryly wandryng the
wastful paths of life, Against nature.
were enforced against nature, to leave sleapyng in fields, and under hedges,
or losing in corners of cities and towns, their young babes and tender
infantes, the beloved fruit of their bodies, tournyng them at adventure, from
their own arms of compassion, into the most unkind and pitilesse world,
because they could not abide to hear their contynuall mournyng noise, their
great lamentation, their pituous co^playntes, and most heavy countinaunces,
always fixed for help upon them, their most wretched and unable parents:
whose woeful hearts abhorted to see (in such wise) the destruction of their
own flesh, and the violente cruelty of death by cold and famyne, ready to
take their lives from them. Either how sorrowful a thing was this to hear,
and more pitiful to see (by the report of credible and honest me^) that in
Hertford shire, beside saint Albons, as they passed by the high way side, they
saw there, lyeng and sitting together, a poor woman, A pitiful sight.
with her six or seven young children. And as they approached nere unto them,
to comfort them with their godly charity, they see the mother of them, lie
dead amongst them, consumed by famyne to the bones, and a young suckynge
infant also dead in her arms, another of her children dyeng by her side, and
the rest pituously making lamentation about her. And as I have here made
relacion (by credible report) but only of one company, and a few
persons, that have sustained (through man's most wretched unkindness) this
great woe and miserye: so could I name of diverse, both men, women and
children: either in villages without the city, or within, in back lanes,
desolate corners, or upon carraynely stinkynge donghilles, that has been both
quick and dead, wrapped in dust and horselytter, among the dogs, pigs,
and filthy swyne. O how lamentable is it, to hear and understand, of the
great fall of England, from the grace of God? O the hardness of our hearts
that hasteneth unto us the wrath of God. O how greattely appears the ire of
God to hang over us? Yea how heauyly already lays he is hand upon us?
Math. 18.
O cursed be the occasion, by sin, for ever: that gods heavy indignation
should so light upon us, and his grace so clearly withdrawn from us, that we
have no pity upon our poor neighbors, but suffer them in such wise, to
wourke desperatelye against nature: the parents to forsake their chylderne,
and the childerne to bewail the loss of their parents, lamentablye
sorowynge, crying, yellyng, sighing, sobbyng, and groaning on both sides, ye one
for the other, and the one not able to help thither, but abide to ye death, the
bitterness or their hard and most wretched fortune. O doleful desteny, and
most heavy adventure. O lamentable loss and most greuouse departure. O pitiful
parents. O forsaken and comfortless infantes. O render me^bres of Jesus
Christ, fe^ly creping always for life, and findyng in theno nothing but death:
whose irremediable and most woeful signs ye bear: Miserable pouerue.
apparaunt pearcynge looks, pale faces: lean chekes, wanne lips, torn
coats, gante bealies: withered skins bodies consumed to the bones, and
waightynge always deaths most deadly brunt, for the banefull breach of
life. O lord, if we now living in these days, and in the ^yme also of light
and knowledge of the gospel, shonsds but in this one only point, compare our
selves, with the good disposition of the people in other ages past, although in
the days of utter darkness and ignorance, for the great pity and tender
compassion that was amongst them toward the common welthe, and for
thadusidyng of such unnatural, most horrible and monstrouse sightes, among
the poor members of Christ and of the common wealth: what an untoward most
pit les, and unnatural generation, should we now think our selves to be, in
comparison of the other: but rather much more wicked: most wourthie also the
wrath of god: most wourthie reproach among the very Infidelles: yea, and to be
reproved also of the unreasonable and very brutishe wild beasts of the field
which against nature (to the reprofe of their own beastelye natures)
commits not at any time, any one such wretched evil: but will naturally
seek to nourishe, save, and defend that thing, which nature has naturallye in
their own kind, most gladly desired, most aptlye framed, inwardly preserved,
tenderly nourished, and brought up in time amongst them: by whose virtue
also, constancy, and tenderness in their rude natures, the name of god their
maker or is, or should be praised and magnified by mankind, the only
reasonable creature, and Lord of all creatures next under him, as by the
chief lover and special maynteyner of all causes necessary to natures good
affecte. O what natural good man then or man of god, except he were the very
deuell him self, or the diuelles own dearelynge, in whom restethend
possibility of pitye or good nature but would lamente and have compassion
upon these good creatures of god in such necessity: namely of mankind, their
own flesshd and blood: whom God him self so derely loves, for our example:
whom he so blesses, and upon whom he pours so abundantly his good graces
and gifts above all other his creatures? Do not (as I said,) the like of kind
help their like? The love of beasts.
Are there any so brute beasts under the son, or vile crepyng worms upon
thearthe, but would in their kind love one an other, and ioyn their hearts in
amity, to withstand to their power, the cruelty of unnatural and strange
adversaries? Are there among wourmes and beasts of the earth, more cruel or
unnatural adversaries one strange beast or worm against another, then is either
nakedness, cold, or famine against mankind, whose furious and deadly force, we
ought every of us myghtily withstand (according to the will of god) for one an
others preservation? Dishonor to mannekinde.
Can there be greatter shame and dishonor to mankind, the lord and ruler over
al under god, tha^ to be reproved in this special point of natural amity, of
most inferior and base creatures? Truly I am of this opinion before heaven and
earth, and think in conscience, I offed not: that as god never sent his sharp
plages and cruel chastismentes, unjustly upon the earth: but wourthili by his
justice, for the punishment of sin, and that upon all estates and degrees of
men: whether it be by wars, pestilence, or famine, all or some at ones: as
his justice, notwythstanding his great mercy, respects the stonye and hard
heaps of sin: whereby his wrath is the more largelye kendled upon this or
other regios: so with the great and most wicked offenders, The inno^^^^
with the (...) are plag^d And why.
the innocents, (I so term them in respect of the other offenders) are also
then plaged to this good end and purpose, that the godly and repentaunte
sinners, and such as are of sufficient ability, should with prayer and
fasting, bountifully and freelye, reach forth their hand of compassion to
the poor and nedy persons: which by wars are either wounded or maimed, by
diverse diseases visited, or elle^ grievously by famine afflicted, to the
asswagynge of gods great furye and wrath, and that the spirit of desperation
thereby put a part, the good creature of god may have patience in poverty,
and thankfully rejoice in his mercy, which abundantly spreads over all
flesh: whereas the only compassion and mercy of man, so to succor and help,
his poor and neady neighbor: upon whom, our eyes (with compassion) ought to
be ever fixed, Eccle. 28.
that God in our charity may be blessed. O how fair a thing is mercy and
pity in yt time of necessity, in the time of heauynes, Eccle. 25.
anguyshe and trouble? Is it not like a cloud of rain, that comes in the
time of drought? But alas, how greatly to the contrary has the devil now
bli^ded our eyes, robbed us of our good understanding and memory, and has also
stripte us naked and bare of all compassion and charity? What pitiles seeds
has he sown in our hearts? What scornefulnesse and contempt? What nicetie,
leude wantonness and folly? O what may we think of our selves, that glory so
much to be called christians, that cannot abide the name of heretic, turk,
scismaticke, or papist, that so much deny Christ in conversation: being
utterly converted into wourse state and behauioure, then the most vile estate
of Ethnickes and infidelles, and suffer our selves to be reproved of beasts,
and ouercomme with these most horrible monsters, fylthie covetousness, pride,
and excess: and to be blyndelye led in such singular and vain affectes,
that we regard not but rather contempne, the most gloriouse and lyuelye Images
of God, Gene. ^.
the redeemed me^bres of Jesus Christ, our christen brotherne and natural
countrymen, but suffer them without compassion (in such lamentable wise) to
appear before our eyes in every corner: In fields, in high ways, in
churches, in streets, in by lanes, in comme^ Iaquesses, under stalles, at rych
men's doors and under their walls? Ah most lamentable and woeful case: whereby,
if we do enter into our own consciences, what shall we there find? What good
matter of reioycinge and perfect peace, shall there (before god appear in us?
What remains in us wanting the charity of god, to be quiet in our selves,
and to live in the state of gods grace? Remains there nothing uprightly in
us? What nothing at all? No no verily, of any inward or heavenly joy: but a
terrible out cry, Where the charity of god remains not, there the
conscience abides un quiet and alvvaies in terroui^.
and an open accusation against us, and the just terror and vengeance of god
upon us: because we have not in time to our powers (according to the order of
charity and perfect compassion) prevented these most notable and cursed evils:
or at the least, for not preparyng present comfort in such time of necessity:
making our friends of wicked mammon, whereby the poor might be relieved, and
that there might be also laid up in store for our selves, a good foundation in
Jesus Christ against the time to come, Romans 12. 1, Timo. 6 Eccle. 11.
and obtayne-thorough him everlasting life. Riches is a good thing, for it is
the gift of god, and so likewise is poverty: and as god has made sum men
rich (with an holy and good spirit) to despise worldly gooddes: so has he
also appointed some, to bear the bourden of poverty, that they might happilye
receive his benefits, at such charitable and rich men's hands. O how
blessed are those that have riches (the good gift of god) where by they may
not only make many friends: to the praise of God, Pro. 19.
and their own comfort: but seek also the favor of the poor: that are
often through poverty (for saken of their friends, whose continual prayer and
sweet blessinge) by the promises of god, shall purchase unto them the favor
of god, healthfulnes, joy, prosperity, and plentiful encreace. For the
charitable act of the rightuous and godly man, god always beholds and
accepts as an high and wourthie sacrifice: which he (at any time) vaynelye
receive not, and without recompense but as his act is worshyppeful according
to Solomon, to do good and to help the poor in their necessity, which be
calls lendinge unto the Lord, or laid out for a season: so the Lord god
that is all goodness and truths, that delights in well doing, and reioiceth
in his people, will not wythholde his bountyfull hand, but see him largelye
requighted again. Prou. 19. Prou. 29. Prouer. 12
The poor and the lender often meet together: but it is the Lord that
lightneth both their eyes. It is the lord that prepares poverty. It is the
lord that gives unto ye poor strength, and consolation, thoroughe faith by
the power of his spirit, to ask in his name, and to attain relief: It is the
lord also that gives riches, Eccle. 17.
and wourketh in the hearts of the rich, tender compassion and mercy toward
the poor, by the same spirit: whereby his name in them both is hyghlys
reverenced and magnyfied. And he that thus geeueth or lends unto the poor in
the name of God, shall be blessed, and not want him self. For the mercy that a
merciful man shows here unto his neighbor, in these terrestrial and vain
earthly things: is as it were a purse with him, or a treasure house,
plentuousely stuffed with thin comparable and endless treasures of god the
father: in, and by our Lord Jesus Christ: through the love and faith in
whom, a man's good deeds preserves him, even as the apple of an eye. So that al
virtuous and charitable deeds God louyngely beholds in Christ, and largely
again requiteth, If grace were amongst us to consider the same, and practice it.
But we are (I say) to the contrary, so blinded and sore infected with earthely
and vain affectes and felse love so preuayleth our senses to rule, that we
forgette god and his wourde: we neglecte Christ and his gospelle: we have
embraced but a benumbed and dead faith: we have not reuerentely in price,
the only merits of Christ's death, but we rather hear the name of
Christyanitie and holiness, secludynge the true faith in the way of
rightousnes, and are in deed enuironned and cloked in with all kinds of
maliciousness and wickedness. we have professed (in Jesus Christ) to love god
above all things and our neighbors as our selves but we contempne God and
Christ, our creator and savior, and the rather neglecte our poor
neighbors and christen brotherne, our companions in Christ, and fellow heirs
with him in his kyngedome: bendynge our whole affectes, to the only dead will
of the flesh: we love so much the world the diuelles snares has caught us: The
deuell the world and the flesh prevails against us.
Ena has deceived us: light fa^tasies are obeyed: excess bears rule: our
callinges are abused: our eyes must be satisfied: our bodies must go gaye: our
feding must be fine: our pastymes must be kept: and what so ever earthly
vanity, the devil motioneth, the world proeureth, or the flesh coneteth,
thereunto our corrupted hearts immediatlye consents. Truly, Satan, that
cursed enemy and prince of impiety, syns his first fall from the kingdom of
god into utter darkness, never better bestirred hi^, to the nereace of his
helly kingdom, the^ now in these our pitiles and most unhappy days. And how he
prevails, and in victory triu^pheth god to our plage suffers, his grace he
withdraws, which our wickedness serves, and that the godly most grievously
feels and with tears also lamenteth. And if herein, we now consider men's
ingratitude: amongeste whom, in their degrees they greatly differ: as some
are much more to be noted then some, namelye of such things as shall
immediately follow: considering how merueilously we be mixed with what
diversity of spirits we be guided: and how variable in all our doings: we
are alwais affected: for we have not amongst us: one only faith we lean not
zelously to one only true god: neither do we seek one only eternal and
heavenly father: whose will of all men should only be received and followed,
if our hearts in deed, were only to him united. But as we be apparauntly and
to euel divided, and some to one way, and some to another addicted, so the
powers of darkness has mightily prevailed, and wroughte open contempt to
our just reproach.

Therefore, respectinge these two natures thus divided, I will humbly now with
reverence, leave here wourthylye untouched, all virtuous, right prudente,
honorable, and godly governors: whose hearts I acknowledge in their doings,
to be always most aptly tempered with the reverend fear of God, from whom
springs (with beauty) the comfortable, free, and lively fruits of
compassion, christen charity and friendly liberality: and unto whom (above all
others) most wourthilie do appertain such things, as hereafter follows,
according to their right reverend estate and dignity: In whom gods people
reioiceth, and unto whom they owe due honor, hearty praise, and daily prayer:
amongst whom also, I mean nothing less, then arragantely to kendle
(herein) offense against the^ or against any godly man of any degree: but
charitablie with humblenes, do touch (in few wourdes) this familiar abuse,
which is: whereof it comes that among the rich and wealthy me^ of this
world, we se (for their pleasures without number) their fat fed dogs of
every kind: their pampered horses: their fair mules and gay glisteri^g
Genettes: And to ye contrary is many starned and forlorn creatures and christian
souls miserably passing by the^, lyenge in the streets before the^, or
standing at their gates to try them, with pituouse cries in their necessity,
through sorenes, hu^gre, and nakedness: and rather receive succor of the dogs
then of them selves (if in their kinds their toungues licking will ease and
assuage these griefs) so pitiles are they and cold of charity, to the
comfort or mankind in his necessity. And to answer truly the question:
what other cause is there, then that they are more affected unto them? their
hearts are bente toward them: they glory in the^, and have their felicity and
pleasure in them (as they are in deed in their kind and creation, and for
their good gifts of nature, wourthie to be beloved and esteemed, to be
prepared for and nourisshed:) but how much more should manne, that noble and
most excellent creature, above all other his creatures, be looked unto, be
beloved prepared for and nourished? if we think it convenient, to make
preparation for the nourishement of beasts, that are seruiseable to us
earthely and mortal creatures: how much more one man for an other, after
thensample of Christ, that has entered the bonds of christen amity, and are
sworn servants to the celestial and euerlyuyng god? What lefull let is there
to the contrary? Beasts in their kind ought to be beloved.
but that we may and ought, by natures good consent, to love every creature
of God in their kind, and be careful for them: specially for those, by whom
we feel not only to have great pastime and pleasure, but such also as brings
us much profit and welfare: whether it be by laborious tillyng the earth: by
payneful travailing in iourneis: by grievous caryeng of burdeyns: by courageous
re^i^tynge enemies: We may not be so affected to fantasies, that we leave
the people of god unprovided for.
or such as also serves to feed our bealies? All which are louelye,
necessary, and wourthye due preparation, with thanks geuyng to god: yet we
may not so love them, and have them in price, nor seek so with excess to
fufyll our affectes, that we forget or neglecte our high charge and duty
toward our poor neighbors and christen brothern: whereunto we are bound by
gods will, and the law of nature: And whom god (above all other his
creatures) so dearly loves: and whom he has so beautifullye adourned, with
reason, with wit, wisdom, and understanding: by whose virtue also and
divine state of life, Psalm 9.
the glory of god does shine: In whom through Christ he is well pleased, he
shows his joyful countenance upon us, he plucketh his wrath from us, he
blesses us, and has also mercy upon us. And although we, in our health,
wealth, and vain felicity, thorough the hardenes of our hearts, be
vnmindeful of them, regard them not, nor pass any thing of them, in their
great extreme agony and misery: beatinge always our heads to the
supportation of our own state, to the encreace of our own felicity and vain
pleasure, and to stablishe our posterity in the estimation and glory of the
world as though our doings therein were sure, and founded upon an immouable
rock: yet god that is omnipotent, rightuouse, and merciful, who justly waieth
the true order and meaning of all our carnal ententes, will accordinglye
prevent us, and with the vehement storm of his furye, beat down, over throw,
and destroy our sandy and stubble foundation: And at the day or hour when he
shall make inquis^tion for the blood of his saynctes, and call to remembrance
the complayntes of the poor, and how wyckedlye we have in this life abused
them: he will be aduenged of them: and for the everlasting love that he
has toward them: he will have mercy upon them, he will be perpetuallye
myndfull of them: he will regard and visit them, and not forsake them in such
time of trial, psalm. 14. psalm. 106. psalm. 138. psalm. 140.
but gives them the comfort and strength of his spirit, patiently a short
time to bear the cross of Christ, and the extremity of their great pain and
poverty, through the unkindness of unnatural and pitiles people, and that
their joys eternallye shall be afterward with him in heaven. For he is always
the comfort, preservation, strength, and defense of all such as patiently
bear the hand of GOD, abide his will, and walk always innocentlye before
him. He is attendannte upon them: he guides them: he keeps them in the
right pathe, and preserves the way of his saints: unto whom he gives
thunderstandyng of righteousness, Psalm. 9.14. Prouer. 2,
judgment, and equity: yea, and every good pathe: and delivers the poor
when he cries, the nedy, and him that has no helper: for he shall be
favorable and friendly to the simple and nedy, and shall preserve also the
souls of the poor. Of whom in their great agony and bytternes of pain, he
torneth forth other whiles, with out number, before our eyes, and in such
misery, to the end we should behold in them, as in a glass, the face of Jesus
Christ, his great poverty and most grievous afflictions and tourmentes. Unto
whom as unto Christ himself, in their hungre, thieste, and nakedness, we ought
chari^ably to minister bread, drink, and cloathe, as also in their sycknes to
confort them, Math. 25.
and in their bands and imprisonment to visit them. They are the price and
redemption of Christ: they bear before our eyes the Image of Christ, and
also in whom we partly do se the great anguysh and dolor of Christ: And
what so ever we be hold in them, we behold in Christ: and what so ever we
give unto them: we give unto Christ: Math. 25.
And what so ever we wythdrawe from them, we withdraw from Christ: for those
are they, who^ Christ spoke of to be left always amongst us (his beloved
poor members) representinge his most dear person: and upon whom we should
for his sake, and in the remembrance of him, have compassion upon them, use
friendly familiarity amongst them, and dispose our godly charity to the
vpholdynge of their lives, and the asswagynge of their most woeful pain and
miserye, their great anguish and dolor in soul and body, as we would wyshe
unto our selves (being now altogether in the hands of god) if we were in the
like adversity. Let it not now be spoken by any tongue from an unfeigned heart,
Eccle. 31, Tobi. 4. Math. 7. Luke. 6. We must do, as we vvoulde be done to.
that ever specially within the mind of man, in this famous region and noble
angle of the world, a countreye heretofore no less feared then beloved of all
nations for our virtues, strength and great wealth, was seen the like
multitude of poverty, Poverty.
raised up, encreaced, and spread for the amongst us, by gods sufferance and
visitation, through the hardness of our hearts, through forced wars, great
speknesses, and famin^ where shall a man now wtin these dominions, either ride
or go, but still there shall be great occasion ministered unto him of pity?
Which way shall he now turn his face, but the poor members of Christ shall
appear before him, in extreme necessity and miserye, and call upon him for his
charity, in the name of Jesus christ? whose name we ought to reverence, ^say.
65. Math. 1. Roma. 14 Philip. 2.
and to extend freely for his sake our charity, according to our ability,
and as we see justly occasion of necessity, to content well god. Or at what
time shall we in conscience better dispose our charity to the people of god?
Was there ever by them the like woeful attempt? O that the spirit of god our
sins through his mercy being remitted would yet happilye descend upon us,
and amongst us, to wourke in us, and to pourge, and mollify our corrupted and
flintie hearts, of impiety, unnatural slackenes, self love, and all vain
affectes: A needful request of God.
that we may with the more lyuelye diligence in the fears of GOD, tender his
beeloued people: and so prepare for them, that our holy and most just GOD,
may in all our doings, be well contented and pleased. O how happy should
we be to fulfill the will of GOD, if our ears were opened, and our hearts
by the dew of gods grace, soft tempered that we might aptlye hear and
worthily receive the voice of god ^h^e calls unto us, saying: Be not ashamed
of thy neygboure, in his dystres and miserye: Defend the poor and father
less! Deliver the out cast and poor: Shut not thine hand whenne thou
should geeue: Eccle. 4. psalm. 82. Eccle. 4.
Distribute thy bread unto the poor and hungry, bring the poor fatherles
home into thine house: geeue him lodging: clothe him if he he naked: Esaias. 18.
and turn not thy face from thine own flesh: that is to say, from thy
poor neighbor: thy Christen brother or Sister. And likewise to hyde thine
Almase in the bosom of the poor, that god may be blessed, and thy sins
pourged.

Not by thy merits, I say, but tho) rough the lively faith and love that is
in thee toward Jesus Christ, and for his only merits sake: who loved thee
first, who preciously with his blood has redeemed thee, and inspireth thee with
his holy spirit, to love again: and thankefully to wourke his will: whereby
thou may than understand, that as water que^cheth fire, so almose deeds
also proceedynge from such a lovely faith, quenches sin and asswageth the
wrath of god. Luke. 11.
Give al, mose therefore by this light of grace, foreshynyng in thee, and then
as shall be pure and clean unto thee. And although he be thine enemy, yet
forgive him for the love thou haste to Christ: and if he be in necessity and
hungry, yet feed him for his sake: If he be thirsty, give him drink if he be
naked, cloathe him: or if he be in prisone, visit him. For in so doing the
charity of god shall clearly shine in thee, and thou shall heap coals of
fire upon his head, Prouer. 25
The grace of god is offered unto thee: Prou. 25. Roma. 12. Eccle. 34. psalm. ^^
be not overcome myth evil, but do thou overcome evil with good: For
thereupon depends the blessinge of god, as unto the charitable and rightuouse
man, according to this saying. The blessinge of God hastneth to the reward
of the ryghtuouse, and makes his fruits to flourishe and prosper. Again,
blessed is he that considers the poor and neady, for in the troublesome day,
the lord shall deliver him. And contrary wise, he that stoppethe his ears at
the cry of the poor, he him self shall also cry in the day of necessity,
but the lord shall not hear him. For the whole congregation of the people of
God, are ever cryinge out (with great lamentation and sighinge) against him or
against the whole rablement of them, that are so wicked and hearted against
them. For they are the cause in deed, that so many men are hungrye, naked and
bare, or to want sufficiency for their natural succoure and comfort. Job.
24. Eccle. 13.
Those are they that detest or abhor the poor and nedye man. They are
proud, stought, blasphemouse, and scornful. They be unkind, pitilesse, and
rejoice at the decay of the rightuous. But the lord laugheth them to scorn,
and his vengeance lurketh for them, Eccle. 27.
even as a lion. They shall be taken in the snare, and anguyshe of heart shall
consume them before they dye. It highlye dyspleaseth the ryghtuous and most
just god, when we, whom he has made of ability, sittyng at home at ease
and in security, be not moved with pity, at the great calamity, miseries and
troubles of the poor people of god, as the prophet Amos complayneth, Amos. 6.
saying: Woe be to the people, that are of ability and wealthy, which are
not moved with heaviness, compassion, and pity, to se the poor creatures and
people of God in woeful distress, affliction, and misery, and will not with
tenderness, of their hearts, seek meat, and necessaries to ease them,
relieve them, and comfort them. O that our, The curse of god follows
man's iniquity.
untowardness (with tremblyng fear) would suffer us, to way well this woe or
curse of God: which signifies unto us the greatness of this our iniquity, and
how largelye (in time) his vengeance is like to fall upon us.

And how outward so ever we be in deed and without regard, in this wise to
mynister unto the poor members of Christ, and to seek or devise by all
means possible, to help and relieve them: yet our consciences therein,
always opens unto us the good mind of God which (before him condempneth us
utterly of our disobedience, ingratefulnes, and most wylful slacknes, of what
so ever estate and degree we be of, or of ability in the commen wealth. For
the charity of God, vninersally and of duty, tends to all estates and
degrees of men, from the higheste to the lowest, Charity be longs to all
estates: but it appears not from al m^ alike.
that have professed his name: And it is rather apparannt (by due order) in
some estates, of, and for the commen wealth of gods people, then in sum.
The excellencye and nobleness of which virtue, shynethe not from all
persons alike: for as there be diversities of degrees, and sum in moore
auctoritye or of more habilytye then other that should rule in a common
wealth, for an assured good state and comfort of the people: so this most
lovely and pearelesse virtue (gods heavenly charity should break forth
more abundantly, and shine more clearly from such as bear rule and be in
authority, then from other thinferiour and base people of the co^minaltie, or
from such as be not of ability, for examples sake and increase of virtue:
although every of us in our vocation, should seek an others commodity. And
again, as there duly, by the promyses of god, belongs unto us the
blessings of God for our charitable demeanor and well dooyng, through our
lively and sound faith in Jesus Christ, so for thabusyng of our profession,
state, or holy vocation, depends over us, the malediction and just wrath of
god. Princely or spiritual gouernemet.
Thou art called in the church of god, to princely or spiritual government:
thou art a lord, a master, or a father, over the servants and people of god,
thou have a charge committed unto thee by the power and will of god, for their
health, wealth, consolation, strength, and defense. Thy charge herein and
vocation is greatest, and most straight above al others for the lyuelye setting
forth amongst them in body and soul, the glory and praise of god. But thou
being in honor, and wanting the fellowship of a good guide (namely the spirit
of god) art now without understanding, thou art forgetful, thou art wedded to
vanities, thou art very negligente, or an abuser of thine office: Thou
considerest not directely, whereupon truly thine honor depends: Thou
sek^st not above all things the glory of god in rightuonsnes: Thou art not
careful nor tender over the people: neither have thou compassion nor pity upon
them: Thou art not a good shephard among thy sheep: Thou watchest not over the^
to nourysh, save, and defend the^: Thou blowest not thy trompe amongst the^.
to keep them together in the obedience of ryghtuousnesse, lest they straye and
be in danger of the swourde of God: Ezech. 34.
Thou harkenest not, what furiouse and devouring beasts assaileth them.

Thou art slouthefull, careless, and not continually studious for their bodilye
and ghostly comfort: but rather singulerlye (for thine own glory) corruptlye
infected with vain affectes, and so suffer them to straggle and wander, to
starve, and diversely to stand in great peril and danger. Thoroughe which
unnatural and noisome euelles, thine estate is abused thine honor disteyned,
thy person defamed, and the glory of god thereby greatly hindered. Whereby
also most plainly appears, that the bright beams of righteousness shines
not from thee: namelye, the good fruits of love and charity, which should
chiefly break forth, for the peoples felicity: and therefore (before God)
thine own open wickedness shall justly condemn thee.

He will pour out his cruel displeasure upon thee: he will undoubtedly
confound thee, root the out, and consume thee in the fire of his wrath. The
blood of his people, will he require at thine hand: Eze. 22.32.
and thine own crooked and vain ways shall he recompense, upon thy very
head. Thou art a gentle manne, a man of worship or a landed man: Gentlemen or
men of worship.
thou art peradventure raised up of nothing, to a right honorable or
wourshippefull estate: thou art a lawyer, a judge or a justice, an officer, or
a minister in the comme^ wealth: thou art endeued with the good gifts of god:
with wit, wisdom, learning and gravity: thou have also in thee, an
apperance of virtue: by reason whereof thou growest into effimation, and art
auctorisod and put in trust under god and the high magistrate our
sovereign, to be in the commen wealth a diligente ouerseer, a faithful and
true minister, a shield and mighty pro^ection, by authority aforesaid, that
the simple poor people or flock of Christ, be not ouercomme with these
outrageous and devouring beasts: rebellious idle vacabundes, sturdy beggars,
murderers, thieves or robbers, conspirators, privy pickers, extortioners,
oppressors, whisperers, wilful deceivers and crafty deuisers. Thy charg
committed unto ye is great, and requires at ye hand of god, a just and
straight account. But you also art negligente and s^ongtheful: thou duelye
lokeste not to thy charge: thou wyckedly appliest the gift of god or thou thy
self with sum of these foresaid euelles are spotted: whereby thou can not
worthily reprove others according to thine office, least peradventure thine
own shame, should the^ be opened, and so thou suffer much wickedness in
thy self and in others rankely to abound: thou art therefore fled from God:
thou want in thee the charity of God: thou have offended thy maker, thou
have been unthankful to him: thou have been hurteful to his people: thou have
deceived thy prince: and art known and so noted in the common wealth, to be
but a monster, a corrupted and lewd officer, a pernicious enemy, and most
subtle deceiuer. The divine justice hangs over thee, the curse of the people
shall prevail against thee: yea, thy state shall be changed, and thy glory
abated. And where thou by thine authority, have disorderlye ruled or abused
others, to the great offense of god, to the dishonor of the king: and great
grief of the commen wealth, thou thy self shall also by some other, be rightly
used: to the glory and praise of god, to further the kings honor, and to the
reformacion of thine abuse in the commen wealth. Thou art called a marchaunte
man, or use the trade of marchaundise. Merchaunt men.
Thou bear the face of a friend in the commen wealth: and that thy vocation
therein (thou say) is of necessity: thou have at thy disposition, the
commodities of thy countreye: thy charges and travails are great, thy iourneys
be far: thy dangers be not small: thou cariest over: thou recariest, thou
make exchange, thou preparest and bring in such things, as ye time
orderly will permit: in appera^ce, for the good state and necessity of the
commen wealth: secludyng in secret all privy and corrupted avarice, all craft
or deceit, al falsehode or subtletie. Thy pretense herein is honest, well
pleasyng, and commendable and wourthye due supportation, by princely authority.
But if thou swerve from the forsaid straight trade of simplicity, virtuous
good demeanor, and sincerity, into doublenes, auariciouse dealyng and
subtilte: thou show thy self an approved enemy, very unfriendly and
unnatural is thy country and therefore clean void of gods heavenly charity:
for the which, his indignation shall fall upon thee, to the encreace of thy
woeful mishappe, spoylynge thee of thy pleasures, and plagynge thy posteritye.
Fermer. Grasier. Vitailers.
Thou art a rich farmer, a stoughte frankelyne, a graster, or a vittayler in
the commen wealth of thy countreye. God (under thine hand) blesses the
earth, thy fields, and pastures: and gives thee great encreace of corn and
all manner of cattaile, for the assurance, first of thine own welfare: that
thou with a reioycyng heart, and thanks giving to him for his bountifulness,
should accordingly as a good servant and faithful steward of his
benefits, not only to receive them, preserve them, and in due time
distribute them, as thine ability shall require, either free lie with a
charitable heart, to thy poor cou^treymen, in their necessity, for the dear
loves sake thou have to God: but also (at the least) for a sufficient and
competent gain to make sale: that the common wealth of thy countreye, may the
rather, through moderacion and good order of thy prises, lyuelye flourysihe,
and the poor members of Christ, well contented and nourished: which is the
ground of thy vocation and duty, and that ye name of god in thine obedience
may be lyfted up and magnified. If you would in this behalf object for thy
self, the raisinge of rentes to be an impediment, ye you can not as you
would, use thy vocation duly for the wealth of thy country: I pass over with
silence, ye auaricious and most notable evil, co^mendyng it to the devil from
whense it camme: humblye beseching almighty god, for the greatness of his
mercies sake, and for ye love yt he has to his people, in Jesus Christ, so to
wourke the confusion thereof, that al things in time, to his praise, may be
broughto to their pristinate and former state: only requirynge of thee, that
art a man of god, the virtue of thy good will and charity, to bewail
unfeignedly this great wyckednes crept in amongst us, and to plucae it down
(as much as in thee shall lie, and not to uphold it) to the comfort of the
people: which shall be thy sufficient discharge before God to his praise, to the
quietenes of thine own conscience, to the good encourageme^t of others, and to
the purchasyng unto thy self, prayer, friendly report, and all honest and good
men's favors. But if thine heart be otherwise corruptly fixed upon fylthy
avarice, only without the fear of God, regarding the state of thine own
welfare, and to enriche thy self with craftye abuse: in withholdynge, Who so
ho^deth or hides up corn, shall be cursed among the people: but the blessing
of god shall light upon his head that sells it. Prouer. 11
secret hoordynge, hydyng, buryeng, wilful spoylyng, raisynge of prices, or
uncharitable denyeng, not to have that, which in deed thou haste: or to
withhold thy diligent good will, from labouryng, tyllynge, temperyng, and
sowyng the earth, And so forth, to seek as much as in thee shall lie, good
encreace and frendely furtherance of all things under thyn hand, ioynynge thy
good will to the will of god, to put by dearthes, and further a common wealth
in thy countreye, to the comfort spectally of the poor people, and that they
may happilye live by thee: or else that thou of a naughtys and evil
conscience, only for private wealths sake: flatteringly thoroughe the color
of necessity, or falling into poverty, Deceiptful enemies of the comme^
wealth.
by chargeable service in marciall affairs, or otherwise: thou suest to the
virtuous and noble cou^saylours, and other thy friends, to be frendelye unto
thee, and to be thy gracious good lords and medyatours in thy beehalfe, unto
the kings majesty, for ye grant of a license, in recompense of thy service,
to carye over beyond the seas, a certain su^me of grain: peradventure by
request one thousand quarters. etc to make thy market: or otherwise certain
dyckers of leather: or such like commodities of the realm, whereby thou
should be relieved: sygnifienge unto their honors, formallye forgyng a
false tale, not wayeng the virtues of such godly acts, and laws, as has
been from time to time, for such purpose appointed and stablished: neither
charitably considering in deed, the present scarcity of thy country, to the
increace of famine and destruction of the people: neither yet regardyng the
wrath of God, the indignation of thy prince, nor heauys displeasure of his
nobilitye) do declare (I say) what super^luous store is thorougheoute the
realm, and that there is largely and more then sufficient, both for the
countreye, and also to serve thy turn, if yt would please their honors to
grant thee thy request: doubting also the less to obtain thy suit, because
(thou sayeste) it is not chargeable to the King, wherebye thou should be
well recompensed, and the King not charged. And the rather binding them to
creditte thee (because thou know their honors to be both wise, virtuous,
and faithful to their countreye: and that they will not in any wise, as nere
as they can, grant any thing corruptlye, that should be prejudicial or
hurtefull to the common wealth, forasmuch as they be honorable, pityfull,
and sworn fathers to the same) thou craftily vndermyneste them, thou
diligently pliest the^, and art ever before their faces, and rounding in their
ears, bringinge in before their honors certain witnesses (peradventure one
at the least, of whom they have some knowledge) to testifye of thine honestye,
of thy good service, of thy poverty, and so forth, and that thy suite may not
be hurtefull to the commen wealth: for all things are true that thou say:
they bear the face of honestye, of good estimation, or peradventure like
gentlemenne: although in very deed, another so, nor so, but by due probation
thoroughe such vnnnaturall and ungentle suits, playnelye tried men like unto
thy self: and approved enemies of ye comme^ wealth, if men should creditte the
whole voice of thy countreye, for that ye are all partakers or one commodity.
And whenne thou have thus by this means, or such like simple pretense,
obtained thine unseemly suit, and caryest with thee, thy commission into the
countreye, fullye to serve and satisfye there, thy hungey or gredy turn, thou
abusest also the virtue of thy commission: thou art vnreuerent: thou art
unquiet, troublesome, and an outefacer of the people: thou rangest at liberty,
thou over reacheste, and straynest thy conscience tylle it crack again: for
thou art entered into the sweet: thy lust must be satisfied: and thou art
fully fixed, to have thoroughly at the least, thy full fraighte for thy vyage how
so ever in what order the pryses be made, or the money to the sellers
disbursed and paid.

These doings (I say loving brothern) or such seek out of order: where, or when
so ever they be committed and done in any common wealth, are truly very
villainous, and unseemly base shifts of reprochefull and lewd shifters, and not
meet for the degree of honesty: whether of gentlemen, men of wourship,
seruisable soldiers, landed me^, scruyng men, or such also as only and
insufficiently live by art, by service, by office, friendship or fee: for they
may undoubtedly by the grace of god, seek many other ways, honestely, and in
good order, according to virtue, to the augmentation of their well wisshed and
wourthy honest living. But as there be in every common welthe, among the
degrees of men, some natural, friendly, and charitable men, that seeks gladly
the preferment of their country by their virtue and wisdom: so to ye contrary,
there be many other also, that are unnatural, very vnfrendlye, and vnlouinge
to the same, and always seek the hynderaunce thereof by their craste and
subtletie. Of whom we may say with compassion and pity, because worthily
there ha^g over them the danger and prick of misfortune: O unnatural and
strange people, perverse and untoward to the use of virtue, And unfriendly for
the comfort of your country: before whom stands always the vrefull face of
gods justice. For if in these or such other like things, offense be
committed, shall it not then be manifest of thee, what so ever thou be, that
the charity of God abides not in thee, or that an evil spirit possesses
thee? What is this, but that the devil prevails againse thee: when thou art
rebellious against the will of god, or hateful to thy country? Thou have not
sought thaduancement of Gods glory. Thou haste not directly answered to thy
vocation: thou have sought only thine own wealth and commodity: Thou art
disobedient and false to the king: thou have craftily deceived him, and his
most virtuous counsaylours: thou lyuest under him, an unnatural and wicked
subject: thine heart is unsound toward him: thou art sclaunderous to his
person: Thou careste not for his laws: Thou dishonorest his nobility:
neither loueste thou his people: thou haste shut up thy compassyon from
them, thy poor neighbors: thou haste not sought their commoditye, whom
thou oughteste to love as thy self: but rather haste styrred them up, as
much as in thee has line, to dispeyre of the grace of god, to disobey the
wourde of god, to break without fear, the true peace of god, to hasarde in
madness both body and soul, and to make rebellion and vproure, against him
their anointed King and natural prince, as in the days of darkness or great
ignorance of god, to danger his person, and to put in hasarde under him, his
whole dominion and empire, although (of late days) the myghtie hand of god,
thorough ye power of his grace, to his only praise, has so stayed the hearts
of the people, that thy most wicked attempt has not taken place, O blessed
therefore be the name of God for ever, that has wrought so mercifully in us, to
the lyghtnyng of our darkness, and to works in us his reverent fear and
obedience: whereby the people of god, (the commons of this realm) has been
quiet, patiently in all things to sustain the sharp rod of his justice:
which he of late has bitterly laid upon us, for our former disobedience,
and great unthankfulness, in the days of his merciful visitation amongst us:
who in time, according to the greattenesse of his mercy in Jesus Christ, and
for the loves (sake in him) he to his elect, has and will return again his
joyful countenance upon us, and wourke myghtily for us, contrary to the
expectation of his and our most wicked enemies: Psalm. 89.
yea even in such wise, that they shall se and peciue it and be ashamed, because
he our god, has mercifully leaned unto us, blessed us, holden us up, and
comforted us. Thou therefore, what so ever thou be, ye art a maynteyner of
thine own only state rather by corrupted avarice, untrue dealing, or fylthy
gain, then truly in the fear of god without dissimulation or doublenes,
according to the duty of gods faithful servant, and the kings obedient
subject, to the praise of God, to the honor of the king, and comfort of his
people, thou plainly approuest thy self the very ennemy of God, a
disobediente rebellious subject to the king, and a wilful spoyler or murderer
of his people.

Thou art wourthy no better to be termed among the people in a common wealth,
before God, and to the knowledge of the king, than an open ennemy, a secret
sower of sedition, and a privy worker of rebellion: whereby the king (the
appointed high minister and servant of God, thy liege lord and sovereign) and
his derely beloved people, the flock of Christ, may be greatly vexed, and in
danger of confusion: although I say, such cursed instruments and workers
of mischief as thou art, God prospers good ententes.
ar oftentimes by the grace of GOD, swyftely prevented, and the just
confusyon, thorough thy very occasion, to light upon thine own pate. Things
that are well devised and intended, from a good heart to a good end god
prospers them, and brings them well to pass: but the wicked devises and
ententes, of an evil heart to a wicked end, Wicked de (...) of (...) god
prenented.
are often of God prevented, and comme not so to pass, but as a stone
vehemently rebou^ding from the rock or hard wall, does stryke or hurt him
that threw it, to his great peril and danger. Revoke therefore thine evil
order, to the supportacion of thine own state. Prevent betimes an
inconvenience, and beware that thou be not rightly used, and sustain the curse
of god. Fear him, and honor thy king: be obediente to his laws, and love
dearelye his people.

Bridle (I lay) thine unlawful attemptes: least through the justice of god, the
Kings authority also fall upon thee: for he bears not a sword for naught,
but wourthily for the sharp punishemente and cuttinge of, of such rotten
members, noisome and destroyful caterpillars, Roma. 13.
engendered in the commen wealth, of an evil wind and pestilent air of the
devil: that spileth and deuoureth the lovely buddes, tender grene leaves, fair
fresh fleures, and pleasant fruits, plentifully flourishyng over all, the head,
the branches, and the beautyful renoumed stock of this English common
wealth. And finally, what soever member thou be, or artificer, inhabiting
within thy country, Artificers and other.
that bear the name of a christen subject, and abusest thine honest estate
and vocation, through corrupted avarice, falseboode or subtletie, not duly
wayeng the true order and frendshyp in a common wealth, appointed and
stablyshed by thauctoritie of god and the kings laws, to the comsorte of the
people, thou shall also manifest thy self to be void of grace, not to be of
Christ, not to have in thee the charity of god, nor to live in his fear, and
under the obedience of thy king: and therefore as a disobedient and wylfull
malefactor both to God and the king, thou shalt wourthyly, by due justice,
stand in danger of them both, to thine vttre overthrow and destruction:
the one justly condempnynge thee, and the other mynystrynge his vengeance upon
thee. For as thou art the very adversary of god, mischeuouse, hard hearted, and
evil willing to goodness: so will he by some means, Eccle. 21.
send the bitterness of his wrath upon thee, and it shall destroy the even as
the stubble. Therefore, O thou enemy of righteousness, thou uncharitable,
unnatural, and wicked man: Harken in few wourds unto the voice of the holy
ghost, by the mouth of the prophet (who narowly respects thine evil fixed
state, and wicked vain life:) These things (says he) have thou done. Psalm.
50.
And because in thy doings I stayed my tongue against thee, and have not
presently according to justice reproved thee, and poured my plages upon thee,
but have gently delayed to try thee, after the greatness of my mercy, for thy
better amendment: thou haste therein contempned me: thou haste unthankfully
forsaken me, and repined against me: thou haste abused this my blissful
state of gentleness, long susterynge, and patience: and have still most
wyckedly continued and wandered forth in wickedness, in unfaithfulness, pride,
lieng, and deceitfulnes, and thoughtest me thy creator, thy rightuouse Lord,
merciful, and omnipotent god, to be as no God: or to be even like unto thy
self (that is) vnrightuouse, very vain, most feeble, fantastical, and
foolyshe: and to be but a sleepinge, double faced, or drousie god: either not
to know thy dooinges, or wantonly wynkyng at thy wickedness, as one that always
looks through the fingers at thee, as though I were but a dalier with thee,
forgetful of thee, an hider of my face from thee, or without earnest regard
of thy behauour, and not recompensing thy condition in the end: But be thou well
assured (O thou very worldelyng and most vain creature) that as thou art
utterly deceived, greatly blinded, and wilfullye led in the damnable ways of
darkness: so shall thou utterly be vnexcused. For if thou (in such wise, thou
earthie slime and slipper filthiness) wilt needs be ignorant of me, not
knowing, or rather not regarding the state of mine eternity great power, and
majesty, but still evil affected, to fondness and vanitye: neither yet
confessing thy faults before me with repentance and humble submission, thou
shall both know and feel, that I the only omnipotente, rightous, and most
true god, do plain lie perceive thee: and as my soul does abhor thee: so
will I duelye also reprove thee: and unawares set before thy face, to thy
confusion, the wickedness which thou haste done, yea I will in deed so
visit thee, and lay justly mine hand upon thee: that I will make thee as ye
filthy and rotten du^g upon ye earth, or as ye light flie^g stubble, before ye
face of ye wind. For I do thee truly to understand, that as I, the great god
of heaven and earth, have sworn by mine holiness, to keep faithfully my
promises, and to be merciful unto the charitable and faithful christians (the
generation of the rightuouse) that wyllynglye will walk in the right way: so
will I also upon all flesh, and al faithles and pitiles generations, that
leads vnkindlye their lives in wickedness, perform straightly the rigor of
my justice, in the truth of my promises. For as mercy is highly annexed, to
the exaltatio^, most wourthy aduaunceme^t, and supportation of mine eternal
glory, or the excellency of my divine majesty, in the incomprehencible state
of my deity, among such as love me, and tread gladly thappointed plain paths
of piety: so ye brightness also of my glory, my potent power or omnipote^cy, my
wisedo^, godly love, faithfulness, and verity, has been is, and for ever
shall be, both seen, selte, known, embraced, advanced hyghlye, and feared most
emde^tly: because justice is joined so aptlye to mine etertistie, for the
defense of my loving tre^des against the enemy: whose lives has been traded,
evil spent, and wasted in the hurtefull steps of impiety.

The Prophet therefore goes loorthe with this most gentle and myld
exhortation, saying: Regard and consider this, O ye ye forget god, of what
estate or degree so ever ye be: whether ye be high or low, rich or poor,
of the clergy or laitye, natural country me^, or strangers, ye have office,
authority, or any kind of ministry, in the church of God, and in the common
wealth of his people, least his wrath be thus kendled against you, and that he
suddenly re^t you, and pluck you away, and not one else of powerable to help or
deliver you etc. For touchui^g this point of ingrate fulness, what thing is it
committed by us and amongst us, upon thearth, through out all degrees, that
more greuousely offends God, and causes him to tourn upon us ye terrible
face of his justice, then the want of an universal ear, to thvse of gods
charity, natural friendship and amite, whereby the common wealth is vpholden and
florisheth? Has not the wrath of god fallen upon great cities, whole kingdoms,
and countries. for using themselfes to the contrary? Either has not
particularly such wicked people ben worthily plaged, that has wa^ted this
virtue of charity? we feel daily (if we have will to regard it) the sweet
favor of god, for choose of virtue, procedyng from the true faith in Christ:
and what displeasure also by his justice does fall upon us, The (...) of god
respects not (...).
for our incredulity vice and great wickedness. The justice of god ha^gith by
egal bala^ce nuer a^l flesh that disobeieth his holy precepts and laws. And
like as his justice for our Ethnike disobedience, is ready to fall upon us: so
his mercy, for our christen obedience, shall ever remain amongst us. Look
which way we apply our selves, and dispose our lives either wickedly, or in
the way of godlynes, so our rewards with joy or pain, are accordyngly
prepared us, and shall assuredly light upon us, at his appointed and most
certain time Are we not at liberty to sink or swymme, and to ascend or
descend through our behavior, to God, or to the devil? Either will we needs
wylfully walk in the way of wickedness? Let us leave god if we list: Note
(...).
let us set light by Christ, and his wourd: let us follow the dyuel: let us
still love the world: let us yet lean to our old lewd lusts and flesshly
foolishnes, with obstinate and hard hearts, so to accomplysshe the fullness of
our most fickle and vain affectes through our filthte avarice, pride, and
excess, that we else regard nothing, in this life, touching either god and
christ, or his poor afflicted members, but suffer them without compassion, to
wander abroad and perysh, or to minister occasions, whereby the commen wealth
shall decay: by his iussice (I say) he will also leave and forsake us: He will
wythdrawe his grace from us: we shall be vnwourthi the joy of his cou^tinaunce:
Math. 18. Jacob. 2.
And as we showed no mercy or comfort upon his poor people, according to his
word, nor were studious for their natural preservation, but with drew our
careful diligence and charity, both to the loss and great danger of their
bodies and souls: so will he also withholde his mercy from us, and pour duly
his heavy indignation upon us: he will be vnmyndeful to do us good: he will
diversely visit us, Leui^. 26 Deu^. ^^. Job. 7.
he will not cease his wrath ou^r us: he will vex our spirits and fill us with
bitterness: he will suddenly shorten our days: he will pluck us from our
pleasures: other shall enjoy our winnings he will leave us evil heirs,
vicious, and wastfull spenders: for we our selves are unjust and corrupted
gainers, and have craftily deceived our neighbors: we are gone back from god
uns have been disobedient to the voice of god: Daniel 9
for we have she wed our selfs unthankful a faithles: Esav. 59. 1. John. 3.
we are also pitiles: our hearts possesses maliciousness: we have broken yt
peace of god: our hands are full of blood: we have committed murder: we have
slain yt innocent: we are gyltie of our brothernes death: and therefore their
blood in yt way of (reuengeme^t) cries from the earth with terrible and shyrle
sound, for the swifte vengeance of god to come upon us: who also has promised
to revenge the quarrel of his dear people and loving friends, upon his and
their most cursed and malicious enemies. Deuteronomy 3^. Psalm. 11^. Romans 12.
Vengeance is mine (says the lord god) and I will revenge. I will rose up at
the exclamation and cry of the poor It is I that will visit the wickedness of
the people upon them selves and upon their childres children, unto the third
and fourth generation of the^ that hate me, Exodus 54 Iere. 32.
and break my commandments. And in the parable, betwixt the wicked slow
judge, and the poor wydowe, that cries for vengeance against her enemy:
Luke 18.
which although at the beginning he would not harken unto her, to perform
shortly her glad desire: yet thorough her importunacie and busye calling
on, did grant her, her suite in the end: So (says Christ) shall not God
also revenge the quarrel of his elected and dear people, which with their
extremities and necessities, cry day and night unto him, for succor, strength
or deliverance, although he seem somewhat, at their first cries, to defer in
helpinge the^? Yes yes I tell you plainly, he will notwithstanding be revenged
for their sakes: yea, he will pour our the bitterness of his wrath upon their
enemies, Abacu. 2
and yt without delay. And the prophet Abacuk says of gods coming to perform
his will: If he tar^ (says he) look for him assuredly, for he will shortly
appear, and not be slow in coming. After this manner, in sundry places, and for
diverse causes, yt lord in the scriptures, thundreth unto us his sharp
thretninges and most hytter reuengementes, to remember our selves, if we could
happily with due reverence, receive the^ into our hearts. O Lord, in what
dangerous state stand we now in, if we should wourthily join with our wicked
desettes the due justice of God? Math. 25. Romans 3 14 2. Cor. 5. Hebre. 10
What shall we be able herein (in the terrible day before the judgment state of
God) to lay for our selves, for the escapyng of our damnation to come? How
shall we then excuse our lyngryng and lyghtenes, and our flacknes to turn
unto god? O let us remember, how fearful a thing it is, to fall into the
hands of the living god. He is the God whose wrath and great fury no man mate
withstand: Job. 9.
but the proudest and most stought of them all, must stoop under him. It
shall therefore be most expedient for us, christen brotherne, and loving
friends, (according to the mind of the prophet of God, Psalm. 119.
) to call to our remembrance our own wicked ways, and to turn our selves
to the testimonies of god: and not to use dalyaunce and prolongynge the time to
keep his laws. The way of life (at any time) may not us neglected: It may
not slouthefully be applied unto, neither fearfully, but with most assured
purpose, with all our hearts and with right confident and forward minds. The
spirit of god calls unto us: saying. Make no caryeng: seek no delays to
turn unto the Lord god: put not of from day to day, for suddenly shall his
wrath come, and in the time of vengeance shall he destroy you. Turn in time:
set not your felicity in vain things: mortify your affectes: trust not in
wicked riches, Eccle. 16.
nor in the pleasures of this fickle life: for they shall not help you in the
terrible day of gods sharp wrath and ponishment: but being abused, they
shall rather stance as witnesses against you, to your utter condemnation for
ever. Psalm. 119.
We may not defer nor dalye with the voice and counsayles of god offered
unto us, at what time, by whom, or by what mean soever he shall send them
(our own consciences being judge) least through our slackenes and most
beastly negligence, there appear wickedly in us open contempt: and so the
spyryte of grace be utterly taken from us: and fall into the like danger of
the obstinate, blind, and stiffenecked Jews: whose vncyreumsised hearts were
possessed with the spirit of unquietness, instabilitye, Iere. 19.
and lyghtnesse: which also whenne they knew GOD, Roma. 11. Esaias. 6. Math.
13. John 12. Act. 28. Romans 1.
glorified him not as God: they were unthankful for his benefyttes: they were
vaynely addicted in their imaginations: their foolish hearts were blinded:
neither regarded they their obedience and duetye to the voyee of GOD: whose
voice is gloriouse, and (as the Prophet says) mighty in operacion: Psalm.
29.81 Prou. 1.
and therefore he wythdrewe the swetenes of his grace from them, and gave them
up unto the bytternesse of their own hearts lusts: and wyckedly to follow
their own fylthy and vain fantasies: which was, to lead their lives in all
abomination and vnrightuousenes: as the holy ghost by the apostle does show
unto us: among the which, he touches contempt of god, dysobedience,
maliciousenesse, murder, envy, debate, backebightynge, truce breaking,
unmercifully and vnlouynge (the fruits of an evil and most wicked spirit)
which their hearts blyndly thorough pride and obstinacye, wylfully possessed:
whose filthy familiarity, we must hate and not haunt: but with an humble and
make spirit, for the more speedy prevention of gods ire and wrath, to yield
unto his voice: and without delay to receive the divine and most neadeful
request of the holy ghost, Iere. 11. Hebre. 12.
by the mouth of the apostle, which says: See that ye despise not him that
speaks unto you. By which heavenly and dyuyne advertisement, (although the
sentence he but short) it comprehends yet a great charge: for we must
therebye learn, and consider, who it is that the apostle means does speak
unto us: what a loui^g GOD, he is: a GOD of righteousness: a merciful GOD: an
everlasting god: almyghtye, just, and terrible: and to what good end be
speaks unto us, and in what danger also we shall stand in, If we vnreuersely
do neglecte his voice. For if they in those days (in the time of Moses)
escaped not yt wrath of god, which the^ refused to here him, yt spoke upon the
earth: much more shall we not escape the great ire of God, if we turn our
ears from him, Exodus 19.
that speaks unto us from heaven, whose terrible and mighty voice, hid
then move and shake the earth. God diuer sly and oftentimes speaks unto
us, esther by his faithful ministers, according to the scriptures, or one
godly man (in times of necessity) to wright unto another, or conferring, and
reverently counsallyng one with another: either as we, in readyng to our selves
with hu^blenes of heart, desire to know god, to love and fear him, and
obediently to keep his commandments, All that is contained in the book of
life, Psalm. 116.
is written for our learning: it is the wourde of truth, and the lantern
unto our feet: It lightneth our understanding: It cleanses us of al
darkness, filth and corruption: and guides us unto the light of life,
health, strength, joy, and everlasting salvation: which ought to be
amongst us most gladlye retained, reverently embraced, obedientlye followed,
and in no wise to be in any thing contempned: Prou. 1^.
for he that is an abuser or co^tempner of the wourde of GOD, or settethe
light by the counsayles of GOD, he slippeth from his welfare, he wandreth
astraye, and seeks the bye paths of death and destruction. And Christ our
good shepherde and pastoure, because he would have us harken unto his voice,
and be obediente to his call, and follow him, he says unto us of him self:
John 10.
I am the good sheppeharde, and know well my sheep, and they also know me,
and will hear my voice, and follow me: And I will geeue unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perys^he. I am the way, the truth, John. 14. John.
8.
and the life. I am the light of the world: and he that follows me, does not
walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. etc. In consideration
of which heavenly and comfortable sayenges, and that they may the rather
take good effect in us to a good end, let us fyxe our selves to be
reuerentelye constante in the doctrine and way of Christ, and not be doubtful
of our preservation, health, joy, strength, and salvation by him: and so
contemptuously think Christ and his wourd, to be unto us, only a voice or
vain sound, without signification or good effect: but to be unto us in deed al
righteousness, truth, and mercy: and that be also in his own person (for our
liuelye exaumple) to be approved charity, simplicity, innocence, patience,
cleannes, and finallye, what soever thing he him self used, most holilye to
teach unto others. But as the Jews, which were the peculiar and picked out
people of god, among all nations of the world, Roma. 9.
the natural and true Olyue branches (to whom perteined the adoption, the
glory, the couenauntes and the law that was given, and the service of god and
the promises: whose also were yt ancient and holy fathers: of who^ also as
concerning the flesh Christ came) were not spared, but sustained the wrath
and heavy hand of god, for their incredulity, unthankfulness, and
dysobedience: how much more shall we, the unnatural and will olyue
branches, (although for a season, thorough their vnbeleeue, we be grafted
into the true and perfect flock) be torn forth again, John. 15. Roma. 1^.
if we abyte not gree^e and fruitful branches in our calling, but
vaynelye bos^e our selves, with wicked lives, in so holy and most pure
profession? Verilye, strayghte and of great charge is our bond, to that our
magnificente, most glorious and gelous god: before whoms, our ways must be
straighte and right forth: we may use no tournyng daliaunce: we may not be
now going, and suddenly turn back again: we may not stand to day of good
assurance, and fall to morrow of very wilfulnes: But must lean strongly at all
times, to our assured and ready stases: And all flattering fantasies, put a
part, to love and follow our good guide Christ: by whose most virtuous and
wise gouernemente, we shall have priest wylles and good encouragement, at all
times to resyste our enemies, and to preuail against them, by whom we have
been dysceyded, ^nercome with vanities, or blindlye seduced. Let us not (to the
contrary) so vaynelye bost our selves, in name and title of Christ only, when
in deed our conversation appear clean contrary Shall we only glory in our
selves, and say: Are we not called christians? Question.
Bear we not upon us yt name of Christ? have not we the living god to be our
God? Do we not call him our lord, To be called a christian prevails nothing,
except we so low the steps of Christ.
our master, and father? Are not his holy laws, and the truth of his wourd,
more liuelye flourishynge amongeste us (called christians) then among other the
bar, batouse nations of the world? And is not this our priuslege and
profession, of all others, called most acceptable, most rightuous, and holy?
Yes verilye, all this is true: Answer.
there is no religion, nor no profession of holiness under the son (what so
ever name or vain show it bear to the face of the world) that is like it, or
to be compared unto it, because it is most straighte, most holy, ryghtuous
and pure. And must it also be of necessity, that as we have professed and
bear the name of Christ, we must take him for our patron, embrace his
wourde, and follow him in strayghtnesse of life? Ye truly, unless we show
our selves but fained and dyssemblynge christians, we must counterfeyte him in
conversation and follow his sleppes: we must be obediente to his voice: and
that with all synglenesse of heart, if we will seek the favor of god, and his
eternal salvacion, by the benefittes of his dear sons death and passion.
The true christian obeys the voice of Christ, and obtains by (...).
For what avails this title, and al this glory amongst us, only in
conceipte: when in stead of humility, love, patience, chastity, godly
liberality, and modesty: our hearts are inwardly enforced and rankeled, with
pride, envy, wrath, murder, couetousenesse, leachery, self love, vain
sloughtnes, and such like? What lothsom spots are these in the most holy
church of Christ, and greatly discentyng from christianity?

Should not our lives so shine in holiness, Math. ^5.
yt by the light of good conuersacio^ others might be converted unto christ? Do
not the change of their incredulity, and corrupted state of life, greatelye
depend in the purity and good behauour of our lives? Bear we in
sufficientlye and only, the good name of Christ, without regard of his
heavenly exaumples and doctrine, to our own great reproach, and to others
decay and falling, whereby the name of GOD, is irreverently spoken of? 1.
Peter. ^ Romans 2. Esaias. 42.
Let us herein judge truly of our selves and examyne rightlye, our
untruth and doublenes, what folowshyppe (amongst us) has light with darkness,
Christ with beliall, or GOD, with the deuell? Are they at unity may we
think? No no, they have been divided from the beginning: neither will they
ever be at unity: for the one guydeth unto life, and the other unto death:
let us not therefore be deceived (brotherne. God requires the very heart.
) For it is not the outward show only, and the name or title of Christ, that
came dyscharge us, and satisfy rightlye a God of ryghtuousenesse: who
requires the very heart, and the whole su^me of faythefull fruits therein
contained. For as the law is boly, and our profession of al other most pure: so
the purity of our lives, must in such wise appear, that the law of god and
our profession, may shine above all other. In vain to the contrary shall we
bost of our holiness, of god, and Christ, and of their most holy and undefiled
laws: how so ever in accustom we use to commend them, to bear them in our
hands, to handle them, to carye them at our gyrdles, in our bosoms, talk
of them, here the^ reuerentlye preached of preachers, or at any time else read
of our selves.

For the book or holy table, wherein the law of god should be imprinted or
depely graven, are the hearts of men, and such as he has chosen to him self,
which is according to this saying of David: Psalm. 36.
The law of god is in their hearts. From whense proceeds the very perfection
and true meaning of the holy law of god, to the good exaumple of the heathen,
or such as know not god, and for their conversion to yt praise of god.
whereunto we are cou^sailed of saint peter, to show forth yt truth of our
profession yt is: to lead an holy co^uersacio^, among yt heathen and strau^g
nations: yt they which backbighte us, as evil dooers, may behold our holy and
good works, 1, Pet. 2.
yt ye name of god, in yt day of his visitatio^ amongst us, may be lifted up
and magnified. Roma. 2. Jacob. 1. Math. 7.
And S. Paul says: Not yt herers of ye law, but yt fulfillers of ye law shall be
justified before god. neither shall every one yt says: lord lord, enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but such as do yt will of our father, which is i^ heaven,
and those are they also, whom David, speaks of, to be undefiled in the way
of the lord, Psalm. 119.
and that they shall be blessed, because they keep his testimonies, they
commit no wickedness, neither are they double faced disse^blers, but seek
him right forth and simplye with their whole hearts: whose hearts are sound
and pure: and unto whom in such wise belongs the blessing of god, that they
shall clearly see the face of god. Math 5.
The joys whereof, no ear has herd, no tongue can speak, nor the heart of
man at any time can think: which joy and everlasting reward, god the father
in Jesus Christ, has promised unto the rightuous, for their obedient and holy
lives, for the cleannes and puritye of their hearts by the power of his holy
spirit, and shall be performed truly upon the^, at his gracious and most godly
appointed time. But if we that have professed the law of god, only bear an
outward face of love toward god, confessing him with our mouths, and
deny him inwardlye in our hearts, thorough our evil and corrupted
conversation, wourke we not then, rather our just dampnation then salvation?
or rather to be cursed of god then blessed? The true knowledge and lous of GOD,
amongeste us: effectuallye consists herein: that is, in wourking, in
following, and in good order of living, according to his most perfect
exaumple by the rule of his wourd: rather then in vain talking, ^ayned
favoring, or in cold or slipper loving. 1. Cor 4^.
And touching the said capital vice of pride amongst others, (A poisoned
(...) of perdicion) If we would happily enter into our selves, (...).
with sincere judgment and secret examination, what we be of our selves:
what substance we are made of: of what base matter: of how frail and filthy
flesh: what loathsome fruits comes thereof: unto how many miseryes, diseases,
and dangers, we be in subjection unto, living in the flesh: The misery of
makind, in this life.
the filthiness of our conception: the place, and manner of our birth: with how
great danger we be borne (ryther touching our selves, or our mothers that
bears us:) how naked we also are: how neadye: how brutishe: how sore: how
wretched and how myserablye we creep into this chaungeable light of life:
and that our race then being but short, death in the end, must of
necessitye overcome us: These few things (I say) among other, well noted of
us, would some thing mortify in us (I think) our corrupted and gross affects,
they would be a mean the rather, to cleanse in us among the rest, that
pestilent insectio^ of pride: a vice most ougly, hateful, and detestable
before God and man, and the original of all sin: whereby also we are filled
with the cursings of God: Eccle. 1^.
who has promised that great wretchedness and misery shall come upon us, that
in the latter time shall dwell in the world, for the greatness sake of that
loathsome and cursed vice. And how it abounds now in these da^es, Esd^as. 8.
we may well note and think, the appointed times of gods vengeance, to be
wourthilye entered amongst us.

And because that in the life and welfare, of the proud people of this world,
depends great and many mischieues, to the grief and vexation of the poor
and rightuous, the prophet cries in this wise, for the hastenynge of Gods
vengeance amongst the^: Psalm. 9^.
Arise O lord, thou judge of the world, and recompense in thy fury ye great
pride of this people, even after their just deserving. O forget not ye voice of
thyn enemies: for the presumption of the^ that be hateful against thee,
encreaceth yet stylle more and more. Again: Let the proud be confounded, O
Lord for they go wickedly about to destroy me. And tholde saying, has been
from the beginning: Pride will have a fall. Which agrees to the saying of
Salomo^; Presu^ptio^ goth before shame and destrucito^: and after a proud
stomach there follows a fall. May we not no we think it at the highest, and
never so like to fall? Pro. 21.29
Was there ever sens god created heaven and earth, yt like abuse and
abomination without measure reignyng? Can it by any means more horribly appear
amongst us? Can it with possibility, Excess in pride.
from any fa^tastical head yt bears life, be more diversely devised and
chargeably, to ye painting forth and setting out of our rotten carrainly
carcases? Or can it be by other more vainly or fo^dly devised, tha^ is of our
selfs fo^dly co^se^ted and to receued? Of there consider we as we ought in all
such our doings, our poor and hase estate, or the sleandernes of our
ability, for the supportation of such a chargeable fantasy? In pride we
forget po^^^tie.
And does it not also by our wourkes appear, that as we are gloriouse, gaye,
and rich without: our hearts are wretched, deformed, and full of pouertye
within? yes undoubtedly, both in the presence of god and all godly men, it is
to to plain and evident: and that we are presently thereby (among other
euelles:) greatly entered into the hatred of god. Our Lord have mercy upon us,
for his son Jesus Christ's sake, and temper our hearts with the spirit of
his fear, that we may in all our doings, better consider our christen
profession, and declare it more holylie in our outward conversation, that the
terrible threatenings of gods vengeance, do not light upon us. Temperance in
the life of a christian, is a most precious and bright shynynge virtue, to
show forth gods glory, and to declare the beautiful lively state of the
christian commen wealth. It is a true saying, that the wourdes, countinaunce,
gesture, and the apparel of the outward man Gods vengeance amongst the^:
Arise O lord, thou judge of the world, and recompense in thy fury ye great
pride of this people, even after their just deserving. O forget not ye voice of
thyn enemies, for the presumption of the^ that be hateful against thee,
encreaceth yet stylle more and more. Again: let the proud be confounded, Psalm.
(...)
O Lord for they go wickedly about to destroy me. And the prophet also
foreseing i^ himself by the spirit of god, how horrible and loathsome this
sin of pride was in the sight of god, and how hurtful and dangerous a thyng^
it was, both touching the poisoned nature thereof, either raingning in him
self, or i^ any other person: and what power also to mischief, was therein
approved often: he cried in this maned unto god, saying: O Lord that art my
strength, keep me thy servant I beseech thee, from the sins of presumption:
O defend me, least they get the dominion over me: then shall I O god be
clean, innocent, and undefiled, end from the great offense. O let not the
foute of pride come against me: neither let the hand of ungodly cross
overthrow me, and cast me down. Thus this good man of god (for his own
safegarde and defense, and for the avoiding of gods vengeance) declares his
own weakness, and cries upon god for his assistence and strength, against
this pestilent vice, and against the possessoures thereof: least by fastnyng
(specially) upon himself, susteining thereby the violence of his enemies, he
should be confounded and thrown down, as experience diversely has taught
at all times and upon all estates, either upon the proud people them selves,
by gods only hand, for the proud to be plaged and subverted by the proud:
or also upon any other, that have sustained (in innocence) the violente
cruelty of the proud. And because, as he him self was a fearer and feruents
lover of god, and had experience (as before mentioned) of this infectuous vice,
and would have all men in like manner to reverence God, to love him, and to
eschew the dangers of this vice: what the nature thereof is, what it wourketh
in them that possesses it, and what they co^menlye are that sustain the
violence thereof, and what the reward also shall be unto them that embraces
this evil, he him self besides other, wrighteth thereof in this manner: Pride
says he, engenders forgetfulness of god. Pride wourketh in ye hearts of the
wicked, co^te^pt of god. Neither is God in ye thoughts of the proud. Their
wa^es are continually greuouse. Their mouths are full of cursing, spite,
bitterness, scornefulnes, wilines, lyeng, deceipte, and fraud: and under their
tongues is ungodliness, and vanity: they are lurkers, they are dyggers of
pyttes, setters of trappes, and layers of snares, to catch the rightuous and
lowlye: they are priuye murderers of the innocent, and they have their eyes
fyxed and full bente to the destruction of the poor. Psalm. (...)
etc. What euelles are there that be noysom upon the earth to the hurt of
man, ye springs not from ye heart of ye wicked proud man? For pride is the
original of al sin and wickedness: ye beginning whereof, is wickedly to slip
and fall from God, his creatoure and maker: for his heart is wythdrawne from
dym. Ecclesi. ^^ There is no fear of God before his eyes: The proud flatter
theimselues in their own sight, even till their abominable sins be found
out. Tush say they, in the pride of their hearts: we shall never be cast
down: there shall no harm happen unto us: God has forgotten: he hydeth away
his face, and he shall never see it. Psalm. 10. But contrarywyse the holy ghost
men cloneth of the proud, respectyng the affectes of their corrupted hearts,
that the mighty hand of God, scatters them in the imagination of their
hearts. Luke. i. The Lord shall root out all wicked and deceiptful lyppes,
and the tungues also that speakethe such proud things. Psalm. 12. Again, as
God being most high, respects gently, the humble and lowely: so beholdethe
he the wickedness of the proud people afar of. Psalm. 138.

And again: who so has a proud ^oke, and an high stomach: him will I not
suffer (says the Lord) Psalm. 101. And in an other place: The glory of the
Lords majesty casts down the ^aute and high looks of the presumptuous,
and brings full low the vain pride of man. Esaias. 2. And this also in an
other place: All people that are forgetful of God, and of their duty, in
humility and obedience unto him, shall be turned into hell. Note also
touching pride, Psalm 9.
among other places of the scriptures what the prophet Esaye says: and what
the terriblenes of gods wrath: is there mentioned against the same. And here
also I think it not out of the way, Esaias. 3.
that we consider and note well the blyssefull state sometime, of the moss
glorious, clear, and beautyfull creature Lucyfer: that gloried so much in him
self, and sought in his pride being but a creature, to advance and to exalte
him self up into heaven, and to set his throne besides the stars of God
his Creator and maker. He desired in his proud heart, to clyme above the
clouds, and to be in comparison like unto the most high God. But what
happened thereby unto him? Received he not his reward accordingly, when he was
wourthily thrown down, even to the very deapthe of hell: where he remains
in stead of a fair bryghte angel of heaven, an horrible foul deuell of
hell, abiding in dampnacion and darkness, with his companions for ever, the
right father of pride, and of al wicked presumptuous persons, and the only
ring leader, high captain, prince and ruler, of all abomination and
iniquity? Esaias. 14 Seeing then that the apparaunte and just vengeance of god,
has been felt from the beginning, for such disobedience and pride, and that
he has promised by his wourd, to perform truly his wrath, for such wicked
offenses: O why would pride spring (by any means) from the heart of man:
over whom hangs the yrefull power of so terrible a god: man being of him
self most feeble, and a frail creature, very corruption, earth and ashes?

Eccle. 10. O blessed therefore is the man that is lowly, and meeks spirited, ye
has only with reverence, set his hope in ye lord god, and has not turned unto
the wais of the proud. For undoubtedly when ye wrath of god, shall fall by his
justice upon this generation for the sin of disobedience and pride, as in all
ages before it has been grievously felt: O how great shall the fall thereof be
upon us? yea, how (alas) shall we wretched creatures be able to abide it? The
old saying, has been from the beginning: Pride will have a fall. Pre. 21 2^
Which agrees to the saying of Salomo^: Presumption goes be fore shame and
destruction: and after a proud stomach there follows a fall. May we not now
think it at the higheste, (...) pride.
and never so like to fall? Was there ever sens GOD created heaven and earth
the like abuse and abomination (with out measure raignynge? Can it by any
means moare horribly appear amongeste us? Can it with possibility, from
any fantastical head that bears life, be more dyuerslye devised and
chargeablye, to the payntynge forth and fettynge out of our rotten
carraynlye carcases? Or can it be by other more vainly or fondly devised,
then is of our selves fondely conse^ted to and received? Either consider we (as
we ought) in all such our doings, our poor and base estate, or the
sleandernes of our ability, In prvde we forget pou^^^tie.
for the supportation of such a chargeable fantasy? And does it not also by
our wourkes appear, that as we are gloriouse, gaye, and rich without: our
hearts are wretched, deformed, and full of pouertye within? yes undoubtedly,
both in the presence of god and all godly men, it is to to plain and evident:
and that we are presently thereby (among other euelles:) greatly entered into
the hatred of god. Our Lord have mercy upon us, for his son Jesus Christ's
sake, and temper our hearts with the spirit of his fear, that we may in all
our doings, better consider our christen profession, and declare it more
holylie in our outward conversation, that the terrible thretnynges of gods.
vengeance, do not light upon us. Temperance in the life of a christian, is a
most precious and bright shynynge virtue, to show forth gods glory, and to
declare the beautiful lively state of the christian commen wealth. It is a true
saying, that the wourdes, countinaunce, gesture, and the apparel of the
outward man, expresses plainelye, the natural disposition and lust of the
inward man But what diversity is there now touching the present state of our
lives betwixt us, We diffre nothing from the sodomites.
and the most vile people some time of the world, that were most detestable in
the light of god, for the gretnes of their wicked company, and the multitude of
their terrible sins: over whom god rained from heaven, sulpher, fire, and
brymstone, with great darkness and horrible stinch, for their reward and
destruction:: (namely the filthy sodomites and stinking Gomorreans:) whose joy
and felicity was in pride, delicacie, fulness of meat, abundaunce, and
ydlenes: neither reached they their hand to the poor, but were hard hearted
and pitiles, and full of al filthy abomination. Unto whom in the fulness of
their pride, and stynkyng felicity, the Prophets of God preached repentance,
to turn them from their great abhominatio^, and wickedness and to escape the
heavy wrath of God, presentely hanging over them, if they could have
prevailed: whose heavenly doctrines from time to time, sharp threatninges,
gentle warnings, and fair promises from god offered unto them, Preaching
prevailed not against the Sodomites. The destruction of the sodomites.
were no less bitter and unsavory unto them, then their accustomed haunted
fleshlines, or beastly filthiness, was pleasant and sweet unto them. And so
without leaving of, or fearing danger, they still continued in their beastelye
wickedness, until the unquenchable fire of gods vengeance fell down upon
them, to their perpetual confusion of body and soul. The sign of which
horrible destruction, and great vengeance of god, remains in the place vnts
this day, for an exaumple unto the wicked inhabitours of the earth: wherebye,
they may learn to know and fear the mighty at me of so terrible and just a
God, against his obstnate, styffenecked, We are careless of gods vengeance.
proud, uncharitable, and filthy enemies. O how careless also are we of such
things? How slack and far of are we, from due cogitation of that mighty
god, and of his justice, that should be always a terror in our consciences?
And of his humility and great example also of love, lowlynesse, cleannes, and
puritye, that should move us to charity, mekenes, holiness, and chastity?
Neither consider we the frailty, rebellion, and vilitie of our fickle and
frail flesh, We seek not to with stand the rebellion and great
frailetie in our flesh.
to withstand the corrupt motions thereof, that ever yeldeth to evil, and
reeleth always with great danger to fall. Yea, and other whiles the fall is
such, as we may here and know (through our wilful presumption, long
suffering, lyngerynge daliaunce or filthy wantonness) that it descendethe from
sin to sin, We fall thoroughe the flesh never to rise again
and from one iniquity to another, till the stay of gods grace be utterly
taken away, and so never to rise again, but fall with ye sinking Sodomites, by
what order of corporal death so ever it be, from god to ye deuel, to eternal
death, hell, and da^pnacion for ever. O pleasant purchaced end, and wourthy
reward for such pleasures. Has it not ben as well truly known as often spoken,
ye sweet meat, will have sharp and sour sauce: have we not also known, yt
after a few vain, short, and foolish pleasures: there follows many bitter,
woeful, and endless miseries? ye after laughter, joy, and iolitie, there follows
lamentacion, grievous and cruel desteny? yt after health, wealth, and worldly
prosperity: there follows the trodden trace of infelicitie? And finally, after
an vnrepe^tant and wicked short life: there follows gods just judgment to
eternal death? These things well noted: May we not think our times well
spente, that serves for so lovely recompense? For a few days of vain
pleasures, to enjoy ever lasting pains? Thou O man, that art in such wise
disobedient, a contempner of god, a refuser of his grace, or obstinate and
heady against him, that is so mighty, so merciful, pitiful and gentle: and
thou an apt follower of the deuel, that is so merciles and cruel a tiraunts: be
thou well assured hereof, that in this case, thorough thine own wylfull
malice, and beastly obstinacy, both their minds shall be set and joined
together against thee: that is: the one to wythdrawe his mercy from thee, God
fotsaketh the refuser of his grace. The deuell receives him.
and utterly to forsake thee, and the other maliciously to take thee, and
merciless to torment thee. Thou shall not devise to do more wickedly, then he
will prepare ways to cruciate thee. And though thy time of fylthy pleasures
and to do wickedly, be but short: Our filthye pleasures are but short: but the
revvard of iniquitio endures for ever.
yet the just reward for thine iniquity, shall for ever endure, whether thou
escapest or not the diversities of gods wrathful visitation in this present
life, as partly before is touched. Truly therefore, I think, If the
remembrance of these things were happily planted in our hearts, The
remembrance of gods justice would temper well our doings.
they would not a little assuage our statelye and haught courage: they would
bridle and pluck back our fleshly affectes: they would wourke temperaunce in us
to use well this life: they would make us in deeds bear our sails lower, and
keep more close our pecockes tails. Our lord prepare us apt vessels: to
possess his holy spirit, Prayer.
that by the virtue and mighty operation thereof, our hearts may be pourged of
this most loathsome and filthye vice of pride, and of all unrighteous: that
our lives being reformed, or converted into holiness, the blessing of God may
shortly ensue upon us. And to proceed further in this foresaid pride.
wherewyth we are so greatelys deformed: If it be puffed up in us, pride
thoroughe rycher.
because of riches: whereby we feel our selves lusty and in great iolitie:
and that the world estemeth us, the simple people croucheth unto us, and the
gross multitude honors us (which seems a gloriouse, and a thing greatly
contenting the vain flesh:) let us not in any wise stay there: let us
quickly remove our affect, for most wretched therein is our state to stand,
and the curse of god hangs nere over us: but let us humble our selves with
thankefulnes to god, and descend into the us tome of our own consciences, and
there see and and consider, the most miserable estate and poverty of the
mind, and the foul blaynes, botches, and leaprosy, whereby our souls also
are so greatly disfigured: whose deformity and vile baseness, the good
spirit abhors, and all godly and wise men utterly detesteth. Yea, let, us
have in remembrance the lord of glory, We must remember the humility of
christ
and his simplicity and humblenes: whose most excellent and glorious estate,
was of the vile world despised, and of the proud people utterly abhorred and
defied, but of GOD the father most highly blessed, esteemed, and glorified. Let
us consider, how he in his nativity, confounds pride. It pleased him that
made us and all the world, to descend humblye from above, even from the
world of all worlds, in to this earth and world of al wretchedness, to be
incarnate, to be borne, and to show him self destitute of all glory, in most
base estate, in poverty and in humility, that our pride might the rather be
pardoned our insolen^te abated, and our vanities confounded: and that through
his poverty, we might be enriched: and by his humility also highly exalted
unto god the Father, and with him to remayn for ever. This virtue of humility,
The virtue of christ's humilitie^
so greatly appeared in him, that he was contented for our sakes, to be of
this world despised and hated, that we of his heavenly father, might be
esteemed and loved. Whose love, we assuredlye want not, if we in contempnynge
these worldely and vayn things, have our hearts fyxed upon permanente and
heavenly things, according to the exaumple of our gentle and meek
savior Christ: who take upon him our flesh, and suffered all kind of
affliction in the flesh. O to what end, shall all these our fugitive and
flitting pleasures serve, wherein we are so greatly blinded, and where unto we
are so si^gulerly affected, if god in castyng us away from him, shall despise
us, and the celestial spirits both abhor and defye us? If God blesses us,
and makes us fortunate and happy with his gifts, let us the^ acknowledge the
geuer, and use them without abuse, that always in them, glory may only
redounde to him. The virtue of gods spirit against pride.
Certainly, where the good spirit of god abides, there, neither wealth, nor
abundance of richesse, ar any provocation at al to pride or wantonness: nor yet
any bar or ^efull let, to withholde free liberty, to use and bestow the
benefits of god, to his due laud and praise: but rather (to them that have
them) a sharp and quick spur, to prick them forwards: that by the use of
charity and frendely liberality, the grace of God may clearly shine in
them, to the quiet state in them selves, and to others most happy
reioycynge. The virtuous and wise manne ought to think, What the virtuous and
wise man thinks.
that as long as he lives in this world, he holds all earthelye pleasures
but at adventure: and that our felicitye is geeuen unto us, but in most
slipper wise to abide amongst us: which the course of time consumethe, and
causes us to leave if, and it to leave us. We must remember also (as before
written) that god is Lord of heaven and earth, and of al things in them
contained: Gene. 1. Ier c. 32. Psalm. 8.
he with his own hand has both created them and us: he is the Lord god
omnipotence: he has put all things in subjection under his feet: he
dysposeth his gifts at his pleasure: he bestows them after the measure of
his grace, where, whenne, and to whom him lusts: and will at his godly and
appointed time, take all away again, God geeueth and takes: 1. Reg. 1. Psalm.
113. Eccle. 8.
God encreaceth and dymynisheth: GOD lyfteth up and throws down: god
exalts, and brings again full low. And Job full well descrybeth our
miserye; namely of such as are covetous, Job. 27.
proud and vayneglorious in this world: that have their delyghte in vain
riches, and that holds their felicity upon the consumynge trasshe of this
world: that whenne we dys, we shall carye nothing away with us: and in the
twyncklinge of an eye, we shall be gonne, Job. 1. Eccle. 5
and leave altogether beehynde us. Naked we camme out of our mothers womb,
and so without caryeng any thing with us, we shall thither return again.
Pride thorough dignity.
Furthermore, if we swell in pride, because of dygnytie, wit, wisdom,
learning, health, strength of body, beautye of face, and such other like
gifts and graces of nature; do we not slip then from our mark, and show
our selves forgetful of God our cratoure, unthankful for his benefyttes,
and greatly to abuse him in his gifts? Fynallye, what good thing is in us?
What is to be seen upon us? Or what good things are those that belongs unto
us, 1. Coe. 4. Eccle. 17,
ye we have not received? If we answer, we have not any good thing, but that,
we have received, and acknowledge also the geuer, which is god: why do we then
(forgetters, or rather despisers of Godd vainly glory and proudlye host in
our selves, is though such things camme of our selves: and apply not rather
our studies, (with humblenes) to seek his glory in his gifts, Iere. 13. Act.
12.
that is only wourthye all exaltation and glory? Let no mariesteeme more of
him self, then becomes him.

Err not my brotherne: Every good gift, and every perfect gyste, is from
above, and comes down from the father of light. Prou. 2. John. 3.
We must be in submission therefore under the mighty hand of god, that he in
time to come may exalte us For as God resists the proud, Jacob: ^^
so gives he grace to ye humble? Have we not often experience of gods doings
in his wrath, ye long before age or death, or other whiles by death for
unthankfulness sake the honorable of this world and men in auctority, are
thrown down, and al their glory trodden in the duste? Psalm. 14^.
that of tyche men there have becomme poor men? Of the us neglorious, most
witty, and wise persons, 1 Cor. ^.
their wysedomes are turned to foolyshnes? that healthful and strong men
(by syckenes and many dangers) are made weak and enfeebled? that of semelye
personages becomes deformed creatures? Yea, and of fair faces, lothesome and
foul visages? Are not these the wourkes of God (to a good end) wourthye the
notinge of us? And if we only consider the state of our flesh (wherein we so
greatly glory and delight, Gene, 6, R^m. (...).
nourysshing it and settinge it forth without respect of charge) what are we?
What appears in us? Are we any thing else, the^ erthly creatures in ye hands
of yt creator, and as the clay pot in the hands of the potter? Are our
bodies any other then earthly vessels, duelye proportioned of the maker,
Job. 10. What we are to^^^ my, only the flesh.
covered with skin and flesh, and joined together with synewes and bones?
Either are we any better, then very dungeons of darkness, vile donghilles of
all filthynes and stinche, wourmes meat, and a foul synke or puddle, that
flows with infections and all noisome corruptions? Are not our bodies flesh
and blood, of less substance then shadows? The shornes of man's life.
our lives more swiftlye vanishynge then the smoke? or of as short
contynuaunce, as the sudden ryuyttyng bubbles? Are we not also compared for
our short abydyng to the swift trace of a cloud? to a consuming mist, to a
vapoure or smoke, to a light flyeng lease, to dry dustie stubble, Sapi. 2.
Job 1^.
to wythered hay, or to the flowers and grass of the field, whose flouryshyng
times are but short, and that the swaye of death (in time) by the sickle or
sith do light upon them? Psalm. (...) Eccle. 14, Jacob 1. 1. Pet. 1.
Are not the cruel strokes of the inevitable dart of death in all times from
the first life of the young and tender infant, unto the last breath of the
most old and crooked aged man, felt with most dolorous pa^ges to end this
life? What are al these discriptions unto us, and innumerable such other, but
familiar and lyuelye exaumples, perfect and true layinges, to make us
myndefull of god, to know well our selves, and to remenbre our end? to
fashion our wylles to his will, and to wythdrawe without delay, our fyxed
hearts from vain things. May it no the thought very madness and a great
folly in us to be vnmyndefull of such things, as we daily both feel, and
see? or to be forgetful of our saylynge with paynfull travails, It is great
follye, not to remember the dangers of this life, and that we Shall dye.
thorough the great and dangerous perilles of this life? And that we are
sodeynely at one beck, commanded (in time) of necessity, to take land, to
discharge us of our flesh, and to take the earth in the sepulcre? The mighty
lord and creatoure, the rightuouse god and just judge him self, has thus
plainly determined against us: and has given ever us (touching our end and)
short and terrible sentence, saying: The determinate sentence of god.
Thou shalt dye the death. This his brief sentence is irrevecable: It is not
now: but has been experimented upon all flesh from the beginning: neither
will his ambassador be corrupted in his Embassage with gold nor silver, nor for
the whole treasure upon the earth, to withdraw one title or jot of his
commission, Deaths extremities. without respect of persons.
but will with all rygoure and sharpened, execute the extremity of his
appointed office: not respectinge the vain estate or stoughtnesse of any
person: violentelye he stryketh them: he cruellye with his deadely darte
yearceth their hearts in sonder; he ryddeth them of their lives, and rolleth
them together in the dust. It is the fatal destiny of us all earthly
creatures, that we must needs dye: we are borne to dye: And as we have known the
death of many, so many also shall know us dye. VVorldlye ^ros^ (...).
We are now youthful, lyuelye, and at liberty: healthful, wealthye, and
full of solitie: we have presently all things at pleasure, and live in
security: yea, we wysshe not for any thing, but it frames luckily: such is
the good disposition of god otherwhiles upon us, to put us in remembrance of
his goodness, with due reverence and thankesgeuing. but what does tha^ ensu?
(...).
Note the untowardness, the cursed abuse, and unthankfulness of mankind. We
are so rapte and over run with our own blindness, with obstinacy, pride, and
beastlye folly, swymminge in vanities and earthly felicite, that we are then
forgetful of god, unkind, vnre^uerent, stiffenecked, and brutishe. (...)
And as we at such times are vnmyndefull of GOD, and of death, the messenger
of god, and think all things, to be coch sure on our side, saying with in our
selves: tusshe, let us be merry: let us be iocunde, lustye, and lively: what
impedimentes are there to the contrary? we have peace: al things are safe, we
stand in no perel: we think of no danger: we care for no change: we pass
of no wars: we remember no famine: neither pestilence or murrain; we dread no
subversion, nor feel none affliction: So destruction or sorrow hastille
approaches us, or death immediatlye (by the will of god) comes swiftlye upon
us: like an outrageous and most vehemente runnynge stream, with his terrible
chastisementes, and with his impytuous and most roughe rorynge soundes of
horroure and desperation: renewinge into our conscyences the sharpo sentence of
GOD, saying unto us: Thou shalt dye, The (...)
Thy time is now expired, therefore needs must thou dye. I death, the
messenger of the most high, immortal, and just GOD, am sent unto thee for
thy present confusion.

My charge and and comyssion is so grayghte against thee, that I may not
defer to styfle thee, or geeue thee thy deadly wound. Nay nay, striving
prevails not: there is now no remedy, for the swourde of god is when against
the. What, could you not have thought of this before? Have thou not ben often
advertised to remember the end? Have thou not had (by the doom of thy
conscience (often and sufficient admonition of gods mighty hand and power?
Haste thou not sent by all means possible the experience of this bryckle life?
Remembrest thou not, that with one only blast, Job. ^^.
ye dim light of thy candle of life, is utterly extincts and put out. And
that it is in such wise dynged, that there remains in it no spark of hope
for thy light to return again? And that the light being ones loft, the wax
lies waste, the heat abateth, the ^nuffe smoketh, it corruptly stinketh, it
quickly consumes, and sodeinely falls to ashes? Haste thou not thus thought
of man's mortality and fall? Either haste thou presumed upon Gods
sufferaunce, or wantonly fyxed thine heart to daliaunce? Have thou not yet
aptely prepared thy self to God, a repentant sinner, for the multitude of thy
sins and iniquities? Haste thou not in thee ye charity of god? Haste thou
presently wrath in thee against thy neighbor? Either have you maliciouslye of
wicked and set purpose detracted thy neighbor, to the spoylyng of his good
name and same, He that is stiffenecked, and will not yield to the grace of god
and he reformed, shall suddenly (without help) be rooted out and destroyed.
Prou. 29.
loss of goods, loss of friends, or loss of life? Haste thou not sought
with a sorrowful heart, to bewail thy wickedness to God, and to be reconciled
again unto thy neighbor, accordyngs to the will of god? Has the deuell so
blinded thee, or poisoned thine heart with pride, malice, contempt, or
scornefulnes, that then wylt continue in stoughtnesse and be ashamed of well
dooynge, to knytre thy self in the bond of peace and amity, with thy friend
or enemy, thy poor neighbor, thy christian brother or sister? Have thou
oppressed him, or craftilye deceived him? Have thou been slack in doing thy
duty to him? Have thou ben pittles, or uncharitable to him? Have thou thus
set at naught the precepts and holy counsels of God? Either haste thou so
fyred thy self to the world, (refusing the grace of GOD,) that thou have not
yet found time, to be stowe and set in good ordrs (to his glory) the vain
things of this world, fore seeing the sudden visication of God, or the swiftnes
and cruelty of me death, Eccle. 24. Eccle. 41
ye messenger of god? Have thou not herd, that at my coming I tarry not? Have
thou not been taught to byspase thy goods, and to be charitable unto thy
freende: and according to thine habilytye, to reach out thine hand and geeue
unto the poor, and to wourke righteousness before thy death, to the
sa^ctifieng of thy soul in. Jesus christ? Examine thy self: what think
thou? Feel in thy conscience the due justice of god, and the terror of me
death his messe^ger? Does ye sorows of death now compass thee, and the huge
floods of iniquity make the afraid? has the pains of hell fastened upon these,
and the stra^gling snares of death overtaken there? Shrinkest thou now at me?
Feelests now in thine heart my deadlye gripes? See thou now no way to fly,
nor longer days to amend thy life? And is there therefore now in thee, a
fearful hope of joyful life, and condempnatio^ in thy conscience to eternal
death, for thy leuds folly and forgetfulness of the will of God? Ah, the more
accursed and dampnable is thine estate, neither do I pity thee: no no, let
hell fire devour thee, or all the torments of hell fasten upon thee. for as I
find thee, so must I surely take thee: I may not pass the bounds of my
commission. And as I thy mortal enemy, Death (...)
regard not thy present state of dampnacion to eternal death: so will I now
not defer so ^^uruec thy soul from thy body, and will byolently with my force
deforme thee, wait and consume thy beautye, and take from thee my breath of
life.

And as thou have has hards and seen or many, that have sustained my p^^^es
^urye and ouerage: so with (...) my most violent cruet^^^, I new take ^^om
thee thy me O the arear terror and sharpenes of ^eam. (...)
O sodayn and ^^r^or cruelty. O the mercyles meisenger or the (...): most
^euere god, than thus in ^o^yne cutteth us thorre from (...) curshly rei^^^e.
^e^, rather were may any with lamentation: We for ever ^ee (...) th^ie (...) and
damnnable sowles: whose benumbed and dull senses has been wylfully stopped from
the apt seelynge and receiuyng of the divine grace and voice of god: wrootyng
and cumblyng like swine, in the mire of their carnal and filthye affectes:
wandryng the byepathes of Satan, refusyng the straight wate of Christ, and
contempnyng the most pure and undefiled law of the highe^^ Whose birth whenne
they be borne, (...)
shall be to cursynge: and when they dye, the curse shall be their portion. For
horrible is the death of the unrighteous. He shall never come our of darkness,
the flame shall dry up his branches: and with the blast of the mouth of god,
he shall be taken awa^e. O ^ure wilful and stiffnecked wickedness, that hasteneth
upon us goods heavy ^^^o^gnation and wrath: heaps of his plagues to torment
our flel^he, and the violence of death to shorten this life. If we a^^er
escape everlasting death. For as ^ynne prevails against us, to the justice of
God hangs over us. And because we are the servants of (...) we shall also
receive the reward of (...) which is death: Romans ^.6.
as it was plainly signified unto us from the beginnynge by the mouth of God,
Gene. 2.
when Adam (whose children we are) disobeied and transgressed the wourde of
God. We with our forefathers (to the destruction of this life) must all drink
of the cup of death: We must drink all of the cup of death.
who dyuersely knocks before he stryketh, to warn us of our end. But who
regards that? Who harkeneth gladly to the knock or call of death? Either who
always duly receives that monishementes of death, for a remembrance of his
end by death, thorough innumerable sygnifications and exaumples of living
things: whether it he in their rysynge or falling, in their quicknyng or
decaying: or in their uncertain living and most certain dying: besides the
fickle course of man's short life, felt and approved in all times and ages, eue^
from the young and tender infant, to the youthful and middle age, and so forth
to the gray heded and crooked old age, as also these daily and familiar
messengers, that is: Many and strange diseases, violent plagues, great perils,
hard fortunes, and sodein deaths (with such other like, as before mentioned
and prepared for sin) either partly and worthily felt upon his own flesh,
or fully performed before his face upon others? wh^ I therefore consider but a
little, the forgetfulness, great frailty, and usual disorder of mankind in this
behalf: and behold (to the contrary) the great works of God, and the most
mercyful order of all his doings toward man, for thvpright conversation, good
life, and salvation of man: As I can not (herein) but highely magnify and
praise the good name of god, for such his favorable and most gracious doings:
So again, I must most grievously lament and bewail sorowfullye, the frail
state of man, through unthankfulness, disorder of life, and great forgetfulnes^
namely of goods determination touching our short and familiar passage or thend
of this life: whereby (with godly and good understanding) we should alwais the
better frame our selves in living, and with the more ioyfulnes, peace, and
quietness of conscience, and that the terror of death also should ever ye less
molest us: by whom, we feel in our selves, that most horrible and poisoned
bitter stinge, which so defiles and wounds our weak consciences: drawing
us to enemitye, to impaciencie and rebellion, to forgetfulness, to incredulity
and distruste of gods mercy, with such other, even the spots and foul
deformities of sin and iniquity: whereby also we must judge, and that
justly of our selves to be but ye servants of sin, and stand therefore in
danger of gods wrathful judgment to eternal death: and occasion therefore
given, to express with sorrow and woe, our most wretched and frail estate:
feelinge in our selves, just reproach, shame and confusion of face, fearful
trembling deadly sighing, bitter wayling, and most hearty and inward gronynge,
for this our weakness and great imperfection: These things (I say) thus
considered of us, how ca^ we in such distres but lamente all the sort of us,
and say with groninge desires: for grace and better memory, as subjects
continuallye in hands to the slaughter, under such a careless, most pitiles,
and public enemy: O death death, thou most cruel and deadly aduersarye,
seeing we are not at any time of power, able to preuayl bodily against thee,
or with force to wythstande thee, Iere. 13. Act. 12.
nor can find favor in thy sight to stay thee, neither can wage thee by
any means to defer thy doings: I would most ioyefully wyshe, that we were
at least so happy, always to remember thee, for our health and felicity, as
we continually have experience of thee, Prou. 1. John. 3.
seeing we must assuredly and unawares abide thy dint. I say therefore, how it is
ordained that we shall al die: neither may we escape in the end) the force of
death: Jacob. 5.
For we plainly se from time to time, that gods power by death, shall styfle
our breath, and fynyshe our end. Ah, what shall we then sale? Seeing there is
no resystence against the violente force of this messenger death, Psalm. 147.
what shall we then irreverently against god, esteem of our selves? What
shall then avail amongst us, 1. Cor. 1.
our vnprofita^ble and vain studies: and our busied heads for fantasies?
Where shall then become our nice and light affections, our solitie, our deyntie
desires, and earthelye delyghtes? What shall we then gain by our haught
courage, and the most foolyshe and vain brute of stoughtnesse,? Where shall
then lie our lifted up heads, our high looks, our forged canntynaunces, our
fair faces, and our stretched out necks?

Even there full lowely truly, where our ^^mble and fine feet, our tripping
toes, and the whole body of earth shallye. By the order and decay of all
things, m^nes death is signified.
The order and state of al things upon the earth, being or living in their
kind upon the earth, does playnelye signify unto thee, (O thou man or
woman, even in the midst of she ruste and folitie,) what thou art, and
whereunto also thou shalt. For as they are altogether but earthly, very
vanity, transitorious and flitting: sommetime beautiful and seemelye,
frethely in flowers flourishyng, youthful, fruitful, and well pleasynge the
eye: healthful, puissaunte, fortunate, and happy: to the contrary (in time)
foul and unseemly, wythered and deformed, ^loe and unfruitful, infected,
enfebled, Man is in the number of vain things.
unfortunate and unhappy: So thou also, in the number of vain things:
(although of greater estimation and price before god: who has endued thee with
his good graces and gifts, above all the rest of his creatures) to his praise
and thy joy, if thou well note it, haste thine order and turns in times
prescribed thee: nothing available to ground upon, nothing certain or sure,
nor never abide in one state. God, Gods immortality is not more certain
then the mortality. of man is certain.
touching the state of his most pure, immortal, and incomprehensible majesty,
is not more certain by his own power, for ever to endure and reign in glory,
with his angels and blessed saints in heaven world without end, then thou,
corruptible, mortal, and earthelye creature, shall here hold thy felicity,
but earthly and at adventure: nothing certain nor stable, nothing pleasant
or sweet, nor nothing wourthye any hungrys delyghte, whereunto thou may
happily cleave or leave of assurance, but altogether shall be unto the but
unstable, lightness and vanity, very fo^dnes, misery and most certainlye to
end. It may well be says of those, that only seek this life, and glory in
the pleasures of this world: they follow but fantasies and a vain shad owe:
Which, when they think to be surest of, vanyssheth away, and is nothing: For
let us nener so much apply to this life: beewrappe our selves, Vain travel.
frame, fashion, and flatter our selves with the vayns delyghtes thereof: and
seek by all means possible, to now sell and stablys^he our selves therein: in
vain and most foolyshe shall be our travail: we have our times prescribed to
dye: we are al planted within the limits of death: all flesh is but as
grass: death must be our end: from the earth we came, yea, very earth we
are: And as we being but earth, were bredde in the entrayles of the earth,
and are nourished upon the earth, and by the earth: so are we also cyted by
death, to return to the earth again. For the grave must be our house,
Eccle. 11. Psalm. 104. Job. 16. Job. 7.
and from whense also, we shall never return again, until the day of
Christ's general judgment: Neither shall our eyes see any more, the vain
pi^asures of the earth. O full well described Jeremy of our unstable,
lumpysshe, and most gross nature, Iere. 22.
and of the short contynuaunce of our lives, when he called unto us in few
wourdes, faleng: O thou earth, earth, earth. And as we earthlye creatures, are
not able to say, that we hold any thing certain in this life, whether it be
life yt self, times belonging to life, or things necessary for this life: so
there is nothing so certain against life, Luke. 12.
as death, though the times of death be un certain, in what kind so ever we
sustain his force: either in bed, or out of bed: by force of law: by
dinte of swourd: by rage of fire: by peril of water: or by innumerable other
wais and casual chances: under all which, Roma. 5. Hebre. 9.
we live in subjection to dye. And notwithstanding, that with great grief
and careful studies in the fiesh, we rub thorough this vale of misery in many
dangers of the flesh, uncertain to attain the hungry delights of the flesh:
and of a few things doutfully attained unto, we do not only doubtfully keep
the^, thereby to enjoy ye fruits of our trauail and to take the sweet with ye
sour (for as we have the proof in getting the^ with perils, so we often also
in perils for go them, which sygnifieth unto us, most manifest and open misery,
besides the uncertain hour of the bodies most certain death: and that as we
here live a while deliciously, we suddenly depart hense most bitterly, but we
be also in further danger by gods sharp and extreme judgment in the latter
day, Esaias. 52. Apoca. 1. The reward of the wicked
of the second death: that is: the death of the soul: A death most
dolorouse: A death most horrible and everlasting: ever more in torments: ever
dyenge and never to dye: whose intolerable pains no heart can think nor tongue
can express. In vain shall we their (...) ^^laine and lament our grieses and
wicked state of lives: Sapi. 4. psalm. 49. Sapi. 4. 4. Esdr. 16 psalm. 49.
we shall lie for ever among the dead in shame and dishonor: hell shall be our
dwelling, and we shall for ever be laid waste unto the highest: we shall now
mourn for evermore, and our memorial shall peryshe: We shall remember our
sins, and our own wickedness shall ever condemn us: we shall lie in hell
like sheep: death shall gnawe upon us incurable shall be our wounds: most
outragyouse and stoughte, shall be the strokes of gods mighty arm upon us,
to drive us down headlonge into the doleful dungeon and deep botomelesse
pyite: where perpetuallye is stynche, darkness, languysshynge and yellynge,
endless horror, Math. 13.22.25. 2. Pet 2. Jude. 1.
and gnashynge of teethe. From whense we shall behold, with the eyes of our
tormented and most wicked souls, the buckled brows and moeste terryble
countynaunce of that rightuous and just GOD: by whose irreuocable sentence
(thoroughe our own wickedness) we shall for ever lie bourninge, in the
perdurable lake, and unquenchable fire of hell: Hebre 10.
a place prepared for the deuell and his Aungelles, his most fylthys and
malygnaunte members: the dungehylles of sin, the vessels of venguaunce, the
children of perdicion, and the most cursed adversaries of Christ, and of his
dearelye beloved church. As the blessing, toye, and salvation of god, shall
comme upon all them, that hunger and thirst for ryghtuousenesse, and
preuayleth in sight, against the furiousenes of our bodylye and ghostlye
enemies, having the eternal God to be their God, their only way, and their
only strength, thoroughe hope, as the children of his kyngedome: Apoca. 21
so the lovers of wyckednes, the co^tempners of righteousness, the fearful,
the unbelievers, and the abominable, and murderers, adulterers, filthy
whoremongers, beastlye drunkardes, sorcerers, deceyuers, idolatoures, scorners,
liars, flatterers, and all wrongefull dealers, shall have their part in the
lake, that bourneth with tire and brymstone, Psalm. 89.
which is the second and everlasting death. Ah, terrible is the Lord our
God, and greatly to be feared among his saints: of whom he must be pleased
and reverenced with godly fear: yea, (I say,) he must be feared, and his
great wrath thorough his grace prevented: for he is against his enemies in
cases of reuengeme^t, Deuteronomy. 4. Psalm. 105.
a terrible and co^suming fire: whose mighty arm and most sharp punishments:
are felt through out ye whole world. Therefore in ^ope of gods mercy, although
we have committed iniquity, and have paumpered our flesh deliciously, and
withdrawn our godly charity.

(And therefore have or do sustain in this life great affliction and miserye^
in the flesh for our whole imperseend truly and vnrightuousenes of life, so
marueilousely has iniquity prevailed amongst us, Iere. (...)
to the hastnyng upon us the sharp Justice and wrath of god:) yet let every of
us, yea the most rightuouse of us, without seekynge the condempnacion of
others, straightlye appeal to the judgment of our own co^nsciences: and
there see, Es^v. ^4.
how very foul and filthye we are (as witnesses the prophet) in the sight of
god: whose most clear and lively quick eyes, penetrateth the heues: where
through he sees and sercheth ye secrets of ye hearts and raines: Iere. 1.27
Psalm. 3
before who^ also (notwithstanding his divine counsels and most bitter
threatnynge, often ryngynge in our tares, we show our selves inflexible,
stought, stonye hearted, and sturdy, untoward, sloughthful, and unprofitable
servants: And do the rather merit to have poured upon us the vialles of his
heavy indignaion and wrath, throughout the race of this shortlyfe, and in the
end corporal death: yet let us (I say) reuerentlye in time, Psalm. 119. Iere.
4.
have peace with God, seek to content well God, with troubled spirytes, broken,
contryte, and meek hearts: let us mourn and weep: let our laughter, our
lyghtenesse, and our folitye, be turned into lamentation and mournyng, and
our earthly ioies and vain foolyshenesse, in to bitter weepynge and heaviness:
let us pluck down our pride: Jacob. 4.
let us subdue the lusts of the flesh, and use temperaunce in all our
affectes, according to our honest estate and calling: let neither pride nor
excess, in such wise prevail against us, but that virtue and reason may
partly bear rule: let us be charitable, and love better one another: let us
be more liberal, to the comfort of the poor, that GOD may again bless us,
and wythorawe his furye from us. And if he will feeme yet further to visit
us, then patiently with repentance, to bear al kind of affliction, and the
cross of Christ: Hebro. 12.
for we may not despise the chastisinge of the lord: neither fainte when we
are rebuked of him: for whom the lord loves, him doothe he chastise: yea, he
scourges every son that he receives. Prouer. 3.
Whereby: we do and shall feel the love of God in Christ, and his fatherlye
kyndenesse toward us: who by his sharp rod of justice, Jacob. 4. Job. 13.
Psalm. 32. Luke. 15. 1. John. 1.
puts us in remembrance of our iniquitye: a way to prepare us unto
repentance: and with all lowlynesse also and humble submission, to fall
prostrate before him, to confess from our hearts our sins, to acknowledge
our weakness, and to appeal to his grace for mercy and forgeuenes, that by
hastnyng his heavenly benediction, and the wourkynge of his spirit in us, we
turn from presumption to humility: To be turned from our vvye^ednes and
sin, is the gift of god. Iere. 31.
from carnal fooolyshenes, to cleannes and puritye: from vain superfiuitie,
to temperaunce and modesty: from unmercifulness, to compassion and pity: from
enemity to amity: from discord and discentio^ to peace and unity: and so
forth from strength to strength, to ye happy amend me^t of our untoward and
most perverse lives. Iere. 3^.
And though we have long time heretofore stopped our ears, Let it repent you
and be converted (says Christ) that your sin: and iniquities may be done
away Math. 4. Act. 3.
turned our faces, and fled back from the voice of our most holy and
rightuouse God, in the lare days, specially of his merciful visitation: yet
let us repentauntely turn in time, and embrace him most lovely with our
ready spreadde arms of faith, charity, and constancye. And as we have over
long, with corrupted and vain hearts, been vaynely addicted to vain things,
and our wylles greatly dissenting from the will of god: so let us now make
haste, that with all purity and cleannes of heart, such fondness and
impuritie may be refected, and gods most divine will obediently retained.
Yea, and though God (in deed) by his justice, has some thing of late days
and presently also touched us, Gods heavy and bitter wrath upon England.
and has seemed to lay upon us cruel strokes, and rough chastisementes,
whether by our late kings death, that most godly and christian prince, either
by the breach of virtuous and good laws: by the alteration of Christ's holy
religion, by taking away the light of the gospel, by cruel persecution and
destruction of the pastoures and flock of Christ: And in stead of mercy and
pity, bitter tyranny, and most shameful effusion of innocente and christen
blood, by bournynge, famishinge in prysons, buryenge in dungehylles, rackynge,
headinge, drawing, hanging and quartering, as in the days of gods
slaughter by his great and most heavy indignacion: besides strange diseases,
sodein deaths, dishonorable wars, greuouse exactions, meynteinyng of
strangers, universal famyne, loss of goods, loss of friends, or otherwise,
yet for the auoidynge of further dangers, that by ye bytternes of his wrath
may yet fall upon our flesh, and specially escapynge the second death,
secludinge wilful ignorance, obstinatie, Good counsel.
and stiffeneckednes, let us humbly give thanks unto gods divine majesty for
all things, and namely for the present show and ioiefull light of his
countynaunce, now shynynge again upon us: dailye besechinge him to continue
his goodness, to assiste us with his grace, and to prepare us lyuelye and apt
folowers of his holy and divine will, without murmuring, vnreuerente
talking, secret conspirynge, or cursed rebellynge: for they are euelles
greatly dyspleasing god, and wourkes of the deuell and of hysedicious members,
upon whom, he will assuredly pour down his determinate plages to their swyfte
confusion of body and soul. Let us fear therefore to offend the majesty
of so mighty a God: We may not with. stand the vvil of god.
who is rightuous and a ieolous god over righteousness: let us not repugne his
will, or strive against the stream, preparyng newly unto our selfs the cup of
gods wrath, and to drink double the dregs of his vengeance: but spedyly
with a lively faith, to return and lean toward him, and not be doubtefull
of his mercy: for he has promised (in Jesus Christ) that our sins shall be
consumed, our transgressions covered, and our iniquities pourged. He is
merciful, Daniel. 9.
he beholds us in Christ, and rejoices in the conversion of sinners: he
will have mercy upon us, after the multitude of his mercyes: which will not
the death of sinners, Math. 3. Eze. 18.33. 1 Timo. (...) 1. Peter. 3. The time
and hour when god will vifite us and take accomptes of us, we know not.
but rather that they repentantly turn and live: and aptly receyuynge the
grace of god, readily to prepare them selves, that in what so ever time and
place, death (by the hand of God) shall assaild them: they be not found
unprepared, in that so short and sudden warnyng. And not withstandinge this
most apt preparacion touching life and death, or times appointed for them,
let us refer all (with a lively hope) to the good disposition and will of
god, and say with saint Pauie: whether welyue or whether we die, to god and to
gods good pleasure we live or dye. For herein shall consist great
perfection in our spiritual profession, if in our redines, and most apt
preparacion, we humblye embrace righteousness, showing our selves always well
pleased and rejoicing in god, and desire according to the will of god, to be
dissolved from this frail and corruptible body, and to live incorruptible with
Christ for ever. And we may be sure, if god see in us such apt towardnes, yt we
hunger and thirst for the way of ryghtuousnesse, and that we earnestly seek
the mortification of our old gross affectes, and shake from our shoulders
that grievous pack, and reprocheful bourthen of malice, Collos. 3.
fearcenes, wrath, bloodshed cursed speaking, co^spiring, rebelling, lieng,
octractio^, false accusation, pride covetousness, dru^kennes, uncleanness, self
love, vain affection, and such lewd fondnes: and in respect of gods he
auenly felicite and endless treasure, to neglect the fugitive and short
pleasures of this life, he will not defer to help us, to assist us, and
stre^gthen us, such is the accustomed goodness of his divine nature toward us,
but will be myndefull of his promise to have mercy upon us, as he in this wise
says of him self, by the prophet Esaye: I have forsaken you (says he) for
a small season: Esaias. (...).
I have turned my face from you. I have sharply with plages visited you, and
have stretched out mine arm against you: to stryke you, and make you stoop
for the greatness of your pride and iniquity, ye have been against me, so
stoughte, so stonye hearted and sturdye: but now I see you again relented,
repentaunse for your sins, and turned again unto me, I will with great
mercyfulnes turn me unto you, embrace you, receive you, take ye up again
unto me, and for ever hold ye up and preserve you. And where in my wrath (as
it were the twyncklynge of an eye,) I hid my self from you: I have now,
thoroughe mine everlasting goodness, turned me again unto you, and pardoned
you: says the LORD GOD your auenger. I am he, Psalm. 102.
I am he (says the Lord) which takes away your iniquities: for mine own
sake, and will no more remember your sins. Thus we understand the great
mercy and goodness of God toward us dysobediente and wretched sinners: who
will not only here us, and turn him mercyfullye again unto us, by our
humble suit and peticion, or by our happy amendmente of life, thoroughe the
true faith and love in Jesus Christ, and stay his present indignacion now
raygnynge upon us, and the great terroure of his vengeance to comme, either
in cases general, touching this our already afflicted realm or country, our
lord bless it and defend it: or properly touch^^^^ our own persons, for
every of us see in our selves, our due dosertes: but will henseforthe bless
us: he will renew still his joyful countynance upon us: he will wythdraw the
power of the devil from us, that he prevail not against us in no kind of
temptacion: he will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but will in
the myddeste of temptation prepare us away to escape: Numc. 23 1. Cor. 1.10 1.
These. 5. 2. Pet. 2.
he will so strengthen us that when his grace is offered unto us we shall not
receyne it in vain: his good spirit shall poisesse us, and cleanse our
hearts of the deuelles infections, he will not suffce us to be ouercomme or
drowned in them: for he will sow in our hearts, the lively seeds of his
grace, and fill us full of the wisdom of Christ: By thereare of god sin is
eschevved.
he will put his fear into our hearts (which the proud and scornful
people of this world, and they that maliciousely meddle against god do want:
Job. 18.
his grace is taken from such, for they dwell without his fear, he will so
knitte our hearts in unity, that having but one heart and one way, we shall
fear his name all the days of our lives, that we and our children after us,
Iere. 32. Psalm. 118.
may be blessed and prosper the will deliver us from all dangers and
misfortune: he will take war and discention from us: he will geeue us
victory over our enemies: he will prepare us quietlye to^ inioie our
wynuyngs: he will not suffer us to be confounded, our children destroyed, our
goods spoiled, nor our wives, our daughters, our maidens to be ravished and
defiled, he will be our mighty protection, at all assaies, and geeue us long
life: Job. 8.
he will bless our posterity: he will fill our mouths with laughter, and our
lips with gladdenesse: he will bless the land wherein we dwell, and take
from us, famine, pestilence, and all strange dyseases, specially of the mind:
that our souls being found, we may behold him with a pure says, and serve
him ioyfullye with a clean heart: he will be unto us a GOD of ryghtuousnesse,
truth, and mercy: he will be faithful to fulfill and keep his promises: He
will set up an everlasting covenant with us: namely, that he will never
cease to do us good, and that he will put his fear into our hearts, Iere.
32.
so that hensefoorthe we shall not run nor go astraye from him: he will
make us walk in the good and perfect way, and to keep the paths of
rightuousenes. Yea, Prou 2.
he will have a lust to do us good, and faythfullye to plant us in the land
of the living, with his whole heart, and with all his soul.

For like as he has brought upon us, Iere. 32.
great and diverse plages: so will he also of his mercy, take them again
from us: and in stead of his great vengeance yet to come, he will bring
upon us all the good that he has promised unto us. I four hearts have in
possession, this precious and lyuelye virtue (the fear of God) the grace and
favor of God, shall abundauntly be poured upon us. Neither shall we at any
time in such wise offend him, that his wrath shall be kendled against us. There
shall nothing be wantyng in us, or neadefull for us, that shall be to the
comfort of soul and body, if we have in us the said virtue. It is the
beginning of wisdom: Prouer. 1.
It is the very entrye, to attain the favor and blessyng of god. Iere. 31.
psalm. 24.
In whom so ever it abides, the secrets of our lord god are ever unlocked
unto them, laid forth and spredde amongst them, and shows also unto
them, Psalm. 25. Act. 13. psalm. 23. psalm. 147. Psalm. 34. Psalm. 102.
his comfortable and most ioiefull covenant. Unto them also (as unto the
faithful seed of Abraham) is the wourd of salvation sent. They that fear
him, and put their trust in his mercy, behold, his merciful eyes are ever
fixed toward them, his delyghtes in them, his angel pitcheth his tente
round about the^. He is their strength and delyuereth them, his salvation is
nygh unto them. And look how high the heavens, are in comparison of the ^arth,
so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. Look how wide ^he East is
from the west, so far has ^e set our sins from us: yea, and like as a
father pitieth his own children, even so is he merciful unto them that fear
him. psalm. 103.
The merciful goodness of the lord endures for ever and ever upon them that
fear him, and his ryghtuousenes upon their childres children. psalm. 111. psalm.
112.182.
He geeueth meat to them that fear him, and toward them, he is ever
myndefull of his covenant. They are blessed that fear the Lord. The fear of
the lord makes a long life. Prou. 10. Prou. 14.
The fear of the lord is a well of life, to escape the dangers of death.
The fear of the Lord preserves life, yea, it gives plentuousnes, without
the visitation of any plage: We are sure it shall go well with them that
fear the lord, because they have him before their eyes. Prou 19. Ecclesi. 8.
Ecclesi. 1.
The fear of the lord is wourshyppe and triumph, gladdenes, and a joyful
crown: it makes a merry heart, and it drives out sin.

The fear of the lord is in the heart of the wise, whereby he departs from
evil and walks in the pathe way of ryghtuonsenes. The fear of the lord is
with the wise manne in all his doings, Prou. 14. Eccle. 28.
and in the days of transgression he keeps him self from sin. Eccle. 25.
The fear of the lord, sets it self above al things: It is the beginning
of love. and the beginning of faith, is to cleave fast unto the fear of god.
The fear of the Lord wants nothing, Eccle. 40
and neadeth no help. The fear of the lord is a pleasant gardeine of
blessing, and nothing is so beautyfull as it is. Eccle. 25. psalm. 128.
O blessed therefore is the man, unto whom it is granted to have the fear of
god. For (as Esaias says) it is the power of gods holy spirit: whereby we
reverence god by auoidinge evil and embracing good, according to this
saying: The wyseman fears god, and auoydeth from evil. And Job says:
Behold, the fear of the lord, is even very wisdom it self, and is wholly
co^tinuyng for ever: for it is the strength of the divine spirit, to the
reuerencing and wourshypynge of God: which strength, is not (in us) the wourke
of nature, but the grace of god bath planted: not the will of man, but the
purpose of god, toward his beloved and chosen people: unto whom (in Jesus
Christ) pertains the great strength and myghtys wourkyng of his grace^, to
the renewing of their minds, that through a reverent life in righteousness, the
promises of god may (in this life) be atrayned unto and felt: And after this
life, Math 25. John. 5.
to have a joyful resurrection into everlasting life, thorough the only
merited and death of his dearelye beloved son Jesus Christ, our lord and
savior: who lives and reigns with him in the unity of the holys ghost most
blessed for ever and ever.

Amen. The grace of god. (O dearelye beloved) abound in our hearts to the
showing forth of his glory in righteousness that all we knowing our duties and
obedience to his dyuyne and most gloriouse majesty, may be rich and
plentyfull in all good wourkes, to the pleasynge of our neighbors, for their
wealth and co^yeng, Roma. 15. Gala. 15.
according to the exaumple of Jesus Christ, the true patron, comforter and
savior of the world: who for the tenderness of compassion that he had to
his people, and to save them from destruction, sought not to please him self,
but being innocent, and a lamb unspotted, suffered as a wicked offendour,
most shameful reproach, bitter torments, and pains in the flesh, as also
bodilye death, as it was written of him by the prophet. The rebukes of them
wihche rebuked thee, sell on me. psalm. 69. Roma. 4.
What so ever things are written aforetyme, they are written for our learning,
that thorough patience and comfort of the scriptures we might have hope. The
god of hope, patience and consolation, fill us with all joy and peace in
beleuynge, that we may be rich in hope, through the power of the holy ghost,
Leuit. 19.
and be like minded one toward another after the ensaumple of Christ: that we
al together agreeyng in unity, may with one mouth, praise God, the father of
our lord Jesus. Amen.

The God of peace, tread Satan shortelye under our feet. Roma. 6.


FINIS.
Fautes escaped in pryntyng.
In the leaf of A. the.xii. page, the.xi. line, of the Queens epistle, for
into, read unto. In the leaf of B. the iii. page the xvii. line, or, to
much. In the leaf of B. the iii. page. the.xx. line, read for restranitie,
restraint. In the leaf of, D. the.x. page, the.xv. line, for his paths, read
bypathes. In the leaf of D. the.xi. page, the.ix. line, much to much. And in
the xxv. line, for wrath, read wroth. In the leaf of D. the xiiii. page, the
vii line, for co, read to. In the leaf of d. the xv, page, ye xxii. line for all as, read as all. Note also, the x. page, of F the iii. line for in this
manner, read, he teaches us in this manner. In the leaf of G. the v. page, the
^. live for confession, read profession. In the leaf of G. the xv. page, the
xxiii line, for thy read the. In the leaf of H. the xii. page, the xxv. line,
the (...) or, is to much And in the xi. line before, in the same for if, read,
that. In the leaf of L. the iii. page, the.xix. line, for he to his elect,
read he has to his elect. In the leaf of N. the 14. page ye.v. line for a
glorious, read glorious.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henrye Sutton, at the costs and charges of Myghell
Lobley and Ihon Waley. The.vii. day of May, in the year of our Lord a
thousand. v. hundred and syxtye.

And also perused and allowed according to the Queens majesty's injunctions.


