A Dialogue against the Tyranny of the Papists.

Translated out of Latin, into English. by E. C.

17. Septembris. 1562.

VV. S.

A Dialogue against the Tyranny of the Papists.
The speakers names.
Aul^s Cecinna. Cneus Heluidius.
Cecin. How goes the woorlde Heluidius? al well? why are you thus sad and
pensive?


Heluidius I do well enough (I thank God) my self Cecinna, Marye in these so
lamentable times, wherein Satan so rages, and his Ministers bestirre them with
fire and sword, most pitifully tormenting Christ in his poor members,
spoilinge and murtheringe them by all means most cruelly, how can any good man
be either pleasant or merry?


Cecin It is very true that you say, notwithstanding we must have pacience^
^ithall. For almighty God will wh^ (...) sees his time, succoure his afflicted
people, and overthrow with the breath of his mouth, the Trowpes and bands of
our enemies, be they never ^tragious or many in number.


Heluid. God will assist in very deed those that be his, and both has already
done it, and does it daily. How be it he does not always give them the
victory. King Pharao, he held the Israelites long in captiuitye: The
Philistines vanquished them often in battle: Nabuchodonosor banished them out
of their Country: And Antiochus slew the people of god most lamentablye in the
holy Temple, offering them up even upon the very aulters for a sacrifice to
their Idols. Even as therefore by reason of this destruction of Gods people, and
decay of all good and godly things, Moses, Samuel, Tobias, Mathathias, and a
number of other good men made continual moan and lamentacion: So were it very
hard for us, seeing so many most constant men of god, partly in great hazard
and danger, and part most miserablye wounded, lifting their hands up to the
heavens: Not to have our hearts dieplie perced therwithall, and to sighe and
groan to our selfs for their so great calamities. Which as we do now but
only hear of, so may we perhaps feel them ere it be long our selves. You
are not ignorant, how that we are but very lately by the special goodness
of God, crept out of the like miseries, the burnt bones of our own people
even smoking well nere to this day. Wherefore seeing our enemies, and those so
nighe, so cruel, and so bloody, do begin as you would say to thunder and
lighten a fresh, I can not but tremble and quake for fear. For how will they
spoil other Nations trow you, that so willingly spill their own peoples
blood?


Cecin. Your talk I wot nere how, begins to make me very much afraid also,
it is so fearful and terrible. But I pray you tell me: Do the papists use
such cruelty still in France?


Heluid. Yea truly, in so much as their violence and tirannie does daily
increase more and more. And hereof first and foremost may the Town of Wassy
be a The ^a ter at (...)
witness. Wherethorowe as the Duke of Guise passed with certain bands of armed
men, finding the people serving of God with psalms and hi^es: He commanded
his souldiars to set upon the sely unarmed creatures, who wounded and slew the
poor innocents, even in the midst of their prayers. Hereof may also be a
witness, that same cruel, yea that horrible, and bloudye decree, which all ages
shall speak of and hate, the remembrance whereof al our posterity, ^e Edict
^clamed (...) last.
shall detest and abhor. For it is a horrible and strange kind of crueltye
to take those that be quiet and peceable citizins, and without cause,
complaint, or yet suspicion of crime, to hale and drag them up and down the
street, to stab them through with their weapons, to drown them in the rivers,
and so to put them to most terrible execution, even only for y^ they are
thought to be professors of the gospel. The for^e of this most monstrous edict,
diverse god ly citizins of Paris felt, and a number of Paris. (...).
other good people that dwelt there about, which were most shamefully mur
thered. The river of Seyne felt it also, ^brued with y^ blood of the dead that
swam up and down the chanel, and were carried with the stream from the town of
Seyne, to the City of Paris. And no Town ^yne. (...) ^ecourt.
less did the Captain of Abbeville feel the same of late, whom, together with
his Son, and certain other Noblemen of his family, these fierce and wicked
blood suckers by pretense of the said cruel edict, mangled and murdered
contrary to all right and equitye: Because this worthy Gentilman, a stout and
worthy gentilman in deed, spoke somewhat boldly and frankly, of an unity and
agreement to be concluded betwirt them.

Besides this, Rhoane, that famous and florishinge City can witness the Rhoan^
same: Where the forte that was thon^ly defense of the City was continually
shaken with the roaring shot of y^ Cannon, the Country about daily spoiled
with Trowpes of horsemen, and the cityzens lay round about miserably slain in
defending their Country. Neither had this most worthy City stood till this
day, ne had* there been any living creature left therein alive, unless
almightye God taking pity upon the besieged and distressed* people, had
through the singular manhood of the Citizins and Towns men, put the Daumale
to the foil, that lay batteringe the walls, compellinge him also at length
for all his wrath and fury to depart with great dishonor. But what talk I of
the Duke Dawmale alone? Let the rest of the princes and noble men be cowpled
with him, which be not only fellows and cooperteners of his factyon, but also
chyefe Authoures and captains of this cruelty, the Duke of Guise I mean, the
Constable and the Mareshall Saint Andrew: who marchinge to the Town of Bloys
with ^oys.
most terrible force of War, full of threats, and gaping after blood, met
before they came to the gates, a pitiful company of the Towns men fallinge
down upon their knees before them, offering them the keys of their gates,
committinge them selves and all that they had, into their hands, criynge to
them for morcye, and humblye entreating them to spare their own, and the rest
of the Citizins lives. How be it these proud and stately Lords, besides
that, they refused to hear the request of this meek and miserable multitude,
added also to their bloody purpose most spiteful and bitter words: Telling
them that their Canons should serve instead of keys, and with their swords,
would make their entrye into the town. Wherein they deceived them never a whit,
for both they bet down their walls with their artillerye, and put the towns
men of al sorts some, to most cruel and sudden death, being giltye of no
offense at all, but only for that they had embraced that form of religion
which was before establyshed by a solemn Edict and decree made in the month
of January last past.

And now to return again to the Duke Daumale, whose madness passes all
measure, when as the naked and innocent inhabitauntes of Pont Du Mer, laying
away their weapons, fell Pont du (...)
flat down before him, askinge pardon, requesting mercy, and offering him the
keys of their town: He like a famished and hungry wolf, rushing in amongst
the poor seely sheep, first and foremost not without great impiety,
commanded their chief preacher or Minister to be apprehended and hanged, and
afterward, without any respect either of kind, or of age, slew most
shamefullye and wickedlye, the rest of the common people.

The Mareshall Saint Andrew following the crueltye of Thaumale, thinking his
confederates had not spilt blood inoughe at Poityers, highinge him thither
in great post, with sword, shot, and sundry other torments, oppressed and
destroyed a sely company of innocent women, and young folk, that had escaped
the hands of the foremer butchers (who belike had had their fill of them
before, or else were ouerweried with to much bloodshed): Whose act was so much
more detestable then the rest, because not contented with the crueltye of
others, he heaped mischief upon myschyefe, and blood upon blood.

There is another act committed besides this, against al order, nature, law
and humanity: whereof albeit I name not the Aucthor, yet is it true: yea, alas
to true, and so shameful a matter, as of the same Countreimen, it is scant to
be beleaued. For when as the Count Palatine, one of the Princes of the Empire,
had delivered to one of the Gentlemen of his Court certain packettes of
letters, to carye to the Prince of (...), there was laid for him by the way a
Popish murderer, that intercepted the Messenger, ^lew him, took his letters
from him, and brought them to the Guise, and his accomplices. Lo in one offense
how many enormityes? in one wickedness, how many detestable crueltyes? But
here an end of these particular calamities, for these same men daily
offend more and more and ware more cruel, yea, and so cruel (all the whole
company of them) as a man can scarce imagine.


Cecin. These things be horrible if so be they be true. The great Turk him
self could not deal in these matters more cruelly.


Heluid Nay if al things be dulye considered, this furye ercedes the rage and
broils of all times. At the beginning of the common wealth of Room, it was
a very lamentable season to see to, when as the Comminalty severed from the
Nobility, by reason of sundry great wrongs received at their hands, assembled
themselves in Mount Auentine: Notwithstanding, they bridled them selves so in
that rage, that they used no force of weapon against their aduersari es. Mary
now when the common wealth was grown to more perfection and riches, the mal^e
of the people growinge also greater, there followed very sore dyspleasures
between sundry sorts of the Citizins. Amongst the which if you consider the
horrible Stir of the Triumuiri, ye shall not find it was so full of
crueltye, as this present broyle A state in (...) commen (...) wealth w^ in
three (...) have equ^ aucthorit^ together.
of the Papists is. For in that desolation of the Common wealth, the nobles
only were invaded, neither was there any touchid but they, and they alone were
held and taken as condemned persons. But this faction of the Papists runs
hedlong upon al sorts of men, neither respecting the kind nor age of any, nor
yet waiyng either the deserts or virtues of any: But do condemn all to
death, that according to the rule of the gospel, do truly and sincerely
worship God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.

Greece when as it had been a long time tossed and turmoiled with most cruel
Greece.
dissentions, was content at last to let go and forget al wrongs, which was
both an wholesome medicine for their sick minds, and also a good mean to
redress all their civil hurly burlyes. The Popish prelates, they will neither
give nor take any other condicio^s of concord and unity, but that the Idol of
Room may still be adored and kneeled to, and that all other powers, states and
causes, finallye all manner of holy or prophaine matters, may be under his
authority and jurisdiction. The Turk albeit he makes Christian men his
slaves and bondemen, yet suffers he them to live after their own religion.
But the professors of the gospel, they must either worship the great God of
Room without exception, or else they must have their throtes cut, and leese
their life's.


Cecin. These things be to true, that you talk of. And it has often ben my
chance to muse very much, how it comes to pass, that this opinion is so
surely settled, and almost grounded in the peoples minds, that there ought to
be had so great and so due reverence to the B. of Room, as it were to an other
God in earth: that each word that comes out of his mouth, should be taken
for an Oracle: And finallye that all manner of meetings together and
Councelles, be they never so solemn and general, should be inferior and
subject to his authority.


Heluid. There may be hereof alleged many and sundry causes, but the chiefest
of them all and of greatest force is Evil Custom.

Which Cipriane does very aptelye term A Contynuance of Error. It is this
same continuance of Error O Cecinna which having ones been planted by
custom, and in process of years taken root, does exercise great Tirannye in
men's minds, and can hardly of a long season be forgotten. Moreover this same
great Potentate of Room, has ordered the matter so, that he has brought and
conveyed unto him self the fruytes, profittes, dignities, prefermentes and
promotions of all quarters of the world, which he does very liberallye dispose
among his adherentes, where withal they being so largely rewarded and
benefited, can not but honor so good a benefactour, hang al together on his
sleeue, cleave to him like burres, and rather he content to loose their life's,
then forgo so great commodities: There may be added hereunto a third cause
(which is also very much material) how that the Sea of Room gives out great
store of pardons, and grants almost a free liberty both to say and do all
manner of evil: and as for men's manners there is small head or regard taken
thereto. But if there chance any fault or trespass to be committed, money will
strayte heal all the matter, and under Benedicite thoffender shall be absolved.
Wherefore, where forgeuenes of sins may so easily be procured, and where be so
liberal rewards stirring for the pleasures received, it is no marvel at
all, though there be both a great number of ambitious and covetous men abroad
in the world, and also as great routes and swarms of wicked offenders, that be
nothing ashamed of their evil doings, whereof they look for little or no
punishment at al, and from whence they can as often as they lust, be so easily
quit and discharged.


Cecin. Your talk seems unto me very probable. How be it the Popish
propsters as you know, make their reckeninge from Peter, and they do derive a
certain continuance of their religion from the ancient sea of the Bishops of
Rome, which they have also at length gotten confirmed with the opinions of
certain deuines: and therefore suppose it not lawful to swerve fro a truth
that is so old, so manifest and so well proved with the Testimonies of so
great clerks.


Heluid. These things that you talk of they brag in deed, and they be the
chiefest grou^des they allege The Pap^ chief gro^
to establish their popish aurthoritie upon. Wherefore, although I have no
leisure to stand long upon every point, yet will we lightly run them over,
unless you be other wise dysposed.


Cecin. Nay verelye, it is the thing I most desire, neither like I any thing
better, then this kind of discourse and communycation.


Heluid. First of all this same Monarchy, or rather. Hierarchye, The goue meant
of a Priest.
if it took: beginning of Peter, it must needs have been ones settled in his
person. Let us therefore resort to the holy Scriptures, and by them examine
Peter's aucthority. S. Paul calls him as he does also James and John, a pillar
of the Church. And as for the rest of his fellow Apostles, they ascribe unto
him no manner of special name or prerogative above the rest. Yea, but (say
they) our Lord Jesus Christ used him very lovingly and familiarly. I grant
that, but so as he did the like to James, and much more to John. And in
planting of the Church (which point the Romish Doctors take to be their
chief hold) Peter is for no other cause specially and by name spoken to, but
for that he alone in the name of his fellows had made answer to that our
Savior demanded of all the rest of thapostles as well as of him. And as for
the rest of our Saviors talk concerning the Rock, where against the gates of
hell should not prevail, it proves no special preemynence to be in Peter
more then in the rest, but betokens the public profession of our faith that
should be in the Church of Christ. Which opinion and interpretacyon the
ancient Fathers have left to us in writing. And if so be it were not true,
our most loving savior would not in the self same communication, have so
sharplye rebuked Peter calling him Satan, and reproving his ignorance in the
Scriptures. But why do we argue in a matter that is out of all doubt? how
often is it repeated in holy writ, that God has no respect of persons? but
if this oppinion of the Romish Deuynes be allowed, not only Peter should be
highly aduau^ced above al his fellows, but also he alone should have a
celestial prerogative of gods power, an invincible faith and an authority
not to be spoken against. Peter's companions never acknowledged this great
authority.

Peter him self, never challenged so strange a dignitye. Paul commending unto
our prayers, Christian magistrates, places first Kings, and then Rulers.
Peter framing our life with wholesome doctrine, wills us first, to fear god,
and next him honor the king. Why names not he him self who was already
vested in his dignity? Why speaks not he of his successors, the Bisshoppes
of Room? For if he should so have done, it could have seemed no pride in him,
for so much as he might do it, by the institucion and ordinance of our
savior. But of this extraordinary jurisdiction, was no mention made in the
beginning of the primative Church. Likewise, not a word spoken of it a long
time after. For at those days ye Emperors of Room shrewdly persecuted the
church of Christ, and also some of the Bisshops of Room they slew, who were in
that time chief spectacles of godliness, and occupied in all holy exercises, and
besides valiant witnesses of the death and resurrection of our savior Jesus
Christ. For the church of Room had not such an hard hap as to have no
commendable Bishops in it, among whom we confess some of them in deed, of
ancient time, were excellent, and singular fathers. And as long as that
simple and innocent age endured with out pride, and ambition, so long was that
Popish government unknown, so long the Bishop of Room coueted no
especial dignity above the rest, except perhaps because he was an example of
the flock, he sought to win the crown of Martyrdom from them. Whereof Gregory
may be a very good witness, who pronounces that Bishop of Room accursed, who
will take upon him to be called the universal prelate of the whole church. Such
was ye modesty of men in those days. Mary by process of time vice grew, and
when as by the providence of god, ye Emperors of Rome were now quiet and well
pacified, there was not only peace planted in ye church, but also it was
endowed with many goodly and large possessions. Since that time the bishops of
Room (as it commonly comes to pass,) corrupted with idleness, and abundance
of all things, forgot by little and little, the discipline and frugalitye of
their former life, and at last degenerated into this monstrous tyranny. By
mean whereof they do not only make ye whole world to quake for fear of them,
but also sell heaven and hell at their own pleasure and disposition. And now
when their po^pe and excess grew to the highest degree it could come to,
there arose a number of feed men, and flatterers, who having tasted of y^
golden streams that issued from ye precious sea of Room, being dronken
therewith, built this popish kingdom for ye false successors of Peter. Herupon
came this notable succession founded with possessions and riches, enlarged with
pride and ambition, continued with terror and tirannye, not once named in holy
scripture, not known to Peter, nor understood in those ancient times. Hereof
sprange those monstrous maxims of the Popes bond men. That the Pope can not
err, that the Pope is above a Counsel, that the Pope does keep all the
decrees of the law closse vvythin his bosom, (...) mon^ous opi^ons of the
^pistes.
that the Pope if he dravve [I can not tell how many thousandes] to hell, he
is not therein to be reproved, and last of all that all men must be judged by
the Pope, and he judged of no man. To these strange sayings and opinions, were
applied those most licentious keys, under color whereof, they make must wicked
sales of pardons and bulls, not with out great injury to ye most precious blood
of our savior shed upon y^ cross, wherewt only we are washed from the
filthiness of our sins, most shamefullye against holy scripture, by which we
are prohibi ted to make any marchaundise in matters of religion, and most
absurdly against al reason. For how can man that is but earth and ashes for
mede, pardon offenses, I cannot tell of how many years to come? God himself
gives us not so great hope, no not of his own mercy.

Upon the neck of this is heaped another most sharp scourge of godly
consciences, that is, thadministracion of common prayer, and holy sacraments,
in a tongue unknown, contrary to y^ manifest doctrine of the holy ghost,
contrary to the sincere custom of the prymatyue Church, against the souls
health of those that do pray, and quyte against the nature and ordinance of
prayer, in which thing alone as in a most deep tomb and Sepulcher, the hole
sense and savor of al our religion, and even as y^ would say the soul of all
godliness lies hid. The time would fa^le me if I should recite the residue of
all the detestable abuses of the Popish kingdom, al which things, yet custom
has made so familier, unto the unskillful common people, that scarce, (Or not
at all) they can be pulled from them. But even in like manner as they whose eyes
be heavy laden with sleep, are loathe to be raised, and would not by their
wills look up to the light, even so, a great part of Christ's Church, having
slumbred and slept as it were by the means of Popy seed in the domme dregs
and traditions of the Romish Ceremonies, do as yet rout in darkness, and when as
the clear light of the Gospel is offered to them they lepe back in an anger,
yea, and are ready to fight for the matter to, rather the^ they would be drawn
out of those mistye caves and dongeons. And now that god y^ father of all
mercy, has raised up in this our time a certain godly and devout company of
christian people, who having respect unto y^ primative church i which christ
himself lived with his Apostles, desire to call home again ye pure worshipping of
god, founded in the gospel, used of ancient time, and now many years omitted,
this Romish hell hou^d fares as he were wood, whetting his teeth, casting out
his thick smoky threatenings, shaking his fire brandes, yea kicking and
spurning on every side, y^ he might not be co^struined to go out of his murk
den, and maugre his head, behold the new light of the Gospel. But god shall
raise up an Hercules, who shall pull this Cacus ^uge Gi^ whom ^rcules slew
Italy.
fatted and pampred with the blood of innocents, out of his nest, draw he
never so far backewarde, strive he and struggle he never so much, unless he
spedelye (which we look not for) shall correct and amend him self.


Cecin. There is very small hope of his amendme^t hitherto showed: In so much as
his adherentes at this present, be very sore bent against the light of y^
gospel, using such cruelty, as we can not remember y^ like. For before this time
they were of the basest sort whom they meddled withal, pullinge up here and
there one for the most part. Again they proceaded, against those that were
accused by a certain ordinary cours^ of the Popes law: Now whole towns, yea,
whole cities, and almost whole kingdoms be condemned. The field is the place
of judgment, the judge is the sword or the halter. The laws be y^ proud
presumpteous commandments of the Popish potestates: nothing is done by law,
nothing is done by order, they proceed only by violence. Wherefore either their
ti ranny must be out of hand repressed, or else the Gospel must needs
quail.


H^l. Nay sure, unless we take the better head, y^ gospel will be quite
overthrown and al y^ professors thereof utterly perish. For since ye Devil has
fastened so depely, even in the bottom and root of the popish minds, the
hatred of true religion, y^ his ministers ca^ find in their hearts, to beseage
their own Cities, to slay their own Citizins, to wou^d their own bowels, to be
cruel upon their own blood, and (to be short) to bring in foreign power and
aid to overthrow their own native Country: what trow you will they do to
other, which tear their own in pieces? What outrages will they make in strange
lands, who so spoil and waste their own country?


Cecin. What then is best to be done? or what shall be the end of these miseries?


Heluid. we must refer thend to God, who will maintain his own quarrel
himself, and defend his own servants, though all the world, and all the devils
in hell say* nay to it. In the mean time we must look y^ we lay good
foundations, and must dili gently way these matters. Let us then before al
things call upon god the father, and his Christ our savior. Let us lift up our
hands to heaven, Innocent hands I mean, not bloody, pure hands, not
corrupted, lowly, not proud, meke, not cruel, and from thence let us crave
aid, where the prayers of the just be always auaylable. Moreover since that
the kingdom of Antichrist does thus conspire against the trothe of Christ's
religion, let us likewise agree amongst our selves to defend the gospel, not
to provoke, but to resist, not to bring iniurye in, but to drive it away, not
to offend any other man's estate, but to preserve our own, to preserve our
own lives, and the lives of our Wives and children. For both nature
commands and all law, both of God and manne, permits, to resist open
violence. Mattathias, that famous and worthy Captain, Ma^tathy
when Antiochus Soldiers fierslye invaded him, and profaned al holy things,
being required to taste swines flesh, he put on armor, (and that upon the
Sabbath day) transgressinge one commandment, to the intent he might keep the
rest. And the fathers example followed his Son Judas Machabeus. Judas Ma
chabeu^.
Since the y^ most noble famely had rather dye then eat the flesh of Swine, how
fervently ought we to be bent to maintain and defend the pure light of the
Gospel, wherein god the father, with our savior Jesus Christ is so lively
portiered and e^pressed that we have nothing else to quiet our consciences
withal? The holy ghost in the gospel aloweth wages to Souldiars, and also
gives precepts how they should live. And if so be any war at al be lawful,
surely that is lawful, wherein thou do not assault an other man's life, but
defendest thine own, thou do not spoil other men's goods, but preseruest
thine own. Thou do not seek a kingdom or dominion, but to serve god and thy
conscience wherein there is meant, no revenge, but necessity obeyed. For war is
not to be taken in hand or al lowed, but when there can be found none other
remedy else: especially, against a lawful maiestrate, whom y^ holy ghost has
appointed to be had in such estimation, y^ he ought no ways to be touched, or
misused. Wherefore my talk tends nothing to him, but to y^ extraordinary
vprores of y^ Popes warriers: whose gre dye appetites if by any lawful means
they could be pacified, I would prefer a hard peace before a just war: But
sinc^ they have no respect to god, non to their brethren and citizins, none to
their own na tiue country, if serving a foreign priest, they will without y^ will
of their prince, and eue^ against a law oppress al* with tyranny, if none can be
in rest for them unless he first become wicked, if we must needs either be
overthrown and trodden under foot of our enemies, or else setle our selves to
defend: I se no cause why in so unnatural, so cruel, so manifest a violence, al
honest means are not left unto us, to provide for our safety. For why should
not necessitye prevail as much with us to defend our life, as their unlawful
violence prevails with them to overthrow our estate? And if we be in fault
that dryne away this tyranny from our heads, how horrible is their myschiefe,
that persecute our life with fire and swoorde? We must therefore beware and
take great h^ede, sithe our adversaries be so subtle and wilye, so cruellye
and myscheuouslye minded, so mighty and strong on every side.

Their atttemptes must be stayed, and prevented in time. For if France be in
this heat, the Realms that be nere about cannot long be in peace. Let us then
ass^mble our selves together, to quench this common fire: with which, if
France shall once burn and flame, so many Christian Nations shall be in hazard
of like destruction, as Antichrist can anoy with all his members.

(Thou chieflye O England) look about thee, and take dilygent heed, Engla^
for besides the common quarrel of Relygion, thou have certain Popysh
Princes, dwellinge at the next door to thee, that be even sworn and fully
bent to do thee a mischief: who before this time, when as they were not in
armor, went about (as much as in them lay) to spoil and bereue thy most
excellent queen of her lawefull Crown and Diadem. The Q nes man
They y^ devised such iniuryes in peace, what will they do in war, we must
stand stoutly to our cause, we must forsee, al things diligently, lest this
plage fall upon us, before we know from whence it comes. Where there is
least fear, there the Enemy does most anoy, specially being so heinous, so
craf ty, and deadly an enemy. Therefore it is more wisdom, to fear, then to
live in hope, for fear increases head taking, but hope causes us to be
negligent.


Cecin. You do very well require a care in this matter y^ only thing that is
most precious in all worldly affairs without which no notable exployt was ever
done worthy commendation. The gentiles in the old time honored the same as a
stay and Buttresse of their whole life. The holy Scripture does detest that
person (who ever he be) that is negligent, and slow in the works of the
Lord. The Author and penalty of which curse, if miserable mortal men would
inwardly and diligently ponder, they would lay aside all vain desires, they
would cast away the works of darkness, and would be enflamed with the heat of
godliness, in such sort, as neither fire nor famine, nor sword, nor any
violence from Hell or heaven may hale or draw them away from the love of god.
So fervent was Paul that elect and chosen Uessell of God. So earnest was David
the king and Prophet. Who professes hatred against the enemies of God. So
zealous was Ieremye, who couched in a deep dongeon, and afflicted with most
bitter torments, did Thunder out his sayings and prophecies against the
frowardnes and ignorance of the people. But we which would seem to worship and
reverence the restored truth of the Gospel, we do it so faintly and coldly,
that it had been much better for us never to have known so divine and reverent
treasures, then suffer theyn^ so shamefullye to be taken from us.


Heluid. You iustlye complain of this matter, and surely it is a heavy case.
It is to much rest and ease in deed that has made us so negligent, and
recheles. Now God gives us these troublesome seasons to stir up our flouth,
to wake us out of our sleep, to whet our wits, and to make us more diligent. It
is time therefore to rise up from ^eepe, it is time for us to play the men,
yea it is high time for us to remove by commen advise, the commen disturbers of
all godliness, about which matter, that we may use such courage of mind, and
cherefulnes of heart, as the weightynesse of the cause requires, two things
especially ought to be consyred of us: The first and the chiefest is, that it
is gods quarrel which we take now in hand, by whom we live, move, and have
our being. And seeing by his abou^dant goodness and mercy, we are come to this
estate wherein we now stand, let us restore to him again all that we have, sith
we received it of him, when he demau^des it. Of him only, and alone, comes
whatsoever we have, had, or may have. To this eternal, terrible and
almightye God, let us consecrate the temples of our minds, and dedicate the
tabernacles of our bodies, and let us go with a sure confidence of mind (if
need be,) even to death: for the honor of him who sent us, his only begotten
son Jesus Christ, to die for us, to thynte^t he might make us a way to
everlasting life. And in this has the holy ghost decreed to consyste
eternal life, truly to know God, and whom he sent Jesus Christ.

To the end therefore that we may keep purelye and sincerely this profession of
Gods holy name, and power, there is no labor to be forsaken, no peril to be
shonned: For if al things, which we would even wish and devise, were heaped
upon us, if our soul perish, there is no hope nor comfort remaininge.

Therefore let us either clerelye refuse the name of Christians, or else let us
for y^ glory of Christ, adventure any manner of thing, how difficult so ever it
seems to be: yea what e^tremity so ever is offered unto us, let us arm our
selves patiently to endure it. For Christ will forsake us in heaven if we
forsake him in earth. When after this sort we have lift up our minds to
heaven, and joined our selfs with God, then let us come down again to the
earth, and there let us look about us, what kind of men they be, with who^ we be
at variance, what they te^d to, what mark they shote at, and what end they
would have of their matters: And if we list to look so far back as ma^s
remembrance is well able to reach to, we shall find them a cruel and bloody
brood, like unto their Graunde and great Graundefathers, who have always
gone about to scatter and spoil the meek and innocente flock of Christ.
The Devil has been a murderer from the beginning both him self, and also
sturred up Caine in the first creation of the world to kill his brother Abell,
making sacrifice to God, and being holilye occupied. The ancient Prophets
when they lived the best and quietest life that might be, and took upon them
none other charge, but only to declare the will of god unto his people, were
afflycted with all kind of spite and punishment. Our Lord Jesus Christ living
a most peaseable life, and entermedling with nothing, but with the sincere
worshippinge of God his father, was most shamefully railed upon, was most
cruelly torn with all kinds of torments, and last of all nailed upon the
Cross. The disciples followed their masters steps, being like both in life,
and not much unlike in death. The ancient Martirs that did succeed them, when
as even their adversaries bare witness of their virtue and innocence, and in
this thing only reproved them, that they risinge betimes in the morninge,
worshipped in great assemblies a certain God of theirs, and song Psalms to
him, yet in this tranquillity and synceritie of life, could they not escape the
torments of Heathen Tyrauntes. The same state stand we now in at this day,
wherein God having reserved to himself a certain godly sort of people, that
refuse to fall down before the Romish Baall, living according to the lore of
Christ, and his Apostles, laying hands upon no man, troublesome to none, nor
attemptinge any thing sediciouslye against any person, but do both give them
selfs to the true worshipping of god, and do exhort also their brethren to the
like unity and concord in Christ, void of all conte^cion, free from al force
and violence, and continual mouers of the people in their sermons to patience
and quietness: Yet this Romish Haman and tyrant, because he sees himself not
crowched and kneled to, he commaundes not only gallows to be set up for the
poor Mardocheans, the most pacient and innocent servants of god, but also
murthereth them with swords, strangles them with halters, whirles them upon
wheels, and broils them in the fire. So as if the Tyranny of all times and
ages were well wayed and considered, it can not be compared with this most
horrible crueltye, that these Romish Tetrarches have used toward this godly
people of Christ. For the etrarch is ^ler of a ^arte of a ^me.
heathen persecuted that they knew not, but the Papists, wittinglye, and
willingly, do tear and rent in pieces Jesus Christ in his miserable members,
whom with mouth they profess as well as we. The heathen moreover contended
them selfs with taking away the life's of Christian men (for we read not, that
either Nero or Maxentius, went any farther.) But the crueltye of this our
Romish Nero, (far passing Maxentius and the madness of all the tyranntes of the
world) is such, that it extends even to the ashes of men, disquietinge their
dead carcasses, that have of long time been buried in the earth, and (as much
as lies in him) suffering them never to dye. O barbarous brutishnes of this
proud purpled prelate. O monstrous usurpers upon Peter. O most cruel and bloody
seat. And shall we now compassed about with such enemies, wink at the matter*
Plounged in such perilles, shall we slumber still as we do? So malicious foes
thundering about us on every side, with threatninges and sword, shall we lie still
and hold our peace? Who shall take our parts if we help not our selves? If
each manne particularlye refuse to fight, we shall be ouerco^med all the sort of
us together. If we get us not out of our doors the rather, we shall every
mothers son of us be slain at home in our own country, yea in our own
houses, when there shall be none to help us. If we draw back and make
courtesye in this quarrel of Relygion, we shall ere it be long, lose not
only our religion, but forgo all that we have besides. Although we be never
so loath to fight, yet very necessity forces us there to. And the farther we
fly from it, the nearer it commes: Yea, and the closer a man kepes him self
in, the more danger undoubtedly hanges over his head. Wherefore against such
conspiratoures we may lawfully arm our selfs. Uiolence (if need so require)
may be encountered with violence. I mean not, to stand against lawful
Magistrates, (whom I made exception of before) Nor yet for the gospels sake
only, which the providence of God has defended heretofore, and will defend
it hereafter, albeit the Pope bestirre him never so much: But against the
wicked and unjust furles of the Romish rabble, that would overthrow and destroy
us and all ours, without hearing of our cause, and without all law and
aucthoritye.

This quarrel is a common quarrel to us al (my brethren) for as much as we
have all one God our father in heaven, and al one savior Jesus Christ his son.

How be it to thee most peculiarly O noble Germany, ought the praise of the
many.
preservation of the Gospel be given, for as much as thou had specially
the glory of the restoring of it. Gather O daughter Sion thy Systers about
thee, call unto thee thy kinsfolks, which do partly dwell within thy Territory,
and partly border upon thee. The vineyard of the Lord ones purged by thee,
behold the Romish Boar begins a fresh to tread down, and spoil. He
begins fiersly to assail it, vanquishe him therefore in time, calling to
mind, thine old worthy praises, thy forpassed wounds, and the present
danger that hanges over thy head.

When I speak of Germany, I speak of thy great courage and stowtnesse, O
worthy Svvycherlande, whom almightye vvychernde.
God has for a great part of thee made in these last times, a famous witness
and Trompet of Jesus Christ. Let thy end therefore be like thy beginning, and
run fourth thy race boldly which thou haste a great while ago courageouslye
entered into, against this Romyshe Prince of darkness.

Neither must thou O valiant Denmark be unlike thy self, which have by
Denma^
Gods providence been an harbourer of the professoures of the Gospel, so as,
though the devil raued never so much, yet was there always one shepefolde left
for the afflicted and scattered flock of Christ to resort to. Thou therefore
that have been as a man would say an hostess, and an entertayner of gods
people, put away from thee the ennemies of the same, and suffer not the
blessed state of thy Church, that is planted in true godliness, to be defiled
with the Romish dregs.

And thou O Scotland, our own flesh and blood, knyt to us before by nature,
Scotla^
but lyncked now also unto us by the profession of the Gospel, hold thou
also fast the word of God, lately graffed into thee, which will at last
purchase us the salvation of our souls. Thou have a florishinge nobilitye, and
a worthy company besides amongst the rest of the people, the number whereof
God will augment, when it shall please him. With these therefore continue
stronglye in the faith to the end, and fight out lustelye the noble fight
thou have begone, that when thy godly conflict is ended, thou may receive
of thimmortall God an everlasting crown and reward.

And now to come to thee O Swethland, thland^.
although thy kingedome be far distant from us, yet has the bright son and
clear light of the holy scriptures, descending down from above, lightened
thee also with the beams of true godliness. Wherefore if need require, gather
thou thy force also together, and employe all the power and strength thou may
make, to maintain the glory of the majesty of God.

Finallye albeit I name not all, yet do I speak to all those Nations and
countries wherein the Gospel florissheth, and the true service of God has
taken place. Awake my brethren, and consult all of ye together against this
Romish fox. He has laid snares and baytes to hurt and harm your commonweals: He seeks all the corners he may, to enter into you: He thyrsteth
after your blood, and would (if he wist how) root quite out of the earth,
both your name, and al manner of remembrance of you. Whereunto he has many
assistauntes, and also great aides and succoures of vile and naughtye men. And
as for your selfs, next unto God, ye have this one only refuge left you, or
else none at all. Which is, that ye love together, agree together, hold and
take part together. Each of your Nations severed one from another, the Romish
force may easilye overthrow, but joined all surely together, it can never
hurt. Our life brethren, though it be an hundred year long, is in deed but a
short and a miserable time, as Jacob witnesses of him self, and this same
being so uncertain and so quickly run out, to how many perilles of fortune
besides, is it subject? with how many dangerous diseases also is it wasted?
Let us therefore take bold and stout stomachs unto us, aduauncynge our
selves, and lyftynge up our hearts unto heaven. In a good quarrel it is
better to dye manfullye, then to yield cowardlye. And as for the goodness of
the quarrel, what either is, or can be a better quarrel, then that that is
for the defense of virtue, truth, and the Gospel? Or how on the other side, can
there be a worse composition or yelding, then when the truth shall yield to lies,
the light to darkness: and the eternal wisdom of God to men's traditions.

Thus have I communicated with you friend Cecinna all my griefs, and cares, so
far fourth as my business would permit. There is naught remaininge now
behind, but that with most earnest prayers we commit our whole cause unto God,
requiringe him to look fauourablye upon this his troubled and afflicted
Church, hallowed with the precious blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, that
put their trust and confydence in him, that live (as nere as man's frailtye
will suffer) according to his laws, that hang altogether upon him, and
finallye do refer them selfs and all that they have wholly to his singular
goodness and mercy.

Arise, O god, and put to flight thine ^rayer.
enemies. They be thine ennemies, and thine is the quarrel that we have in
hand. It is for thy glory that we fight, it is thy majesty that our
adversaries assail, and the honor of thy Godhead that they impech. And though
they pretend never so much the name of christ, it is the Sea of Room whereunto
they would bring and convey all manner of honor and reverence due to thy holy
name. We might easily be at one with them, if we would suffer thy people to be
plucked away from thy Gospel, and to be fast bound to their fond and wicked
traditions: winking also besides at the great slaughter of thy servants. In
fine if we would forsake the true sound, sincere, and Apostolic church, and
would join our selves to this same fond, feigned and counterfeit vysarr of
the Romish church, alto corrupted with supersticion, and defiled with most
foul errors. But O most louinge Savior, we can not depart from thee, nor
never shall. Thou art Jesus Christ, the son of god the father, having the
words of eternal life, which we have believed. We be thy sheep, and therefore
we hear thy voice. Thou art the true and only pastor of our souls. And
therefore we acknowledge thee only, as for that same hired shepehard of Rome,
we can not skill of him, but do rather hate him as a thief and a murderer,
because he entered not in by the door, but thrust him self in a by way. This
cruel and bloudye wolf raungeth up and down spoiling thy flock. Keep him
of O God, repress his furye, strain his jaws, with bit and bridle, and
turn away at length his mischeuous bands of souldiars from cutting our
throtes. Which do nothing else but lie gaping to devour us, and seek by all
means they can, to suck the blood of thy Lambs. O father, help thy
children. O Lord assist thy servants, O God aid thy people, and thou O
Savior succoure thy Supplyauntes, and those that call upon thee. For we have
none other that fights for us, but thee only O Lord god, and Jesus Christ
thy son and our redemer, who sits above in heaven on thy right hand in
glory everlasting.


Cecin. You have made Heluidius a very good conclusion. And where I esteamed
you before for your learning and wit, I shall from henceforth love you for
your godliness and religyon. And now let us rise if you please, for I must go
visit a frynd of mine, that lies very sore syck. Hell. And I must to the
Court to talcke with my friend C^.


A Prayer Surge Deus, Dextra, seruos attolle cadentes etc.
VV. S.
O God arise, with thy right hand,
Lift up thy fallinge flock,
The wicked fend, with wrathful mood
Does threate^ sore this stock.
These irksome days, with vprores fierce,
In fearful sort are toste,
With force is virtue rent and torn,
And fury arms an host.
Law oppressed, is laid full low,
And lust for law bears swaye,
And puffed pride, with raging threats
Against the skies does braye:
But we thy ofspringe poor, that care,
Taduaunce Christ's glory due,
That do extol thy blessed name,
With praise and honor true,
Afflicted are full sore, and in
A thousand perilles live,
And bloodye force does on each side,
From place to place, us drive.
Lo, some the strangling rope does kill,
Some, Iron wheles do wrast,
Some are consumde in fierye flames,
Some into floodes are cast,
Here swords, there guns, the tyrants shake,
And force the fearful sound,
By sundry slaughters they make red
With blood, the luke warm ground.
What furye now (O brethren dear)
Does stir, these rancors wood?
From whence proceadth this gredye thirst
And wish to spoil our blood?
One father we have, in heaven all,
One savior and no moo,
One flesh we be, One name we bear,
One faith we have also.
But mothers discord (alas for woo)
Does break the bands of peace,
Out of this spring, these sundry illes,
To flow still do not cease.
The mother, which our god has made ^e Prima^ Church.

In reverence due we have,
Whom christ to him as his dear spouse
To couple did vouchsafe.
Out of whose breasts, the prophets old,
Their words by sucking drue,
Whose infants were thau^cient troop
Of all the fathers true,
This spouse did Christ, with tender love
Bring up, when he was here,
To his disciples, care was left,
Of this his spouse most dear.
Of this mother did witness bear,
Thappostles every one,
And whosoever Martyr was,
In times that now are gone.
The keeper of this spouse remaynth,
The sacred Bible old,
Which without spot, does former faith
In firm estate still hold.
This mother of corruption void,
In godly life did shine
And had respect unto her spouse,
Always and to his line.
Holy, gentle and mild, she was,
A shamefaste faithful wife
And kept her duty still in mind,
And loved up right life.
In alms large, forgeuynge all,
Of truth a perle most pure,
Unmindfull of displeasures past,
But good things noting sure.
And to be short, this mother first,
Of virtue found the vain,
And so she does, a pillar firm,
Of virtues life remain. The R^ Church

The Other Romish stepdame proud
A mothers name has got,
An ouglier monstrous beast then which
The son now sees not.
Putt up with pride, In lust she flows,
And hunteth honors gain:
No care of good, nor fear of God,
There does in her remain,
Smoky words, and shadows vain,
Of things to sale she settes,
No godliness at all she has,
But crafts that money gettes.
Laws she does, to her self appoint,
And break them as she will,
Of gold a greedy gut she is,
And bribes deuoureth still.
Her to adore, she all commaundth,
And flat on ground to fall
Before her fight although they bear,
The Princely mace and Ball.
This misbegotten beast, in blood
Of Saints has great delight,
And does the members wound of God,
With poysond mouth and spyte.
O father dear, drive back this wolf,
Who with embrued Jaws
Does tug and fear, this scattered flock,
And never has full paws.
We follow thee, and eke thy spouse,
All thy precepts we love,
Our hope, and help does ever come,
From thy great Throne above.
O mighty God thy mercy great,
Us simple wretches keep,
Thou art our only shephard chief, and
We thy flock of sheep.
Look down from heaven, disperse y^ rage
Of all these Giantes proud,
For sacrilege is their desire,
Thy temples spoil they have voud.
And although we unworthy be,
Yet worthy Christ behold,
Who with his blood, has washed clean,
Our sores and festers old.
The cruel stepdame frettes, wc troops
Of vices compast round,
And us thy seely sheep she kilth,
No help at all is found.
O God, cast down thine eyes unto
Thy servants wrack not small,
And let the wicked armies force,
In midddes of threats down fall,
Or let thy grace them all forgive,
Their former fault now past,
So that we have (as once we had)
One mother at the last.
And thus of Saul, there shall be Paul,
Thus cruel war shall cease,
And than shall follow, wished rest,
Of joyful quiet peasse.
O that thou would, us worthy think,
Of this league in our days,
O father, O our god, O one
And three, most worthy praise.
FINIS.

