THE Third and last part of Palmerin of England.

Enterlaced with the loves and fortunes of many gallant Knights and Ladies: A
history full of most choice and sweet variety.

Written in Spanish, Italian, and French, and translated into English by A. M.
one of the Messengers of her Majesty's Chamber.

Patere, aut abstine. I live to die. I die to live.

printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for William Leake, at the sign of the Greyhound
in Paul's Churchyard. 1602.

To the right Worshipful, Master John Swynnerton, Esquire: And to the most
virtuous Gentlewoman his wife: the complete issue of their own hearts desires
entirely wished.
THis long labor (right Worshipful, and my most affected) having cost me so
many late and early hours, among other mishaps of much bodily sickness:
being now fully perfected, and past through all contrary oppositions, comes
to kiss the hand of my most gentle Patron, and to honor him with his very
uttermost service. If you find the translation to come short of such absolute
perfection, as a work of so much merit in right might challenge: bury that
blemish in your euer-knowne affable nature, and prize my good will beyond all
other ability, which gladly would attain to higher sufficiency. Again, where
a man is abridged of so necessary a help, as not to have the reperusall of his
own rash-written papers, which an after judgment may easily check and
control: many errors may escape, and gross slyps be committed, all which I
must now bear the burden of, and endure the sentence (as I may) of every
strict censure. But if your Worship countenance my endeavors with your wonted
kindness, and hold them any way worthy your very meanest acceptance: I have
all I desire, and which I will further study to deserve, remaining to you and
yours for ever obliged, and (in what I may) continually to be commanded.

Your Worships poor, yet unfeigned wel-willer. A. Mundy.

To Master John Swynnerton Esquire.
TO thee true friend and favorer of learning,
The foster-father of my mean deserts:
Great Palmerin perfected, now imparts
His worth and mine, to pass by thy discerning.
Spain, Italy and France, have entertainde him,
And made their greatest Peers to write his praises:
But now his native Countries love him raises,
And that high zeal has home to England wainde him.
Long travail rest him of his language quite,
Therefore he is constrainde to speak by me:
This then he says: He only comes to thee,
To intercourse some matter of delight,
Whereof his History affoordeth store:
Then bid him welcome, and he craves no more.
A. Mundy.

Finis.
TO THE TOVVARDLY young Gentleman, Master Henry Swynnerton. AN ODE.
Fair issue of a worthy Sire
(like Rose in bud)
O let thy blood
Taste the true Promethian fire
Of sacred Art: twill bear thee boue thy birth,
So many times is Learning tried from earth.
Thou second Patron of my Muse,
Guild thy brows
With Laurel bows,
Perfection shall be thine to use.
And live a happy heir (being thus inclinde)
To the sweet treasure of thy Fathers mind.
A. Mundy.

FINIS.
To his good friend, Ma. An. Mundy.
IF pure translation reach as high a glory
As best invention: (to denie't were sin)
Then thou (dear friend) in publishing this Story,
Have graced thy self, and thy queint Palmerin,
Thou much by him, he most by thee shall win.
For tho in courtly French he sweetly spoke,
Influent Thuscane, grave Castillian:
A harder labor thou do undertake
Thus to create him a fine Englishman,
Whose Language now dare more then any can.
Nor thou, nor Palmerin in choice do err:
Thou of thy Scholar, he his Schoolemaister.
Tho. Dekker.

FINIS.
To my kind friend, Ma. An. Mundy.
THe sighs of Ladies, and the spleen of Knights,
The force of Magic, and the Map of fate:
Strange Pigmey-singlenes in Giant-fights,
Thy true translation sweetly does relate.
Nor for the fiction is the work less fine:
Fables have pith and moral discipline.
Now Palmerin, in his own language singes,
That (till thy study) maskt in unknown fashion:
Like a fantastic Britain, and hence springs,
The Map of his fair life, to his own Nation.
Translation is a traffic of high price:
It brings all learning in one Paradise.
Io. VVebster.

FINIS.
To his very kind friend, Ma. An. Mundy.
Friend, if thy Book allow me so much grace,
Though no such merit, I must needs confess:
Yet (if thou can) affoorde these lines a place,
More in thy love, then their own worthiness,
Let greater spirits speak by richer pens,
Plain poor affection has as true a tongue:
And though his voice be under other men's,
Yet highest keys have lower noates among.
Of Languages I skill not, whence thy pains,
Has now at length completed Palmerin:
Praise is a true Translatours worthy gains,
T'abridge thee of it then, were half a sin.
Yet no such torture is there (in my mind:)
As when great pains have no reward but wind.
An. Gybson.

FINIS.
The third Book of the two valiant Knights, Palmerin of England, and Don
Florian his brother.
Wherein is likewise discoursed, the hardy attempts of Primaleon the second,
and of many other young Knights, with their strange adventures and wonderful
fortunes.
CHAP. I. How the bodies alive and dead, of the Princes, Dramusiande, and
others, (supposed slain) were conuayed unto the Perilous Isle.
THE wise Aliart, who (giving credit to his foreknowledge, that all the
Princes would miscarie, and the Pagans gaining the victory, should bear the
sway in Constantinople) having made such provision as for the purpose was
convenient, when he noted, that the highest Power would not permit, yt man
should certainly know what was to ensue: comforted himself by some of the
Princes, who being yet alive, (though void of sense or feeling) might yet
recover. And therefore determined, by means of his art and singular
medicines, to give them hope of life: albeit they could not speak one word,
through the extreme loss of their blood, yet by lifting up their eyes, and
gesture of countenance, they seemed to entreat help: which was with such
diligence administered to them, that howsoever their minds were afflicted, yet
their bodies amended. Hereupon his joy exceedingly increased, seeing their
weakness so diminish, and their outward appearance so pleasing: as now he h^ld
no longer doubt of their death, which was verily expected in the end of their
last battle. And as his mind was thus busied about their recovery, he heard
of the ship which brought the dead, wherein was Argentao with heavy
countenance: which was the less to be meruailed at, in regard of the small
comfort there to be expected: and sending to understand some tidings,
suddenly issued forth certain persons in two small boats, crying, good
news, good news. At which noise, Aliart, as one wakened out of sleep, knew
not well what to say, or how to conceive thereof. But being come near this
Ship, he heard them all say, that Dramusiande (who for two days had lien as
dead) was come to himself again, and lying with his eyes wide open, seemed to
request remedy for his wounds.

These tidings were so joyful to them all, especially Aliart, that intending
presently to succor Dramusiande: he entered where the Princes alive were, who
though they spoke not, yet in their trance could they understand what was said
or done to them. My Lords (quoth Aliart) take comfort, for one of your loving
friends, who has heartily bemoned the dead, lives, and hops yet to restore
them, that you may rejoice in their lives so dearly loved of you. But he
would not name Dramusiande, fearing least the weak bodies of the princes, by
such matter of so great and sudden joy, should be the more shaken and
endangered. As he was going to medicine Dramusiande, some of the other persons
turned back, crying: Sir Aliart, succor the lives of these Princes, whom we
suspect for dead, that we loose not all hope, which this good adventure has
persuaded.

Aliart having about him all necessaries, that are required in such an urgent
need, went to Argentaos ship, wherein being entered, he found Dramusiande,
Almaroll, Francian prince of Thessaly, Dragonalte king of Navarre, Don Rosuell,
with Dirdan son to Maiortes, in whom appeared very little show of life. Then
beginning to annoint the^ with a certain unguent, thought powerful enough to
revive their weakened forces: Dramusiande and two of the Princes seemed somewhat
restored. But Almaroll, whose head was in a manner cleft, as one not to be
hoped of by any outward testimony: the other holding him dear in friendship,
could not but show themselves highly contented, to see him raised from death,
the want of whose company might be a hinderance to their health. These
businesses thus proceeding (as in like cases of misery) somewhat
prosperously, the ships being under full sail, attained near to the
Perilous Isle, where none else could discern them but the sage Aliart, who
had covered the^ with a cloud, that they might not be seen by any other:
because the Pagans remaining vict^s (as they thought) might have no power to
violate this royal Signorie, neither that they might extinguish all hope yet
remaining, of preserving the memory of so many wounded Princes. Wherefore
causing the shypps thus to enter the Isle in this cloud, he commanded that
Dramusiande, with the Princes Francian and Dragonalte, should be brought into
the ship, where Primaleon and the rest alive were: but separated them from
the other, because as yet no express sign appeared in the^, whether they
should escape the danger or no: and the rather, that the extreme affliction of
the one, might raise no discomfort in the other. Afterward he appointed, that
the ship which brought the dead, should enter the nearest Bay to the
Fountain where the beasts of metal were, like them which Palmerin slew when
he conquered that Isle: and thence they were carried into a fair Palace, where
they remained til he could give them sufficient burial. All which he did, to
the end, the Ladies (whose husbands were dead) should not offend the living
with their dolorous complaints: intending by little and little to make them
forget their losses, and with patience to bear their ouer-hard fortune.

The ship being thus come into the Bay, immediately the news of their
arrival was known to the Ladies, where-upon, accompanied with the men of the
Isle, they came in great fury running thetherward, each of them thinking to
find her husband alive, not deeming how soon they should rue their mishaps.
When they were come to the ship, Aliart, who best knew the estate of the
wounded Princes: with cheerful countenance met them, and being round
environed with them, taking Gridonia and Flerida each by the hand, said:
Ladies, I am glad of a deceit happening to me in mine own art, which untruly
told me, that all the defenders of the Grecian Empire, should perrish, and the
City of Constantinople be in the enemies possession: but (praised be the
divine bounty) the Pagans are discomfited, and all your Lords in good hope of
life. But thus I would advise, that without any noise, or your disturbance,
they might be brought forth of the Ship, and each one quietly carried to his
Ladies lodging: For this I must tell ye, there is another Ship at hand,
wherein comes Argentao with many other, among whom are they that died before
you were conveyed to this Island.

All the Ladies, between hope and dread, departed thence, each to her Cabinet,
because they would not contrary what Aliart had appointed. Then caused he to be
carried Primaleon to Gridonia, Florendos to Miragarda, Platir to Sidelia, Don
Edward to Flerida, Palmerin to Polinarda, Florian to Leonarda, Berolde,
Gracian, and Dragonalte, severally to their wives: Floraman to a Palace hard
by, and Blandidon to his mother.

And one thing most notable happened, when Palmerin was brought to his Lady,
the love which between them had ever been equal, wrought now a contrary
effect. For Polinarda, seeing her husband not able to stand on his feet, in
great amazement was deprived of her speech: And he that had not the power to
speak a word while he was in the Ship, when he beheld his love thus
ouer-gone with grief, suddenly said: Fear not sweet Lady, for I shall soon
be well.

Aliart gave order to the Princesses, how they should dress and regard their
wounded husbands: then taking with him Cardigea, Bernarda, and Arlencea, he
conducted them to the Ship, where they might look to their Lords, because as
yet they were not in case to be brought out of the Ship. Joy intermedled with
fear, made these Ladies diligent and careful each of her charge: but they
whose husbands were not there present, neither dead nor alive, were wondrously
afflicted with grief, and had not ye place been so enchaunted, that thence
they could not depart, many of them would have adventured by land and sea to
have found them.

But Aliart by fair promises still gave them hope, that shortly they would be
there, all which auailed not: For when they saw so many Princes, which were
the very flower of all the Christian Knights, so dangerously wounded, and in
such peril, they had little hope of their husbands lives. And this was partly
occasioned, by one of the prince Beroldes servants, who coming in the Ship
with Argentao, where the dead were, happened to step in at the same instant,
when Aliart labored to continue the hope of the widdowed Ladies, and said,
that Argentao had brought back the Knights dead.

These words did so dampe and utterly dismay their minds, that being now
more then certain of their several loss, in rage they would presently have
run to seek their dead bodies: But Aliart, who by the skilfulnes of his Art
sought to quallifie their coffeehouse, caused certain spirits speedily to
appear before them, resembling in shape and proportion the known servants to
their Husbands, and they to each Lady delivered such ^nde Embassages, as they
then verily believed their Knights were living.

Thus pacified he this impatient fury of the Ladies, and attended to the
curing of the other Princes: who (with the help of their kind wives company)
began to be indifferently recovered, and now all spoke cheerfully one to
another.

CHAP. II. What Targiana did, after the Camp was dissolved, and the Soldane
Albayzar her husband dead.
TArgiana and the Princess of Armenia, when the third days fight began,
considering yt in so many battles, not any of the Christians (most famous for
arms) were dead: began to persuade themselves, that ye Pagan part would be
overthrown and discomforted, where-vppon they withdrew themselves into a
ship: which from her Father was thither sent well provided, and wherein
likewise were many of her friends, where hearing the success of the
battle, and the death of Albayzar, they lanched out into the maine, attended
on by some other ships, that prepared themselves to return with her toward
Babylon.

But her unkind stars, not satis-fied, first with her scorning by Prince
Florian, then to see her husband baselie led prisoner by Florendos, to present
him before fair Miragarda, (as is declared in the second part of this
history,) and now lastly, that he was slain by the same Florian, of whom she
had been so greatly despised: but that now a new disgrace ^as prepared for
her. Wherefore, contending inwardly with her pride of mind, wherewith her
former conceits had always been led, when she beheld her self to be his
widow, who by so many Trophies had renowned her beauty: she now sat
amazedly mourning at her wonderful misfortunes. Having sailed on ten
leagues and more, they were met with an Army of twenty ships, guided by
Ristorano her Cousin, who (after the decease of his uncle the great Turk)
imagined how he might signorize over that state: and taking this to be his
best way, provided himself of the aforesaid Navy, when coming within an
hundred miles of Constantinople, he made stay, awayting from time to time,
what news he could hear of Albayzar and his power.

When he understood of the Pagans discomfiture, he set on toward their Camp,
to disclose some secrets to the unadvised Albayzar: holding for certainty,
that if he were alive, he was conquered and in great distress: thus with a
gentle gale he sailed onward.

Targianas Navy being surprised, that little expected any such fierce
encounter, and therefore rode on at pleasure: were all boorded and seized on,
ere they had any liberty to prepare themselves for fight. When the prisoners
were brought before him, and that he beheld Targiana among them, he was so
joyful that he could not dissemble his deep contentment. Then began he to
scorn the Lady, casting in her teeth what she had done in favor of the
Christians, how grievously she took it, when Polendos and the rest were her
Fathers prisoners, and how she fled (unrequested) with Florian of the Forest.

The Lady, who was of a great spirit, dismayed not a jot, albeit she was his
prisoner, of whose intent before hand she could easily divine: Wherefore,
she answered him sternly, as one dreadlesse of death, for life (among so
many losses,) was not by her regarded. Hear me (quoth she) Ristorano, I
confess I have favored the Christians, in repaiment of infinite courtesies
from them received, while I remained in Constantinople, not that I did
negligently carry my self, in any thing that might or did displease my
husband. But for I am assured, that in vain I do excuse my self to thee,
were all true wherewith thou could charge me: dispose of me as thou will,
but look for war from the Christians, in regard of the love they bear me.
And though I have been absent from my hereditarie kingdom, (which thou
unjustly seek to usurp) yet have I a child, as is well known through all
Babylon: and those people, who for their love to Albayzar, desire to have his
son their Sovereign, will chastise thee as thou well deseruest.

Ristorano (who willingly would have slain her, the easier to compass what
he desired) considering on her speeches, thought it better to defer her
death, till with more security he might effect it: and seeming to show no
outward sign of fear, with angry looks thus he replied. Thy offenses merrite
more then a common kind of death: wherefore so lightly will I not kill thee,
as I see thou wishest I would.

Heere-vpon, he commanded her with the Armenian Princess, into a private
room of the ship: and he was in a thousand opinions, whether he should
land, and take the City of Constantinople, or turn back into Turkey, and
rule that kingdom. For it was the Cities good hap, that Ristorano, not
hearing what had happened to the principal Knights, who had defended the
City, (as the wise Aliart so procured, who likewise knew of this Armies
making thitherward) but believing that the Christians were conquerers, and
therefore doubtful of his own fortune: durst not go on shore, the rather,
because his own men were more willing to be gone then tarry. So contenting
himself, that Fortune had delivered Targiana into his hand, and hearing by his
spials, that Brundo, son to Don Rosiran de la Bronde, with four thousand
horse, lay before Constantinople, expecting if they durst land or no: fearing
to be taken, with all speed possible, he made have to be gone from thence.

When Targiana beheld her self in his power, whom undoubtedly she knew
intended her death, albeit her mind was invincible, yet sat she very pensive,
not giving a word to the Armenian Princess: who likewise grieved to see her
self a prisoner; nevertheless, because she expected not death, she labored
her thoughts the better for her escape, and turning to Targiana, said.

I remember good Princess, that when I was to depart from Persia, a wise
Enchauntresse named Drusa Velona, gave me a Ring of such virtue: that being
sent in a Letter to any Knight, whom I should make choice of for my defense, he
would presently come to help me. Think then what Knight may be most
convenient for your purpose, and I will write the Letter: for the Ring is of
such force, as to wound the heart of any Knight, and make him love ye, although
before he hated ye never so much.

Targiana right joyful to hear Drusa Velonas name, whose Art had before
auailed her, when she conducted her away, and enchaunted the Princess
Leonarda: began to think with her self, what Knight she should determine on,
to deliver her from the hands of Ristorano. But among so many opinions not
knowing how to resolve, the Navy entered Turkey, where Ristorano secretly
conuayed her to a Castle, accompanying her with certain Matrones, who had
charge that she should send no Letters abroad. For he feared, that if the
Turks should understand, how their Lady Targiana was imprisoned in her own
Kingdom: they would stir in her behalf. This hindered their former
desseignment, of sending the Letter with the Ring: and which by reason of the
company appointed to attend them, could not be performed.

CHAP. III. What they did in Constantinople, after the departure of the sage
Aliart.
VEry sorrowful remained all the Citizens of Constantinople, for the
departure of the sage Aliart, who had carried with him thence the Knights alive
and dead: but because on the contrary side they were somewhat fearful, least
the Pagans should renew their forces, seize on the City, and so all hope be
utterly lost in repossessing it: they began to strengthen their walls, and take
order for matters concerning government. And studying to elect one, who might
be fit for such affairs: there thither came (as has been declared) Brundo
accompanied with four thousand Horse, who slew and put to flight all the
Pagans remaining there-about: wherefore it was generally judged, that God had
sent him to be Governor of their City, until such time as their own Prince
returned. Heere-vpon, by public voice he was elected, to his own no little
contentment: not so much for desire of the government, as that he esteemed it a
matter glorious, to preserve the Grecian Empire to the progeny of Palmerin.
Being thus enstalled as Governor, he gave himself to refortifying the walls,
and leueying sums of money for maintenance of the state. To this end he would
often assemble his forces, and accompanied with people of the City likewise,
would sack and destroy the enemies holds nearest the Sea: for therein were
found abiding many Pagans, which had not as yet been dealt withal by the
people: there likewise were hid great sums of treasure, which brought much
benefit to the weal public, helping well to enritch both the Soldiers and
Citizens. The walls being fully perfected, and the ruined buildings in better
form then before they had been: such diligence on all sides was used, that
within two months, the City was as beautiful as ever it was, so yt nothing
else wanted, but the noble presence of the absent Knights, which made it most
of all to be regarded: but by the assembly of people from all parts, it seemed
to exceed the former populous estimation, and Brundo with soundest justice
still preserved them in peace. Yet often was the breach hereof endangered, by
the Ambassadors from Spain, France, and other Kingdoms, who came to demand
the dead bodies of their Princes, and not finding them there, lamented
exceedingly, because they would not credit what was said, concerning their
carrying thence. But Aliart foreseeing this danger by his Art, suddenly showed
himself amongst the^, when by virtue of his authority and unreprovable
reasons, he urged them to rest satisfied, saying: That he had prepared for
their Lords more honorable burial, then ever could be bestowed on Princes:
even as the wise Vrganda, who in the time of Amadis and his son Esplandion,
foreseeing what would be the end of the passed battles, had provided the
like. The Ambassadors contented with this answer, returned to their several
Countries: and Aliart confirmed the Regiment of Brundo, giving order for many
matters, that might redound to the Citizens profit. He likewise told them
news of the Princes, who being carried thence with so little hope of life, were
yet now reduced into so good estate, as within little while they should have
their Emperor Primaleon, though no more he might adventure the life of a
Knight at Arms. The people of Constantinople were very joyful of these
tidings, because now they were assured to see their Prince again, whose
virtues they did both love and reverence. So abiding in provident ca^e for
their City, they entreated Aliart, that (so soon as might be) he would send
their Prince Primaleon: which he promised to do, and so returned to the
Perilous I Will.

CHAP. IIII. How the Princes that were in the Perilous I Will, were now recovered
past any danger: And what happened to Madam Leonarda in child-trauaile. How the
other Princesses in like manner were delivered of children: and how the Prince
Florian of the Forest departed thence.
ALiart being gone from Constantinople toward the Perilous I Will, perceauing by
his skill, that there would happen a mischaunce, sufficient to disturb the
Princes quiet: made his arrival there the sooner, finding all things well as
yet, that the Knights had indifferently recovered their great loss of blood,
and walked about the Island, albeit their wounds were not thoroughly healed: which
somewhat offended them, and made them (in a manner) scorn Aliarts wisdom,
as the like they did in foreiudging the issue of the perilous battle,
handled at large in the end of the second book of this History. But ten
days were not fully expired, till they found themselves in better disposition,
ioying more entirely in each others amendment.

Now the Queen Leonarda, ouer-charged with the irksome panges of
childbearing, having four days together endured the bitter agonies incident
thereto, was at length delivered of a fair daughter named Victoria: who being
no sooner borne, but the weak Mother (folding her arms together, and lifting
her eyes to heaven) departed this life. This her sudden death, which the wise
Aliart before suspected not, very much troubled all the royal company: but
especially Florian, who was wonderously enamoured of her, he ran about in
such fury, as at every instant he would have slain himself, and he had done
it, but that Palmerin, Pompides, and Aliart his brethren, were still enforced
to keep him company. At length, growing into extreme hate of the Island,
because he had lost the company of his beloved Leonarda: one day taking Aliart
aside, he thus began.

My Lord and brother, either give me leave to dispatch my self, that I may not
out-liue her, whose beauty remembered makes life loathsome to me: or let me
depart this Island, to the end I may not see the place, which daily renewing the
memory of my love, will urge me but to the greater impatience. All the Princes
liked well this determination of Florian, who was not yet perfectly healed,
albeit his dexterity used in the battle, hindered his hurts from being so
deep as others were, by means whereof he was the best recovered amongst them
all. All the Lords and Ladies greatly labored to comfort Florian, and pacify
his greefes, but all their endeavor amounted to nothing: for he was so
transported with grief and passions, as he lived the most despised life that
ever malcontent did. When Aliart made proof of his Art and industry, and saw
all was in vain to remove these humors: he provided him a Ship, and causing
him to put on like Armor as he was went to wear, as also a shield with his
former savage man's devise: accompanied him forth of the Island, to the great
grief of all the Princes, especially Don Edward his father, whose age made his
wounds more offensive to him. His brethren would gladly have borne him company,
but he (rejecting all comfort) would not permit them: so taking his leave of
them all, and lastly of Aliart, gone is he for all adventures whatsoever. The
grief for Florians departure, was partly qualified, by joy of ye princesses,
who now were to behold ye fruits of their labors. Miragarda was delivered of a
son, so like her self, as in beauty he excelled all the youth of those times,
and was named Oliuanto. Polinarda had a son likewise, who was called Leonato.
Claricia, wife to Gracian Prince of France, brought forth a son, he had to
name Caro. Onistalda, wife to Berolde Prince of Spain, was brought to bed of a
daughter, who was named Argentina: in beauty she seemed another Miragarda, but
for honest courtesy much more affable. Bernarda, wife to the Prince Francian,
and daughter to Belcar, had a son, who was called Belcar after his
Grandfather. Sidelia, Platirs wife and Primaleons daughter, brought forth a
son, named Estrellant. Denisa* wife to Belisart, had twins, a male and
female: the son was called Fortenbracio, the daughter Candida. This Lady grew
so fair, that she excelled all the dames of Greece, and made the minds
distracted both of Palmerin and the Emperor Primaleon: because each of them
for this rare and singular beauty, without regard of honor or kindred, made
choice of her as their chiefest Patroness. Clariana, wife to Dramian, she had
a son named Orino Leonida, daughter to the Duke of Pera, and wife to Frisoll,
brought a son, called Arguto. This was no less an enemy to Primaleon the
second, (then was Frisoll his Grandfather, who was named in those times the
Knight of the Sun, to Palmerin d'Oliua) according as in fit place shall be
declared Arlencea brought her husband Dramusiande, a son of great stature,
who had to name Franardo, exceeding his father in valor, and doing service
like him to the Empire of Constantinople. Cardigea, daughter to the Giant
Gatarin, and wife to Almaroll, had likewise a son, who became no less
faithful and valiant then his father, and therefore after his name was called
Almaroll. Florenda, daughter to Arnedes King of France, and wife to German
of Orleaunce, had a daughter named Spira: who was so fair, but yet arrogant
withal, that not contenting her self with any Knights offer to her service,
thinking her self to be the only woman: remained without a husband, as shall
be declared when we come to speak of her. Clariana brought to Guerin a son,
who was called Armindo. The joy was great through the whole Island, for these
Princesses good success in childbirth, and when the children came to be
christened, they were all named as ye have heard already: but as for those
Ladies whose husbands were dead, they remained in grief, as they had good
cause: For the kind hearted woman being bereft of her husband, can take no true
delight in any thing else what so ever.

CHAP. V. What happened for the burial of the dead Princes bodies.
ALiart beholding the wounded Princes so well recovered, presently began to
bethink him on burial for the dead, that due honor might be done to each
one, to remain for all their succeeding posterity. And that the Ladies might
not know whether he went, he secretly took shipping, and so passed to the
place where the dead bodies were. Coming near the shore, he espied Argentao,
with others accompanied (who noted the Ships making thitherward) hastening to
the Port, and there they met together even as Aliart landed. Argentao with a
loud voice told him, how Satrafort, Governor of the Castle, had taken into his
custody the Princes dead bodies, by reason of a strange accident there
happening in this manner. The day before, in the chamber where Aliart found the
books of the skillful Vrganda, was heard a wonderful noise, and going to know
the reason thereof: they beheld round about the chamber many fair Toombs,
equalling the number of the dead Princes, whereby they found themselves
disburdened of their former care, which was, how they might find means to
interre the Princes, with such honor as they had all highly deserved. And
holding this adventure to be very important, they stood conferring heereon
with Alfernao at the Castle, even as they beheld this Ship coming under
sail, when Satrafort meeting Alfernao on the bridge, and ioying to be
accompanied with so wise and worthy a Lord as Aliart, began to acquaint him
with the whole accident.

It now remains sir (quoth Argentao to Aliart) that your arrival here in
so happy an hour, may thoroughly resolve us in many doubtful cases: because*
though all these Toombs are of most beautiful Marble, yet know we not how to
appoint each Prince the place best beseeming him. As for you my Lord, to whom
far greater adventures then this are reserved in knowledge: you can best
appoint how matters shall be ordered, in that you are to dispose both of them
and us. Aliart very joyful of these good news, persuading himself, that
whosoever prepared these Toombs so ready, had likewise appointed them to the
dignity of each person: without shaping them any answer at all, entered the
Castle, where being conducted to the Toombs, and assaying to remove them
thence, but could not: he meruailed not a little thereat, and standing in a
solemn conceit heereon, he bethought himself, that it were necessary to have
all the other living Princes there, in defense of whom all they had lost their
lives: but especially the wives of these slain Knights, that they beholring
their honorable burial, should take their loss the more contentedly.

Heere-vpon he dispatched thence Satrafort, by whom he advertised Primaleon,
Don Edward, and the rest, that with convenient speed they should come thither,
and bring with them all the Princesses. Within two days following, they had
there personally present, the Emperor, Don Edward, Florendos, Palmerin, of
England, Platir, Gracian, Berolde, Floraman, Francian, Dragonalte, Blandidon,
Pompides, Dramusiande, who now began to walk a little, leaning on a spears
trunchion, and Dirdan with him. But Almaroll could not be there, by reason of
his weakness, marry all the Princesses were there together: with joy and great
kindness did Aliart welcome them, that all their passed greefes were utterly
forgotten: and each had their lodgings severally appointed, that such as were
not soundly healed, might have the better attendance.

CHAP. VI. How the several Tombs were made manifest, with the Epitaphs
belonging to each of them.
THE Ladies whose husbands were dead, did not as yet behold where they should
be buried: but imagining it would be in ye Castle, grew into the greater
pensiuenes, and wept as women in like case will do. Which when Aliart
perceived, he gave order the next day, that all the Princes with the Ladies,
should come into the chamber, where having caused the dead bodies to be
brought, they flocked all together to behold the event. No sooner were they
there assembled, but appeared forth of the wall the figure of an old woman,
who holding a rod in her hand, made sign by her looks bent on Aliart, that he
should command to be brought into the midst of the Chamber, the body of
Arnedes king of France, which no sooner was done, but a goodly Tomb like a
bed, presented it self unto them, which was bedect with flowers of gold so
curiously formed, as it was most marvelous to behold, and in the midst of a
cloth rarely wrought thereon, was written this Epitaph.

The honor of France is not herein enclosed,
Which nor to time nor place can be disposed.
Policia, the wife and Queen to Arnedes, standing before this Tomb, with
Flerida and the other Ladies, made great lamentation over the Kings dead body:
which they would have continued both that day and the next, if the Sepulcher
(after it was closed) had not been suddenly taken away, they knew not by whom,
and then again beheld if placed in the midst of the wall, under the feet of
the figure of the same Policia his Queen. When presently another tomb most
richly wrought, was seen to stand in ye others place, having this Epitaph on
it.

Spain, grieve not thou, since death cannot deprive
Thy fame and honor which thou heldst alive:
For thou in greater glory do survive.
Melissa his Queen would have stepped before it, to witness her inward grief by
her tears: but the third Tomb (as pleased the power that sent it, to hinder
her laments) intruded it self, and the second was likewise conveyed to the
other in the wall. Each one meruailed at this third Sepulcher, seeing there was
nere a Cross thereon, nor any Christian sign used on such monuments, yet
being very huge and great: wherefore they imagined, that it was made for the
Graund Cane Maiortes, who was a Pagan, and the doubt hereof was fully
resolved, so soon as they read the Epitaph, which was thus. From man, became a
dog, then changd to humane state,
He served me with a dogs firm love, for times to wonder at.
All the Princes shed tears, when faithful Maiortes was laid in his
Sepulcher, especially Don Edward, who had him with him in the form of a dog,
and afterward a man, (as in Primaleons history is declared) could not
refrain from weeping.

It pleased Aliart to behold all these testimonies of love, and he labored to
convert all this grief to joy, in regard the total ruin of Constantinople
had not happened, but that the other Princes, whose death were once as much to
be doubted, were now to be seen in so good estate. But (as in like cases)
grief is not easily removed, so still they held on, till this Tomb was
lifted up and conveyed thence: marie forth of the Chamber, because he was not
a Christian. And then was placed another Tomb before them, so roially adorned:
as they were very desirous to know for whom it was, when looking on the
Epitaph, they read thus.

Belcar here sleeps, heaven has his soul by right,
The world his spoils, all won in fairest fight:
With such rare honor as became a Knight.
Belcar enclosed in his hearsse, with many silent passions of his wife
Alderina, his son, and all the rest (because Aliart had entreated no more
access to the bodies) it was co^uaied thence, and (as the former) placed at
the foot of his wives figure, the statue seeming to shed lifelie tears, such
wondrous art had the skillful Vrganda used on them all. Then appeared to them
another Tomb, the forepart whereof was ingeniouslie formed, and being
covered with a sumptuous cloth all of gold, they read thereon this Epitaph.

Frisols fair deeds do merrite more regard
Then earth can yield, true fame is his reward.
The success of this Tomb, resembled the former, when another was immediately
presented, not one jot less beautified or adorned: whereon appeared the
instability of Fortune, and thus the Epitaph.

Belysart dyed, but not infamously,
His virtues conquer deaths black obloquie.
This Sepulcher taken away before Denisa could do her duty to it: there was
another intruded, whereon in very fair letters this Epitaph was engraven.

Onistade, dreadlesse of deaths cruelty:
With fame has won fair life's eternity.
Quickly was this tomb conuaied thence, and in steed thereof another,
containing this motto.

Albanis has won what never can be lost,
Then death how can thou of thy conquest boast?
This likewise being removed, another more rich and precious was presented,
with this Epitaph.

Mourn not Bohemia though thy King be dead,
His life and death, has made thee famozed.
King Rodamont being in his grave, and bemoned generally, it was taken to
place appointed for it, when Aliart seeing another already in room thereof,
perusing the devise, found thereon this inscription.

Estrellant fought not for an earthly crown,
Immortal life trod those affections down.
The Ladies and Princes could not cease from weeping, beholding the loss of so
many hardy Knights, but when this Tomb was carried to the wall, the next
approaching had this Epitaph.

Vassiliards faith did testify his end,
Whose deeds, whole worlds of time shall still commend.
Next, followed the Sepulcher for Duke Drapos of Normandy, with these two
lines thereon.

Normans, it is in vain to weep for me,
Country farewell, my fame shall live with thee.
Another fair Tomb was next presented, with this sentence to be read thereon.

Tremoran no better way could find to die,
Then in stout war, by fairest chivalry.
Every one stood silent, except such as sighed, not knowing what to say,
seeing the Tombs so strangely carried from place to place, and yet not
discerned by whom, upon the next were these lines.

Fierce Tenebrant, when death had him in chase,
Turned manfully, and died with deaths disgrace.
His bed of honor being covered and gone, another as magnificent was
produced, delivering these verses.

No blame can Orleaunce to my death impute,
That lost my life in honors swift pursuit.
Then Luymans Tomb was the next in course, bearing this testimony of his
virtues.

Virtue the object of my high desire,
Bestowed on me what most I did require.
Next was to be seen another Sepulcher, not of white stone, as all the former
were: but more red and bloody cullored, containing this Epitaph.

Though Rosiran were not the greatest Lord,
His honor here does with the rest accord.
Now even at the days shutting up, Dramians hearsse presented it self, with
this devise.

So sweetly Dramian dyed among the rest,
That now he lives as famous as the best.
And when it was conuaied thence, as all the rest had been, Aliart looked
about, and beheld no more Tombs thus to be offered, wherein the greater
states were to be enclosed: then looking on the old Woman's figure, it turned
the face thereof toward the wall, as if it seemed to command them now to
depart. Hereupon he caused the Ladies whose husbands were living, to lead the
widdowed Princesses by the hand, and he followed, comforting them in this
manner.

Fair Ladies, seeing it pleased GOD, that your Lords should loose their lives
in defense of his faith, you ought to conform your selves to his will, and
withdrawing ye to more quiet of mind, be careful of your own health, least
your loss be a greater endamagement to Christendom. To morrow we shall see,
in what manner these greater Lords are to be buried, for I cannot believe, that
the wise Vrganda would provide such rare Sepulchers for these, and have no care
of them of higher desert. Heere-with they departed the chamber, meruailing at
the strange accidents they ^ad seen.

CHAP. VII. How Pandricia, having hid herself in the Chamber among the Tombs,
was found dead by the body of her husband Bellagris.
Being all of them greatly grieved for the death of so many worthy Lords,
Pandricias sorrows grew to extremity, for she being hid among the
Sepulchers, with resolved mind to pursue her intent, and weeping to die over
her husbands dead body: when she perceived that by the time of night they
were all asleep, she came to the body of Bellagris, and over it made the most
wofulst lamentation, that ever did woman for her husbands death. Recounting the
tedious time of misery, wherein not long they had lived, which being
ouer-blowne with a little better comfort, had now so small continuance. Then
remembering Blandidon her son, whose life she likewise feared, because his
great expense of blood still made him keep his bed: this double corsiue of
grief so labored her thoughts, that overcome therewith, closing hand in
hand, she fell down dead, over her husbands body.

CHAP. VIII. How the other Princes were buried the day following.
YEt was not Blandidon so greatly weakened, but that he remembered his mother,
who was wont to stand very pensive by his bed side: but seeing all had
betaken themselves to rest, loath was he to trouble so honorable a company,
and therefore passed over this night, suspecting what he found too true in the
end. The morning following, they rose not ouer-earlie, by reason of the Princes
weak disposition, and the grief they endured the day past, in burying the
dead.

Aliart, who stood pondering with himself, where the Princes of greatest
merrite should be interred, because he saw no Sepulchers as yet there
appointed for them: early that morning went where the other had been buried,
and beheld all the chamber was changed into the form of half a Theater, with
degrees and pillars of Alablaster so beautiful, as at midnight clear day
might there be discerned, and the Tombs which had been used the day before,
answered in order to the persons enclosed in them. Now in the midst of a place
more high and spacious, and under the feet of Polinardas figure, was a
Sepulcher wrought into the wall, held up by pillars of Porphirie, and arched
over the head most richly, where on the couerture stood (in pure gold) the
statue of the Emperor Palmerin, holding Fortune by the locks, and out-brauing
her power, as seeming to threaten her if she parted from him. On the side
before, was engraven in Letters of gold these verses following.

By valor and good hap I overcame
All mine attempts: To kindred of my name,
Leave I perpetual memory and fame.
On the right hand was another Tomb, little less differing in beauty, being
placed under the feet of Agriola, and in the midst thereof was two Epitaphs,
the first was thus.

The state I ioyde, made me not fear to die,
Because I knew that shame and infamy,
Follows a life not led heroycallie.
The other, which was somewhat lower, and written in lesser Letters, was thus.

It Is endless death to live without content:
Die then like me, who will the same prevent.
This second Epitaph made known, that Polynard was buried with the Emperor
Vernar his Brother, whereat they all meruailed. Now on the left hand of the
Emperor Palmerin, was another Sepulcher richly adorned, having this Epitaph
thereon.

Years did not let me from desire to die,
Wanting the life my father got thereby.
The description thus engraven on this Tomb, made it apparent to every one,
that therein lay enclosed, Polendos King of Thessaly. Then under that of
Palmerin, there was another of read Marble: but the Epitaph thereon was
written in Greek, and is thus interpreted.

It was ill hap for me to end my days,
Not spending of my blood, as others have:
To guarde the walls and gates got me no praise,
They did me wrong that sent me so to grave.
Every one gathered, that this was King Tarnaes, who in regard of his grave
years, was left to guarde the City of Constantinople.

Now stand all the Princes and Lords dumb (as it were) at so many meruailes,
and nothing else could be heard, but earnest and profound sighs, sent from
the melting hearts of the widdowed Ladies. And Aliart, to know certainly
whether the bodies, which were not buried the day before, remained as they had
been left, went to the chamber, and finding that of Bellagris, as also
Pandricia lying dead by it, he stood as one aghast thereat, the Princesses
likewise, when they beheld her in that case, delivered forth such lamentations,
as might easily be heard through the whole Castle: which raised such admiration
in them that lay wounded, as made them forsake their lodgings, to the great
peril of their lives: especially Blandidon, whose mind misgaue him of some
ensuing ill, not having all that night seen his woeful mother.

Aliart by his words could not pacify their complaints, but worse was like to
have ensued thereon, if the old woman's figure had not made a sudden noise
with her rod: wherewith they all turned about, to understand the cause
thereof, and being in a general marvel, immediately they beheld a goodly
Sepulcher woorthily wrought, having two Epitaphs engraven thereon: the first in
this manner.

I lived a Pagan, but for truth I know,
That following time will bliss on me bestow.
The other which was fastened to this former, with many branches (as it were)
was thus.

Life full of grief, with little joy or none,
Welcome sweet death that knits two hearts in one:
For with Bellagris is my hope alone.
In this Sepulcher were they both laid together, and without any one putting
hand thereto, it was taken up, and placed under that of King Tarnaes: for
Pandricia, albeit she was nominated amongst the fairest in the world, yet was
she not pictured in this chamber, the reason was, she led such a sorrowful
kind of life, as hindered the perfection of her beauty from sight. These
Princes buried thus with such glory, as the wise Vrganda in her providence
thought meet, preserving by her in readiness so many Toombs, as might serve
such great Princes to take their latest rest in. Aliart (having brought thither
from the Profound I Will, diverse Priests and religious persons) caused their
obsequies to be celebrated, as in a Country so far from Christendom could
be performed. Which being done, he brought them all back to the Palace, having
first seen the old woman's Image take her leave: who with her wand made
certain signs to them, which seemed by Aliarts signifying the same, that,
that Theater of Toombs should there continue, while any of Palmerins blood
should survive, whose race and fortune for ever should be most famous, and to
the very last not utterly abolished. Blandidon, in whom could not be hid the
sad hap of his Mother, used such passions of grief, as seemed to menace him
with death: but that Aliart got some mittigation thereto by his Art, causing
him in sleep to see his father Bellagris, who spoke to him, that he should
abandon all other thoughts, studying only to recover his health, that so he
might go govern the state of Niquea: because a bastard sister of his, by the
favor of some Barrons confederating with her, one whereof expected her to be
his wife, were practicing how to enjoy it. And this vision was not a dream, by
reason these affairs were there in good forwardnes: but the young Lady named
Tirena, would not consent to any Barron of that Kingdom, because she was
deeply enamoured on Dirdan, son to Maiortes the great Cane, and meant to
deny her faith so lately received, thereby to make him Soldane of Niquea. Nor
was this hidden from Dirdan, who because he was young and amorous likewise,
looked not so much at the friendship of a Christian Princess, for satisfying
her love: as perhaps he did to the joining of so great a neighboring Signorie
to his own Kingdom.

Blandidon giving credit to his dream, and perceauing if he slackt the
redress hereof, he might remain still a private man as he was: began to
consider advisedly thereon, for he knew right well, that albeit he was son to
noble Don Edward, yet could he expect no government in England, therefore he
took truce with his thoughts, and attended his health.

CHAP. IX. How the Knight of the Savage man following adventures, there
happened to his hand a Letter with a Ring.
TArgiana and the Armenian Princess, who attended no other opportunity, but
how to write, concluded to put in trust therewith a young maiden daughter to
one of her nearest kindred, who at this time should serve insted of a Squire,
she having good knowledge of Targiana, yet fained not to know her, for fear of
Ristorano. But on a day following, when the Matrones were busily bathing
themselves, they called her a-side, and Targiana at full disclosed herself,
and what she sought to compass by her: promising her no mean advancement,
if by her means she might recover her liberty and Kingdom.

The Maiden, who was discreet, and so loved her Lady, as for her help she
would make venture of her life: made ready one evening such a kind of wine,
that distributing it frankly amongst the Matrones, they all went to sleep, and
not one of them boudged till the next morning. Targiana setting her self to
write, among many other, made choice of sending her Letter to Florian, because
she loved him before Albayzar: and bestowing the flower of her honor on him,
it could not be, that in this her great mishap he would forsake her, albeit the
virtue of the Ring should fail her. Beside, she conceited another helping hope,
that Leonarda might be dead, because Drusa Velona, (when she enchaunted her
into the Serpent) said withal, that Florian should not long time enjoy his
fair Leonarda: according as the constellation governing at her birth declared,
that she should live but a little while, and when that happened, she might
promise her self Prince Florian to her husband, in that she could not believe,
that her courtesies used toward him were utterly forgotten. On this conceit she
framed the Letter, and folding the Ring therein, the Princess of Armenia
commanded it to fly to the hand of Florian of the Forest: and opening the
window, the Letter with the Ring mounted in the air, betaking it self as it
was directed.

Florian (as you have heard) being parted from the Island, with intent to come
in no place of humane resort, sought with his Ship to keep aloof from land,
where he might discern either City or Castle: and holding on a solitary
course of Navigations, he came to a desolate and ruined Haven, so unfrequented
in his own opinion, as he imagined himself highly beholding to Fortune, for
bringing him to a place so fitting his desire. Here going on shore, he left
the Ship, and because he coueted to be alone, walked on into a Wood: where
ouer-taken by the night, weary, troubled, and burdened with many thoughts, he
lay down under a tree to repose himself. Here, redoubling grief on grief,
because he had so soon lost his fair Leonarda; at length toward morning, his
eyes (ouer-charged with watching) began to fold down their lids, yet still
dreaming on his conceits waking: but pausing a while, he felt him self lifted
from the ground, and inwardly touched somewhat amourously.

This was by a Niece of Eutropa, Aunt to Dramusiande, who when Florian combated
with her brother, became so enamoured of his valor, as ever afterward she
labored to get hold of him, and make him tractable to her desires: She being
som-what skillful in Magical sciences, knowing thereby, that Florian (after
the death of Leonarda) was in desperate humors departed from the Perilous
I Will: by her cunning conducted him to this vast Desert, meaning thence to guide
him to a Palace of hers, which stood somewhat further within the Land. Florian
feeling himself lifted up in such manner as has been declared, said: what
may thou be that thus troublest my quietness? think not that any amorous
thought has power to enter my breast. Then Dorina, for so was the maiden
called that burned thus in love, forgetting to help her self any more by Art:
came in person to be seen, and said. Sir Knight, take pity on the love of a
young Damsel, who not able to repair the hurt by thine eyes and her own
committed: desires to bestow her self on thee, not as a Lover, but to be thy
Servant. At these sweet speeches, which avail very much in generous minds,
and could not be quite extinct in Florian, who was (by nature) to women
inclined: he began somewhat to yield, not as one disposed to grant what she
requested, but with an intent to hold her in some hope, till he could better
compass to be rid of her, whereon he thus replied.

Such are my fortunes (fair creature) as my heart can hardly yield to love any
woman: nevertheless, your passions have urged me to some pity, and makes me
willing to depart hence with you, hoping that when your self shall behold me
in like manner afflicted, and with such amorous torments as I now behold in
you, you will the sooner desist from this ouer-fond humor. The Damsel being
wise, was highly contented to have him with her: persuading her self, that
hardly could hot young blood defend it self, from the sweet enticements of
an amorous Lady. So taking him by the hand, she conducted him to her Castle:
where he was so gallantly entertained by light of Torches, as scant could he
imagine how to deny love to so gentle a creature. Being entered a goodly hall,
he was seated at a table right against Dorina: who seeing him so often look
babies in her eyes, supposed him thoroughly vanquished by her love, making the
less account to use any more enchauntments. The hour being come of going to
rest, a chamber most sumptuously adorned was prepared for Florian: where by
reason the night was very far spent, he laid him down and slept right soundly.
Dorina, either weary with so long watching that night, or making her self
certainly assured, to be beloved where she thought her self never enough
pleased: would not then go see him in bed, because she imagined not that a
victory sufficient. But arising the next morning, very richly decked, she went
to awake the Knight: who being glad he had no further that night been tempted
by the Lady; arose, with intent to depart thence, that he might no more be
assailed the next night following. But he found his hope fore-stalled, for as
he issued forth of his chamber, Targianaes Letter with the Ring came flying
into his hand: the virtue whereof was such, that suddenly he felt himself
enamoured on her that wrote it. So being further pressed on by force of the
enchauntment, he went to the Stable, where mounting on horseback, he departed
without taking leave of Dorina: who had no power to hinder him, by reason Drusa
Velonaes Art was of such perfection, as no other Magitian (how skillful so
ever) could withstand it.

CHAP. X. What Florian did, after his departure from Dorina.
FLorian, when he was gotten about a stones cast from the Castle, opened the
Letter, and began to read it, the tenor thereof being thus.

Targianaes Letter to Prince Florian of the Desert.
IF sincere love (by gentleness only occasioned) may never be al togeher quite
forgotten: then I persuade my self, albeit you are (in effect) fully
estraunged from me, yet some little spark of love may be remaining, that will
be your conductour to my abiding, if the same be not utterly quenched in your
heart. By this persuasion I am moved, to solicit you with an honorable
enterprise, which is; to free me from the hands of Ristorano my Cosen, who
holds me as prisoner within mine own Kingdom. Take pity then on Targiana, who
heere-to-fore has been not ungrateful to you, and (by these means) win to
your self eternal glory. The way how to deliver me, you shall understand when
you come into Turkey, to the City of Tubante, where I will take knowledge of
ye from a window; if you wear a green plume in your helmet, pointed with
gold, whereof you shall find very many in this City.

Desolate Targiana.


The Letter, which of it self was enough to wound a firmer heart then Florian
had, with the strong enchauntment thereto applied: so wrought with the Prince,
that forgetting altogether his late Leonarda, he became enflamed beyond reason
toward Targiana: remembering her manifold courtesies used to him, when being
prisoner, he combated with Arduramet. Setting forward on his way, he might
hear behind him many dolorous exclamations: to wit, of Dorina, who seeing her
self thus forsaken, and hopeless of recovering him again, fell into such
fury, that taking a knife, she would have slain her self therewith, and
being somewhat wounded, she was espied, and stayed by her Damosells, who
altogether railed on the discourteous Knight. But he making no reckoning
thereof, got to the Seaside, where finding a Ship of Turkey, which by
fortune had made stay a while by this desolate Wilderness, he speaking Turkish
very readily: was by them received into the Ship, imagining him verily to be a
Turk. With this Ship went Florian for Turkey, making them believe, that he
had been at Albayzars wars, the success whereof he rehearsed so
perticulerly, as every one delighted much to hear him.

Thus sailing with a prosperous wind, at length they reached the City of
Turbante, where Targiana remained imprisoned. Now was Ristorano gone against
certain Barrons of ye Kingdom, who disdaining his Regiment, raised war upon
him: knowing withal, that Targiana was enthralled within the Castle, and now
was likewise come thither with a great power, Sucusano brother to ye Armenian
Princess, and to the Soldane of Persia, that died at Constantinople. By means
hereof, Florian might the more freely show himself before the Castle, and
bearing his appointed notice of the green plume: he was known by Targiana,
who not a little glad of his arrival, devised how she might get him lodged
near the Castle, so to expect the hour when he best might free her.

CHAP. XI. How Ristorano returning to Turbante, provided good guardance for
Targiana, delivering the Armenian Princess to Sucusano: and what Florian did
for Targiana.
RIstorano being advertised, that Sucusano (with a mighty Army of Persians)
was entered Turkey, to recover the Armenian Princess: returned in have to
Tubante, where seeking to pacify the people, who knew Targiana to be there
imprisoned, he sent word to the Persian, that he should have the Lady without
further contradiction, provided, he would pass on no further: so causing her
to be brought from the Castle, with a very small train he sent her to her
brother, because he else suspected nothing. But Florian, whose thoughts were
busied how to deliver Targiana, perceiving that Ristorano (fearing she should
be recovered by the people) had manned her with a very strong guard, when he
heard the Armenian Princess was sent to Sucusano, intended an enterprise
(ouer-venturous indeed) but that he was still favorably protected by
Dorina, who in so many perrils gave him help. And this was his determination,
to take ye Princess forcibly from them that conducted her to Sucusano: so to
procure war between the Turks and Persians, when restoring her again to
them (his own turn being served) it must needs sort to either of their
contentments. Making this known to Targiana, who not imagining what to hope of
this doubtful enterprise, remained between joy and fear: but referring all
to the good or ill success, sent him word, that he should compass what ever
he thought good for her escape.

Florian arming himself for the purpose, went to pursue the tract of the
Armenian Princess, who by an hundred Turks was sent toward her brother, and
being come to them, he cried: Abide, and let go the Lady, except ye all mean
to die by my hand.

The Captain of these Turks, who was a man very arrogant: turning to his
followers, said: This fellow seems as though he would fight with men made of
straw, that he is so liberal (at first sight) in his threatenings, but we
shall see what he can do: then turning to him, he thus spoke. Brave man, I
will try my self with thee, because I will not see so many of mine perrish by
thy strong hand: but yet thus I condition, that if thou overcome me, thou
shall lead me whether thou please: but if I foil thee, I Will keep thee as my
laughing stock, to smile at in my bravery.

Florian hearing himself thus scorned, in deep disdain (without speaking a
word) turned his horse, and met the proud Turk on the breast with such an
encounter, as his Lance ran a handful and more through his shoulder, whereby
he tombled dead to the ground. When his followers saw their Captain so
suddenly fallen, and remembering how this strange Knight had threatened them all,
without any regard of shame, they ran altogether fiercely upon him, some
wounding him, others his horse, because he should have no means to escape.

Thus Florian being on foot, and wounded, seeing death imminent before him,
leant his shoulder against an old withered tree, minding yet to sell his life
a little deerer. And byding the battle for a good space, he grew so weary, as
nothing was to be expected but death: if enamored Dorina, who had no power to
kill him, had not at his departure intended especial care of him. And albeit
by her art she understood, what effect the Letter and Ring had wrought, as
also that Florian afresh solicited by his former love borne to Targiana,
endeavored greatly for her deliverance: notwithstanding all hope of ever
enjoying him, the more resolved and soundly grew her affection to love him.
Now seeing in what perrill he was to loose his life, by rescuing the Armenian
Princess from the Turks hands: she changed her self into the shape of
Palmerin of England his brother, provided of horse and armor accordingly, and
aloude she cried to Florian, saying: Fear not Brother, I am come hither for
thy defense: so placing herself by him, performed such deeds of valor, as
the Turks began to retire, as resolved that this Knight would be the death of
them all. But because Florian had lost much blood, she gave help to mount
himself upon his horse, that he sat behind toward the crupper, and so the
Armenian Princess was placed before him: and she was so suddenly carried
thence into a wood, as the Turkish Knights stood in amazement thereat.

Dorina, when she had Florian safe from his enemies, showed her self to him
what she was: and perceiving that he affected not the Armenian Princess,
without any regard of her, she thus spoke to him. Most gentle Knight, love,
that has made me altogether yours, enforces an opinion contrary to all hope,
of joy, when no likelihood is that ever it will be: for I know ye to be
enamoured of a Lady, who strictly by enchauntment binds ye to love her, when
perhaps her beauty might fail in other means of prevailing, all which makes
me the more desirous of ye: and to witness my inward inflamed love, see here
the wound I gave on this breast with my knife, as willing to have slain my
self upon your unkind departure.

The Lady was young and beautiful, her words likewise uttered so effectually,
as Florian would have yielded her love, if the other enchauntment had been no
let thereto. But he unable to use any mercy to her, and the Lady (being
wise) considering all this was occasioned by the Ring, determined to awaite
fitter opportunity, till Florian should be released from that enchauntment,
and taking order, that one of her Damsels should cure his wounds, she thus
began again. Thou can not let me from loving thee for ever, albeit thou
take no pity on mine affliction: and so she departed.

Florian, without regarding her speeches, suffered what soever was applied for
his recovery: and by reason Dorina help him by her art, in four days he
was able to sit his horse again. Then conferring with the Armenian
princess, he excused what had been done in hindering her from her brother
Sucusano, disclosing likewise what he was, as also to what end this injury was
offered her, as not able by any means else to redeem Targiana.

It displeased the Princess, that thus her return into Persia was
fore-stalled, but when she knew him to be the Prince Florian, so far famed,
and noted withal his gentle behavior, she accounted her self indebted to
Fortune, for letting her fall thus into his hands, with whose love she felt
herself suddenly amated. Then remembering that she sent the ring in Targianaes
name, she had little hope of winning him to her love, so long as that
enchantment lasted: wherefore she pacified herself, and Florian desirous to
return toward Tubante, had new Armor and horses for conduct of the
Princess, all right after the Tartarian manner.

And this was done by Dorina, that Florian might go back to Tubante, and was
not known to be he that fought with the Turks in rescue of the Princess:
whose habit was likewise in such sort trans-formed, as none in all the city
could know her. Thus being in Tubante, often times he showed himself to
Targiana by means of his green plume, but he could no further prevail,
because of the watchful guard appointed by Ristorano, for which (good Lady)
she was even ready to die. And the Armenian princess so curbd in her grief,
that she might not enjoy the benefit of Florians love: as day and night she
offered to sleep by him, yet would he move toward her no more then a stone.

CHAP. XII. What Sucusano did, when he heard that the Armenian Princess was
forcibly rescued from them, that had charge of conducting her to him: And
further concerning the Prince Florian.
THe Turks that had fought in this manner with the Knight of the Savage man,
seeing they had gotten themselves so far onward, as they needed not to
stand in fear of their enemy: because they had lost ye Armenian Princess,
they made no have of returning to Ristorano, but intended their journey to
Sucusano, to let him understand what had happened them in pursuit, so to
excuse their Lord who had sent him his Sister. Being come to his Army, and
news spread that the princess came not with them: it was expected that they
should all presently die, but yet on more deliberation, they were admitted to
his royal Pauillion. Sucusano seeing them without his Sister, with stern
countenance demanded from whom they came. They fearfully falling on their
knees, reported their whole success, and in what sort she was taken from
them. But it seemed so disagreeing with truth, that one Knight alone should
perform so much, in taking the Lady from them, though (needless) another came
at length to help him, as it was merely scoft at: but for better assurance
herein, he sent many of his own men to the place, where the Turks declared
that their Captain lay slain.

Dorina, who marked all these proceedings, to bind her lover to her so much as
might be, hoping one day the enchauntment should be dissolved, and then he
would take compassion on her, by her art conuaied all the dead bodies thence,
yea, all signs that any fighting had been there at all. Whereupon, the
Persians returned to Sucusano, saying, they found no show of any such matter as
the Turks had told him: when he (starting up furiously) without admitting any
more words, commanded them all immediately to be hanged, and raising his
Camp, consisting of an hundred thousand brave Soldiers, beside a most gallant
troop of Infanterie: went and assailed Tubante so suddenly, as they could not
provide themselves of victuals to withstand the siedge, though otherwise the
City of it self was strong enough.

When Florian saw what he desired to take such effect, he earnestly entreated
the Princess of Armenia, that faining her self to be escaped from the Knight
who took her from the Turks, she would get into the Castle where Targiana
was, so might she be out of danger of her own life, and a mean likewise of
Targianas liberty. The Princess seeing her brother so near to deliver her,
and loving Florian so earnestly as she did, was well contented to perform his
request: so slipping with him forth of the City, entered a wood near
adjoining, where letting her horse run loose on his bridle, like one escaped
from an enemy, she entered the City, dissembling extraordinary fear, and
coming to the Castle gate, where Ristoranos guard gave their attendance, was
quickly known by them, and soon conveyed in at the wicket, she still seeming
doubtful of her security. And coming to Targiana, so artificially she
continued her feigned fear: as she verily imagined her to be escaped from
Florian. But when time came that they might more safely conuersse together,
she then revealed all: whereby Targianaes hope very greatly increased, seeing
now an entrance to her freedom so soundly begun.

Florian perceiving that the Princess was got into the Castle, and having with
his presence (a far off) comforted Targiana, armed Turke-like, he went and
offered his service to Sucusano, who seeing him so bravely disposed, and but
young withal, would needs have him sit down by him, but Florian doing him
double reverence, began in this manner. Most mighty Lord, I am son to a
Turk, who served most faithfully the great Emperor deceassed, and thereby
received of him no mean benefits. I that desire to do you as loyal service,
hearing that my Princess is imprisoned by Ristorano in the Castle of Tubante,
and that he would usurp the state from her, am minded to adventure my life for
her delivery. Let me then entreat your highness, to do somewhat for so
great a sister as your own, and my Sovereign: wherein, beside eternal fame
following so glorious an enterprise, she will acknowledge herself deeply
indebted unto you, when she shall be seated in her kingdoms of Babylon and
Turkey. And might it please ye but to favor me in this enterprise, I offer my
self body to body, against so many as dare maintain Ristorano to be no
traitor: trusting more in justice of the cause, then any hardiment or valor
in my self.

Sucusano very respectively noted Florian all the while he spoke, and judging
him to be a man very valiant, replied: that seeing him so loyally inclined
toward his princess, he would gladly have both the Ladies set at liberty,
because his sister was likewise prisoner with her, and therefore he wished to
them both alike. Then presently he sent one of his Captains well accompanied,
to the city to Ristorano, requesting to have delivered him his Sister and
Targiana, whom he labored to dispossess of her estate: and if any of his
would justify Ristorano not to be a traitor, he should meet a Knight in
field, who would make it good upon him by sword and Lance.

Ristorano offended at this demand, which dissolved all his former dissignes:
would have satis-fied Sucusanos Ambassador, that he did send him his Sister,
and knew not how his purpose was impeached. But now, his demanding of both
the Ladies, drove his senses into such a confusion, as he knew not what to
imagine concerning the Armenian Princess. And in regard a Turkish Knight,
backed by Persians, would fight against the City, and requested combat: he
intended to provide for the present perrill, lycencing the Ambassador to
depart, saying: His Sister he had already sent him, but with Targiana he had
not to meddle. The Ambassador bringing this answer to his Lord, and Florian
being advertised thereof, made have to the field, to loose no time, and least
the Persians mind should hap to be changed: hearing that his sister had been
sent him before, and taken from the Knights, as has been before declared.

Ristorano, fearing no less the Turks then the Persians, turning him to his
Knights, said: Which of you dare go combat this companion, and bring his head
to me? Many valiant Lords proffered themselves in have, and great contention
there was who should go first: but the lot falling to the Prince of Tharsus,
he armed himself for the purpose, and came so disdainfully forth of ye City,
that without speaking any word to Florian, he ran against him with his
Lance: wherewith Florian being moved, met him in the midst of the course, the
Turks staff hitting on his shield, made him loose a stirrup, but Florians
passed with such force through his breast, that he fell down dead to the earth.
The Persians seeing a victory so easily obtained, both ioyed and meruailed
thereat. Contrariwise, they of the city stood amazed. Nevertheless, the Lord
of Antioche, (a man of great mind and opinion) presented himself, and
encountering with Florian, hurt him a little on the arm, albeit himself had
such a salutation on the pate, as he was liker to lie along, then keep his
saddle. Then Florian determining, either to die this day, or regaine Targiana,
smote at him with his sword, which lighting on his shoulder, cleft him down to
the saddle, and cut off his horses head likewise.

This was such a fearful astonishment to Ristoranos Knights, as no more
being willing to adventure themselves, they drew back into the City: where
Ristorano (fearful of the people) sought by what means Targiana might be
slain, as always before he aimed thereat: but because he knew not who to
trust, and saw every one inclined to favor their natural Sovereign, he
resolved with himself upon speedy flight. Then hearing what a great rumor
was at the walls, the Persians fully persuaded of success, having him for
their Captain, who had so soon overcome two such valiant Turks, he drew
near (with diverse of his trustiest folowers) to make head against them, and
going to a false posterne of the Castle, caused Targiana to be fetched forth,
that he might have her along with him: hoping in extremity, to yield her for
safegarde of his own life, or else by being still possessed of her, to have use
and government of the state.

This could he not perform so secretly, but he was discovered by the people,
who cried out with loud voice, that Targiana was led away to death: whereon he
was pursued by so great multitudes, that he (having work enough to do to
escape alive, and knowing how few of his own people did affect him,) left
Targiana behind him. Some fearing least the City should be taken and spoiled
by the Persians, hung forth their flagge of truce, and opening the gate,
received in Florian and four thousand Knights with him, according as Sucusano
had before appointed, who behaved himself on the other side very valiantly.
But Florian fearing least some disaster should betide Targiana, ran
presently to the Castle, where he found her in company of them that Ristorano
left her withal, who perceiving the Tyrant fled, labored to keep her from
perrill, and so were returned back with her thither again. Of him they grew
all afraid, and in danger had they been, but that Targiana knew him by
managing his weapon, the^ stepping forward: Sheath your sword my Lord (quoth
she) for these Knights are for my safety, and at your service.

Florian, seeing his intent accomplished, full of joy, took Targiana by the
hand, but she trembled, as showing the great love she bare him, from the
beginning when he was in her Court. Thence was she conducted by the people to
her Palace, and being placed in the royal seat of her Father, was
publicly proclaimed and confirmed their Queen.

Sucusano, glad for recovery of his Sister, and that he had done so special
service to Targiana, without the loss of any of his people, entered that night
into the City, with an hundred of his worthiest Barons: and because it was
late, as then he could not go to see the Lady, by reason Targiana had
withdrawn herself aside, none in her company but Prince Florian, as not
being able to satis-fie her self with embracing him, and yielding him thanks,
as his great pains had well deserved. But thus far they proceeded, that
promising she would become a Christian, they were affianced together, in
presence of the Armenian Princess, and the Damsel that help her when she
wrote the Letter. Afterward, by other kind of ceremonies (in such cases
required) they so ratified their marriage, as it was past recalling: but now
return we to the Perilous I Will.

CHAP. XIII. How the Princes in the Perilous I Will, being recovered to their
former health, would have returned thence to their several estates: but they
were stayed there for a while. And of a new accident that suddenly happened.
THe Emperor Primaleon, being thoroughly healed of his wounds, had yet his right
arm benumbed in such sort, as it was great pain to him to use his sword, and
little help any way could it yield unto him* Don Edward, by means of a wound
received through his neck, held his head awry, leaning to one shoulder, so
that it grieved him to bear armor thereon. The other were well recovered, and
of indifferent strength, except Florendos, who went somewhat lamely on his
right leg: and Dramusiande, who was (as it were) beside himself, although of
his hurts he was very well amended. Almaroll could not be thoroughly sound in a
long time. Floraman was better recovered then all the rest, because now he had
lost the remembrance, of his former earnest affection to Altea, finding
himself quite delivered from that vain humor: yet soon enough ouer-taken
with another, when casting his eyes on the widdowed Ladies, he most regarded
Clariana, who in his conceit was a thousand times fairer, then any other
amongst them all. But afterward, his silent thoughts showed him much more
enamoured on Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian: but because he might not
enjoy her, he desperately slew himself, as shall be declared in place convenient.

Aliart, seeing these Lords so mindful of their several homes, sitting one
day conuersing with them, he entered into these speeches. Great Princes, I
rejoice that mine own art has so deceived me, which made me believe, that all
you should die in the passed war, and Constantinople fall into the Pagans
power: but most of all this deceit delights me, that I behold ye so well
recovered, and the Grecian Empire yet at liberty. Therefore you shall do
very well, that each of you return to his proper state, to give order for
providing men in readiness, and fortefying your Cities: because it may so fall
out, that the Heathen renewing their forces, will on a sudden seek your
endamagement. The Emperor Primaleon very glad hereof, caused a Galley to be
made ready, when calling all the Princes and widdowed Ladies, with large
protestations, he gave them thanks for the loss they had suffered to
maintain his estate: offering himself for ever a Father to the widows, as
also a defender of them and their children. So embracing altogether, he went
aboard, with Florendos, Almaroll, Dramusiande, and their Ladies, who greatly
desired to visit their own homes, and to be in their former estate of
dignity.

As they were setting off from the shore, they descryed a little Barque a
far off, which (as swift as a byrd) came flying toward them: they expecting
what it might be, beheld it no sooner near neighboured with them, but thereout
leaped the most misshapen old woman, that ever in any time had been seen:
she making toward the Emperor, who as yet stood upon the deck, thus spoke.
Most powerful Lord, marvel not that I appear so spent with years, and yet
at this instant hazard thus the perrill of my life, for the cause of my present
coming hither, is to make proof among thy Knights, of an adventure which
holds these conditions, that who soever can finish it, shall have promise of a
boon from me: but attempting and failing, is presently to go along with me.
The Emperor, who was loath to see any of his oppose themselves to perrill,
being not yet so strong and lusty, as when they attempted the last dreadful
battle, thus answered. Perhaps the late unfortunate battle is not known to
thee, wherein the most worthy amongst all Christian Princes have perished: and
we that yet remain are in so weak estate, as I could gladly wish thee choose
some other time, both more fit for thee and them in this case.

The old Woman, very disdainfully, and with a countenance seeming none of the
best, thus spoke to the Emperor. Blessed for ever be the constancy of the
royal Emperor Palmerine, that never made show of any baseness, albeit
himself past through many miseries. These words so pierced the Emperors
princely mind, that his choler arising, he craved pardon of the old woman for
his unkind answer: desiring her to declare the adventure. Then she withdrew
herself toward the Barque, showing as if she were grieved beyond comparison,
for not having found what she sought in so many Princes Courts: yet being
still moved by his highness intreates, and Don Edwards likewise, who would
not leave her, she drew the small Barque alande, using certain words to her
self: when suddenly issued forth a Monster of very strange shape, having the
head of a Serpent, the neck of a Lion, the body of a Bull, the feet of a
Horse, and the tail divided in two parts, so piercing withal, as it would
pass through any Armor. With this beast (quoth the hagge) must thy Knights
combat, under condition before expressed: so many as shall be vanquished by it,
must go with me to an enterprise as honorable, as pleasing to themselves.

The Knights, whose spirits were heated with high resolution, co^tended amongst
themselves who should be first: but the Emperor willed, that Don Edward, who
could make no proof of himself, by the reasons before rehearsed, should
nominate them after his own liking. Don Edward, highly thanking the Emperor
for this great honor, not to show himself ouer-ruled by affection, as might
be judged if he should name any of his own Sons: gave the first battle
to Dyrdan* in honor of his Father Maiortes, so faithful always to the
Grecian Empire. The young Lord, glad of so special a favor, hoping beside of
glorious victory, came forth armed, with his sword ready drawn, and drawing
near the Monster, smote him over the head with his sword: but he found it so
impiercible, and rather damageable to his weapon, as he grew doubtful of the
honor, belonging to this enterprise. Nevertheless, turning again to the
beast, he was caught within the divided tail, and thrown three times about so
furiously, as his memory failing him, he fell to the ground greatly astonished.
But he being of a very valiant spirit, quickly recovered footing again, and
offered once more to make proof of himself: but the old Woman thus prevented
him.

No more Sir Knight, because if well ye understand me, the condition by me
propounded was thus: that if any Knight were ouer-throwne by the Monster, he
should be admitted to fight no longer. The Emperor perceiving the old Woman's
intent, gave a sign to Dirdan that he should withdraw himself, and Don
Edward caused Pompides to present himself: who very boldly assailed ye Monster
with his sword, reaching him such a thrust in the flank, as well near had
made him to tumble over. But the beast gave him such a blow on the breast with
his foot, as made him fall down backward: Whereat each one both grieved and
meruailed, seeing two so good Knights so soon disabled.

Dragonalte, by Don Edwards license, was the next that assailed the Monster,
and he being very nimble at all advantages, gave the beast diverse hurts,
which (by reason of his slothfulness) he could not shun: But catching at
length the sword between his teeth, snatched it out of his hand, and made at
him so furiously, that striking him rudely against the ground, very hardly
could he arise to withdraw himself. Floraman, having received his sign from
Don Edward, delivered many rough strokes to the Monster, but could not by any
means wound him: and traversing about to keep him forth of danger, still
using his sword for his best advantage, at length he was caught between the
monsters tail, which cast him up the height of a Lance, when falling down,
he lay as if he had been dead, to the great grief of every one, who doubted
least this strange adventure, would serve as a shame to the Grecian Court.

Don Edward, fearing this monster would sley some of the Knights, called for
Palmerin, who staying a little to gird on his sword, was prevented by
Dramusiande, who though he stood before as one amazed, meruailing at these
strange encounters: pricked forward by valor, he set himself against the
beast, and not seeking how to hurt him otherwise, caught fast hold on his
great tail, which he held so strongly, as the beast could not recover it from
him: for such was the Giants greatness, as he could neither lift him up, nor
cast him down. During this contention, to the great pains of Dramusiande, who
would not let go the tail, neither could have other kind of victory: every
one was very pensive, not knowing what issue of these affairs to hope for.
Dramusiande, endeavoring with all his strength to cast the monster, became so
wearied, as he was not able to strive any longer: whereupon, entering into
better advise, with a leap he threw himself upon the beasts back, and
holding him with his hand at the vauntage of the chain, gave him such
prouokings with his legs, as the monster to be disburdened of so great a
weight, ran to the shore side, and at one skip mounted into the Sea: where
Dramusiande, not terrified with fear, though he beheld himself but dead as
it were, kept still his hold upon the beast, as if afterward he should
chance to leap on shore again.

Arlencea, when she beheld her husband in this danger, for whom she had shed
so many tears when he was reputed dead: fell on her knees at the old woman's
feet, and thus bespake her. Sweet Lady, if ever thou did vouchsafe love to
any one, I pray thee suffer not my husband to be drowned. The old woman,
hearing herself coniured in this manner, being herself (as you shall hear)
deeply enamored, made a sign, and the monster mounted back with Dramusiande
into the Barque, which stood ready for purpose at the Land-side. Afterward, by
her art she caused the other four Knights that received the foil, to be
therein likewise conuayed: then entering the Barque herself, she launched so
far into the Sea, as she could be but heard to speak in this manner.

My Lord, I must have these Knights with me, because I may by good reason
claim them, and Dramusiande shall bear them company likewise, for I am Dorina
his Coosin, that preserved him, as now your selves have beheld: him have I
great occasions to employ in, and shortly shall he return again in the same
estate, as when he was young and eyghteene years old. Then causing him to
come upon the deck with her, they were heard confer together very
familiarlie, to the great liking of all the beholders, though loath to have them
thus carried thence.

Arlencea (above the rest) seeing her husband with such a light Damsel, as
now she showed herself, was almost dead with jealousy: but that she had
heard Dramusiande often swear she was his Coosin, and therefore she had the
less cause of fear. Dorina bidding them adiewe, set sail and departed. The
cause of her coming thus, and carrying away the Knights with her, the sequel
of the history shall make manifest: for now we must return again to
Targiana, at Tubante.

CHAP. XIIII. How Sucusano became enamoured of Targiana, and knowing Florian to
be Nephewe to the Emperor Primaleon, laid hold on him: suspecting likewise
evil between him and Targiana.
ON the next morning, when Sucusano was entered Tubante, as ye heard before
declared, Targiana with the Armenian Princess, entered the great Hall, she
likewise leading Florian by the hand: and so sumptuously was she attyred, as
the Persian (given more by nature to martial affairs, the^ loves wanton
allurements) seeing her such a princely and beautiful creature: became
foorth-with enamoured, and so much the rather did he promise success to his
love, in that the supposed Turk which came to him, to wit, the Prince Florian,
had by his strength freed her, and was now in her company. Therefore, at the
first to make known his love, he took her by the hand, and placing her in her
Fathers seat, there pronounced her to be rightful Queen: of which favor
before she had but little hope, when it was generally suspected, yt Sucusano
sought to signorize over all Turkey himself.

The Persian made many amourous semblances to Targiana, but yet so simply, as
none of the beholders took any heed thereof: except Florian, who diligently
noted all, and ruminating with himself, what success was likely to ensue upon
this new love, grew in some sort fearful of violence, that might be offered
him by this Pagan. Another while he was surprised with doubts, least Targiana,
moved by so great a state as the Persian, should alter her mind. So floting on
this variety of opinions, Sucusano embraced his Sister, who knowing that
Florian was married to Targiana, whereby herself was disappointed of all hope,
she began to convert her love into hatred, and seeing how her Brother was
likely to grow frantic for Targiana, she imagined this the best way to
trouble this marriage, already celebrated with such love. But like one very
subtle, she dissembled her intent, and showing nothing but cheerful
disposition, offered to sit down by Targiana: who not dreaming at all on her
fond affection, committed to her trust her nearest secrets.

A supper of great pomp was prepared, whereat Sucusano would sit right before
Targiana, wherewith Florian was so highly offended, as many times he thought
to have slain him: and he had done it, but that he knew not how to defend
the City from so great an Army, and Targiana being so lately seated, had no
people in readiness to back such an enterprise. Sucusano, not minding
Florian, reputing him a Turk but of mean quality, set down his rest, to
enjoy Turkey, and the Souldanesse of Babylon, considering withal, that when he
was become Lord of such a strength, he might be revenged on the Christians for
the death of his Brother.

Ten days together the feasts and banqueting endured, in which time
Sucusano courted Targiana to ye proof, as making himself assured, that she
should be his wife: and among other amourous ceremonies, placing his rude hand
upon her delicate breast, said: I love thee, and yet am silent. The Lady, yt
abhorred him more then death, showed herself so disdainful, as the Persian
began to persuade himself, that the Ladies thoughts were elsewhere addicted.

Between this love and disdain, stepped in the Armenian Princess, who seeing
Targiana so scornful toward her brother, knowing also what had past between
her and Florian, her thoughts laboring twixt love and hatred, would, (and yet
she would not) declare to Sucusano what Florian was, whom he imagined to be a
Turk. Continuing in these imaginations, a matter happened, that made her enemy
with Targiana, and thus it was. Targiana one day busied about affairs
concerning the estate, the Armenian Princess finding Florian alone and
pensive: reputing herself no way inferior to Targiana in beauty, she came
and sat down by him, entering into these speeches. Knew I not that your self
has made proof of loves sovereign forces, I should forbear to reason with
you in amourous discourse: but your gentleness, and my hard fortune
constrayneth, that albeit I know your thoughts are devoted to Targiana, yet
must I entreat one grant of love, yielding my self wholly to your power. And
as she delivered these words, a sea of tears streamed from her eyes, her heart
still trembling, expecting his aunswers.

Florian, overcome with grief, for the love he saw Sucusano use toward
Targiana, made her no reply: and she (by his silence) conceiving some hope
that he would love her, threw her arms about his neck, when it happened that
Targiana (having ended her business) suddenly stepped in, and seeing in her such
unseemly behavior, thus spoke. Ah shameless Damsel, whether has thy
luxurious appetite transported, thus to insult upon another right? And into
worser terms would she have grown, but that the Lady (as one confounded)
without returning any answer, stepped forth of the Chamber, leaving both them so
astonished, as neither of them well knew what to say: especially Florian, who
considering the great perrill and doubt wherein Targiana stood at this
instant, had not the power to comfort her, himself being oppressed with what
he most feared.

The Princess of Armenia, conceiving deep disdain at Targianas words, and
seeing herself despised by Florian, went directly to her Brother, and there
declared, that the dissembled Turk, who had done so much for Targiana, was
Prince Florian of the Forest, termed the Knight of the Savage man: who was
married to Targiana, not withstanding yt by his hand her former husband Albayzar
was slain, yet had she made a lascivious choice of him.

Sucusano perceiving within his power, the very greatest enemy that
Heathenesse had, reputed himself most happy, saying: Since Targiana had
committed an offense so unpardonable, he thought her unworthy to be his wife.
But because he would not loose so rich a booty, he caused the chamber to be
round engirt where Florian was, whence Targiana but little before was angerly
departed, and was busily talking with certain of her chiefest Barons, how
Sucusano intended to take away her Kingdom from her. The Persians being
entering the Chamber, assailed Florian, finding him unarmed, but only with his
Rapier: nor sought they to kill him, but thronged round about him, to take him
alive, so in the end he was bound, and carried forcibly to Sucusano.

Targiana, hearing the rumor and noise, ran to the Chamber, and diverse with
her, whom she had made to arm themselves: but ouer-late was her coming, for
they had thence conveyed her lover, and doubting now what might become of him,
attyring herself like a man, and accompanied with an ancient Knight, she got
presently forth of the City.

Sucusano having thus gotten Florian, intended a sollemne revenge, for all the
injuries before received, but yet he was much offended, that he had not
Targiana: wherefore he sent to search the Palace, and not finding her, he
understood by a Damsel committed to torment, that two hours before, she was
departed in habit of a man, giving diverse other signs beside, whereby she
might be soonest known.

Now was not the Persian slack in sending forth his Knights by sundry ways,
to pursue her, that they might bring her back again unto him: and perceiving
how the Turks were addicted in love to her, he mindid as yet no violence
toward her, till first he were fully possess of her Kingdom: then he
concluded to satis-fie his lust with her, and afterward (to despite her the
more) to give her as a spoil to his very worst boy.

The Knights posting about every way, toward Sunsetting, they found her by a
Fountain, where (being wearied with riding) she stepped aside to refresh
herself, minding to have ridden all that night. When she beheld herself
overtaken by the Persians, without any on her behalf to make resistance, she
was so strangly distracted with grief, as the Knights setting her on
horseback, had carried her more then a mile, before she made any sign of
reviving: but being come to herself, she uttered ye wofulst lamentations
that ever was heard from any Lady.

The Knights, who little knew her case, used some comfortable speeches, that
Sucusano, the great Lord of Persia, earnestly desired to make her his Wife: so
that she had more cause to rejoice, then to offend her self with grief and
weeping. These reasons little auailed with her afflicted thoughts, in that she
well knew to what end Sucusano sent to take her: so recommending all the
Christians to God, in whose faith she had firmly promised to continue, she
rode on quietly, remembering she had often heard some of her Christian slaves
say, that Christians calling only to their God in time of their tribulation,
received help by him: as likewise she did, as shall be declared in the Chapter
following.

CHAP. XV. How Dorina, with the four Knights and Dramusiande, arrived at the
City of Tubante, and delivered Targiana, with whom they entered the Fortress.
THe Knights that had the charge of Targiana, not suspecting any thing, rode
on disorderly, jesting among themselves to delight the Lady. But Dorina, who
knew the success of all that had happened, qualified her course of navigations
in such sort, as she made choice of time for deliverance of Targiana. And this
she did, to the end Sucusano might not prove the marriage by her testimony,
that she had taken Florian to her husband: for the Persian (by this accusation)
might lawfully deprive her of her kingdom, and put Florian to death as he had
determined, though the Turks knew nothing what he was before his taking.

Afterward, when they understood more of him, in regard of the service he had
done their Sovereign, they would not consent that he should be slain: but
rather instantly desired, he might safely be sent into Christendom, because
they had received certain tidings from Constantinople, that the Emperor
Primaleon, with all the most famous men at Arms, were alive and recovered. But
when it was told, that Targiana their Queen had made this Knight her husband,
with promise likewise to refuse her faith: they would presently have both him
and her torn in a thousand pieces. Dorina then, that Florian might not perrish
by this occasion, bethought her on these Knights, suspecting what danger was
like to ensue, and brought them (as you have heard) from the Perilous I Will,
conducting them on to the rest of the enterprise. And having particulerlie
conferred with Dramusiande, knowing the especial love he bare to Florian, who
had adventured many perrills for him: she would not disclose that he had
married Targiana, but labored him with earnest persuasions, that now he
would stand her lover in some steed, even as he had any pity of her,
showing him likewise the wound she gave her self, when Florian so vngentlie
departed from her Castle.

Dramusiande, who well knew how entirely she affected the Prince, had
compassion on her, and promised his uttermost on her behalf: but (in his
opinion) it would very little avail her, such was his conceit for loss of the
Princess Leonarda, after whose death desperately he left the Perilous I Will. So
bringing her Barque on shore, she mounted all the Knights, disguising them
after the Turkish manner, to the end they might (without suspicion) fall in
company of Targiana. From midnight rode on these five Knights, till morning
appeared, and then they ouertooke the Persians, as they were entering at a
secret gate of the Castle, that Targiana might not publicly be seen of the
Turks.

Dramusiande, getting near Targiana, lifting up his beuer, spoke to her in the
Greek tongue, (which she very well understood, by means of her aboade in
the Emperors Court:) Fear not Lady, for here is come in your defense
Dramusiande, with these four Knights of Constantinople Court: so taking her by
the arm, set her before him on his saddle.

The Persians seeing only five Knights take the Lady from them, ran all to
assail Dramusiande, on whom they had bestowed many Lances, but that they
feared to kill Targiana, whom they had special charge to bring back alive,
yet received she a little hurt on her back. Floraman, Pompides, Dragonalte,
and Dirdan, circkling her about, defended her all the way toward the Castle,
killing with forcible strokes many Persians. The croude was so great, that very
hardly could they get onward, yet getting nearer the Castle side, one of the
Guarde, who sometime had been Page to Targiana, knew her by her habit, and
crying, Behold our Princess, without longer stay, let down the Bridge, when
Dramusiande and his four companions, though well near wearied with using
their weapons, got themselves upon it: and Dorina (by her art) having the
gate ready open, permitted them entrance, but above an hundred Persians entered
with them, who standing in fear of their Lord Sucusano, if they did not bring
back Targiana with them: concluded to regaine her alive or dead, for ere long
an infinite number more would come to assist them, because all the Persian
Camp was hereon in an vproare.

Dramusiande, having gotten in the Princess, returned on the Bridge with a
mighty Mace in his hand, which he found by chance at the entrance of the
gate: and dealing his blows about him, so many he sent headlong into the
Ditch, that the rest beholding their manifest perrill, were glad to give
back: so the Bridge was drawn up, even as Sucusano (hearing of these news)
came thither with the flower of all his Army.

Dirdan, and the other Knights, with the men of the Castle, gave such
entertainment to the Persians which got in with them, as they dispatched them
all, not leaving one alive.

Targiana, when she had considered with herself, that through want of
victuals she could not keep long in that Castle: she went to the gate next
to the City, where causing a Trumpet to be sounded, great concourse of people
was immediately assembled, and she coming herself upon the Port, spoke to
them in this manner. You see (my faithful friends and loving Countrymen) how
Sucusano, urging false slanders against me, has sought to inflict sharp
torments on me, to make me confess what never entered into my thoughts, and
afterward (by that excuse) unjustly to defeat me of my lawful right and
kingdom, and to enjoy it himself. I am certain, that you would not willingly
be under the Persian government, and my self doubting you should be in
subjection to foreign rule: will rather yield the kingdom to Ristorano, who
is of the royal progeny of your own Princes. Now, seeing in what estate I
am, if you respect my life, have care of me and of these Knights, who have
adventured themselves for defense of my liberty: and because ye are likewise
beholding to Florian, who (only moved by his own gentle nature) put himself
into so many perrils, to deliver me from imprisonment: go therefore with your
power to the Palace, so soon as ye shall be conducted the way, and free him
from prison, that enfranchised your Queen.

By chance there was then present in hearing hereof, a great Signior of
Antioch, being subject to the Crown of Turkey, who bearing some affection to
Targiana, and imagining, by accomplishing a service of such import, it was the
readiest way to attain her love: forthwith he called together a very
sufficient troop, and to the Palace they went, where they could not find
Florian, because the Persians, (doubtful of maintaining themselves in the
City) had secretly led him with them to their Camp. Which tidings greatly
displeased Targiana and the Knights, but especially Dramusiande, who was ready
to die with conceit of grief. Now because the Persians had forsaken the
City, they issued forth of the Castle, leaving Targiana and Floraman still
to keep it, so running to the Palace, they gave order for defense of the
walls: intending likewise to advertise the Emperor of these affairs thus
happening in Turkey, but by reason of the multitude of Persian horesemen, as
yet they knew not how to compass the means.

Dramusiande, to show what perrill should ensue on Sucusano, if he durst put
to death the Knight of the Savage man, went armed into the field to demand
battle: carrying this opinion, that if he could kill any great Co^maunders of
the field, or take them prisoners, he should urge dismay in the rest, and so
the easier recover his friend. The Persians hearing the battle called for,
and not knowing as yet against who^ to wage it, fell in contention among
themselves on the matter: contrary to the liking of Sucusano, who reputed
Dramusiande one of the most signal Christian Knights, that ever searched after
adventures. After his Persians had long importuned him, he gave them license
for the fight, and the first that came forth was a Giant, descended from the
progeny of Darmaque, who was slain by Palmerin d' Oliua, for which, having
mortal hatred against all Christians, he declared his discontented mood, and
making his sign for the Ioust, without speaking one word, he proceeded to
encounter him.

Alfiero, for so was he named, being a hardy man at arms, wounded
Dramusiande upon the shoulder, bearing away with his Lance the piece of
Armor that covered it, but the Christian piercing him through the shield,
passed on through his arm, bearing both horse and man to the ground, when
easily he might have slain him before he could get from under his horse: but
using knightly courtesy, he stayed his leisure till he could arise. The Giant,
who never knew what courtesy meant: imagined, that this favor proceeded from
his enemies slender skill in chivalry, whereupon he said: Foolish Knight,
seeing thy wit served thee not, to overcome me when I could not defend my
self: I Will teach thee better judgment by the temper of this sword.

Dramusiande, returning no answer, dismounted from his horse, and aduauncing
his weapon, began to hacke and hew Alfiero: which strokes were so well replied
unto, as both of them were very sore wounded. Mary Dramusiande bestird himself
about so nimbly, as his hurts seemed but little to offend him: and now he began
to beat his enemy round about the field, even at his own pleasure, and the
others great disadvantage.

Alfieros two Brethren, no less courageous then himself, seeing their brother
grow into such extreme weakness, having purposely hid themselves in a wood
near hand, suddenly rushed forth together upon Dramusiande, who finding
himself much wearied, and being now so ouer-matched, could not defend
himself against these three, but they buckling round about him, took him
prisoner. For which Targiana was at deaths door, yet the other four Knights
renewed her comfort: albeit they greatly reproved themselves, because they were
not as then armed in the field, trusting but shallowly the Pagans
faithfulness. Sucusano feyned, that this Knights imprisonment, rather
displeased him, then otherwise, and would not that he should be led to his
Tent: yet made he no other show, of setting him at liberty again.

Dorina, when she beheld matters fall from ill to worse, repented that she had
not brought Palmerin and Florendos with her: but that nothing might want which
she was able to perform, she would personally go to Constantinople, and
thence bring with her the most famous Knights, that Florian might not die,
whose grief was incomparable, because he could not hear what was become of
Targiana. And Sucusano many times would have slain him, not so much for
revenge of his Brothers death, as utterly depriving Targiana of all hope, to
enjoy him as her husband, were he so or not: or if she were not married to
him, then her mind might alter, and choose him for her husband. But still
herein his Counsel diswaded him, saying: That when never so many Pagan Lords
prevailed by their powerful Armies, evermore the most valiant of the
Christians were permitted to live: as not to incite those spirits forward, that
before were animated to pursue revenge.

Notwithstanding, he might cause it to be noysed abroad, that Florian should
be beheaded, and placing a Scaffolde near the City, engirt it round with
his own Caual^erie: then to bring thither some other malefactor, yt should be
of his height, and apparrelled so like him, as it might be generally reputed to
be he. By these means he should perceive the disposition of Targiana, and yet
keep the Knight in prison still, for all accidents that after might ensue.
Sucusano was highly pleased with this advise, and caused a Scaffolde to be
raised in sight of the City, and the day following, a prisoner was brought
thither after the order appointed: who by the distaunce of ground, and
multitude of horsemen hemming it about, could not otherwise be discovered but
to be Florian. But now we must needs turn to the Perilous I Will, where (as you
know) we left the Emperor.

CHAP. XVI. How the Emperor Primaleon returned to Constantinople with Don
Rosuell, and what happened to the rest. Likewise, how the wise Aliart, advertised
Palmerin, Florendos, and other more, of Prince Florians case, who needs would
depart to give him succor.
PRimaleon the Emperor, being now in full readiness, set sail for
Constantinople, having Don Rosuell with him, which else had not been
permitted, but that the danger of death was past him. The morrow following,
Don Edward, very malecontent that he could not wear his Armor, embarked
himself for England, and left the Perilous I Will. Wise Aliart, who while the
Emperor and Don Edward remained there, would not disclose to what end Dorina
had led away ye Knights, because grief for the Knight of the Savage man, as
also their unableness to travail, being unapt to bear Arms, would have
hazarded their lives: but they being gone, calling Palmerin and Florendos
aside, he made known unto them Prince Florians case, who was taken but the day
before. He told withal, how Dramusiande, and the other four Knights, was
conducted thither by Dorina, for he stood in great need of help, and all was
for the safety of Targiana.

The Knights, being very pensive at these news, armed themselves in all have,
and without taking leave of any other but Aliart, with a ship are sailing
toward Turkey. This their sudden departure, not a little moved the other
Princes, and desirous to know the cause, they importuned Aliart: who as yet
would not let them go, for although their wounds were thoroughly healed, yet
were they weak and feeble: but being unable to contain, such was his fear
of Florian, he told the whole discourse, whereon the Knights prepared
themselves presently.

Platir, Berolde, and Gracian, were in such have to be gone, to be there in
time for help of their friend, that desiring no more company, (for they
thought it a shame to go so many together) they set on toward the place where
Aliart had appointed them. Blandidon very angry that they would not stay for
him, was feign to go alone, and so did Francian likewise: but leave we them to
their journey, and speak of some matters done in the Perilous I Will.

Aliart, who took care to maintain the family of Palmerin, caused the
children of these Princes to be brought up very industriously: that when
occasion served, it should appear they were well governed, wise, and apt to
arms. Among who^, the second Primaleon was of such fierce courage, as he
terrified Aliart, doubting least afterward he would not be benign to other
Knights, but prove as stern as his Graundfather Palmerin. Wherefore Arguto,
son to Frisoll, who declared himself to be somewhat proud, when he came to
deal with him at his weapon, would fight disdainfully, and was desirous to
kill him: but Aliart, who diligently regarded them, would suffer them to fight
no more together, for hereby he gathered, that when these Princes came to
years, there would be mortal hatred between them.

The like strife was in Leonato and Tarnaes, by reason they both delighted in
Candida, daughter to Belizart, whose very name obscured every one, that sought
to be famous by beauty. For these reasons Aliart was desieous to separate
them, but he could not send the one away, except he did the like to the other:
therefore (though against their wills) they abode there together: and he
likewise desired as yet to keep them there, till matters were better
established in Christendom, for France, Spain, Almayne, and most of the
other Kingdoms (having lost their Princes) were subjected to mutinous
seditions, whence great ruin was likeliest to ensue: beside, he was the more
willing to stay them still there, that they might not seek after their order
of Knighthoode, until they were grown in years more strong and able.

Oliuanto, brother to Primaleon, being yet very young, gave assured testimony
that he would become valiant: but Leonato, son to Palmerin of England, showed
himself so forward to chivalry, and was so like in countenance to great
Palmerin his father, as wonderful matter was expected of him, because he gave
himself to so brave disposition. Caro, son to Gracian, kept in secret by his
Nurse, was conuayed thence into Spain. Belcar, son of Francian, Estrellant
of Rosuell, Fortenbracio of Bellizart, and Orino of Dramian, were all of great
towardlines: but Tarnaes son to Platir, was so unlike the other in managing
Arms and other behavior, as there seemed to shine in him a kind of
Lacedemonian severity, for whosoever had marked the image of Lycurgus the
Lacedemonian lawmakers, even the same that was to be seen on his Tomb: have
sworn that he rather resembled his figure, then that of Platir his father.
Franardo and Almaroll of young Giants stature, declared the same spirits
remained in their fathers: but being children as yet, no other judgment could
be made of them. Now leave we them, to go see with what love the Emperor
Primaleon entered Constantinople.

The people being advertised of their Lords return, came upon the bridge with
such sportes and feasting, as never was the like seen in Constantinople
before, for Brundo the Governor suffered nothing wanting, that might any way
serve to honor him withal. At the gates and crosse-wayes of the streets,
were placed triumphall arches, whereon was presented the passed battles
against the Pagans: to wit, the death of the enemies, but not of the Christian
princes. Both great and small there humbly submitted themselves, all weeping
for joy, which made the Emperor and Grydonia shed tears: and according as it
was appointed, in the first Church of the City they came at, the Imperial
Crown was set on their heads, to make the solemnity more royal, and this the
only joyful day that ever before was seen in that City.

The Emperors walk continued from morning till night, not able to satis-fie
himself, seeing each ruined place newly reedified: so that now he might spend
his time in joy, but for the pain of his arm. Yet the death of so many
Princes was grievous to him, to whose children therefore he confessed himself
the more indebted: chiefly to the Emperor of Almaigne, who died, both he and
Polinard his brother. Wherefore, by sending his Ambassadors into that Kingdom,
there came to his Court Bazilia very aged, and with her a son of Polinards,
named Trineus, which he begot on a Lady of that Country, whom he took to wife
only for her beauty.

The Emperor was exceeding joyful to behold the young Prince, who was about
the age of thirteen years, apt and towardly to receive his charge of the
Empire. After solemn welcomes used to his sister, and the Princes that were
come to the coronation of their Emperor: he caused young Trineus to sit
down in a chair of estate by him, and with all royal pomp to be anointed
Emperor: then setting the Crown on his head, in magnificent state he rode
with him thorough the City, to the end he might the better be known, and
more publicly honored.

All the ceremonies being accomplished, he gave himself to the hearing of
weighty causes, such as Brundo wanted authority to perfect: for he being
but a Lieuetenant, would not put his hand to every business, but reserved them
of most importance for the Emperor himself, whose coming was from time to
time so long expected.

CHAP. XVII. What happened in Turkey, when the prisoner dissembled in the steed
of Florian was led to death.
SVcusano, according as he had been councelled, commanded, that fifty
thousand horsemen (ready prepared for fight, should circle the Scaffold: where
each of them verily believed, that justice was to be performed on Prince
Florian, and the very same opinion was conceited in the City. With much ado
the prisoner was brought thither, and the Christian Knights (full of grief)
armed themselves to go to death with him, for now they were void of all hope
to free him. Targiana, because Dorina was gone to Constantinople for aid,
seeing she now should remain alone in the Castle, began to be dismayed: and
though her friends labored to comfort her, yet would she not remain as a
pray to her enemy, but providing herself with Armor accordingly, would
needs bear them company, considering, that seeing she must needs die, she
could never have better occasion, then to spend her life in giving help to
her husband. So she with ye four Knights mounted on horseback, having about a
thousand Turks with them: who perceiving that their Princess went to this
dismal stratageme, were the more willing to bear her company. Great was the
rumor amongst the Persians, and the crowde so wonderful, as hardly could they
bring their dissembled prisoner to the Scaffold: but Targiana and her train
shouldering in among them, got into the way where they must pass with the
prisoner.

Dirdan fearing they would ouer-soone attain the Scaffold with his friend,
made such speed forward, and outstript his company so far, that he was
known by the Persians, who fiercely assailing him, slew his horse under him,
and at length (after he had slain about fifty of them,) he was taken
prisoner. They never minding to carry him before Sucusano, but taking him by
his Armor to be a Pagan, that was a favorer of the Christians, led him along
with the other to behead him. Pompides, Dragonalte, Floraman, and Targiana with
the rest, having lost the sight of Dirdan, and hearing the marvelous noise
among the Soldiers, imagined what was to true: then striving to get onward,
the preasse was so innumerable, they could make no way, but still were driven
back by such a shock of people, as they knew not well how to stir themselves.

Dragonalte, being gotten hand to hand with a Giant, brother to Alfiero, that
had taken Dramusiande, so separated the company, that being alone with him,
he found small courtesy at the Giants hands, who being assisted by many of
his followers, took him likewise, and led him on with the other prisoners to
the Scaffold. Floraman, Pompides, and Targiana, carrying themselves very
valiantly, did very much with their weapons, but to small avail: because they
were so hemd in with enemies, as they could not hope to get forth alive.
Wherefore, proceeding on so far as they could, Targiana, who labored to
attain the place, where she imagined her Florian to be, pricked still
forward, but being kept back by the Persians, that kept the prisoners in a
round, after she had defended herself so well as she could, (having on an
enchaunted Armor, that sometime belonged to her great Graundfather) she was
taken unwounded, and led bound to suffer death with the other prisoners,
because she was not known, and she herself, perceiving this was no place to
make her self known, kept silence, least she should be further tormented.

These affairs falling out thus unfortunately, it came to pass, that (the
night before) Palmerin and Florendos, were arrived at the Castle of Albayzo,
which was held by the Christians, (as is declared in the book of Primaleon)
and that it was conquered by Polendos. Here they were given to understand,
that the next morning, Prince Florian should loose his head: it was no need to
bid them ride all night, and such speed they made, that (by the ninth hour
the next day) they reached the Persian Camp. When they heard such a mighty
noise as was made, they thought the Christian to be dead, or in extreme
perrill, wherefore putting spur too lustily, they happened on that side, where
Pompides and Floraman, with about three hundred Turks, were strongly borne
back. Then running into the crowde with full carrire, not hiding their signal
at Arms, they began so to lay about them, that the Persians amazed, to see a
man sliced through the midst, and some-time both horse and man hewn through at
a blow: began to make way for them. Beside, when some noted the Arms
imperial, and others the badge of the Serpent, both which they feared so much
in the war at Constantinople, gladly they withdrew themselves.

So got these two Knights into company of Pompides and Floraman, who reckoning
the^ but in state of dead men, only sought to sell their lives so dearly as
they could: and being both on foot, Palmerin (knowing Pompides by his
Scottish Arms) cried to him: Fear not Knight, for here is Palmerin of
England. Then killing a Giant that stood contending with him for the
maisterie, he took the Giants horse, and gave it to Pompides: who because he
would be no longer trodden among the people, mounted thereon quiclie.

Florendos, sided his friend Floraman, and dealt his alms so bountifully about
him, that he had soon got him on horsbacke to. Thus these four Knights kept
their own squadron, defending their Turkish assistants, who were very weary,
and but few in number: yet seeing what valiant Captains fought for them, they
stood to it manfully every one.

A Persian that knew Palmerin and Florendos by their Arms, went presently to
acquaint Sucusano therewith, who imagining the game were absolutely won, if
he could be possessed of these two Knights, beside, that not only the Grecian
Empire were conquered, but all Turkey likewise assuredly his own: commanded
all his whole power forthwith in a readiness, determining so to enclose them
with Armed men, as they should compass no means to escape.

So busily was every one arming himself, as Dramusiande was quite forgotten,
who being shut up in a Chamber in the Tent, had bound up his wounds and
recovered good strength. He seeing each one so earnestly employed, and that
little or no care at all was had of him, covering himself with a Persian
cloak, as if he meant to lay him down and sleep: watched opportunity, when
stealing forth, he went along lymping like a wounded Persian, holding down
his head on his hand, as hiding a hurt, and being thus gotten forth of the
Camp, made have toward the City, where making himself known, he was let in,
there compassing the means to Arm himself anew.

All this while the prisoners were in leading forward, and now they had
attained near the Scaffold, when suddenly a Turkish Knight, one of them that
went forth with Targiana, returned to the City, bringing news that the
Princess was taken, and should be beheaded. At these tidings, all the people
arose, and arming themselves immediately, went and joined with ten thousand
Soldiers, which came under the conduct of the before named Lord of Antioche.

Dramusiande, not a little glad of this supply, led the way out of the City,
having thirty hundred horse in his company, and so soon as he reached the
Persian power, he made toward the Scaffold so near as he could, bearing a
Mace, yt sometime belonged to Alfiero, which he brought with him forth of the
enemies Camp, because it was strong, and well knotted. Such havoc made he
therewith amongst the Persians, that where he came, every one gave him place,
and now had the Turks recovered the prisoners, but ye fifty thousand horse,
with a brave troop of Infanterie suddenly came upon them: these so environed
the Turks on every side, as not a man could devise how to get away.

Palmerin, Florendos, and the other twain, being earnestly fighting on the
contrary wing, knew nothing of this stir, by reason whereof they had greatly
been endangered: but that the Persians (sore weakened by their mighty
strokes) shunned so much as they could, from dealing with them at the swords
point any longer, but sent Lances, darts, and arrows to them very thick from
a far off, having no other help left to defend their own lives.

By this time was there arrived from the Sea, Platir, Berolde, and Gratian, who
having met a footman wounded to the death, heard, that this battle was in
rescue of a Knight, in danger to be executed, his name being Florian: and
three other (thrusting themselves in for his defense) were likewise in the
fight taken prisoners.

These Knights, seeing the Army (in a manner) numberless, not able in ten
days space to be discomfited, when likewise they beheld mountains of
slaughtered men, they thought it impossible to recover Florian: yet not to
fail one jot in Knightly duty, they set upon the Camp, even where they
imagined the skirmish to be hottest, and that was where Dramusiande was circled
in with the enemy, yet cheerfully fighting to encourage his followers. This
small handful of united hearts prevailed so successefully, as the Persians
(seeing such a fresh charge come backward, imagined themselves assailed with
Turks both before and behind: so beginning more and more to loose the field,
the Turks compassed the means to get near the Scaffold, whereon already they
had mounted the dissembled prisoner to behead him.

Florendos and the rest seeing him on the Scaffold, made such have to help
him, as beating down every one that stood in the way to resist them, they got
near the other prisoners: and cutting the cords wherewith Dirdan,
Dragonalte, and Targiana were bound, holp to mount them on horseback again,
providing them of swords and shieldes for their defense. Targiana, giving the
spurs to her horse, rode on with such fury to free her Florian, that she
being the first which got upon the Scaffold, at one blow slew the executioner,
and cut the halter wherewith the prisoner was bound: but when she saw it was
not Florian, she was greatly astonished, nevertheless, finding him in such
danger, she used all means she could to save him, calling to the Christians,
not to forsake him, but seeing Florian was not there, to rescue him.

When Dramusiande saw the prisoner unbound, and perceived what had been
performed by the valor of Palmerin and Florendos, without making any reckoning
of his own life, perforce he got him self up on the Scaffold, taking the
prisoner up under his shield, to bear him to the City, he knowing no other
but that it was Florian: but by reason the prisoner was unarmed, he could never
have carried him forth of the Army alive, had not Platir, Berolde, and Gracian
made toward him, who laid so valiantly every way about them, as Dramusiande got
through ye throng, and went to the City.

When he beheld the prisoner not to be Florian, he stood awhile as one amazed,
but to help the rest of his friends against the enemy, he returned
foorth-with again to the field: where the Persians seeing the prisoner was
carried away, and that such loss had ensued on them beside, full gladly would
they have retired, but standing in fear of their Lord, and being so strictly
hemd in, they stood still to it valiantly, to the great hazard of the
Christian Knights lives, but that Blandidon and Francian came to help at a
dead lift, who as they passed by Constantinople, had received of the Emperor a
band of four thousand Soldiers, wherewith having wind and Sea at will, they
came in good time to join with them thus distressed: and entering on that side
where the Tents stood, they gave such a sudden terror to the Persians, (who
well knew the Grecian power, and that few of them were too many to be resisted)
as they began to retire: so this new supply joined with Palmerin and the rest,
conuaying Targiana into the midst among them, because she should be no more
endangered, yet were they all discontented, because they had not recovered
Florian.

Sucusano, seeing such a fresh supply there arrived, and doubting now the
destruction of his whole Army, sounded a retreat: which was not a little
pleasing to the Christians, who being wounded and wearied, especially the
Turks that were their assistants, let the enemy gladly go, and withdrew
themselves likewise to the City. There did they joyfully feast and banquet
together, giving charge that the wounded should be carefully respected:
afterward, they called for the dissembled prisoner, and knowing by him the
subtle drift of Sucusano, desired to understand of whence and what he was.

He seeing himself in the hands of Christians, lifting his eyes to heaven,
thanked God, that had ordained so happy a mean for his deliverance, and thus
answered. My Lords, I am called Mirante, descended of Maulerino, the famous
Magitian, that did so much in favor of Palmerin d' Oliua, and because I
delighted to confer with Christians, Sucusano at his coming into Turkey,
hearing of my inclination, took me prisoner, threatening to kill me at
Constantinople in presence of the Christians. Right glad were the Knights of
meeting with this man, both in regard of his discen^ from Maulerino, as also to
have firm instructions from him, concerning all occurrences of the Kingdom.
But minding more earnestly the freedom of Florian, they perceived ye Sucusano
purposed to sley him: therefore they should bestirre themselves the better for
his deliverance.

CHAP. XVIII. How Sucusano raised his Camp to be gone: and being followed by
the Christian Knights with their power, yielded Florian.
AFter Sucusano beheld, that on every side so many Christians were entered the
field, and their certain number could not be discerned, by the confusion
they made amongst themselves, he purposed a present return into Persia: for
seeing ye most famous Princes of Christendom were so soon arrived there, he
feared that in short time no mean strength would be sent them, and so their
Army might grow to an infinite multitude. But that which most of all dismayed
him, was the shallow disposition he found in his Knights, who though they had
done good service in the late war at Constantinople, yet now they wexed
hartlesse or void of all spirit, by very beholding the Knights of the
Grecian Court, whose behavior was as an unrecoverable daunting to them all.
Ouerswayed with these varying and piercing thoughts, that night he raised his
Camp, and very silently made away with his Army: leaving Tents and Pauilions
good store behind him, yt their base flight might not suddenly be known or
perceived.

The morning ensuing, the Christian Caualierie armed themselves, to try what
they could do for the freedom of Florian, and drawing near the Tents, where
they could neither see man nor hear any noise: upon their further entrance
into the field Trenches, they perceived that the Persians were fled, and had
carried away the Prince Florian with them. This mishap was so displeasing to
all those generous spirits, as it made them to exceed in vehement impacience:
especially Palmerin, who could restrain his rage within no bounds or limits,
because he had so negligently lost his noble brother. Hereupon, they called a
counsel very suddenly, wherein they concluded to turn back to the City: and
taking so many Christians and Turks with them as they could make choice of,
pursue the flying footsteps of cowardly Sucusano.

Being come to the City, they found a fresh reioynder of ten thousand
Turks, who were but now come in the aid of Targiana their Sovereign. Them
they took along, as also the Grecian ^and, and diverse others, amounting to the
number of an hundred thousand horse: and so they put themselves in pursuit of
the Persians, taking likewise with them Mirante, the Nephew of Maulerino, who
promised to conduct them by so near a way, as they should soon join with the
Persian Army.

So setting forward with good provision of victuals, because it was a very
desert Country, they were feign to adventure by such dangerous passages, as
they were much troubled with defending themselves from many wild beasts: but
the Captains and Leaders being careful and diligent, made slaughter of diverse,
and guarded all in safety.

Palmerin, who would needs stray further from the Army then any of the rest,
to track more narrowly the footing of Sucusano, was assailed by two very
furious Lions: that slew his horse under him, and by reason of his foot
hanging fast in the stirrup, had likewise slain him, but that Platir and
Blandidon came in good time, for one Lion had grappled him by the shoulder, and
very easily had dragd him away, but that by the wounds these Knights gave them
both, they were disappointed, and made such loud outcryes on their hurts, that
their cry called thither two Lions more.

Platir wounded deadly the Lion that had fastened on Palmerin, and cutting off
one of his legs, made him fall down along upon the earth. Blandidon cut the
other Lion quite through the reins of the back, which made the beast meddle no
more with Palmerin, but turn to revenge that hurt on him which gave it: so
closing with Blandidon, the Lion had entreated him very curstly, but that he
plied his hand with his short sword, and pierced so far into his entrails,
as the beast tumbled backward over and over.

In this time had Palmerin freed his foot out of the stirrup, and it happened
well that he did recover himself so soon, because of the two other Lions,
that were come at the clamor of them now slain, and a she Bear beside, the
very fiercest that was in all that desert Forest, and having but little before
been robbed of her whelps, made her to be much more violent and furious. The
Lions ran, the one at Palmerin, the other at Platir, and the beasts finding
them as yet not to be crowned (for they neither can nor will offend any of
royal progeny) assailed them somewhat sharply. The she Bear only dealt
with Blandidon: but he ordered her in such sort, as there he made her to
leave her life, where-vppon there came running at him two other huge Bears,
and they had well near laid him along on ground, but that Florendos (envying
that these Knights should seek glory alone by themselves, in a place where
strange adventures were to be found) having committed the Armies care to
Floraman, spurred amain thither, being followed likewise by Dramusiande,
Gracian, and Berolde. Pompides, Dirdan, and Dragonalte, could not so readily
have along with them, by reason of the wounds they received in the last
battle, whereof as yet they were not thorowlie recovered.

These Knights came and joined with the other, even as they were so hardly
beset by the Lions and the Bears, so that the issue of this encounter might
very well be doubted. The Lions (according to their nature) were exceeding
furious, and the Knights being dismounted, spared not to let them feel the
goodness of their weapons: but Dramusiande perceiving Blandidon in very great
perrill, went to help him, and gave the Bear such a wound upon the head, as
part of it fell therewith to the ground: yet for all this the beast made hard
at him, and got him by the bosom, griping hard his right hand with his rude
paws, and but that the Bear was much weakened by his former hurt, he had
been brought into very hard distress, wherefore the other Knights beholding
the necessity, and that Dramusiande was so narrowly bested, came to rescue
him, even as Dramusiande having got his sword into his left hand, made
therewith the beasts right pawe fall to the earth. And so the Giant being now
out of danger, went once more to give succor to Blandidon, who was mightily
disaduantaged by the other Bear: and running mainly at him with a full thrust,
the sword passed quite through him, and the beast tumbled over dead to the
ground.

Palmerin, who had now unbuckled his Cuirasse, found himself sore wounded in
the left flanck: but an undaunted mind being his only supporter, he drew his
hand-kircher through the beasts belly, and clapping it to the hurt, so bound
it up as an especial medicine. Florendos, who in envy was come to this
bickering, had almost found the just punishment to such a sin: for one of the
Lions caught hold on his Creast behind, and threw him so violently against
the ground, as the Helmet flew off his head, and had not Dramusiande stepped to
him in time, his life had been dispatched for ever. But he smiting the Lion upon
the buttock, made him past ability of further going, and lying sprawling along
in raging manner, he roared so extremely, as the cry brought thither above an
hundred Lions, Wolves and Bears: and they had very speedily devoured these
Princes, but that by hap the Army was near at hand, where beholding an
occasion offered of such desert, they slew most part of the beasts, and the
rest fled: notwithstanding, Blandidon, Palmerin, and Berolde, were so hurt in
their first encounters, as for certain days they continued in weak
disposition. Mirante went still before the Army, and now began to get
intelligence of the Persian forces, so that determining upon more speedy
iourneyes, within eight days they could easily discern them from a Mountain,
which serving as a safe Sanctuary to the Christians, allowed them now some
rest after so teadious labor.

Soon after, Floraman who had been created Captain of the whole power, gave
order for entrance into a Wood near adjoining, where quietly reposing
themselves till ^t were night, they might then take the Persians unprovided and
in their sleep: for otherwise they did so exceed them in multitude, as there
could be but slender expectation of victory, nor stood they so much upon
slaughter of the enemy, as only the recovering again of Prince Florian.

So pacing on very silently, about midnight they came close to the Army: which
stood upon small guarde or defense, because they were void of all suspicion.
Our Christian Knights would not assail the weaker forces, but made way for
themselves to the Tent of Sucusano, where then giving out the voice of
battle, they gave a valiant assault, and slew at the first closing above ten
thousand Persians. But because Sucusano had before given order, that five and
twenty thousand should attend every night the guarde of his own person, and
those now, though very sleepie, had their bodies unarmed, and their horses not
sadled: yet suddenly put themselves into so good sort, as they resisted the
Christian power very resolutely, and among them was the Giant Alfiero with his
two Brethren, and they bestird themselves with no mean fury: for, having
Maces of unreasonable weight and greatness, they made havoc enough of all that
durst come near them.

Dramusiande, hearing the report of these Giants, imagined it was they that
before had taken him: wherefore, rushing through the prease, he encountered
Alfiero face to face, saying: Behold how Fortune has once more made us meet,
because at my hands thou should receive thy death. Alfiero, who had soundly
felt his blows before, could gladly have been rid of him: notwithstanding, as
it was now no time for cowardly frights or fears, so he gave forward boldly to
buckle with him, and there they two were at it alone by themselves.

Dramusiande, whose only desire was Prince Florians freedom, fought with such
fury and earnestnes together, as within a small while Alfiero was brought into
such estate, that falling down ouer-laboured among the horse feet, there the
huge Giant was trodden to death. The Persians did what they could to resist this
hot assault, but what with the suddennes, and frighted amazement, neither
could they arm one part of their people, nor endure in any degree against the
Christians. And (which most dismayed them) Sucusano, who supposed so slender a
strength of his enemies, durst not thus so have persued and assailed him: could
now determine on nothing but flight, so causing Florian forthwith to be
horsed, with about two thousand of his trustiest followers, away both he and
they fled toward a Castle.

This was not done with such cunning or secrecy, but it was discerned by his
own Soldiers: who falling into the like affright as their Lord before had
done, and imagining the number of their foes to be more then they could
possibly withstand, began likewise to leave the field, and so the Christians
remained victors.

But when they came to Sucusanos Pauillion, and found that he was escaped and
gone: they grew very desperate, and fearing least they should loose his track,
pursued immediately with all possible speed. But to no purpose had this labor
sorted, had not Dramusiande (by good hap) light on a Dwarffe by the way fallen
into a Ditch, whom he helping out, and taking up before him on his saddle
bow, understood by him whether Sucusano was fled. He aduertising Floraman and
the rest hereof, without taking any provision, or great part of the Camp with
them, they spurrd speedily after, and came thither at the instant, when
Sucusano was coming forth of the Castle, with intent to post toward Persia
presently.

But seeing his enemies thus come upon him, he returned in again, where now
he meant to make himself strong, and send for fresh supply to be his
deliverance. But by reason of the Countries barrennes, not affording victual
or other provision: they grew to articles of agreement, which were, that
Florian should be rendered safe and sound, and he pass without molestation
into Persia, upon promise, never to move more war against the Christians,
nor against the royal Lady Targiana. Thus was Prince Florian delivered, and
Sucusano departed thence, after he had assembled his scattered forces together.

CHAP. XIX. How Dorina left of her love to the Prince Florian, with intent to
advance the honor of Primaleon the second, son to Florendos: not because
she bare any immodest affection to him, but only to make him famous through
the world.
DOrina, after her departure from the city of Tubante, for demand of further
help, when she was alone within her Barque, began to think with herself,
that all her labor was but in vain, in seeking to gain any grace from Prince
Florian: because, beside her being far less fair then the Princess
Targiana, she was likewise but poor. In this regard, herself held it as a
matter most unreasonable, that she should labor him to any such indignity,
considering his strict bond of affection to the Turkish Lady: wherefore,
being ashamed of what she had already done to him, and much reprehending her
former wanton desires, she altered her thoughts now to do somewhat worthy
good repute, without any more subiecting her mind to carnal inclinations. And
entering into consideration with herself, upon what person she might employ
this industrious purpose: immediately she apprehended, that Primaleon the son
of Florendos, was an apt subject to work matter of worth upon. Then looking
advisedly into his nativity, she saw, that he was borne to finish many high
adventures, and should likewise suffer very sharp travails for a Ladies
love: wherefore, being now come to the years of fifteen, and the wise Aliart
having so ordered all matters, that all the young Princes should be sent to
their several estates, Dorina caused a young beautiful Damsel, to appear
to young Primaleon in his sleep, and she taking him by the hand, spoke in
this manner unto him.

My beauty (if any) is only dedicated to be thine, nor can I otherwise choose
but love thee: nevertheless, I have very many great perrils to pass, which
because thy valor must be the only means of, they shall make thee glorious.
For proof hereof, thou shall see a young Virgin, which hereafter shall bring
a Monster into this Island: and when thou see thy self crowned with the
conquest thereof, go whether she shall guide thee for my beauties sake, and
according as thou find thy desires enflamed with my love. This dream so
delighted the young Princes mind, that he found himself presently to be
enamoured, but knew not of whom: for the Damsel that thus saluted him in his
sleep, he could not now discern waking, and therefore could not devise how
to be further satis-fied herein. Hereupon his thoughts became much altered,
and daily would he walk down to the Sea shore, to try if he might gain a
sight of her, that should be his conduct to so worthy an enterprise.

Not many days were past, but as he stood alone upon the strond, he saw a
far off a little Barque making thetherward: whereon, imagining that this
might be it which should bring the Monster, he stayed in further expectation,
within an hour or little more, Dorina put in her Barque to Land, and stepping
forth on shore, went up directly to the Palace: where was Aliart, and all
the other young Princes, who beholding her there arrived in such sort, troopt
together to understand of whence she was.

The Lady falling on her knee before Aliart, spoke in this manner. Mighty and
most discreet Lord, once more am I come hither with my Monster, to try if I can
conclude an enterprise of mine: but now I partly repent my coming hither,
because (turning and looking about her) I see none here likely to conquer the
Monster, for he that could perform it, is to go with me to a greater and much
more honorable adventure.

Aliart, who was not now accompanied with any Knights likely to vntertake a
matter of such moment, thus answered. Good Lady, the adventure of your Monster
could not have failed here, when we had such Knights as your self have made
proof of: but now you come at a very unapt time, for here are none now but
youths only, and such as yet have never been knighted.

Dorina, interrupting Aliarts answer, said: My Lord, I am not come hither by
chance, but directed by a vehement desire, which I have to make famous this
gallant Infantrie, whom Fortune may favor with vanquishing the Monster. And
albeit they are not knighted as yet, that may very easily be provided for: let
them but be had to Constantinople, where the Emperor is ready to knight any
worthy deseruer, and there they may be ready for all good haps whatsoever.

Aliart, who could not well gainsay her reasonable speeches, (for all the
young Lords longed to be exercising arms, and wearied with practizing usual
feats of defense, began to murmr that they were thus long hindered) and
hoping the best of their towardly forwardnes, forthwith commanded a ship to
be made in readiness, and sending all the young Princes aboard, with provision
convenient for such a voyage, under the conduct of Argentao, and with license
of their mothers, though loath to leave them, they were thence dismissed.

Dorina who would not go to Constantinople, dealt so subtly, as she made
her Monster to appear, even as Primaleon the second was ready to step into the
ship: whereof he being desirous to have a further sight, without any longer
tarrying, leapt into the Barque, which suddenly was seen to put off from the
shore, and got more then half a leagues distance, ere they could see what
was become of Primaleon, and afterward it sailed so swiftly, that quickly had
they lost the sight of it altogether. The Ship with the young Lords, made on
for Constantinople, and in meet place shall be shown what after became of
them.

Dorina was not a little glad she had got this young Prince, made him
promise of horse and Armor, and afterward he should undertake an adventure:
which although it would prove dangerous, yet he should accomplish it, and
attain to as great glory and renown, as ever had the Emperor Primaleon, Don
Edward, or Florendos his Father.

Primaleon, who had mind on nothing else but horse, Armor, and knighthood,
made liberal promise of his lyfes hazard in any attempt what soever, as
thinking it a death most glorious, to be afterward eternized famous. So sailing
on, the Barque at length put in at an Island, which seemed rather a receptacle
for wild beasts, then any habitation for civil people: there he (forsaking
the Barque) stepping forth on Land, walked a little along by himself, and
having not been accustomed to such accidents, the vncouthnes of the place
somewhat dismayed him. But afterward, making better remembrance of himself,
considering also what Dorina had said unto him, and doubting least she should
discern any dejected spirit in him, he entered a wood near adjoining, and not
far had he paced along therein, but he had a glimpse of bright Armor
hanging there on a high tree, and being not a little glad that he had found
what he sought for, he hied him to the place, coming so near to it, that he
might easily take it down with his hand, which as he made offer to do,
intending to arm himself therewith, he felt a forcible strength to restrain
him from it, whereat meruayling in his mind, and somewhat offended that he
could not arm himself so soon as he would have done, he made a more violent
proffer, when suddenly he heard a voice from the tree, saying: Fond youth,
since thou though^st to have this Armor so easily, thou must know thou art
deceived therein, for this is the Tree dedicated to Fortune: and who soever
will have this Armor, must swear and vow, to proceed without any fear or
distrust, in all such actions as Fortune shall assign unto him. All which
attempts shall make him much more famous, then any that has sprung from the
family of Palmerin d' Oliua: and shall likewise bestow on him the fairest
Lady, that in all ages past has been seen to this day.

Primaleon, who thought there was no occasion so perrilous, but by his courage
he should out-goe it: took his oath immediately, and protesting the same with
strict asseuerations, to see what further might thereon ensue, he beheld the
Armor to be taken from the tree, and the tree to extend it self into such
largenes, as by little and little it formed it self into a goodly Palace,
after the shape and resemblance of a Theater. In the midst whereof appeared a
seat royal, and thereon sat a Queen very maiestically, with fair goodly
tresses of hair before, but all bald behind: afterward she took a wheel
unto her, whereon there seemed to be many men and women, who changed from place
to place as often as the wheel turned about. There were always some, (though
very few) entreated as favorites, that stood near the footesteps of the
state, and other so near, as they might easily touch it: but at no time durst
any make offer of doing it, nor hold they this happiness for any long
continuance, but ever as they grew proud of th^se graces by Fortune, she
wheeled them about into far more lowlines.

The place was figured forth in very lively cullers, where might be discerned
the four Monarchies in their first flower and beauty, afterward, how the
three (already ruined and destroyed) fell into their overthrow, and the fourth
(to wit, the Roman) tossed up and down by the wheels turnings, now aloft,
then as low, was yet still in the wary eye of Fortune.

There were infinite Kings and Princes together on a heap, striving and
contending for her favoring countenance: but all their labor was in vain,
for the more they strove, the less she respected them.

The young Prince Primaleon, who had care of nothing else but how to compass
the Armor, made no regard of all these apparitions, but pressing on a little
more, he beheld Fortune to descend from her seat, and showing him very kind
looks, as to one whom she especially favored: by her own hands he was armed
Knight-like in all respects, with such loud applause of all the other
bystanders, as it appeared he held no mean room in her grace, which
afterward altered into some shows of envy, because he alone was regarded, and
they held as neglected, then thus she spoke to him.

Henceforth be thou called Fortunes Knight, and very aptly art thou so
entiteled, because thy desires shall never aim at any thing: but for every
drop of sweat thou spendest therein, thou shall have infinites of fame and
glory, and my self always to be thy sovereign Patroness. Primaleon, who
only thirsted after honor, as also to reach the height of his hope in love,
thought this (as well he might) a blessing beyond all other to be thus armed,
and favored by Fortune: then gave she him her forelockes to hold in her hand,
as a sign, that by such progression was his likeliest way of prevailing.

So taking her seat again, she made a sign of his departure, when presently
all vanished; the tree closed again, and the wood appeared as it had done
before: whereat he meruailing not a little, saw a goodly horse coming toward
him, with a fair shield fastened at the saddle-bowe, the horse gently coming
to his hand, he mounted on his back, and looking on the shield, he beheld a
Knight portrayed thereon, holding Fortune (in the habit of a beautiful woman)
by the forelocks.

So pleasing was this devise unto him, as now he concluded to call himself the
Knight of Fortune: and looking somewhat lower upon the sheelde, he perceived
the face of a Lady, but covered with a veil in such manner, as he could not
apprehend the form of her beauty, but there appeared a hand as pointing to
her, and under it was written this motto, Proud beauty.

Thus rode the Knight on, his mind still hammering on love, and desire of
glory, and then he espied Dorina coming toward, who before had stood
invisible by, and she causing him to go on board again, set sail
immediately for Constantinople.

CHAP. XX. How the young Princes arrived at Constantinople, where they received
their order of Knight-hoode: and how preparation was made for a Tournament.
THe Ship that was embowelled with the gallant young Princes, casting Anchor in
the Port at Constantinople, they were by the Emperor and Empress very
lovingly entertained: and understanding by Aliarts Letters the cause of their
coming, it was appointed that they should be Knighted the Sunday following, and
each one having watched in his Armor the night before, accoring to the custom
in such cases provided, there appeared certain signs unto them, which gave
notice of important matters to diverse of them. Leonato the son of Palmerin
being devoutly at prayer, he beheld an aged Emperor enter the Chapel, who
laying his hand upon his breast, said. Behold, I take all fear from thee, that
may be injurious, or hurt thee in any perrillous enterprise, and make thee
Knight of the Sword: which devise he bare while he lived, atchiuing manifold
honors thereby, and it was imagined, that this old man was the shadow of the
Emperor Palmerin d' Oliua.

These speeches were plainly heard by diverse of the rest, and others entering
the Chapel, found him both armed and girt with a Sword: which made them
suppose, that he should need no doubt of arming by the Emperor. To Arguto,
who was at his devotions in another place by himself, appeared a King with a
Shield, which had figured in it a goodly Sun, and taking him by the hand
said. I know that thy fortune, will hereafter cause thee to offend one, who^
thou rather ought to honor: but because thou shall not be the meanest in
those services which thou art to undertake, I give thee my shield of the Sun,
which shall be impenetrable, part therefore from hence, after thou have thy
title of Knighthoode. No other heard what this King had said to Arguto, but
saw how he armed him as a Knight.

To Tarnaes the son of Platir, came an old man in very short garments, who
wanted one eye, and in brief terms he spoke thus to him. I give thee this
Armor, which once belonged to King Phillip of Macedon, which shall make thee
famous in all thine enterprises: and arming him therewith, presently departed.
Many that saw him at his departure, judged him to be Lycurgus the Lawmakers of
Lacedemonia.

In the morning, the Emperor not a little wondering at these strange
accidents, gave the other Knights their degrees: whereat Oliuanto, the second
son of Florendos, was much discontented, because the Emperor had not in like
manner knighted him, though indeed his young years was his only hinderance.

The feasting was very pompous, and the Emperor showed himself exceeding
joyful, as beholding his Court now begin to flourish again, which had been
before very sad and solitary, in regard of the mighty losses sustained: and
the case of Prince Florian caused some coffeehouse, albeit a little
glimmering of good hap appeared, in that so many Knights was departed in quest
of him, and doubtless would defend him from any perrill of life.

The new created Knights, to give some presage of their hopeful valor,
concluded a Tournament among themselves, at the Lance only, and it was free
for all comers what soever: only it was in this manner ordained, because if
any Pagan Princes should chance to be there, no treason or villainie could
then be offered. The fame of this Iousting flew through diverse parts of the
world, yea, even into Turkey, where the Christian Knights were in great joy and
feasting, for the happy deliverance of the Prince Florian. And Targiana omitted
no gracious kindness what soever, that might avail for his delight or
contentment: so that the Turks thought she had made him her husband, whereat
they grew sad, and much displeased, expecting every hour when they should be
forced to deny their faith, and be subjected to a Christian Prince, the thought
whereof to them was worse then death. Very gladly would these Christian Lords
be present at Constantinople, as well to see the behauior of their Sons, as
to make proof of them by their own experience: for at these years men ought
endeavor to make themselves glorious, and (in imitation of their Fathers)
contend who should be most famous.

But they could not as yet get away from that Country, because Ristorano,
having mustered together many Persian Knights, collected from diverse parts of
the Provinces, that came not in time for the aid of Sucusano: were reputed to
be a very great Army, and they were making speedily to Tubante, having four
crowned Kings in their company, who were to be known by these descriptions.
Carino King of Illium was ye first, who had with him two huge Giants, and
thirty thousand armed Soldiers. Drago King of Memphis, the second, who had a
Monster in humane shape, the very strangest that ever was seen before. It went
both on two feet, and likewise on four, the head like a Goat, with four
long bending horns, two turning toward the face, and two forward: with the
first he wounded when he stood on his two feet, and with the other when he
went upon his four. His arms were hairie bristled, and more long then they
that bore his body, having nails or talents so sharp and piercing, as they
would enter through any Shield: in all the rest he resembled a man, except
his feet, and in stature greatly he exceeded any Giant whatsoever.

Vlderino King of Tanais was the third, a man very valiant of himself, having
twenty thousand followers, and two Sons of a Giantlike stature. The fourth
was Stupendo, the most cruel King of Scithia, with fifteen thousand of his
armed people: according as their custom is to go, only with Lance and bow,
mounted on horseback, but without any bridle.

All these joined their forces with Ristorano, who likewise had an hundred
thousand men, what with his Persians and those of Turkey, who marching
disordredly, cumbred much ground, and were greatly feared all the way they
went: for now no other news ran any where abroad, but that their Princess
Targiana was married to Florian King of Thrace, and thereby they doubted
subjection to the Grecian Empire, which was very yrkesome to them but to hear.

When the Christian Knights heard what a power was coming against them, and
that so many Kings had joined their strength with Ristorano, fearing least
their supporting this present occasion in Turkey, might abridge them from ever
beholding their own Countries, they dispatched thence certain Turks to
persuade the Kings, that the Christians had no other business there, but only
to seat Targiana their natural borne Lady in her Kingdom. And th^s
persuasion had past for current with them, but that Ristorano (having no mean
care to keep those Kings firm unto him) got intelligence of this treaty
from the Christians: and causing the Turks to be quickly apprehended,
commanded them forthwith to be hewn in pieces.

This dissigne thus miscarrying, the Christian Knights provided for their best
defense, but they found all things out of or^er that should avail them: for
all the Turks were in a mutiny about the marriage of Targiana, and she
(being altogether transported with her affection to Florian) made such outward
appearance of but an inward supposition, as the matter suspected grew to be
soundly assured, so that not daring to build any trust upon the Turks, and
themselves provided of very few people, they stood in an amazement, not
knowing what to say or do for their own advantage.

Blandidon, perceiving he was not far from his Kingdom of Niquea, promised
to write thither, that so many armed men should be sent him as they could make,
and Dirdan the Graund Cane was urged to the like, that he would also send to
his kingdom of Paraz. But he that stood rather disposed to make conquest of
Niquea, and take to wife the beautiful Lady Tirrena, being thereto before
solicited by sundry inuitations: alleged such excuses, which although they
were slenderly credited, yet none knew directly how to object against them.

The messengers from Blandidon being come to Nequea, there they understood by
diverse good friends of his, how matters stood already accorded concerning
Tirrena: wherefore, without deliverance of their Embassage, they returned back
again, and certified the Christian Lords of their ill success. This
disastrous chance much troubled Palmerin and the rest, but especially
Blandidon beyond them all, who remembering the dream he had in the Perilous
I Will, and telling the same to the Knights, they all found it not fit to contend
with so mighty a puissaunce, but to take the best course for the safety of the
City, which not being so entirely furnished with provision, they thought it
best, day by day to deal by single fights, until they had made hauock of the
Leaders and Captains.

In these hopes and determinations, they expected the enemies approach, who
found as they came but small resistance, by reason of the fault imputed to
Targiana: and the Turks were very desirous and thirsty after news, because
they heard that Targiana (with Prince Florian) was with-drawne into the
Castle, and daily they endeavored to fortify Tubante.

Hereupon, Ristorano being come within a league of the City, and there
devising on his best and aptest means in proceeding, to besiedge it was the
general conclusion. Palmerin, to give a beginning to their former intention,
armed himself, and coming forth of the City, staying a place far enough
from the enemies Camp, gave them to understand by an Heralde at Arms, after
what manner they demanded battle.

Ristorano, who was wise and provident found very readily the purpose of the
Christians: and knowing that these were the flower of all the Grecian
Caualierie, would not agree upon such single combat or fight, alleging, that
in regard they were but few, they had no other way more expedient for their
own defense. For, they could not expect any further assistance, because the
Empire of Constantinople was so emptied of her Soldiers in the late battle,
as thence could come no supply: and therefore it was meetest to engirt the
City with strong sledge, which was the only way to vanquish without any
damage.

This indeed was the soundest counsel and advise, but the Kings being
youthful and gallant, unexperienced in the proof of the Christian warriors:
would not allow of any thing but Combat, and because they contended who should
be foremost, to conclude all further iarring, it was determined, that Carino,
with one of his Giants, Drago King of Memphis, and Stupendo King of Scithia,
should combat with any four Knights of the City. This answer was returned
to Palmerin, that he and three other should prepare themselves, to deal in
Combat the day following, near to the City, and in mean while should no
ways by them be injured.

These news were not a little welcome to the Christians, seeing their
desseignment sort to so good effect: heerevpon they made their preparation, and
because that all of them were willing to go forth, they were commanded to be
in readiness, according as afterward should more aptly be concluded upon.

So Palmerin, who already had accepted the Combat, ( Floraman remaining still
as Captain general) Florendos, Dramusiande, and Berolde, were to be the other
with him, whereat the Prince Florian was greatly offended: and this was a good
help of preserving the City from loss, as in the success hereof shall be
declared. But leave we them now in their former preparation, and return again
a while to Constantinople.

CHAP. XXI. How they proceeded to the Tournament, wherein Arguto would have
slain an unknown Knight, because he could not endure his company.
ALiart, who trusted not a little to his art, sent diverse of his Magical
messengers, to understand by them how the affairs went in the enemies
kingdom: and when he was resolved, that there was no Army prepared to come
against the Christians, but only that of Ristoranos, (who would much more
willingly have held his government in quiet, then hazard it by meddling with the
Christians, whom he verily imagined to be invincible) he grew exceedingly
desirous, to send all the Princesses with their daughters into their own
jurisdictions. And as they conferred heereon together, they concluded to go
for Constantinople, especially such as had lost their husbands: because their
sad minds would not admit them to see their native homes, where they were
assured to find nothing but grief and desolation.

This their determination displeased not Aliart, wherefore causing a Ship to be
very well provided, they all went aboard, and himself was the more willing to
bear them company, because no sinister chance should befall them by Sea:
which usually was wont to be perrillous by reason of the enemies forces being
abroad, but now in better quiet by their late disabling.

Safely they sailed along to Constantinople, where the news of their arrival
ran quickly through the City, and the Emperor commanding the young
Knights forthwith to Arm themselves, accompanied with ye Empress Grydonia and
Basilia, went to give welcome unto the Ladies.

The Queens Palitia, Melissa, Francellina, Arnalte, Miragarda, and Polynarda,
were the first that went on Land, the three foremost in their widdowed attires,
but Arnalte more pompous and proud then ever before: there followed them
Alderina, Leonida, Bramaciana, Denisa, Sidelia, Onistalda, Clarissima,
Bernarda, Clariana, and Florenda, who because she was high minded, would
needs be the last, and went alone by herself from all the rest. Then followed
the younger Ladies in such sumptuous ornaments, as they drew all eyes to behold
and admire them. Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian, because she was eldest,
was admitted the privilege of landing first, seconded by Argentina the
Spanyard, so excelling in beauty, as it delighted all hearts to behold her.

Candida came next, whose perfections aunswering her name, made her much
wondered at. Spyna would have gone with Florenda her mother, being of such a
haugtie proud disposition, that though her singular beauty made many to
commend her, yet her coy disdainfulnes, gave just cause of as great condemning
her. Then followed Arlencea, with her Son Franardo, that was left with her in
the Perilous I Will, and Cardigea likewise with her Son Almaroll.

The new created Knights led the young Ladies Palfrayes by the bridles, and
the younger men the Palfrayes of the married Princesses: whereat the Emperor
laughed indifferently, and many pretty frumps and jests were broken on the
elder Ladies.

Arguto, whose expectation was at the Kingdom of Hungaria, as giving place to
no one in justice of his title, presented himself forward, and taking
Victoriaes Steed by the bridle, showed her the greatest kindness he could
possibly use, with speeches sweetly couched, and very effectual: but the young
Lady, not acquainted with such salutations, nor understanding the youthful
gallants purpose, by natural courtesy returned him a very accomodate answer,
which he entertayning as a good presage of future happy fortune, thought him
blessed in so fair a beginning. Oliuanto was the leader to Argentinaes
Palfray: but because he was yet ouer-young, and not endued with knighthood, he
did not behold her with the eye of affection. Tarnaes laying hand on Spynaes
bridle, was welcomde so sullenlie by her that knew no course of kindness, as she
showing apparent signs of coffeehouse, and the young Lord blushing at such
discourteous behavior, stepped back again, very much amated in his thoughts:
and this repulse of hers being generally noted, raised a present imagination
among them all, that this scornful pride, would keep Spyna long enough
without a husband.

When the Emperor Primaleon had well beheld the beauty of Candida, albeit he
was old, he could not contain, but needs he would go and be the guide to
her palfray: whereat the Princesses smyled a good among them selves, but his
sister Basilia (to thwart their intended iestings hereupon) called Arlencea,
and giving her room to ride in the midst of them, began to talk pleasantly
concerning Dramusiande, and how if he had not departed with Doryna, what
little hope remained of his longer life. So entered they the City in very
great triumph, and wonderful preparation made by the inhabitants, unable to
conceal their joy and contentment, having their Emperor so royally among
them, and matters reduced into their former dignity.

And in this manner they came to the Palace, where the Empress Grydonia
having richly furnished many tables, every one was seated according to his
worth and estimate: the new Knights and other Princes, at Tables by
themselves, and the Ladies with their daughters, at other by themselves. The
feast was aunswerable to such a time of solemnity, and the tables being
withdrawn, the new Knights went jointly to the Emperor together, desiring
that now they might proceed to the Tournament: for diverse Pagan Princes were
already there arrived, with especial intent to make known their hardines, and
some of them having seen the forementioned Ladies, were in their heat of
affection become so amourous, as they practiced all means to be possessed of
these beauties, and have them thence with them into their own Countries, if by
their chivalry they could attain to such happiness.

Thither was come a son of Sucusanos the Soldane of Persia, who was called
Salaman: and from Romata came the young King Gorgoneo, who forgetful of the
benefits his Graund-father received by Palmerin d' Oliua, joined in
confederacy with Sucusano, and both these Princes were purposely come thither,
to pry into the proceedings of the Christians, and thereby to catch occasion of
a new commencement of war.

There was also arrived a King of India, called Tamerco, who had brought his
Sister with him, a Lady of such beauty, as she was envied of very many, and
thought to be fair by the Christians themselves: this he did as moved thereto
by a vain opinion, thinking to equal any Christian Lady with his Sisters
beauty. Tinto King of Armenia was likewise there, the only valiant man of his
person, and most famous amongst the Pagans: and had he not died by mishap in
the Tourney, the victory had not gone on the new made Knights side. Thither
came also the Prince of Apuglia, the Earl of Antwerpe, who was a Christian,
and many other great personages of Christendom, whose names shall be reported
in their apt time and place.

The Emperor gave authority to the Duke of Pera, to see the Lists prepared,
and to take care for the observation of the laws to a Tournament belonging,
wherein it was provided, that neither Sword, Mace, nor Poleaxe should be
brought within the Lists, but only the Lance, whereof ten were allowed to
every Knight, who having run and broken their staves, should depart and give
place to all fresh comers. The new Knights came with their attendants in
costly liueries, to make the show appear more pompous, the like observation
was among the strangers: and the limited day being come, they entered
according to appointment within the Listes.

Leonato and Arguto had the honor to begin, the first with Salaman, and
brake their Lances bravely, parting thence without any advantage discerned,
more on one side then another. The second encountered Tinto of Armenia, and by
overmuch have failed in the break: nevertheless, their Shieldes so mainly
met together, as the horses (not able to endure the shocke) fell down, that
belonging to Tinto, breaking one of his legs behind in the fall, and Leonatos
three of his ribbs in the side. The Knights quickly leaping from their sadles,
and having no swords to enter further trial, stood as men discontented: but
the Emperor (somewhat displeased that two such Knights were thus excluded the
Ioust, without any fault by themselves committed) gave this sentence, yt the
foil of the horses, caused by the hardiment of the Knights, did not deprive
them of fame or reputation, and therefore with fresh horses they should once
more try their fortune.

While these two Knights were gone to prepare themselves, Tarnaes entered the
Listes, against whom Gorgoneo advanced forth himself, this encounter was
with such fierceness performed, that Tarnaes bare away the Pagans
shoulder-plate, and Gorgoneo brake his Shield in two parts: then turning to
recover other Lances, they intended to approve which of them exceeded the
other in valor. But the Emperor, who would not that any one should miscary
in this Tournament, having an especial and provident care, that no Pagan
Prince should be offended, and thereon to ground a new occasion of war, the
Grecian Empire being yet but in weak estate, and having heard likewise of the
proceedings in Turkey, ordained immediately, that the Knights should take new
Arms for the^ lost, and so without any blame to enter the Listes again.

Tamarco was now prepared for the Ioust, and Belcar the man he was to cope
withal, who being as yet but very young, could not withstand the shock, but
fell backward over the crupper of his horse: when presently Fortenbracio made
against Tamarco, and such was his success, that Tamarco lost his stirrup, and
nodded forward very near falling: but Fortenbracio had such a stroke on the
side, as he had kissed the ground, but that very quickly he recovered himself
again.

Franardo, who beheld a Giant of Trebisonde preparing himself to the Ioust,
made forth to encounter him: but by reason of his great strength, and more
agility to arms then the Pagan had, he made him try his length along upon the
earth, hurt both with the Lance, as also the fall. This highly did content
the Emperor, to behold shining in him the virtues of Dramusiande his Father:
and Arlencea his mother, who among the other Ladies stood to see the sports,
was not a little delighted to see this sight, to behold her son so especially
honored, and to bear away the victory from his enemy.

A brother to the Giant so lately dismounted, would needs revenge the others
disgrace, but he dealing with Almaroll, the son to valiant Almaroll, though
small inequality seemed to be between them, yet the Giant felt his brains
somewhat dizzied and distracted. Caro encountered with the Prince of Apuglia:
Estellant with the Earl of Antwerpe: Orino and Armindo with two Kings, one of
Lamech, the other of Cusco.

Estrellant afterward Iousted with an unknown Knight, who took disdain to be
shook in his saddle, albeit he saw it apparently noted, and therefore it stood
him to sit the surer. He gallantly managed his horse about the Listes,
vnhorsing every one that came to deal with him, and the mixture of the Knights
was now in such a confused manner, as he could not suddenly apprehend which
part was of most valor, nor to which side he might best appoint himself:
wherefore at adventure he took the Pagan side, which even then was ready to
forsake the place, because that Tinto of Armenia, the only flower of all the
Pagans, had received a blow, not seen from whom, and he lifting up his arm,
as it were to answer his enemy that had wounded him, he felt his strength
fail him, for his hurt had entered his very heart, so down he fell dead: a
sight no less offensive to the Emperor then to the Pagans.

Arguto, beholding that the Knight unknown had dismounted Estrellant, Belcar,
Armindo, and was now to give the like courtesy to Almaroll, gave forth himself
to revenge their misfortunes: and the unknown gallant perceiving him, they
ran three Lances with such fury, as all the beholders expected nothing but
death on each side, and no advantage as yet could be discerned, but that
Arguto was somewhat dazzeld at the third shocke, whereas the Knight unknown,
sat still fresh and lusty, to the admiration of all the Knights which had
run already, expecting now some matter of great valor to be performed
between these two Knights.

Arguto, who little dreampt on so sharp an entertainment, grew exceedingly
ashamed of himself, that the Infant Victoria, who was in the window with the
other Ladies, should see him so disgraced: therefore to amend that mischaunce,
he verily purposed the death of the unknown Knight, who still demeaned himself
so worthily in Arms, as the Pagans (thinking him to be the like) greatly
triumphed over the other. So coming with a piece of a very sharp poynted
Lance, he gave a thrust therewith at the flanck of the Knight unknown,
which happening where the Vaunt-plate was not well joined, might much have
endamaged him: and but that he rarely shunned it, by an encounter of Franardo,
who at that instant was coping with him, he there had slain him.

This discourteous deed so displeased the Emperor, and all the bystanders, as
presently there grew a general murmr, every one saying: that a Knight never
ought to sake advantage by treachery, or by any base means to dishonor his
own reputation.

The unknown Knight, foreseeing the harm intended, made forward to Arguto,
and having nothing to hurt him withal, caught fast hold about his middle, the
like did the other by him: and tugging so together for an indifferent while,
their striving was so troublesome to their horses, (much wearied with Iousting)
that they both fell down under their masters, but themselves recovered
footing again very quickly, and catching like fast hold on each other as
before, the strength of all the bystanders in the Listes could not part them,
no nor the outcries made to them by the Emperor: who fearing to see the death
of two so valiant Knights, forsook his Scaffold of state where he sat, and
entered the Listes with his weapon drawn, accompanied with Tryneus Emperor of
Almaine, who could not make one in this Tournament, because he found himself
very unapt and sickly.

The Knights beholding the Emperors so near, let go their hold of their own
accord, and stepping forward to him to request his departure thence again, the
Helmet fell off from Primaleons head: for Arguto still pursuing his intent of
advantage, in the time of their so strict bustling together, had cut the laces
in sunder. But when the Emperor had knowledge of him, very graciously he
embraced him, and taking him by the hand, conducted him to the Empress
Grydonia and the other Ladies, who were not a little desirous to know of whence
he was.

Now they perceiving him to be the young Primaleon, the Empress caught him by
the hand, and plucking him gladly to her, kissed him oftentimes: but Miragarda,
being overcome with exceeding joy, could not brook with patience his so long
stay from her, and therefore without excuse or otherwise, she went and took
him in her arms, and that in such manner, as she wrested him quite out of the
Empresses hand, whereat both the Emperor and all there present, laughed
heartily. The mother satis-fied with her kind embracings, gave him leave else
where to dispose himself, and he who was not meanly instructed in courtship,
went first and kissed the hand of his Aunte the Empress Bazilia afterward to
the Queens and all the Princesses: but when he came to do that courteous
office to the Infant Victoria, he felt himself suddenly surprised with an
unaccustomed passion, and noting well her face, remembered that he had elsewhere
beheld her, but never bethought him of his dream.

The Lady, who as yet had never felt any amourous fire, was so well pleased
with his affable presence, as she forgot to withdraw her hand back from him,
but continued on such kind discourse with him, and amiable gestures, that
Arguto, who stood and advisedly marked this behavior, thought he should have
died with extremity of affliction. For albeit he had made many signs of love
to her, yet she as yet had never requited him with any, or declared that he
was esteemed by her at all.

And here began a hatred of long continuance, till marying with a Sister to
the said Primaleon, which Miragarda was delivered off in Constantinople, and
named Concordia, whose name and nature afterward wrought that happy effect:
for by her were Primaleon and Arguto drawn to amity: likewise was borne of
Polynarda a beautiful maiden, who at the same time was called Fior-nouella.

The caresses and embracings on all sides finished, and every one departed from
the Listes, the Pagans came with their Helmets off into the Palace, to behold
the Court of the noble Emperor, but especially the Ladies, whose beauties were
blazed through the whole world: and Tamerco led Auriana his Sister with him, a
young Lady, but of fifteen years of age, so fair and richly adorned after
the Indian manner, that all began to grow in admiration of her, forsaking their
opinion of them whom they saw daily. And indeed she carried herself with such
a stately gesture, that the Ladies of the Court (noting their love servants to
eye her so entirely) began to wexe jealous and doubtful of them.

The feasting endured with great sollemnitie, and every ^ne might freely
discourse with the mistress of his affections: among which goodly be^ie of
Ladies, Tamerco having iudicially viewed them all, reckoned Polinarda to
surpass the rest in beauty: and became so earnestly affected to her, yt he
devised how he might best steal her thence, and leave his Sister there in sted
of her: such was his indiscreete and ouer-fond desire, whereof what ensued,
shall hereafter be spoken in place more expedient.

CHAP. XXII. How the Knights of Tubante combatted against the Pagane Kings, and
how the City was near hand loosing, by a treacherous devise that Ristorano
wrought.
PAlmerin, Florendos, Dramusiande, and Berolde, who were to fight the Combat
with the Pagane Kings: armed themselves early the morning following, and went
forth into the Field, whether soon after came the three Kings and the Giant,
who because they rather fought for desire of glory, then any covetous affection
after rule and Emperie, saluted our Christian Champions very kindly, as if they
had been friends and acquaintance, perhaps more to see ye faces of those
Knights, whose fame and reputation was reckoned so great, then any other
respect of affability, when beholding their looks to be so gentle and
debonnaire, they made the less account of whatsoever might be in them.

The Pagane Giant, who was far greater in stature then Dramusiande, came with
a smile and took him by the hand, thinking with a by-wrest to overthrow him
on the earth: but he being of a very great spirit, and not so easy to be
ouerturned, unawares (with his iron Gauntlet) gave the other such a blow on the
face, as made him stagger to and fro. So began the fight betwixt them without
any Iousting, and embracing strongly together, fell both beside their horses:
but being recovered upon their feet again, stoutly with their swords they
hackt and hewed each other.

Palmerin and the rest perceiving the fight was begun, challenged them forth
whom they were to deal withal: Carino, King of Illium, went against
Florendos, and they combatted in the midst amongst the other. Drago of Memphis
undertook Palmerin, and Stupendo the Scithian, encountered Berold.

The Lances which Carino and Florendos ran withal, were so tough and
boystrous, that they would not break, but bare both the Champions to the
ground, with the saddles between their legs, but quickly getting foot
again, they drew their swords and cheerfully fell to it. Palmerin received
such a salutation from Drago, as he (minding more Dramusiande who was down on
ye ground, then the perrill whereto he apposed himself) had almost kissed the
ground for his negligence, and failed of any success with his own Lance.
But coming afterward to try it by the sword, he delivered such forcible
strokes at his enemy, that Drago being glad to make his shield his best
shelter, had it cleft in two parts, and his Helmet shrewdly battered beside.

Drago, who never dreampt of any such valor in a Christian, began to consider
with himself, that if now he did not declare his very uttermost manhood, he
saw no way but immediate death: wherefore bringing his sword over his head
with a back stroke, it lighted so shrewdly on the side of Palmerins head,
that it made him reele about in such sort, as if he had not suddenly set his
sword to the ground with his right hand, he needs must have tumbled over and
over. But that help serving him in his need, as a good support, and he now
soundly acquainted with ye Kings strength, showed himself not slack in
aunswering stroke for stroke, so the fight as yet continued betwixt them
without any great difference.

Stupendo was valiantly encountered by Berolde, both of them in the shocke
being dismounted, and referred to the combat of the sword: wherein the King
behaved himself very gallantly, but Berolde by his more agill turnings and
windings, caused many of his huge blows to be spent but in vain.

Florendos had hurt Carino in the sword hand, by being more skillful in his
weapon then he: and Palmerin found Drago so desperate and resolute, as he very
much doubted the issue of their Combat: but all this might justly be termed as
nothing, in respect of the fight between Dramusiande and Lamiro the Giant, for
they fought more by force and mere might, then any engenie or cunning,
whereupon, Dramusiande seeing his enemy observe no order of Combat, which
hindered him often from many proffered advantages, began to cheer himself
with this hope, that this immoderate fury would at length tire the Giant, and
so he held him play upon so fair a likelihood: beside, he had already wounded
him in the left side, whereout the blood did issue abundantly, both which
confirmed his not long continuance.

Stupendo had slightly hurt Berolde in two places, and he had awarded his
adversary so well, that himself received a wound upon his eye-brow: so the
blood tricking down, much hindered his sight, and aduantaged Berolde in his
further proceeding.

The Knights in the City grew suspicious of some treachery, because they
beheld diverse betake them to their Lances, whereon they forthwith armed
themselves, setting down this order: that Platir, Pompides, Dirdan, and
Blandidon, should go forth of the City, accompanied with fifty other valiant
Knights, as a defense to them yt fought the Combat, and that Florian,
Dragonalte, Gracian, Francian, and Floraman, should be ready armed in the
City with all the Caualierie, beside five thousand Turks sworn faithful to
Targiana, and many of them secretly baptized.

Ristorano, who beheld the fight to fail on their side whom he trusted, when
he saw Platir and the rest issue forth of the City, commanded ten thousand
horse to be ready within half a mile of the field, cloaking his intent with
this excuse, that they were but to guard the Kings from treason: likewise he
placed an ambush in a wood, which was not above a bow shoot from the
Combattants. All which being done, he caused a great huge stone to be taken
up, that covered the mouth of a Cave or vault, from whence was a passage under
the City. This conueiance was long before made by a certain Lord, as a means
for his own escape, when any harm should happen to the City, and Targiana
being a woman of no such suspect, knew nothing of this vault, nor any about
her.

His armed Soldiers entering this Cauerne, they were to rise in the house of
the Prince of Antioche, who perceiving he could not join in marriage with
Targiana, feyned himself to be sick, as no way willing to impeach ye war, but
expecting still some occasion of treason. He hearing them breaking the ground
in his house, and that there seemed a vaulte to be underneath, whereby might
grow some matter of consequence, called certain of his faithful attendants
unto him, and commanding them to break open the vault above, beheld
underneath the Ensigns of Ristorano, which on purpose were carried foremost,
for the speedy knowledge of his people.

This adventure so highly pleased the Prince of Antioche, that he suffered them
gladly to come forth, and there now appeared to be a full Court. But a
Christian Knight, who used to walk every way of the City, to note what the
Turks either said or did, leaning to a wall that abutted on this place, heard
what a murmuring so many people made within, and causing very softly a little
rift to be made, beheld of what a multitude they consisted, whereupon he
posted immediately to Floraman, and to him discovered this unlooked for accident.

The Captain, being a man of mighty courage, dismayed not a jot, but having
imparted these news to Prince Florian and the rest, they all went presently to
the Prince of Antioches Palace: providing that so many men should not come
forth into the City, neither that their number should be any further
increased, by that or any other passage under the ground. Then aduertising
Targiana to fortify herself in the Castle, without any noise they gathered
their strength together, those four thousand under the conduct of Blandidon,
and two thousand which were in the Castle of Albayzo, leaving the Turkish
power for guarde of the Castle: so marching softly to the Princes Palace,
they found the gate open, where presently they entered, and now intended to
make proof of their valor.

Florian meeting the Prince of Antioche, calling him him Traitor, slew him at
one blow, by reason he was unarmed: his death gave the victory to our Christian
forces, because the Pagans being there thus suddenly amazed, and ignorant of
further proceeding into the City, whereof the Prince of Antioche had before
received the full charge, they fell to a confusion among themselves, and the
Christians to discreet and orderly care of their charge.

Dragonalte, Francian, and an hundred more with them, were gotten up on the
battlements of the Palace, and thence tumbled down huge stones so mainely,
that the Courts being full of the enemies Soldiers, they brayned them in
great multitudes together.

Floraman, with Florian, Gracian, and their followers, saw that diverse sought
to save themselves through the vaults passage again: but that was quickly
rammd up with dead bodies, and no way now left for them but present death,
thus was the safety of the City assured, and many throwing down their
weapons to the ground, upon their knees entreated pardon.

Ristorano, who not knowing of this ill success, but imagining the sight to be
as then scarce begun in the City, and that all things would fall out to his
contentment, caused the ten thousand and those ambushed in the wood, to rush
forth upon the Christian Combattants, to make them sure for ever seeing their
Countries any more, and himself with thirty thousand men very well appointed,
intended to go and beleager the City walls, Platir beholding such a power to
appear, prepared to succor his friends, and found that Palmerin (to free
himself from further danger) had cleft both the Helmet and head of Drago, and
there he lay gasping and sprawling upon the earth.

Dramusiande having the Giant fast about the middle, got him down underneath
him, but could not kill him, because he being fearful of death, had got him
fast by the hand wherein he held his weapon, and able to remove no further,
there they lay both tumbling ready to be trodden on.

Carino held out indifferently against Florendos, who by reason of his lamenes,
cou^ ^ot so readily bestir himself on foot: as for Berolde and Stupendo, they
had so ouer-laboured one another, as their strokes did little harm to either.

Palmerin perceiving the treason toward, and the danger of Dramusiande, gave
the Giant such a stroke on the side, as making him let go his hold, gave
Dramusiande liberty to recover his feet again, and so together they prepared
for their enemies approaching. Carino, being a Knight of an honorable
disposition, calling Stupendo to him, excused the Christian Combattants very
much, as no way deserving to be thus intrapt by treason, and so withdrew them
among their people.

Florendos and his companions, seazing on such horses, as were nearest hand,
first killing their riders, made afterward with what speed they could to the
City, but finding at their backs above twenty thousand to withstand them,
could hardly guess what should now become of them. Ristorano being gotten to
the City wall, unregarded of any within to resist him, because as yet the
stir was not ended at the Prince of Antioches Palace, and the Turks had shut
up themselves in their houses, expecting to see the Christians so weakened, as
man to man might sley them safely: even as they were passing along the ditches,
certain Squires belonging to Platir, that watched upon the gates by his
appointment, to espy a far off any treachery intended, beholding the imminent
perrill, one ran presently to Floraman to acquaint him therewith, who leaving
there Florian, Gracian, Francian, and two thousand armed men, went with
Dragonalte and the rest of the Soldiers to defend the walls, calling likewise
those Turks along with him that guarded the Castle, and his coming thither
was in very apt season, because an enemy Banner was already spread on a Turret
adjoining.

Dragonalte made no mean have to be there, where mounting his Turks so fast
as he could, and cutting him quite through the midst that held the Banner, it
encouraged all the rest to mount ch^^rely after them.

Ristorano, seeing the wall in that quarter so strongly manned, caused his men
to get up in diverse other places, and (despite of all the Christians could
do,) above ten thousand Turks were got upon the walls, who began to descend
down into the City, by the help of diverse false-harted Citizens, that
rather then the Christians should be Conquerers, were content to take part with
the enemy.

Florian, Gracian, and Francian, behaved themselves wonderfully, but when they
heard the enemies had assailed the walls, and danger appeared of yielding in
the Citizens, they could not readily determine what to do: for they which had
yielded before at the Palace, beholding the Christians now in so narrow a
straight, forgot all former received favor, and joined with the rest to murder
their preseruers, but all this sorted to very slender effect, so worthily did
our Christian Knights withstand their proceedings.

Floraman, Dragonalte, and their followers, fought very valiantly, and the
Pagans thronged together in such huge troops, as they hindered one another
from mounting the walls: and but for those Turks that were friends and sworn
to Targiana, the City doubtless had been lost. For they took away certain
vnder-shoaring Rampires and supporters, which on the inside vpheld the maine
strength of the wall: and when it was laden with above thirty thousand
persons, down fell they into the ditches, and the battlements upon them, and
there they all perished without one escaping.

This mishap not a little displeased Ristorano, whereupon he thought best to
make toward the Christian Knights, as hoping by their deaths to end this
controversy, much more the sooner be possessed of the City. The Pagans that
opposed themselves against Prince Florian, when they saw what a loss had
succeeded, by the walls fall, they were so affrighted, that hurling down their
weapons, they humbly entreated for safety of their lives: but they that had
experience of their former treachery, and how bloodily they proceeded in all
their actions, would lend no ear to them, but slew them apace on every side,
and quickly had they made an end of them all, if a messenger had not come from
Floraman, who gave them to understand, that Florendos and his friends were
shut up in the enemies Camp, and no means for their escape was now to be
had, but by thrusting forth part of those Turks to succor them.

These news saved the lives of six thousand Turks, who perceiving Targianas
affairs to speed better then theyrs, lifting up their hands all disarmed,
made a sign that they would fight faithfully for the Christians. Florian,
although he could not well trust them, yet beholding the necessity of their
own extremity, gave them their Arms, and promised them many great rewards if
they proved loyal, appointing them also the charge of that part where the wall
was fallen, as the best way to make trial of their constancy.

So joining with Floraman, and leaving Dragonalte with two thousand for safety
of the City, they issued forth on the enemy, finding in one part Platir,
Pompides, Dirdan, and Blandidon, who had made themselves way through the crowde,
with no mean slaughter of their enemies: after them followed Palmerin and the
other three, so wearied with their combat and fighting all day, that very
hardly could they lift their swords: yet were they forced to stand upon their
own defense, because Vlderino King of Tanais, with two sons of his that were
two Giants, continually pursued them, and had prevailed shrewdly against them,
if Florian, Floraman, and Platir had not been near, who undertaking the
quarrel with Vlderino and his sons gave room for the four to pass the
prease, though enclosed with the enemy still on every side.

Platir buckled close with Vlderino, and at the first stroke cleft his Shield
through the midst, himself receiving a small hurt in the left hand. Florian
encountered Arabo one of the Giants, and had a blow from him that made him
stagger: but Florian loath to die in his debt, returned him such a requital for
it, as he wounded him somewhat deep upon his right shoulder. Traccio the
other Giant, gave Floraman a thwarting stroke, and therewith had borne him to
the earth, but that his Lance kept him up in his saddle, by the rude shock he
gave the Giant: notwithstanding, he was a little giddied, at which advantage
the Giant took fast hold of him, and lifting him quite beside his horse,
thought thus to bear him away to his Pauillion, and there to tear him in
pieces at his pleasure, but that the crowde of people was his only hinderance.

Palmerin being by this time somewhat refreshed among the Christians, when he
heard the case of Floraman, he took a Lance to pursue Traccio, who yet had
gotten no great distance of ground: and running him in at the shoulder, quite
through the breast, had likewise slain Floraman before him, but that the
Lance brake.

This accident beheld by the Pagans, made them so fearful and dismayed, that
they began to retire, some one way, some another, and Floraman falling to the
earth under the slain Giant, was very sore pressed with his heavy weight upon
him, yet made he good shyft to get from underneath him, and taking hold of a
strayed Courser mounted upon him.

Vlderino was so full of rage for the death of his son, that Platir (amongst
all the rest) he chose to revenge his fury on, and indeed had handled him
very unhappily, but that Dramusiande having bound up some small wounds of his
own, interposed himself with Berolde between the danger intended, and now
the fight began to alter otherwise, for thither flocked all Vlderinos
Caualierie, and Florian with Arabo were shouldered in among them.

The battle grew to be very dangerous, for Ristorano came fresh upon them,
with forty thousand men, which he had gathered from the uttermost margents of
the Army, against which multitude fought valiantly Pompides, Dirdan and
Blandidon, showing inexpressible deeds of valor.

When Arabo beheld his Father in great danger, with his Mace he gave such a
blow at Florian, (who had an eye to succor his Brother Platir, beholding that
the blood gushed out at his nose, by a stroke which he had received from
Vlderino) that it wounded him in such sort, as had not Palmerin stepped in to
succor him, he had fallen among the horse feet, and there been trodden to
death.

Dramusiande having cleft Vlderinos Helmet through the midst, had likewise
slain him, if Carinos other Giant had not been his hinderance, for he struck
Berolde with his Mace quite out of his saddle, and falling down, he was
reputed for dead. Palmerin, being loath to loose any of the Christian Princes,
noted the Giant at his first intrusion, and had stopped his way, but for the
peoples concourse, before that Berolde was in such perrill: but being compeld
to stay for better advantage, thrust by where Florian fought with Arabo, and
wounding the Giant first upon the left shoulder, gave him next such a gash
upon the head, as he had forthwith died of that terrible hurt, but for
immediate succor which came to rescue him: and they perceiving him to be
likewise sore wounded in the side, advised him to get a while out of the
throng, for very hardly could he stand on his legs.

Vlderino, seeing his Helmet split about his ears, would gladly have fled, but
Gratian meeting with him, (for Dramusiande being wounded by Vlderino in the
throat, was with-drawne upon that hurt) beholding his Helmet off, cleft him
down to the breast. Arabo grew stark mad when he saw his Father fall down
dead, and therefore thrust in with such rage amongst them, as wounding
Florendos first on the side of his head, he made toward Gracian, on him to
revenge his Fathers blood: and questionless had prevailed in his purpose, but
that Florendos, scorning to receive such a hurt without requital, gave him
such a thrust in the bottom of his belly, as his guts began to fall forth
thereat, and the Giant perceiving himself past all hope of escape, caught
Florendos besides his horse in his arms, intending so to have crushed him to
death.

This great danger of Florendos, and rauing outcries of the Giant, made the
people on both sides to troop to that place, as judging the fight to be there
most cruel: but Platir, having now well recovered his former faintnes,
beholding his brother in such a desperate estate, stepped forward to succor him,
and finding one of Carinos coosins there, ready to kill Florendos, he smote him
down dead at the very first stroke.

Gracian being likewise by, and seeing Florendos down under the Giant, whose
burdenous weight was enough to stifle him, he gave him such a cut upon the
chine bone, as he tumbled dead from off Florendos, who had his wind well near
tweakt out with so heavy a load, which made him lie still a good while
without any moving, and this being seen by diverse, was at last reported to
Palmerin and Prince Florian, who cut forth way with their weapons, to be
resolved in this fear of their friend. Palmerin catching him up in his arms,
gave him to Dramusiande, who laid him before him upon his horse, and so like
friends they conuaid him among the Christian Caualierie.

Blandidon, Pompides, Dirdan, and Francian, had much ado to get on toward the
City, because one of Ristoranos brethren, and others of his kindred, had so
narrowly beset them in every place, as they were oftentimes in very great
hazards. Dramusiande having borne Florendos forth of the squadron, he began to
recover his senses again, and imagining he was carried by the Giant his
enemy, struck backward at him with the dagger he held in his hand, and
wounded Dramusiande in the side, who said unto him: How now my Lord, respect
you not your friends? Florendos, perceiving the fault he had committed, leapt
down on his feet, and would have desired pardon, but Dramusiande thus spoke:
It is no time now my Lord to use complement of words, rather get to horse
again, and let us into the battle, and redeem our dear friends, whose
lives are in danger.

Palmerin hearing the terrifying noise, where Ristorano and his friends had so
beset Blandidon and others, imagined there to be most need of his presence,
and Pompides followed him, there he found Blandidon hardly engirt with two
valiant Knights, who still had fresh supply to back them, and there he had
been slain, if Florendos had not stepped in amongst them, who at the first
stroke killed one of the Knights, and they together made such hauock of the other
resisters, as the Pagans (not accustomed to endure such blows) strove who
should get furthest from this massacre.

Dramusiande with Dirdan, succored Blandidon and Platir, who had made such
slaughter on every side about them, as mere wearines would not permit them
scarce to lift their weapons: there slew they in short while so many Pagans,
that their death breeding a dismay in such as beheld it, made them give way for
the Christians to rest themselves a little, which time of breathing renewing
their former courage, they followed freshly on them with Dramusiands squadron,
making a mighty spoil of the enemy. But an other multitude of Pagans, such as
had not seen the sharp strokes of the Christians, came upon them with a
fresh charge, and Ristorano not dismayed with all that had happened, provoked
them forward with all his endeavor. There now began a very hot encounter on
either side, for the Pagan Knights, being fiered with mighty disdain, to see
so many of their greatest Signiors slain, proceeded on with such violence and
fury, as making no estimation at all of death, they gave a very sharp assault
upon the Christians, who seeing what a huge number more they had to kill, would
gladly have returned to the City, for now small hope of life was promised.
But now to make the utmost proof of valiant defending their lives, they put
them selves in rancks, with their faces toward the City: Palmerin, Platir,
Floraman, and their train leading before, Florian, Berolde, Gracian, Francian
and their followers behind: and albeit they were very curstly handled by the
enemy, yet in despite of them they got forward still, and made such way for
themselves with their weapons, that at last they came where Ristoranos forces
had round beset them.

Florendos and Dramusiande with their attendants did very great service, to
support the several rancks of their friends and Countrymen, for ever as they
smit down ten men to the ground, an hundred would immediately make freshly
upon them. The squadron that was guided by Palmerin and his part, brake the
ring or circle of Soldiers which had inuirond them, and forward they marched
through the throng: but being pursued by a strong Pagan squadron, they were
suddenly shut up again in such manner, as their estate stood then much more
desperate then before. Florian, who purposed to die or save his people, seeing
Dramusiande had slain a great Pagan Lord, stepped to his horse and mounted upon
him, then gallopping fierce^ie upon the enemy, and Floraman (newly mounted)
gallantly following, they laid so about them on every side, as the huge crowde
of Pagans were glad to give them passage.

So doing incredible deeds all the way as they went, they came where
Ristorano had caused his men to give a fresh charge on the City, with
undoubted hope that now they should obtain it, because our Christian forces
were sore wearied with fighting, and being taken now at this advantage, no
hope could remain for safety of their lives, but there to be utterly slain
and vanquished.

Our two former named Knights, held on their intended course, and an hundred
chosen men very stiffely withstoode them, who because they dearly loved their
Lord Ristorano, would make proof of their valor upon those two: and so
strictly had they beset Florian, and Floraman, as there their lives had
perrished, but that Florendos and Dramusiande breaking through that quarter by
chance, beheld their hard distress, and doubting the danger which might ensue
them, they got through the throng, resolved to assist them, having left Pompides
and the other twain with their squadron, which making head as boldly upon the
other part, did mightily disappoint Ristoranos great hope.

Florendos assailed that route where the two were enclosed, and meeting with
Ristorano, took so strong hold of him, as in the struggling and resisting, both
fell beside their horses: but Ristorano was down under him, to the great
perrill of Florendos life: for many darts and Lances were cast at him by the
Turks, that in huge troops still flocked about him. But in a happy hour came
thither Dirdan, Pompides, and Blandidon, who allighted on foot with
Dramusiande, and having quitted the place where their friends were so
endangered, afterward engirt Ristorano as it had been in a circle, who
beholding now no other way but death, for safety of his life yielded himself
prisoner. Palmerin and his compeeres were somewhat further off, but hearing
the rumor, and seeing how in numbers they flocked to that place, where they
understood their Lord to be in such distress, they likewise would needs
thither, and Palmerin having changed his horse, came at last where he saw
Florendos holding Ristorano by the arm, but by no means could he get into ye
circle, because so many Knights had ringd it round, though the others made what
means they could for his entrance.

Florian and Floraman came thither at that instant, where the one helping his
Brother, the other his friends Gracian and Francian, they waded through a
stream of blood and dead bodies, and none durst stand before them but they
died the death. Afterward, Palmerin being dismounted, took the Helmet from
off Ristoranos head, who imagining his life to be now at an end, sought what
means he might to have it yet prolonged: and therefore, both with signs and
words to his Soldiers, commanded them to give over the fight, for he was
not able to make any longer resistance.

Now because the battle was not as yet ceased in all places, Dramusiande set
Ristorano before him on horseback, having with him Pompides, Dirdan, and
Berolde, who were sore wounded, the rest rode on toward the Flagge or Standard,
about which (for defense) stood the flower of the Army, and till that were
down or recovered, they could not determine on any conclusion. Florian strove
for the honor of beating down the Banner, which he could not so easily
compass as he thought to have done, but by multitudes of Lances was often in
great hazards: whereupon Palmerin and his undaunted followers, regarding
honor more then life, brake through in despite of all that withstoode them,
and valiantly smote the Ensign royal down to the ground, which was the
discomfiture of the whole Camp, according to the Turkish custom. So betaking
themselves to flight, some one way, some another, ye Christians had the freer
means of withdrawing thence together, and entering the City, Ristorano was
bound as prisoner on a silly poor Nagge, for Dramusiande could no longer
take the charge of him, by reason of the dangerous hurt he had received in his
throat.

Being come within the City, they went to be disarmed and have their wounds
dressed, whereof not one had escaped free: but Palmerin, Floraman, and
Florendos, by reason they were in the best estate, they showed themselves daily
with such as could be armed, because ye people should not grow into weak
oppinion of them, nor the enemy gather any stomach of fresh assayling the
City.

CHAP. XXIII. What followed upon the war at Tubante, and how the Monster was
overcome.
THE day ensuing after the battle, Ristorano (who hourelie expected nothing
but death, was as a prisoner led to the Castle: but first Targiana came forth
to see him, because he had used her so far unkindly, yet was she advised not
to go unarmed, nor durst she repose any assurance in the Turks, because there
can be no greater alteration then changing of faith, especially being false, as
is the Mahumetane, and in this regard she would not go unguarded.

Prince Florian keeping his bed by reason of his wounds, wrought so with his
wife, that for her less trouble in this case, Ristorano should be there kept
imprisoned, and referred over for judgment to the Emperor Primaleon, all
which accordingly was agreed unto. Carino, (who as no pertaker in Ristoranos
treason, refused to enter the day before into the battle) when he saw the
field was lost, used all diligence he could devise to get his troops
together, all of them within compass of his own lodgings and quarters,
because the lame and wounded which were left in the field, slew as many as
offered to hinder their flight. And finding himself to be fourscore thousand
strong, beside the Monster before described, he grew into some hope of
conquering the City, and thereby to gain the whole government of Turkey, in
which oppinion he there continued, expecting the recovery of his sick and
hurt, which were many. This fell out most commodious for our Christian Knights,
who were wounded so dangerously, especially Dramusiande in his throat, as
hardly a months space could serve for their recovery: but that Dorina (who
abode secretly in Constantinople, to conclude the adventure of her Monster)
resoning on this case with young Primaleon, and the desperate hazard of so many
good Knights, the only support of the famous Grecian Empire, was entreated by
him to have care of their lives, least the enemy should assail them again
before they were cured.

The young Lady, remembering how dearly she had affected Florian, and yet all
hope lost of ever enjoying him, would not her self go thither, to grow
amourous again and all to no purpose: for they that determine not to sin in
luxury, should shun all occasions thereto inciting, the act being so
easy, and the will so weak in resistance, therefore (by her Art) she sent a
Damsel to Tubante, giving her most powerful unguents and emplaisters, but
express charge not to reveal who sent her thither. She came to the gates of
Tubante the third day after the battle, and being seen alone by the
guardians with her Surgerie boxes, she was brought first to the Chamber where
Florian lay, according as herself had before desired. After very Lady-like and
modest salutations, she dressed his wounds, and comforting him with sundry
precious restoratiues, his hurts did heal with wondrous expedition: the like
she did to Dramusiande, though at first she was somewhat doubtful of his
life, by reason he had lost such abundance of blood, so dealt she with all the
other, albeit Berolds senses were greatly bereft him.

Dragonalte having no hurts, had charge of the Cities safety, and therefore
daily would he walk abroad with two hundred Knights, that had likewise
escaped hurting in the battle, and they used still to march about the walls,
(laboriously repayring where the ruin had fallen) least the enemy should gather
any means of fresh invasion, and that doubt was especially respected by
Floraman, who by secret spies had notice of the enemies purposes, and therefore
they were the readier for all occasions whatsoever.

Carino, whose wounds were not cured by such extraordinary means as the
Christians had, as yet kept his bed, full of great anguish, and express charge
had he given to all his folowers, that they should not attempt any skirmish at
all, because he could not gather by his spies, in what estate as yet the
Christian Princes were: but such was the diligent care of Floraman, albeit he
was sore hurt in the left arm, that the fourth day after the battle, he
put on his Armor, and walked about through the City, which much terrified the
Turks that hated Targiana.

Such success had the Damsel in her curing the wounded, as within eight
days they could all bear Arms, except Berolde, and Dramusiande, who stayed
eight days longer before their hurts were healed, and then they were but in so
weak estate neither, as they might not safely adventure the fight.

Palmerin, who grieved to be thus long coopt up in the City, and beholding
likewise their store of victual to decrease, committing the Cities charge to
Pompides, Dirdan, and Gracian, armed himself with the rest, and issued forth:
and being come within a bow shoot of the enemies Camp, he sent a Herald to
demand a single fight. Carino knowing well the stout courage of the
Christians, thought how to return an indifferent answer, and thus replied:
that in his Camp were not Princes sufficient to undergo a Combat, and they
being all Captains of so great worth, did not well in urging a matter so far
unequal, nor knew he how Fortune would determine of him, in the safety or
perrishing of his people. Notwithstanding, if they were of such mettle as Fame
published them to be, he had a Monster in his Army, with whom they might
adventure body to body: This offer made Carino, as thinking for certainty,
that no one of the Knights alone could prevail against his Monster.

Our valiant Caualiers hearing this answer, began to conceive this opinion
among themselves, that this proffer was the very uttermost refuge of the
Pagans, and the Monster being vanquished, they were for ever foiled: so
withdrawing aside to further consideration, every one strove who should be the
foremost, and who should first be armed for this encounter: for in those times,
neither kindred, friendship nor dignity was respected, in any attempt where
honor was to be atchiued, but every one would make way to his own
advancement: but Floraman being their elected General, though good to set
down some discreet order among them, and therefore he began in this manner
following.

Honorable and generous spirits, in matter of so maine and important
consequence, rash forwardnes may be as prejudicial, as dull slacknes thought
base and ignominious. First, consider therefore the Country wherein we are,
and upon what terms of hazard we have been, and yet do stand in: if then you
would have the enemy understand the true weight of your worth, and how far
you out-pace Pagans in resolution and courage, let the care of life and honor
be coupled together, for to loose either among Infidels, were inglorious, and
to be respective of neither, degenerate and infamous. I would therefore advise
ye, that such of you shall first fight with the Monster, against whom the
beast shall first oppose himself, and so what soever happen, let the blame be
imputed to fortune: be ready then every one in several distances, and happy
man by luck and success in the trial.

This counsel did highly content them all, and thereupon answer was carried
to Carino, that they would combat his Monster severally, as himself had
propounded: each man appointing him self to his place, where he imagined the
Monster would be nearest to him, but each one a bow shoot from the other.

Carino beholding all this, began to doubt the issue of his proffered fight,
as thinking that these unvanquishable spirits, could run through any
enterprise what-soeuer: nevertheless, he caused his Monster to feed on
nothing but strong meats and mixed wines, which made him so full of stomach
and fury, as he could not be restrained within any limits. And being brought
where he might behold these valiant Champions, the beast made first of all at
Dragonalte, getting so suddenly upon him, as he had not the power to wound
him: but being rapt up between his rude arms, he would have carried him to
his Pauillion, till the Knight (doubtful of imminent death) punched ye beast
in the sides with his dagger, which though it pierced not through his hard
skin, yet did the blows so painefullie grieve him, as casting Dragonalte
against the ground, he returned mainly against Gracian, who thought to give
him a sound welcome because he was near him, but the Monster falling on his
four feet, so affrighted the horse whereon the knight rode, that being unable
to hold him in, he was violently carried among the enemies, and there detayned
as a prisoner.

The Monster next made out at Floraman, who having his sword ready drawn,
bestowed many rough strokes upon the beast: but all to no end, his hide was so
impiercible, and the Monster smote him with his horn so rudely on the breast,
that down he fell backward along on the ground.

Palmerin was the next he offered to deal withal, who running at him with his
Lance, gave him such a forcible stroke, as albeit it wounded him not to
outward fight, yet it made him to writhe aside, as feeling shrewd pain, and
run again at the Knight so furiously, that catching fast hold on his Lance,
he got it from him, and had he been possessed of so much knowledge, as to have
turned the point upon the owner, the strife between them had soon been
concluded, for the beast was of such powerful strength, as no Armor could
have resisted his blows. Notwithstanding, with his hoofes and horns he much
molested the Knight, and many times brought him to very desperate hazards, till
Palmerin perceiving, that his horse bestird not himself so nimbly, as in such
an adventure was held most expedient: he quickly leapt from him, and with
stern courage came against the Monster, who began to express signs of joy
at his being thus on foot, as hoping the easier to carry him away.

Wherefore, hurling away the Lance, which he could not well graspe in his long
tallents, he fell again on his four feet, fighting one while with his
horns, another while with his long claws, whereby he shrewly bruised and
battered the Knights Armor. Palmerin, who by his sprightly agilitie well
defended these sharp strokes, with a down right blow delivered at the beast,
cut off his left horn that bended backward, and this stroke was given with
such violence, as the sword falling out of Palmerins hand, stuck ^ight upon
the point a good way in the ground: but the Monster perceiving he had lost his
weapon, rose upon his hindmost feet, and running hastily upon him, caught him
fast in his arms. When Palmerin seeing himself thus strongly griped, got
somewhat thwart the beasts breast, and then began to struggle and writhe to
get from him.

The Monster still held him with such strength, as the valor of four
Palmerins auailed not with him, if he had been provided of discretion to
govern his might, but he had no other kind of industry, but how to gripe
his claws into the Knights Armor: which Palmerin feeling very sore to afflict
him, gave so many stabbs to the beast with his poniard, as being glad to rid
himself of his burden, he ran mainly at Florian, who minding more the
strange manner of these several encounters, then any perrill that might happen
to himself, received such a stroke with the beasts forth-right horn, as
despite of his heart feld him down to the ground.

The Monster proceeded no further with him, but went and assailed Florendos,
who standing prepared upon his own guarde, defended himself very gallantly:
and the fight had continued long between them, but that Florian being
recovered, and having drawn his sword, least he should be as unadvisedly
taken as he was before, the beast left Florendos, and set again upon him,
where now began a very fierce conflict, full of craft in the Monster to avoid
his strokes, and expressing an vndauntable spirit in the Prince.

Florian, full of nimble changes from place to place, escaped still the horn
and fangs of the beast, but he belabored him with blows on every side: as
what with weariness and extremity of pain he felt, his fierceness was
nothing so violent as at the first.

When Carino beheld the knightly skill of Prince Florian, he verily thought
the day would be lost, for the Monster (in whom he had no mean opinion of
prevailing) apparently he saw to grow weaker and weaker: wherefore, as his very
latest refuge in this distress, he sent ten thousand of his soldiers into a
wood near adjoining, with an appointed signal when they should move thence:
to wit, when himself with an hundred disarmed Knights, not having either sword
or Lance, should enter the public place of Combat, then should the ten
thousand issue forth of the wood, and suddenly set upon the Christians.

Thus Carino, who would have no hand in the other battles treason, as hating
to support another treachery, and loath to mangle his honor for another man's
interest: yet now in a matter tending to his own benefit, had his ear shut
up to all respect of shame and disgrace. And yet this policy of his was to
very slender purpose, espied in the managing and therefore mard before
effecting: for Blandidon with his troop being near the wood, met with the
chief leader of those ambushed forces, and running him through with his
Lance, there he fell down dead. This to the Christians proved very
aduantageable, for when those in ambush saw their Captain slain, and what
danger depended upon the issue of this fight, that Targiana was liker to
prevail then Carino attain to what he desired: they would not prepare
themselves for any further resistance, but only referred all to the success
of the Monster, which by this time was brought into such estate by Florian, as
the Pagans were now out of all hope of prevailing.

The Prince had cut and mangled the beast in diverse parts of his body, driving
him up and down the field at his pleasure, until having lost all vigor and
strength, he fell flat on the ground, where Florian bound his arms and
legs together, intending to send the beast to Constantinople. Carino at his
fall was strooken into such amazement, that having no mind at all of his own
further perrill, he was taken prisoner by Palmerin, and all the Turkish
soldiers in the enemies Camp, came and yielded themselves disarmed,
promising true vassailage to Targiana, and so returned they back to the City
in triumph, causing the Monster to be carried along with them.

But Fortune permitting no man to enjoy any perfect happiness, thwarted this
success in such sort, as they had not long been in the City, before Pompides
and Gracian came to certify the rest, that Dirdan, with ten others whom he
especially trusted, leaving open a gate of the City, was departed thence
toward Niquea: whereupon Blandidon immediately gathered, that Dirdans intent was
to surprise Niquea, and to enjoy his Sister Tirrena and the state, therefore in
have he would have pursued him, but that his hurts in the late conflict did
only hinder him. But Palmerin and the rest gave him this comfort, that all
matters being established, which now were in indifferent good forwardness:
they would then assist him against Dirdan, and doubtless he should easily
prevail against him: by which persuasions Blandidon was very well pacified. So
Carino being imprisoned where Ristorano was detayned, they all began to
resolve on mirth and iollitie, cheefely the fair Princess Targiana, who
lately had been brought to bed of a Son, begotten by Albayzo her former
husband: but she nor any other mistrusting the Barons of the kingdom of
Babylon, who secretly had stolen into her territories, and because Targiana
was married to Florian, and was in short time after to be baptized, they grew
heereon so malicious against her, that one morning they came and stole away the
child, departing therewith presently toward Babylon.

Targiana, greatly greeuing to have her child so borne away, would gladly have
had her Knights to pursue them: but by better advise it was considered, that
this might move the people of Babylon to rise in arms, and oppress the
kingdom of Turkey with war, which already was greatly weakened, as the late
passed troubles apparently witnessed. Beside, having occasion of going to
Niquea, according as before they had promised Blandidon, they were content as
yet to endure the loss of the Child, setting down decrees for better
establishing their own estate: for Princes evermore should have this respect,
to take the most provident courses for their state affairs, laboring by their
very uttermost means for the weal public.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Dorina presented her Monster in the Listes at
Constantinople, and how Tamerco carried away the fair Polinarda.
DOrina, who determined to conduct young Primaleon to some attempt of great
glory, entiteling him by the imprese on his shield, the Knight of Fortune, and
purposing that all the Grecian Court should have knowledge, because his fame
might appear in the brighter luster: when they were all seriously busied in
their sollemne feasting, presented her Monster in the same place where the
Tournament had been before performed, the report whereof was presently noysed
through the City, which foorth-with drew thither the Knights in general, to
behold a matter of such importance.

When the Emperor in person was likewise come thither, he knew it to be the
same Monster which he had before seen in the Perilous I Will, when Dramusiande
and the other four Knights were thereby drawn thence, whereupon calling
Dorina unto him, in the hearing of all he thus spoke to her. Fair Lady, you
ought to consider, that my Court is now unfurnished of those Knights, that
scorned to give place to the greatest adventure what soever, and these young
Princes may easily perrish in meddling with your Monster: therefore I hold it
very requisite, that the trial of this case be deferred till the arrival of
their Fathers, who are able every way to answer your desires.

The Lady somewhat offended with these speeches, thus replied. Full well I
perceive, that the passed battle has frozen up your blood, since you seek
deferring of this small adventure: I pray you let these young Knight make
proof of their valor, and understand withal, that the adventure is no way
dangerous, because they are not to combat with my Monster, but he shall be
held to have finished the same, that can mount upon his back, and then salute
you.

This seemed to the Emperor no matter of impossibility, and therefore he
consented the sooner to Dorinas request, whereupon the day following, all the
young Knights of the Court, as also the strangers, (except Don Rosuell, who was
fallen into such debilitie of sense, as his speeches appeared to be silly and
peevish) resorted to the place appointed for tryumphs, and thither came
likewise all the Ladies, who mounting upon the Scaffolds, made ready to
entertain the^, bringing with them Auriana, whose beauty glittered like a
bright splendant star.

The monster was there already in the field, and Dorina had taken up her
place, to judge who should accomplish the adventure, and the foremost man
appointed was Franardo, who made his vaunts to be more nimble in leaping, then
any four Knights there present. After his reverence done to the Emperor, he
prepared himself for the enterprise, and coming so near the Monster, as he
thought immediately to be upon his back, he was suddenly cast backward with
his heels over his head, of which apparent repulse he seemed so ashamed, as
without using any words he went quietly forth of the Lists.

Almaroll, who was brother-like affected to Franardo, presented himself to
make trial of his fortune, and making an agill offer to be quickly aloft, the
Monster turning quite side-ward from him, gave the young gallant such a kick
with his foot, as he was likewise down, and departed disgraced.

These mishaps made the young Lords to think with themselves, that this
adventure would prove of some difficulty in the finishing, and whosoever
should have the honor of ending it, must out-goe all the rest in the height of
his good hap. Trineus the Almaigne Emperor would gladly have adventured, but
the Emperor Primaleon, having more respect of his dignity, by no means would
yield that he should attempt it. Armindo was so forward to get upon the
Monster, that he was cast quite over on the other side, as though he had never
come near the beast at all, which he took in no mean scorn I warrant ye.
Orino performed his attempt in such sort, and being smitten by the Monster
upon the breast, he fell down very strangely amazed and giddied.

Gorgoneo King of Romata, desirous to essay what luck he should have, proceeded
in his attempt quite contrary to the former adventurers: but the Monster
catching fast hold on his leg, cast him with his head so rudely against the
ground, that he lay still in a trance for a great while, and so was carried
forth of the Lists. Fortenbracio would needs be the next after Gorgoneo, but
he was so slightlie cast off by the Monster, as though it made him blush, yet
every one laughed a good at the conceit. Leonato, seeing Arguto preparing
himself, was so hasty to be before him, that the Monster made a show as if
he feared him: but when he drew near him, and the young Knight was half
persuaded he should end the adventure, he gave him such a fall upon his back,
that Polinarda his Mother was thereat much displeased, and forsaking the
Scaffolde whereon she stood, she went to the very entrance of the Lists, and
there embraced her Son in her arms.

Tamerco was highly pleased at the sight hereof, thinking this a happy means
to compass his intent: for when a man is resolutely bent to commit an offense,
he will serve his own turn with the very slendrest occasions. Among the rest,
Salaman the Persian had the foil in his trial, and grieved not a little to
be so disgraced. Caro and Belcar sustained the same mishap, and so did
Estrellant part without any honor. But Arguto, whose eye was still fixed on
the Knight of Fortune, knowing how well Victoria favored him, expressing more
love then he thought convenient should be bestowed upon him, especially, where
he judged himself to be far more worthy: departed forth of the field
deeply discontented, for he save no honor for him to be had by this
enterprise, but being so dis-fauoured by his Mistress, he thought his stay
there could no way advantage him: nor did this departure any jot imbase him,
by reason his stout courage was sufficiently known to all, but none could
truly guess ye cause of his leaving the place, neither did any Knight follow to
be inquisitiue thereof.

Being entered the City, he went to the Palace of Frisoll his Graundfather,
and devising what signal he might bear whereby to become famous, he saw in
a lodging hanging on a wall, the Shield of the Sun, and he remembered it to
be the very same, which was promised him at his enstaulement in Knighthood, and
had crowned with so much glory the first Frisoll, so taking down the Shield,
he sent for an excellent Painter, to flourish over again the Sun with his
Pensill, which he either by skill or chance so well performed, that it appeared
as fresh and lively as flaming fire.

Arguto had many matters busying his brains, what success might befall him on
this his sudden enterprise, and to keep him the more from knowledge of any,
he caused a fair Ladies face to be likewise painted in his shield, with some
sign of coffeehouse in her looks: then armed and well mounted, he left the
City, and set on toward Thrace, where leave we him to his travel, till we
hear of him again, in such a strange adventure as will bring perrill to his
life, and that an unknown Knight came to assist him, with whom afterward he
goes to battle.

Tamerco, having made his preparation for the rape of Polinarda, a Galley
being likewise ready hard at hand to carry her away: the Knight of Fortune
came to make proof of his ability, and leapt upon the Monsters back so
lightly as he had been a byrd, where-uppon the Monster immediately vanished,
because no more should afterward meddle with him: for such was ye quality of
the enchauntment, that any one Knight having been upon his back, every one
might then very easily perform as much.

Miragarda, Grydonia, and all the Princesses greatly ioyed heereat, but
especially Victoria was not a little pleased, so that to such as narrowly noted
her behavior, it plainly appeared how earnestly she affected the Knight of
Fortune. Now in the confused departure of the people, the Emperor with the
Princes were descended from the Scaffolds, to accompany his Nephew with such
glory to the City, as his happy success had worthily merrited.

Tamerco, seeing Polynarda withdrawn into a Tent, where her Son (by her
comforted) had newly left her, went suddenly thither with twenty armed
Knights, and laying his hand on her mouth, least she should call for help,
ripping up the hinder part of the Tent, they stole forth softly, leading along
two Damsels whom they found with her, and them they threatened with death, if
they kept not silence.

They had gotten near the Sea side, when a servant of Leonatos, sent from him
to his mother about some business, seeing her and her Damosells thus violently
hurried: cried out aloude, that his Lady Polynarda was carried away, which
called a number of Knights to rescue her, without any other defense then their
swords only, because the trial of the Monster was not to be performed in
Armor. Tamerco opposed himself against all comers, and first hurt Tarnaes in
the arm, likewise Armindo in the left hand: but being closed with Franardo,
the Knights wounded him in two several places, so without any more resistance
he got into the Gallie, having Polinarda fast in his arm, and setting sail,
left ten of his Knights on Land behind him, six of which were quickly bereft
of their lives, for Franardo and Almaroll had recovered certain huge Maces,
wherewith they brayned all withstanders about them, but the other four
yielded themselves as prisoners. When Leonato heard how his Mother was carried
away, he ran in great have with his sword and shield, and being come to the
place, he saw the Gallie was put off a good way from the shore, and his mother
lifting up her hands desiring help: whereon in a rage he would have leapt into
the sea to rescue her, as she made many the like offers for her own
deliverance, but that Tamerco withheld her from it.

Leonato was so immeasurably outrageous, that laying about him without any
discretion, he slew two more of Tamercos Knights, and likewise had dispatched
the other twain, but that the Emperor Trineus, being by this time come
thither armed, taking him by the arm, said: Hold your hand my Lord, except
you will disappoynt your self of means, how to follow him that has borne
hence your mother. These speeches made Leonato to temper his anger with more
mildnes, and delivering those two Knights over to custody, sought all the
means he could to pursue Tamerco, but finding no Ship or Frigot there ready
to further his intent, was forced to abide the leisure of better occasion.

CHAP. XXV. How Dorina carried away with her the Knight of Fortune, and how
Polynarda was recovered again by the valor of Arguto.
MIragarda, not meanly proud of her sons glory obtained, went home-ward
with such a gate of majesty, as every eye admired to behold her: when she
saw Dorina approaching near her, and heard her say that her son was to
depart thence with her, she grew into great affliction of mind, and began to
devise with her self, how Dorina might by threatening be enforced to leave the
Court, but the Emperor desirous to do justice every way, went to her, saying:
What hear I Madam? would you hinder your Son from the atchiuement of honor?
Shall not he assist the Lady in her adventure, that gave this Empire to the
family of Palmerin? that were an act of great injustice, unbeseeming your
virtues any way to impeach, or your Son (but in a private thought) to
gainsay.

Nature and love (I confess) pleades some excuse for you, but no just means
of denial is left for him, because desire of glory is circumscribed within no
bounds, nor any affection should be preferred before the love of our Country:
for how can that Knight be reckoned truly famous, that does not daily oppose
himself against the chiefest dangers? And as he would have further proceeded,
Miragarda, perceiving her folly did but blemish her sons desire of honor,
kneeled down and kissed her Fathers hand, for the gracious advise he had thus
given her, and calling Dorina to her, said.

Lady, I understand that in honor you affect the Fortunes of my Son, and
seek to crown his head with the wreathes of many high good happs, whereto he
has no possible means of attaining, but by the desperate hazards of his life,
and your favorable regard: let it suffice you the^ I rest contented, that you
guide him where your art and desire shall conduct him, and as his fame
increases by your furtherance, so may your virtues be renowned by his
endeavors.

Dorina humbly falling on her knees, kissing her hand, returned this answer:
Madame, the desire I sometime had to a Knight of this Court, governed then by
loose thoughts and idle dispositions, is long since altered to a more chaste
determination of life: since when, my favors have have shone upon the Knight
of Fortune, whereof he has found some effects, and of such mine art likewise:
and as many great adventures do especially challenge his presence, so (to his
eternal honor) shall he effect and finish them.

Then stepping from her, she went to the Emperor and said. Right high and
mighty Lord, my only request to you, is, that within six hours I may have
the Knight of Fortune hence with me, to undertake an action that only stays
his coming: whereto the Emperor cheerefullie replied. Your demand by no
means is to be denied, therefore both he, and his time of departure, remains
at your appointment.

The Lady having kissed the Emperors hand, went to the Knight of Fortune, who
stood between the Empress and his Mother, and the beautiful Victoria very
near unto them, but her eyes full of tears, and hartfull of grief, hearing
that her affected Knight was to depart so soon, Dorina thus spoke to him. Time
fits not now Sir, to stand thus idely discoursing with these Ladies, therefore
prepare ye with some expedition, because your presence elsewhere is more
needful then here, and your horse and Armor stays ready for you.

The youthful gallants thoughts combatting with love and thirst of honor,
could gladly have wished that his departure might two days longer be deferred,
for further assurance of the Infant Victoriaes love, whose very eye lauishly
blabd the true passions of her soul: but Dorina still calling him away, he
had no better excuse to hide his loth-depart from his Goddess Victoria, but
only that there he would be armed in the Presence, which was accordingly
performed to his own desire.

After he was armed, he humbly took his leave of the Emperor, the Empress,
his Mother, and the other princesses, and coming to the young Infantrie, it
happened fair Candida then to be nearest him, who had such a sudden
apprehension of ye young Knights lovely looks, and unable to check the
present entrance of an amourous desire, though to this instant she never held
him worthy any respect, yet now her thoughts found themselves strangly
altered. He taking his leave very reverently of her, she suddenly lost her
color and speech in such manner, as she was not able to utter one word:
whereat the Emperor grew so displeased, that he could not imagine what to
conceive thereof: and but that reason restrained him from rashness, he would
have stepped to her as she stood before the Knight, to have known if his
departure were so displeasing to her, as she could not affoorde him a kind
farewell. Arising from before Candida, he went and kneeled to fair Victoria,
being both strooken with such an amorous dumb silence, as sighs were more
plentiful then any speech: Only the young lover said, I am your Knight, and
she replied, so do I accept you, at which words he gave her a jewel, which
she presently fastened in the pleites of her hair. Heere-hence it happened,
that between Candida and Victoria grew a long dissension, each iniuring other
as their aptest occasions served.

The Knight of Fortune, after he had done his duty to the Emperor, and the
other Princes there present, descended down the stayres, and being mounted on
horseback, left Victoriaes thoughts cumbred with a little jealousy: for it
seemed to her a matter disagreeing with reason, that Dorina, (who indeed was a
woman sufficient enough to be liked) should fix her desire only upon her
lover, and carry him away with her, whether she pleased, but heerin she
apparently expressed her ignorance, that she knew not how dearly the Knight
affected her, and the firm resolution of the Lady, whose affection could not
be chained to any man whatsoever, since she failed in her choice election of
Florian, and lost the fruit of her hopes in her younger days.

But let us leave Dorina gone with the Knight, and speak now of Tamerco the
Indian King, who sailing in the high Seas with Polynarda, thought himself
happy by his beautiful purchase, and having brought her into his Cabinet,
began to embrace and kindly entreat her: but she that rather desired death,
then to consent to his unchaste desire, considering her distressed estate, and
that violence might wrong her beyond compass of sufferance, thought better to
dissemble a little with him, then hazard neglectly the unrecoverable loss of
honor: whereupon she used these speeches unto him.

My Lord, I am not to learn, that misery is made much worse by cruelty, and
sad grief doubled by opposed extremity: my wretched estate the true map of
the one, your violent will firm instance of the other. I could say, that this
course of yours is far unkingly, and that honor binds you to better respect
of a Lady: but that were for the prisoner to control his Keeper, or the
dejected slave to check his commander. Here am I in your power, deserving
rather to be pitied then rigorously entreated, and you may gain that by
force* which otherwise you are assured to fail of: yet violence to women is no
badge of man-hoode, for chastities spoil, is tyrannies triumph. But admit (as
men in their oppinion of women are soon persuaded) that time may yield hope
better success in your seeking, and that my mind may be altered from this
strict course of severity: I cannot tell, I am no Saint to assure above mine
own power, nor so certain of my fortune in a case so desperate, for as yet my
blood is chill with the fear wherein you surprizde me, and my thoughts as
distracted as at that very instant, but upon further quiet, I shall have more
ability of my self, both to judge of mine own distress, and of any
gentleness you shall bestow on me.

Tamerco, who loved her very earnestly, was so highly pleased with her
speeches, that he grew half persuaded ere long to compass his love:
wherefore, without any further molestation, taking her by the hand, he brought
her up upon the deck again, using many amourous courtesies unto her. But the
just heavens, never permitting violence to that fair body, wherein so chaste a
soul was enclosed, suddenly raised such a turbulent tempest, as diverse times
they were in danger of perrishing: and Polynarda, seeing so good means for
preservation of her chastity, namely by imminent and still expected death,
less grievous to endure then Tamercoes prostitution, to whom she could have
no will to consent, made this her joy and only comfort: for death desired by
any to escape a diaster, is less fear then the extremity of the others
conflict.

The Gallie drawing near to the shore of Thessalie, at last put to shore,
Tamerco being not a little glad he had so well escaped, though some of his
men were lost in the tempest, but by the help of such as were there with him,
he brought Polinarda on land upon a little table, for which the Pagane looking
she should be thankful to him, and finding no return of gratitude at all,
he fell into such an outrageous fury, as once he purposed there to have
slain her: but converting his intent to ravish her immediately, had even then
accomplished his wicked desire, but yt the Knight of the Sun chanced to
pass by at that instant, who parted (as you heard before) in so desperate a
case from Constantinople, and having ridden many miles, found no adventure
worthy of remembrance, which made him of this oppinion, that by Land he should
light on nothing to make him famous, therefore he would go try his fortune on
the Sea: and spying a far off the sail of Tamerco, made toward the point
where he landed, and came thither at the very time, when Tamerco villainously
would have deflowred Polinarda. Where albeit he knew her not, because the Sea
had much altered her pure complexion, yet he scorned that a Knight should so
abuse a Lady, and therefore called to him, but he who little thought with
whom he was to deal, said: Foolish Knight, if thou have no better advantage
then I s^e to combat with me, let me but lace on my Helmet, and I shall soon
show thee, how much better it had been for thee to have held on thy way, then
thus to undertake this woman's defense.

I will suffer thee to arm thy self, answered the Knight of the Sun: in
which while, Polinarda beholding either her immediate death or shame, in tears
thus spoke. Defend mine honor, thou faire-seeming Knight, for I am the woeful
stolen wife to noble Palmerin of England. Arguto knowing her very well by her
voice, replied: Fear not deere-esteemed Lady, the sword of justice is come to
deliver you. So dismounting from his horse, because Tamerco was on foot, a
very sharp battle began between them, which because it seemed doubtful on
either side, possessed the thoughts of Polinarda with such fear, that standing
in suspense of her Knights success, she fled into a wood thereto near
adjoining, unseen by either of the Combattants. When Arguto had lost the sight
of the Lady, he feared least Tamercoes followers had carried her away, which
raising a more violent fury in his resolution, made him reach Tamerco such a
cruel stroke over the temples of his head, as he fell down amazed to the
earth: then mounting on horsbacke, he fiercely assailed Tamercoes men, and
having slain one of them, demanded who had borne thence the Lady. Another of
them, being so wounded that he could not fly, showed which way the Lady had
taken: whereupon Arguto leaving them, gallopped amain after her, and before he
had ridden the space of a mile, he espied her running, with her hair
disheueled about her shoulders, and calling to her, she looked back, with some
small joy to behold it was he, and not the other that had so misused her.

Arguto, who conceived some good hope, that by the means of Polinarda, he
might gain Victoria in marriage, very kindly comforted her, promising not to
forsake her, till he had brought her back to Constantinople. So taking her up
behind him, rode onward so speedily, that Tamerco, who had now recovered
footing, was out of hope to regaine her by pursuing: beside, the wound on his
head was very painful to him, but there happened an occasion to hinder these
disseignes, as shall be declared in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXVI. How Arguto was assailed by three Giants, which took the fair
Princess Polynarda from him: How she was afterward recovered by the Knight of
Fortune, and given by him to Leonato, that he might go onward to the I Will of
Fortune.
TAmerco, being set down in a shade, while his servant help to bind up
his hurts, saw three Giants coming toward him, armed all in black, with
Maces of iron and swords of huge length: these Giants demanded of him, if he
had not seen a Lady of theirs, scaping from them that way? He replied, he
had seen such a one, and she could not be far gone from them, but he saw a
Knight likewise that offered her defense, and it might be he had carried her
away behind him.

This answer made Tamerco, as well knowing that the Giants sought not after
Polinarda, but some Lady to them belonging: yet this would serve as two
reuenges at once, both on the Princess and the Knight her rescuer, judging it
impossible for him to escape from men of such might. The Giants giving credit
to Tamercoes answer, and seeing the new passed footing of the horse, prepared
themselves presently to follow after, and running with all the speed they
could make, they tore down the trees that stood in their way to let them: and
such a noise they made all the way they went, that Arguto and Polinarda heard
the^ more then a mile off.

Polinarda would feign have had Arguto put the spurs to his horse, for his
better escape from so great a danger: but Arguto, who would not flee, if death
himself had stood before him, by no means could be won to amend his pace:
whereupon the Giants still following by the track, at length ouer-tooke them,
and the youngest Giant called to them, that they should stay.

Arguto, causing Polinarda to alight, covering himself with his Shield, said:
If any spark of true valor do remain in ye, then let us single deal man
to man, so shall your conquest of me be the more glorious. These Giants, (who
were of the progeny of the Giant Lurcon, sometime reputed a bold and hardy
Knight, and was slain by the Emperor Primaleon) having well learned all
kinds of knightly courtesy, thus forthwith ordained: that the youngest, who
indeed was the most agill and active, should first try his fortune against the
Knight of the Sun, and so the combat was agreed upon between them.

The Giant gave many unmerciful blows, such as had surely prevailed even to
the death, but that the Knight awarded them by dexterity and nimblenes, and
wounded the Giant in three several places, though little to any sound purpose,
because his Mace brake off their speed in the fall: at last, the Knight being
hardly beset, and dangerously indeed, delivered such a forcible stroke at the
Giant, as he cut the Mace in sunder very near to his hand, which made him in a
rage draw forth his sword, and now began the fight to be fierce and cruel on
both sides.

The two other Giants standing by, advisedly looking upon Polinarda, perceived
that this was not she who^ they sought, but seeing she was of excellent
beauty, they became so amourously affected to her, as they purposed to be
possessed of her, and speaking in their language to their brother that combatted,
to leave off the fight and follow them, the elder Giant dissemblingly drawing
near her, rapt her up under his arm, the other making the way before him, for
sooner carriage of her to his Cave. The third, that fought with Arguto, turning
his back, ran away with such speed, as the Knight by no means could
ouer-reach him: thus seeing at one instant Polinarda borne away, and all the
Giants borne quite out of his sight, himself now ignorant which way he should
take, he got up on horseback, riding as he thought the same way the Giants had
taken, but in less then half a miles travail, he had utterly lost the tract
of their footing, so pacing on carelessly till it was night, and yet altogether
ignorant whether he went, at last he laid him down to sleep under a tree,
all woe begone that he could not recover Polinarda* to whom he had (by the small
way they rode) imparted his love, and received likewise a promise from her, to
do her uttermost in his behalf: notwithstanding, very slender fruit was to
be expected by her pains, because Victoria in her soul affected young
Primaleon.

But the Knight of the Sun conceived such hope by her gentle speeches, as he
made certain account to enjoy the Lady he loved: a property incident ^o
lovers to deceive themselves, by believing assuredly the folly of their own
desires. Thus all that night he fed upon those perswasiue hopes, not having
any thing else to satis-fie his hungry appetite withal, and in the morning
mounted on horseback again, with intent either to find Polinarda, and be her
deliverer, or end his own life by the cruelty of the Giants.

The Giants, after they had brought Polinarda to their Den, were each of them
severally so enflamed with her love, as each one would have her alone to
himself, without admitting any fellowshippe in so rich a purchase: the elder
Giant would have carried her into the furthest nooke of the Cave, there to
possess the benefit of his lascivious desires, but the other two came running
upon him with their weapons, and there had slain him, but that he caught up
Polinarda in his arms, as a buckler between them. When the two Giants saw they
could do nothing against ye third, but that Polinarda was still in perrill of
her life, they fell to him by handy gripes, charging him to let the Lady go,
or else they would kill both him and her together: and then the two fell at
strife amongst themselves, which of the^ should first have her when she was
free from the other, and being both unarmed, the youngest thrust the other
quite through the body, that there he fell down dead at his foot, and in the
same fury he ran the elder in under the arme-pit, as minding to kill both
him and the woman, because he should not vaunt of carrying her alone from him:
and this his purpose had been effected, if the Knight of Fortune had not even
then arrived at the Caves mouth, being led along that Coast by his favorer
Dorina, without telling him of any action there to be performed. He hearing
the noise the Giants made within, and lending his listening ear to be further
resolved, heard the dolourous complaints of some distressed woman, which made
him suddenly dismount from his horse, and boldly enter into the Cave.

The young Giant beholding an armed Knight thus enter, left the other to deal
with him, and then the elder Giant threw Polinarda so rudely against the
ground, that he had almost killed her with the falls violence: then drew he
forth his sword to succor his brother, and although they were both unarmed,
yet was their power and puissance such, as the Knight had there been slain
between them, if he had not made means to get out of the Cave, for there he
could not so nimbly bestirre him, but still felt his enemies strokes much to
offend him.

But drawing still backward, like the Lion in his fighting, till he found
himself where he had more commodity of place, by his quick and agill
turnings to every offered advantage, he made the Giants strokes to be
bestowed but in vain, and had given to them both diverse dangerous wounds.

The Giants full of fury to be thus ouer-maistered by one only Knight, laid
at him like devils, without any intermission: but during the fight, such was
the Knights success in delivery of his blows, as one of them was very sore
hurt in the breast, and the other under his right side: whereupon the younger
Giant thought to have closed with him, but the Knight ran his sword quite
through his shoulder, and the other (offering to fly) had one of his legs cut
off.

Dorina, who had been inuisibly present all this while, to the end it should
not be said, that by the power of her enchauntments the Knight did these
admirable deeds: made herself to be seen, and running into the Cave, found
Polinarda newly risen up, sitting on a little rock, but greatly bruised with
her fall, then putting a certain sirrop into her mouth, it very much comforted
her. By this time was the Knight himself come thither, who presently knowing
her to be Polinarda, he offered to kiss her hand: but Dorina seeing his blood
issue forth at two or three places, would needs disarme him, and both they
together bound up his wounds. So there they remained three days in that place,
feeding on such provision as the Giants had there prepared, and the Knight of
Fortune grew much perplexed in his mind, not knowing how to convey Polinarda
to Constantinople again: for his desires led him to a second sight of the I Will
of Fortune, where he was armed Knight, and thither likewise Dorina intended to
guide him, for the perfecting of a very strange adventure.

So fetching his horse, which was tied by the bridle to a tree when he entered
the Cave, and afterward let at liberty to feed till occasion was to use him,
they set on their journey: but Dorina as yet led them toward Constantinople,
and as they softly paced on, they met a Knight riding so sadly, as it seemed
his thoughts were greatly perplexed, for his Lance lay quite ouer-thwart
before him, and the end thereof gave Polinarda such a push on the side, as it
had almost set her beside the horse.

The Knight of Fortune offended at so uncivil a part, caught the horse by the
bridle, and forcing him to stand, spoke in this manner. Discourteous Knight,
thou must make a mends for the injury thou have done this Lady: for she (as
her just merrite) deserves to be honored, and in my sight there is no man
living shall wrong her. The Knight, who was Leonato, Son to the same
Polinarda, being angry to see his horse so held by the bridle, without
regarding what Lady it might be, and she likewise ignorant of him as yet, by
reason of his strange habit and Beuer being closed: gave the spurs to his
horse, returning no answer, but prepared to have a race with the Knight of
Fortune.

They encountered together in such fierce manner, that Leonato lost one of his
stirrops, and the other found himself indifferently well shaken: whereat
Polinarda began to be agreeued, being especially moved with some kind
compassion toward the strange Knight, for their conformity in blood urged her
to this pity, albeit as yet she knew no manifest reason why she should
respect him. The Knights drew their swords, and so buckled together, in which
bickering, the Knight of Fortune wounded Leonato on the left arm, whereat
Polinardo was so vehemently afflicted in mind, as if the hurt had lighted
upon her very heart, and compelled her in tears to cry out aloude after this
manner.

Forbear fair Knights, and kill not one another for any cause concerning me,
I freely pardon any injury whatsoever, rather then to see the ruin of such
rare virtue. But she could not so suddenly speak these words, as Leonatoes
sword lighting upon Primaleons Shield, slided down the saddle bow, and
entering where the Armor was ioynted, wounded him a little upon the thigh: and
afterward lending ear to the voice, perceived that it was his mothers speech,
wherefore, without any further contention, he cast his sword from him to the
ground, admiring who his adversary should be, yet with no such inferior
resolution, as to yield or submit him to any Knight whatsoever.

Leonato having lifted up his Beuer, embraced and kneeled to his mother, who
presently knew him, and lifting up her hands to heaven, praised God that no
greater harm had befalne him: and the Knight of Fortune perceiving it was
Leonato, cast from him his sword likewise, and ran and caught him in his
arms, desiring pardon for his so rash assayling him, when Leonato embracing
him, said. Noble Primaleon, well have you witnessed your self, to be derived
from the race of that famous Palmerin, who made so many desperate hazards of
his life, rather then to loose the least title of his atchiued honor.

During these speeches, Dorina had made ready her vng^ents and restoratiues,
and causing both the Knights to be unarmed, bound up their hurts and highly
comforted them, but they abode all that night under fair trees there growing,
feeding on such viands as they had brought with them from the Giants Cave. The
next morning they sat in counsel among themselves, how Polinarda should be
conducted back to Constantinople, Leonato affirming, that the Knight of
Fortune, was the meetest man to do it, because by his virtue she had been
delivered: but he whose mind was opposed to all adventures what soever, and
desirous to go where Dorina should conduct him, replied, that Leonato had the
greatest reason to be her guide, because, being her Son, mere duty
challenged that interest in him.

Polinarda, perceiving how the Knight of Fortunes thoughts were addicted, and
that nothing more displeased him then to be hindered in his journey, used these
speeches. Son, the charge of helping me back again, does most necessarily
belong to you, and no disparagement any way imputed to you, albeit by your
means I was not recovered: but rather it declares a child-like office
performed to your Mother, and a courteous kindness bestowed on this Knight, to
whom no pain seems greater then hinderance in his voyage.

Leonato, not knowing well how to gainsay his Mothers reasons alleged,
agreed to return with her to Constantinople: so changing his horse with the
Knight of Fortune, and mutually thanking each other for all kindness
expressed, they parted on their several iourneyes. Leonato doing all things
he could best devise to please his Mother, (who travailed still with fearful
and distracted thoughts) by the time he had ridden about the space of two
leagues, happened on a small Foist, whereof Almaroll was Captain, the son to
Almaroll: who hearing great report of the Island belonging to Dorina, would
needs sail thither to seek the Knight of Fortune, as desirous (with him) to
undergo some great enterprise, and in regard of the entire affection he bare
him.

Leonato, riding without his Helmet on, was the easier known a far off by
Almaroll, who was walking up and down upon the shoares side, and gotten up at
last upon a little rising bancke, to see what occasion might befall him from
the Land, or any accident which might be offered from the Sea. The young Giant,
not a little glad of his presence, went and met him with very cheerful
countenance: but when he beheld the Princess Polinarda, he could not be much
more iocond then before he was, because all hope was lost in Constantinople of
ever seeing her again.

Almaroll made them a banquet sufficiently, of such provision as he had aboard
in his Foiste, and having with food and sleep that night well refreshed
themselves, the next day they fell in some discoursing together, Polynarda
earnestly entreating Almaroll, that with his vessel, he would bring her to
Constantinople.

The Giant (desirous only to meet with the Knight of Fortune, and hearing
how lately they had parted from him,) stood a while pondering with himself:
and but that he had respect to the Ladies great degree, and his Fathers Castle
being likewise in some subjection to her, he could hardly have been diswaded
from his former purpose, but perceiving it was in vain to deny her,
foorth-with they set sail, with intent to keep off far from the Land, least
they should meet with any accident to be their hinderance: but matters happened
beyond their expectation, as shall be declared in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the fight that chanced at Sea, between these guydes to the
Princess, and an unknown Knight.
POlinarda was now not a little contented, seeing her-selfe in so fair
likelihood to reuisite Constantinople, but giddy and unconstant Fortune, who
will permit no confidence in any worldly bliss, of what apparent security
soever it seem, troubled the Sea with such furious and tempestious winds, as
the Foist being in no safety if it should sail near the shore, they were
enforced to launch out into the height of the Sea, where tossing up and down,
till by a storm of rain the rough winds began to be more calm, they were at
last carried toward Turkey, and far off they might discern a Turkish Ship,
which mainly made toward them with full spredde sails, whereupon they prepared
themselves for the fight, and the Ships being joined, they encountered together.

Leonato, doubting least fear might be hurtful to his Mother, especially if
the Turks should happen to boorde the Foiste, leapt into the enemies Ship,
where killing every one that durst stand against him, at last he chanced to
meet with the Captain, who boldly coming forth against him, there chanced a
very sharp conflict between them. The Turks, seeing with what valor their
Captain defended himself, having another Captain in company among them,
they would needs go fight with them in the Foiste: which Almaroll perceiving,
came forward to withstand them, and to keep them from entering into his Foiste,
he likewise leapt forth into their Ship.

The Captain that led the way to fight with the Foiste, doubting least his
fellow Captain should be slain by Leonato, forsaking his own Ship, got into
the Foiste, where setting sail quickly, and the wind aptly serving, they were
twenty leagues off from the other in a very short space. The Mariners being
but few in number, he menaced them with present death, to tell him of whence
their Foiste was, and what other passengers they had aboorde: whereupon, they
told him that they were Christians, and that Polinarda the Emperor Primaleons
daughter was there aboard.

The Knight right glad to meet with so great a Lady, putting off his Helmet,
bad one of them go and comfort the Princess, telling her, that he was
Dragonalte King of Nauara, and in the other ship where Leonato and Almaroll
were, was King Platir her brother: they by commission of the Princes that
remained at Tubante, were sent to require aid of the Emperor in favor of
Blandidon. The Princess, doubtful of ever seeing Constantinople again, or
enjoying the long desired presence of Palmerin her husband, lifted up her head
at these tidings, and taking truce a little with her disturbed cogitations,
came forth to the Knight, who courteously taking her by the hand, said.

Rejoice fair Princess, that from suggestion of fear, so great hope is thus
derived: and mistrust not danger of your sons life, for there can no such
sinister chance happen, but one sign or other will disclose him to the King
of Lacedemonia. So breaking off conference, they turned back again to recover
the Ship, wherein they left Platir and Leonato fighting.

Alma^oll, having put all the slaves and Mariners under custody, because they
yielded themselves for safety of their lives, stood to behold the success of
this combat, and looking advisedly on the Knight of the Ship, under his Creast
he discerned a little golden Cross, which giving him cause to think he was a
Christian, made him step between the^, using these words. Stay your weapons
a little gentle Knights, and hear me but speak: then turning to the Knight of
the Ship, he thus proceeded. Worthy Sir, I know not whence or what you are,
but the Cross that I have espied in your Helmet, persuades me you cannot but
be a Christian as we are.

Platir hearing these words, and thinking the Giant might be Franardo, or
Almaroll, lifted up his Beuer, and before he spoke, they knew him. Leonato
perceiving how he had injured his uncle, threw his sword at his feet, and
falling on his knee to kiss his hand, was stayed up by Platir, who smiling,
thus spoke. I would never desire better proof of your valor, then in this
trial you have made on me: and now I see the Empire of Constantinople may
hope of long continuance, when her young Knights deliver such assurance of
their manhood and chiualry.

Leonato blushed to hear himself so praised, but returning then no answer
(because grief had surprised his thoughts for the loss of his Mother) at last
he demanded what Knight it was yt had departed thence with the Foist: but
when he heard it was Dragonalte, he became greatly comforted, knowing him to
be a man of no mean valor. So they set sail for Constantinople, and having a
prosperous wind for their purpose, within two days both the Foiste and they
arrived there together, where Polynarda being gone first on land to pass to
the City, looking back by chance, she saw her brother follow after,
accompanied with her Son and Almoroll. You may guess that this sight was very
pleasing to her, especially after so many greefes before endured, and being
entered into the Ship again, till news of this good hap was carried to the
Palace, ere long they beheld the Empress Gridonia, Miragarda, Bazilia,
Arnalte, and all the other Princesses, riding hastily thither to welcome
Polinarda.

The joy of a Mother for recovery of his lost daughter, I doubt not but you
can better conceive then I express, as also the mutual joy and embracings
between new met friends, after so sad and disastrous a separation: all which
on either side was effectually performed, nothing wanting that might declare
the true feeling of affection, nor no praises failing to those Knights for
their great deseruings. By this time was Polinarda clad in other abiliments,
and ledd onward by the hand of her Mother, exceeding joyful for her so happy
recovery: there met them the Emperor, and those of elder years with him,
among whom was old Almaroll, whose vigor was now very sufficiently restored.
The Emperor embraced Platir, and Dragonalte afterward, being a King: then
folding Leonato in his arms, said. I now see the fortunate success of our
family, since the young men do not degenerate from the steps of their Fathers
and Grandsires.

So riding on between Platir and Dragonalte, Sydelia and Cardigia agreed
pleasantly to jest with his Highness, and putting themselves forward, so
trauerssed the street with their lusty Palfraies, that he could by no means
pass along: and being disposed to hold on their merry beginning, quoth one of
them. My Lord, if we were armed, there is not one of us but would challenge ye
severally to the fight, and punish ye for usurping on our prerogative. The
Emperor smiling to see the Ladies so shut up the way, said: Believe me fair
souls, I Will keep my self well enough from warring with any of you, when ye
declare so many signs of courage, but tell me I pray ye, what prerogative of
yours do we usurp upon?

The Ladies not willing to answer him by words, took each of them her
husband by the hand, and one of the^ welcomming hers with kisses, and the other
with kind embraces, declared that their prerogative consisted in those
favors, from which they were bard before, by the Emperors conuersing with
them. All the company laughed at the Ladies pleasant disposition, and the
Emperor confessed his error, in keeping their husbands so long from them: but
since the fault grew through the great love he bare to his Knights, he judged
it might be the sooner pardoned, whereon the Ladies resigned them to his
majesty again, saying, though he had power to command their presence in the
day, yet they hoped to desire their company at night, whereat such as were
married, laughed heartily, and the maidens blushed very modestly.

So breaking witty jest upon jest, they entered the City, Almaroll and
Cardigea then riding with their son between them, and they found the tables
ready covered in fair Fleridaes garden, where they dined with great pomp and
royalty. But when the tables were withdrawn, the Emperor sat in sad
conference with Platir and Dragonalte, of all the passed accidents at the City
of Tubante: wherein was at large discoursed, all matters between the Prince
Florian and Targiana, what success the war had, as also the sudden flight of
Dirdan, suspected to usurp the kingdom of Niquea: adding, to fill up the full
complete honor of their Embassy, that all the Knights (by them) acknowledged
their duties to his Highness, but more especially Blandidon, who fearing least
Tirenna his bastard Sister intended forestalling of his dignity, would labor
his mightines by some means for her supporting.

The Emperor discoursing diversely on the passed wars, was greatly grieved to
loose so good a Knight as Dirdan, but much more offended at his giving this
occasion of fresh strife: nevertheless, not forgetful any way of Blandidons
good deseruings, (to whom in choice regard of his Fathers faithfulness, and
sufficient proof of his own virtue, the Grecian Empire was so much obliged)
immediately he took order, that good assistance should be sent him by the same
Knights.

And this occasion very fitly made offer of it self, for the new created
Knights remaining idle at home, and displeased at the Knight of Fortunes
departure from the Court, he altogether seeking honor by search of adventures,
and they (as willing) yet no way employed: they took it as a note of shame
imposed upon them, and reputed themselves unworthy of the dignity they held,
having no means to express their worth of that office, and therefore by
several ways they disclosed their discontentments. Oliuanto, the second son
to Florendos, hearing that aid was to be sent into Turkey, he fell at the
Emperors feet, holding his uncle Platir fast by the hand, and said. High and
mighty Prince, I humbly beseech you, that you kill me not by too much love of
keeping me in your Court, letting my young years loose the flower of their
own felicity: for were I possessed of my Knighthood, I might share a part of
that honorable reputation, which makes my companions so famous and glorious:
and if they make a full conclusion to all actions of merrite, what shall I say
I was borne for, or judge of mine own condition?

The Emperor smiling on Platir, who entreated favor on his Nephews behalf,
returned Oliuanto this answer: Fear not fair Son, time falls out fit to
thine own contentment, go and perform your watch for Knighthood, and be
religiously devout in your prayers, that that sacred order may be woorthily
received by you, to the honor of our Christian faith, and fame of your self.

Oliuanto departed, and being in the chapel to accomplish his vigill, about
the midst of night, he heard a voice proceeding from the high Altar, saying: I
make thee Knight of the Lion, being mine own Arms and Ensign, and thou
hereafter shall be King of Macedon. This was supposed to be the ghost of
Florendos, sometime King of Lacedemonia, and Father to the famous Palmerin d'
Oliua. The voice was heard of many that were without the Chapel, who suddenly
entering, found Oliuanto armed, and bearing a Shield, with the figure of a Lion
in it passant on his feet. In the morning the Emperor was advertised hereof,
who came with great pomp on horseback to the Chapel, where a very reverend
Bishop celebrated the Mass: and so returning thence to the palace, they heard
that Leonato was newly thence departed, under the title of the Knight of the
Sword, as the old Knight had been before called that armed him Knight, whereat
his Mother was much displeased, but the Emperor perceiving that this was the
way, whereby his Court should grow great again in former reputation, comforted
her thus.

Grieve not fair Daughter for your Son Leonatos departure, if you desire he
should resemble his famous Graund-father, by whose hands we believe he
received his knight-hoode. So taking further order for sending aid into
Turkey, made Oliuanto expect his employment thither, and within eight days
ten great Ships, with as many Foystes were prepared, whereinto entered
fifteen thousand hardy spirits, with Platir, Dragonalte, Oliuanto, and
Almaroll the younger, with his Father: who seeing his son of so honorable
towardlines, would needs bear him company, that he might the better learn by
him, with what discretion to guide himself in any dangerous battle.

The Shyps put off from the shore, but scantly with the good liking of
Auriana, who having thus long conuersed among the Christian Princesses, and
learned the mysteries of our faith, beholding no likelihood of her return to
India, Tamerco her brother having committed such an error as the rape of
Polinarda, was the willinger to be baptized, and so was presented at the holy
Font, Platir and Miragarda being her sureties. She being thus become a
Christian, sought how to have a husband aunswerable to her quality, and noting
Oliuanto with the piercing eye of judgment, what high and especial hope was
held of him, and how in all fair parts he resembled his mother: she grew
very much enamoured of him, never manifesting her love but now at his
departing: when the young Knight taking his leave of her, as before he had
done of the other Princesses and Infantries, seeming very gracious as he was
on his knee before her, the Lady took the spirit to speak in this manner.
Although I am a stranger, yet I may challenge one of this royal assembly, whom
I may boldly entitle by the name of my Knight.

Oliuanto, remembering how many times Auriana had affably eyed him, and
suspecting that love might be the special reason thereof, repented he had
been so slack in exchange of kindness, according as such a beauty in duty
deserved, wherefore taking her softly by the hand, and sealing his affection
with a sweet kiss, said. There is nothing (fair Lady) by me more desired,
then to be called the Knight to so great a Princess, that all my enterprises
being performed under the name of your beauty, might prove the more
successful and fortunate. So after he had expressed, what love in time might
be equally entertained, he arose with a Diamond in his hand, which she had
given him as a remembrance of her affection: but because it was now upon the
very instant of departing, and Miragarda had gathered some suspicion of this
new commenced love, she pleasantly brake this jest upon him. Alas Son, you
must first make your virtue clear in Arms, and thereby become famous, before
you learn the idle offices of love: of which frumpe Oliuanto was so ashamed,
as to cut off further entrance into such imaginations of him, he mounted on
his horse, and so rode down with the rest toward the Ships.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Franardo found Belcar, Fortenbracio, and Forcino hand to
hand with three Giants, that dwelt at the foot of the Mountain Arteferia in
Macedonia, and having slain two of them, they went toward the Island of
Carderia.
ALl the young Knights (as we have already declared) being departed from the
Emperors Court, by deeds of worth so make themselves famous, and amongst
them Franardo: whose fiery heat could not endure the search of mean
adventures, or any slender occasion that might befall him on the way. So
posting on in have, at last he came to the Kingdom of Macedon, very near
unto the Mountain Arteferia* and musing seriously in his thoughts, in what
place he might light on some adventure, which might beseem his valor, he
suddenly heard a great clattering of weapons, and following directly to the
place by his ear, he saw three Knights combatting with three Giants, who had
with them twenty armed men beside, and all they together, had set upon those
three, and doubtless had there slain them, but that this Giant by so good hap
chanced to come thither, who although he knew them not, yet seeing they were
so villainously entreated, he stepped in to assist them, and drawing his sword,
spoke thus aloud: Knights be of good courage, for I purpose to aid you.

Fortenbracio being nearest him, knew him by the imprese of a Castle which
he bare in his Shield, and thereupon said: Welcome is my Lord the worthy
Franardo: which words cheered the other to have so good help. One of the
Giants making at Franardo with a great iron mace, was so encountered again by
him with his Sword, as he cut off the Mace in the very midst, and gave him a
dangerous wound in the breast, whereat the Giant began to stagger, and not
knowing which way to betake himself, made offer of escape away: but four of
his Knights rushing in to defend him, he was the willinger to abide by it,
where the fight continued very sharply for more then half an hour, and the
young Knights, who had fought there four whole hours together, were grown
very weary, and Forcino hurt to his great disadvantage.

But Franardo being fresh and lusty, when he saw the battle endure so
long, said within himself: If I do no greater good then hitherto I have
done, I may accompany these Knights in death. Heereon he buckled to ye
wounded Giant, and making a larger entrance, where he had before opened his
Cuirasse at his first hurt, he made such a window in his body, that his heart
might be seen panting for life. But minding him no more, he smote off the
head of one of his Knights, and smit two other dead to the ground. When the two
Giants saw their third companion slain, they strove to get behind Franardo,
and there they had slain him ere he could be aware of them, if Belcar and
Fortenbracio had not run quickly to resist them, for now he was very
narrowly beset, and had received two blows beside, which did astonish him in
such sort, as if Forcino had not lightly leapt to him, he could not choose but
must needs there have fallen.

But having well recovered himself again, he looked about him, and saw
Fortenbracio run another Giant through the shoulder, and afterward cleave him
down to the left flancke: which made the third, seeing both his companions
dead, throw down his sword and gauntlet on the ground, desiring truce and
mercy at their hands, as in like manner did such of his Knights as were left
alive, whereon they were afforded grace and favor.

The Giant being named Forzato, humbly embraced Franardo, saying: Sir Knight,
so highly has your virtue pleased me, as I mean to leave a little Castle,
which I hold in yonder valley (pointing to it with his finger) and attend upon
you to a very strange enchauntment, which I am verily persuaded will be
concluded only by your valor.

Franardo would gladly have gone up the Mountain Arteferia, thinking there to
make proof of himself in some hardy adventure, because the place was very
famous, by high deeds of great honor there done by noble Palmerin: but
hearing now of this other adventure, by consent of the other three Knights he
thus determined, that the Giant should first conduct them to his Castle, where
they meant that their wounds should be respectively cured, for Forcino, son
to the King of Nauara, (not remembered before in the calender of their names
borne in the Perilous I Will,) had received a dangerous hurt in his flancke.
Being come to the Castle, a Sister to the Giant, who was named Grandonia,
having heard of the death of the other twain, and fearing least her Brother
should likewise follow them, was now not a little glad to see him returned: and
entertaining them very courteously, caused them to be unarmed, taking Forcino
first to dress his wound, assured them that none of his entrails were
touched. Afterward she dressed the other two Knights, but when she came to
took on Franardos hurts, she felt a worser wound strike her to the very
heart: for the young gallant, though the shape and members of his body were as a
Giants, yet had he a very gracious and amiable aspect, and knew withal, so
well how to demean himself, as might incite a settled oppinion to grow
amorous of him: but himself having not as yet made experience of any love
cases, let slip all such occasions in a dream as it were.

The Giant Forzato, who began to affect Franardo in his very soul, and grew
desirous of accompanying him to the Emperors Court, left nothing unattempted
that best might honor him, and showed himself very serviceable to the three
other Knights likewise, understanding that they were Princes of very royal
descent. Eight days were thus spent in physic and Surgerie, in which time
the young Giantesse used kind cherrishings to Franardo, and being one day
alone with him, spoke in this manner. I know not (Sir Knight) what to conceit
of my self, or how to take this strange alteration of my thoughts: except it
be thus, that Fortune has been your conduct to this place, only to make me
so much yours, as I can no longer be mine own.

Franardos d^ll conceits were so wakened with these words, that seeing her to
be of so goodly a shape, and withal so deeply enamoured of him: he began to
consider with himself, that when his Father applied himself to marriage, he
could find no other Giantesse then Arlencea, and when he should intend to take
the same course, he knew not what fortune might betide him, if he should now
make no estimation of her, who he beheld to affect him with such seruencie of
love, whereupon he thus replied.

Lady, you are young, and I unworthy yet of the estate of marriage, not having
done any thing worthy the name of a Knight, as my Father did before he was
married. But because you shall not loose the hope of enjoying me as your own,
if I may remain as assured of you, I promise you here upon my faith, never
to match with any other woman then your self: and taking her by the hand,
contented himself only with a kiss, which perhaps was not so pleasing to the
Lady, who might expect other kindness from him: for the beginning of love is
never firmly suffised, without the efficient cause that makes both parties
best contented.

The Lady returned to her lodging, glad of this good fortune, since it
succeeded no further, and Franardo in like manner, whose thoughts hammered on
the adventure propounded by Forzato, seeing the Knights were now in state to
were shortly their Armor, took his leave of them and the Lady: and being
departed thence, before they had ridden any great distance of ground, the Giant
began thus. My Lord Franardo, the adventure whereunto I am your guide, is in
the Island of Carderia, which the famous King Polendos of Thessalie conquered,
to obtain the fair Princess Francellina: but to him remained no more, then
what only served for purchase of the Lady.

Now concerning this matter of honor reserved for you, let me tell you that
it is a wondrous enchauntment, wrought by a wise Enchauntresse, second to none
for her excellent Art, and one of the Fairies of the Mount Arteferia: but
withal, so dreadful and horrid in effecting, that many Knights have lost
their lives in trial of the adventure: and if any have happened to return back
alive, he has been so forgetful of what soever he there saw, as he could
give no information at all of dangers nature: therefore such as are minded to
try it by their virtue, must go without direction of what may betide them.

Franardo, whose bold hope persuaded him able to finish the greatest
adventure, made no reckoning at all of the Giants speeches, and ryding on four
days together, at last they came in sight of the I Will Carderia, to the high
contentment of Franardo, for unexperienced young men are fearelesse of
perrills, but when they have passed through some proof of such cases, they
then are content to proceed more considerately: let it then suffice, that his
late arriual there, allowed him no other lodging then under a tree for that
night, expecting what might befall him in the morning.

CHAP. XXIX. How Arguto arrived at the I Will of Carderia, and combatted with
Franardo, and how they were seized on by an enchaunted Knight.
NOt long had the fair morning saluted the world, before an armed Knight,
mounted upon a pied-roane Courser, came riding toward the Giant, and saluting
him courteously, received back from him the like form of kindness, demau^ding
afterward what they did in that place? When Franardo hearing with what
humanity he moved the question, returned him this answer. Sir Knight, (for
less you cannot be by your outward appearance,) this place is called ye Island
of Carderia, where is said to be a very perrillous enchauntment, and hither
came I to make proof of my courage.

That shall not you do, replied the Knight, because I intend my self to
adventure it first. By reason (quoth Franardo) he should be first, that first
was possessour of the place. Words, answered the other, serve not to try that
law by, but weapons, and they will quickly discide this controversy.

While thus they parled together, the day grew out brighter, so that they had
knowledge of one another, which was as much as nothing, because in disputation
and strife for honor, a private Knight respects neither King nor Emperor,
whereon (being both mounted) they gave the carrire and met together. Arguto,
(who was the other newcome Knight) being somewhat disdainful, failde in the
encounter, but Franardos Lance met him so strongly on the breast, as he was
tumbled over the crupper of his horse, and had not his Shield been
impenitrable, this encounter had slain him.

Arguto, highly displeased with this bad success, came upon him quickly with
his sword drawn, and wounded Franardo in one of his arms: but he wheeling
about his ouer-long weapon, glided in such sort down his Shield, as lighting
upon his pouldrous, it made a little entrance, and slightly hurt him. When each
of them had felt the weighty strokes of his adversary, they began to order
themselves with more discretion, managing the fight with such regard, as they
might the better undertake the adventure of the Island, yet held the battle
very long and fearful, their horses being so weary as they could scarce
lift their legs, whereupon they both dismounted, to make evident proof which
was most valorous. And albeit their Squires (well knowing either by their
impreses) used speeches sufficient to have them give over, alleging the
Emperors deep displeasure to them, yet would not Arguto listen to any one
word, notwithstanding, he could not laugh at any great luck he had in this
difference, for but that his Shield was impiercible, he had gotten little
advantage by this bargain, the strokes of Franardo were so weighty and
dangerous.

While this fight endured, suddenly there appeared a bridge upon the firm
land, and a Knight covered with black Armor, having the image of death
portraied on his Shield, he coming unto them, said. Foolish Knights, what
will ye kill one another, in hope of that which neither of you can make proof
of? Come turn to me, and lean this folly.

Heereon Franardo first assailed him with such a str^ke, as he thought he had
seuerd him quite in the middle, though indeed he touched him not, for this was
but the illusion of the enchauntment: and as he offered again to smite at the
Knight, he was laid hold on by his Helmet, and griped in such sort, as he
thought that his head had been rift in sunder, and being quite out of all
sense, was taken up by the enchaunted Knight very lightly, and carried as
easily away as it had been a lamb, yet was he a Giant of great hugenes, and
the other seemed a Knight but of common stature.

No sooner had the Knight of the Island freed himself of Franardo, but he
presently returned again to Arguto, and without giving him any word, so griped
him in the flanck, that Arguto thought his very bowels were fallen forth, and
he stabd at the Knights Shield, but did no harm at all, whereon the Knight
grypt him upon the other leg, at which Arguto felt such pain, as he
imagined that it was quite smitten off, and falling down, was taken up by the
Knight, and carried into the Island.

Forzato and the Squires, would have departed thence, but they were immediately
turned back by a wheeling cloud, and before they could guess how, or which
way, they were in the I Will of Carderia with their Masters, who found no lack
of any thing but liberty only, nor could they tell to who^ they were
prisoners: but their imprisonment grew the more offensive to them, when they
saw brought thither to them by the same Knight, Belcar, Forcino, and
Fortenbracio. Then they called to mind, that this might prove the like case
to them, as happened at the Castle of Dramusiande, for there had been other
Knights held as prisoners, and yet they could not know to whom. But leave we
them here in durance, to speak awhile of the Knight of the Sword, and the
other Knights which had betaken themselves to travail.

CHAP. XXX. How the Knight of the Sword vanquished a Savage Monster, and
afterward found Caro and Estrellant combatting together: likewise what happened
to them, and diverse other Knights.
LEonato, who (as you have heard) termed himself the Knight of the Sword,
according to the nomination given when he was knighted, after he had brought
his mother to Constantinople, departed without using speech to any, envying
both Arguto and the Knight of Fortune, because he imagined, that they would
ingrosse up all adventures to themselves, and none would remain whereby he
might be glorious. As he rode through woods and unknown deserts, he met a
wild Savage man, holding an angry Bear by the tail, and wrestling with him
so violently, that the beast feeling himself ouer-maistred, did what he could
to get free from him: but when the Savage man had espied the Knight, he left
the Bear, (which ran away mainely into the thickest wood) and came running
at him, with a knotted young tree as his weapon.

The Knight made no regard of encountering this Monster, because (as we have
said before) no fear or terror lodged within his bosom, but experience now
taught him, that nimble agilitie was his best defense: for the Savage gave him
such a thrust with his tree in the flanck, that (his breath failing him) he
fell backward into a shallow pit, and the Savage, (who sometime had been a
human creature, and indifferently skild in managing a fight,) would not take
him up in his arms, because being naked and vndefenced, the Knight might stab
or wound him being so near him, wherefore lifting up his tree, he purposed to
beat out his brains, and indeed had done it, but that ye Knight (awaked
from his trance) recovered footing, and putting by the blow, reached him such
a sound salutation on the head, that the Savage reeling here and there, at
the last fell flat on his back.

Then thought the Knight surely to have smitten off his head, but by reason the
stroke fell somewhat short, the hurt was the less, and the Savage starting up,
avoided another blow, that came with much more fury. So by reason of the
Monsters strength, and the Knights skillful agilitie, the fight continued
without inequality for a long space, nor could it easily be discerned, to
whether side the victory inclined: for the Savage delivered such blows with
his tree, that if (by good hap) it had not the sooner been cut off in the
midst, the Knight questionless had perrished. And albeit the Savage had
received some small hurts, yet expressing himself careless of them, he laid
about him with such rage and madness, as he would not permit the Knight the
very least breathing while.

This fell out very offensive to Leonato, and therefore, to end life, or win
victory at an instant, he got near the Savage, and giving a full blow at his
face, wounded him so deeply in the forehead, that being no longer able to
see the light, because the blood issued forth so abundantly into both his
eyes, he ran about groaping for his way to fly. The Knight of the Sword
lifting up his weapon, with intent to kill him, heard suddenly a voice call to
him from far off, and to his judgment it seemed to be a woman's speech,
saying: Oh hold thy hand fair Knight, for it is against thy duty to kill.

Hereupon he stepped back, imagining this Savage might be some friend of ye
Emperor of Constantinoples Court, so enchaunted, and looking a while about,
there came to him a Damsel with a very sorrowful countenance, but otherwise
beautiful and gracious, who began to him in this manner. Understand thou
honorable and most famous warrior, that this Monster was the son of the
Giant Seluaggio, and the comliest youth that ever was seen among Giants, it
was then my fortune (being Niece to the wise Filesmena) to become so earnestly
enamoured of him, as, finding no other help for my curelesse malady, I was
constrained to move loves suit unto him: but he, who made regard of any other
save me, cast me off with such scornful and opprobrious disdaines, as, not
contented alone in such base sort to repulse me, gave out in every ear how
much I had importunde him.

Now I doubt not (fair Knight) but thou very well know, that the love is
very urgent which makes a woman become a suppliant to a man, which unhappy
condition falling to my lot, and I noting his daily frequented luxuries,
reproouing him for them with all modest demeanor, yet all this returning no
benefit to me: never Serpent sweld with more venim in his bowels, then will a
woman so extraordinarily iniuried. Wherefore, without any thought of after
repentance, I wrought in such manner by mine art (which is with me in highest
perfection) as by one of my Damsels, I made him to be brought into this
Forest, where trayning him into a circkle, I never ceased by my Carracters and
juice of fatal herbs, (the heavenly influence being likewise very liberal
in assisting) that from the shape of man I brought him into this form, but
left him so much understanding withal, as hourly to remember how much he had
wronged me.

But for my self, so extremely was I bent in disdain against him, as rather
then I would consent to let him have his former shape again, I could have
cast my self headlong into the Sea: yet loves passion at length appeased this
choler, and I became so sad to see him in this ougly form, as no rest could
take hold of me, especially, when by his pitiful gestures, I noted how truly
penitent he was become.

Whereupon, not to throw by all hope of enjoying his shape again, by art I
framed a great vault or Cave, whose depth does stretch under the bottom of the
Sea, and therein I enclosed four Giants, in such sort, as no man's power can
hinder them from turning a wheel, which continually there they must keep
going, till such a one chance to happen thither, whose good fortune shall
manifest apparently unto him, in what thing consists the force of the
enchauntment, and such a one easily shall conclude it, but all others else
remain there dead. If now thy courage serve thee to undertake such a danger,
I will be thy guide thither, for no means else is left, or can be found,
whereby this wretched man shall ever recover his former shape again.

The Knight of the Sword, who made no reckoning of any perrill, offered
himself very readily, and riding on the way, before they had past half a
league in the wood, they heard a noise of swords clattring upon Armor, and
drawing somewhat nearer, they saw two Knights fighting very fiercely together,
but neither as yet wounded, because each stood upon his best defense, only to
attempt the adventure of the Vaulte, the fame whereof was greatly noysed
through that country. The Lady entreated the Knight to step between them, for
they were of the Court of Constantinople: whereon Leonato thrusting in between
them, said. My Lords, I dare be so bold as to stay your combat, because ye
are my dear and best esteemed friends.

The Knights, who had not their proper devises on their Shields, which partly
was the cause of their quarrel, immediately knew noble Palmerins Son: and
each raising his Beuer, became better acquainted, the one being Caro the
Prince of France, the other Estrellant, the Prince of Durace, all right
joyful of meeting in that place, declaring the reason why they combatted
together, which was for supremacy in attempting the adventure of the vault,
which when the Lady heard, she said. Knights, it auailes not who is first or
second in trial of the case, for fortune with valor is more necessarily
required: therefore let us all ride on together, for my mind persuades me
that one of you will prove famous by this adventure.

This made the Knights much more desirous of attayning their iourneyes end, and
ryding on a pace, they suddenly heard a Knight call to them, who with like
enflamed zeal of this great enterprise, made have to be there as soon as
they: but by reason his Beuer was not closed, they had the sooner knowledge of
him, to be Don Rosuell, the father of Estrellant, who though he was well stepped
into years, could not content himself with the deeds he had done, but being
in good estate of health, and hearing in Constantinople the fame of an
adventure called the Vault, would needs go thither to prove his valor.

The gladness of this encounter was great on all sides, especially in
Estrellant, who very dutiously expressed his love to his Father, the rather,
because it had before past in common opinion, yt he would never be able to
bear arms any more. So riding on and discoursing kindly together, they came
at last within hearing the noise of the wheel, which was of such a dreadful
nature, as it was able to affright a very bold resolve: yet failed it of yt
power in these Knights, who when they received their order of Knighthood, made
a full opposition of their lives to all perrils whatsoever, especially, where
honor was to be expected.

Drawing nearer and nearer unto the Vault, on the right hand side they heard
the footing of a horse, and staying a while to see who it was, they beheld a
Giant, whose Armor resembled an Ashe-couller, and the devise of his Shield was
a wheel broken in pieces, because he came with a resolved intent to break
the enchaunted wheel: but when he beheld the Knights, he cried out aloude to
them: Let no man to venture a foot before me, for I am the man that must and
will break the Wheel.

As some of them prepared to answer him, Don Rosuell who always used to bear
him company, during the time of both their weak estates, knew him presently
by his voice, and said: My Lord Almaroll, never menace them that are your true
entire friends. So lifting up his Helmet, Almaroll came and embraced him, and
did the like to all the other Knights, then rode they on toward the vault
together. And being come thither, Estrellant entreated his Father, that he
would permit him to be the first, and without any tarrying to attend his
answer, through his over forwardnes in desire to finish the adventure, before
he came near it by a stones cast, one of the Giants that turned the wheel,
was come forth of the Vault, armed in bright shining iron, bearing a white
Sickle in a black Shield, for his devise, and having neither Mace nor Sword,
but a very long rope made all of sinnewes.

The Knight meruailing at this kind of fight, gave his horse the spurs, and
smote the Giant with his Lance in such sort upon the head, as made him stagger
somewhat amazedly: but in his passage by, the Giant casting his cord abroad,
by a slight bound it so fast about him, as lifting him lightly from beside his
horse, in his arms thus carried him into the Vault.

Don Rosuell, seeing his Son thus made a prisoner, would needs be the next
in trial of his fortune, and another Giant in like Armor came forth against
him, but the couller of his Shield was yellow, and a mountain turned topsie
turuie as his devise, because he vaunted of ouerturning mountains. This
fierce fellow held a great hook in his hand, with four points (Drag-wise)
bending toward the staff, and having been soundly saluted by Don Rosuells
Lance, that near hand he was ready to be overthrown, the Giant struck at
him with his hook, and catching fast hold under one of his shoulder plates,
drew him beside his horse even in the full carrire, and being quickly snatched
up by the Giant, in like sort was carried into the Vault.

These accidents were highly displeasing to the rest, but because a Giant of
far greater stature was issued forth, (clad in black Armor, a Serpents
head in his Shield, of rustie iron couller, and figured in a bloody field,
also a mighty huge Holbard in his hand) Almaroll went against him with his
sword drawn, because he had no Lance at all. Between them continued a
fierce fight for half an hours space, but with some disadvantage to Almaroll,
who, by reason of his youth, could not withstand the others immeasurable
strokes: and therefore when they came to closing, Almaroll felt himself rapt
up in the Giants strong arms, and (whether he would or no) carried prisoner to
the vault. The self same mishap befell to Caro, albeit he carried him self
very valiantly.

The Lady, standing aside with her Savage Monster, to behold these battles,
wondered that these Knights could hold out against the Giants the very least
moment, for over and beside the enchauntment, whence they received an
extraordinary power, she had chosen them amongst the very fiercest that could
be found in India, and seeing Leonato now left there alone, she went unto him
with these speeches. As for you, Sir Knight, this day I would not have you to
undertake this enterprise, not for any doubt I make of your ability, but
because to morrow morning, two full years will be finished since I made this
enchauntment: and it will better agree both with the time and purpose: for
incantations are oftentimes sooner overcome by happiness in fortune, then
outward strength, or human possibility.

CHAP. XXXI. How the Knight of the Sword undertook the adventure of the Vault.
THe Lady of the Savage Monster, having by good reasons persuaded the Knight of
ye Sword to defer his attempt until the day following, and then to undertake
the perrill of the vault: conducted him to a Palace of hers near adjoining,
where he was both greatly honored and curiously served. At his entrance into
this Palace, he took off his Helmet, and his dainty curld locks so sweetly
adorned his amiable countenance, that the Lady waxed weary of her Monsters
presence, and fearing he was over young to hazard the adventure, as also to
endure against the Giants, began in mere compassion to be enamoured of him,
willing withal, to hinder him from the danger she feared.

When night was come, she imagining with herself that so young and sweet
blood would easily be heated, and not despise the love of a beautiful Lady,
such as she took herself to be, and indeed might justly so reckon of
herself: when she saw all safe, and every one in the dead of sleep, she went
to his Chamber, where waking him with a mild and gentle touch, she thus began.
Marvel not thou fair young blood of chivalry, that I (made a prisoner to
thy perfections) thus willingly come as yielded to thy power: for thy
conquering features have the sovereign privilege, to enforce any Nymph or
Goddess immortal, yea, though they had abiured loves mighty controulment, to
be enamoured on a man so extraordinary in merrite. Take pity therefore on a
distressed Maiden, who not able to resist so vehement a fire, as thy bright
eyes burn up and consume my soul withal, is come thus alone to offer thee
her love.

As the Knight of the Sword would have made her answer, the Savage Monster
that loved the Lady, perceiving when she left her chamber, softly followed, and
even as the Lady awaked Leonato, and sat down by him holding him fast by the
hand, suddenly he leapt upon the bed, ano there had means good enough to
have slain him, but that Leonato presently started out of the bed, and drawing
forth his sword, the Savage kept off with great fear and terror, as having
before felt it dearly to his cost, running back, and falling down for
safety at his Ladies feet, whereon she entreated the Knight, that he would
not be displeased at the Monsters fury, but in his knightly pity to forgive
and forget it.

At her entreaties, the Knight of the Sword stepped back from hurting the
Savage, because also upon his life depended the finishing of the Vaults
adventure, which made him the sooner to show himself pacified: and to free
himself from the Ladies importunity, he rose and got on his Armor, which
done, he departed forth of the Palace, laying him down on a mossy bancke
under a tree, where he slumbred away the time until the mornings rise, charged
with many thoughts and suspicious doubts, that the Lady would perform as much
as in her lay, to hinder him from finishing the adventure, because he had made
such light regard of her love: yet referring all to God, and his own good
fortune, he determined there to abide and to try the uttermost.

The morning no sooner put on her bright majesty, but a stranger noise was
heard then ever before had been, and the reason was, because that day the
enchauntment should be ended: also the Giants saw by manifest signs, that
their lives was to end with the enchauntment, and therefore they turned the
wheel with such fury, as the horrible terror thereof, might be heard more then
a hundred miles of. The Knight not a jot dismayed for all this garboyle, laced
on his Helmet, and went somewhat nearer to ye vaults mouth, where never was
heard such a terrible noise: and thence he saw to issue forth the fourth Giant,
armed all in great broad plates of Maile, which in diverse parts shot out
sharp piercing points of steel, but he had neither Sword, Shield, nor Lance.

Leonato seeing him no better provided for his own defense, was the more
cheerfully comforted, but the Giant stauking toward him with mighty large
stepps, and catching fast hold on him between his arms, wrung him so hard
together, that he could compass no means of hurting him with his sword: and
the sharp pointed steeles upon his coat of Maile, bruised and rent the
Knights Armor in many places, whereby he received certain small wounds.

Very much strove the Knight to get out of his hold, but being every way
disappointed, he began to have respect to himself, least the Giant should
get off his Helmet, and giving him wounds about the head, be so utterly
disappointed of ending the adventure: wherefore, making means to get out his
dagger, he perceived that the Giant was most affrayd of his face, and defended
it with all the cunning he could devise.

In this strange kind of fight, the Knight was so dangerously afflicted by the
pointed steeles, that very faintlie he was ready to fall down, but that the
Giant (fearful of the many offers he made with the dagger at his face) forgot
himself, and opening his arms, Leonato leapt from him, keeping then the Giant
off the length of his Sword: but all this auailed not, for as he made a full
thrust at his face, thinking assuredly that way to conclude this troublesome
fight, he was suddenly caught fast in ye Giants arms again, and far worse
oppressed then he had been before. In this miserable state he knew not what to
do, but began to bethink himself, that in some especial matter consisted
the only strength of the enchauntment, which he imagined to be the Giants
face, because he was fearful of no other part but that: wherefore watching a
happy advantage to get up his Sword, with the point he gave him a sudden
stab in the mouth, which made the Giant immediately to let him go, but
therewith he got hold of Leonatos Sword, and writhde it with such a violent
power, as at last he wrung it quite out of his hand.

Now was the Knight in extreme and pitiful distress, not knowing what
defense he should use for himself, nor how to keep out of the Giants arms,
whereinto if he got again, being deprived of the help that best would stedde
him, upon the sharp steeles he should be crushed to death. But as good fortune
fell out, this proved the very last refuge the Giant had, for being thus
wounded in the mouth, he was able to hold out no longer in the trial, but
ran from him with all the have he could use into the Vault, the Knight
following after him, hard at the heels. Down they descended a very long pair
of stayres, without seeing each other till they came in sight of the wheel,
which suddenly gave three turns with such noise and terror, as brake the
earth above it, and so the light of the Sun might presently be discerned,
whose beams no sooner shone upon the wheel, but forthwith it stood still.

But the Giants (who were not as yet void of their magical help, though
disburdened of their labor at the wheel) calling this last Giant to them,
(who in his flight had let fall Leonatos Sword,) prepared altogether against
him, the foremost being he that had the Holbard, to whom Leonato gave such a
stroke, as he let fall the Holbard out of his hand, and the strife between
them had quickly been concluded, but that the Giant with the hook caught him
fast by the Helmet, and the other with his cord got him fast by one leg, and so
together they lifted him upon ye wheel, which then began to go again,
where between them and the violent turns of the wheel he had perished, but
that he showed the admirable fortitude and courage of one of noble Palmerins
offspring: and now it stood him highly upon to declare no less, because his
life was in such exceeding hazard, wherefore, with all the strength he had,
he flung from them, and stood upright on his feet upon the wheel, and
setting one of his hands firmly against the wall, stayde it so strictly, that
the Giants with all their might could never more move it.

The Giants doubting their deaths to be at hand, could gladly have wished
themselves further off from that place: notwithstanding, he with the cord
still held his hold, and so did the other with the hook in his Helmet: but the
Knight with a reuersse blow cut the cord in twain, which made that Giant
forsake his hold on the wheel, and the other with the hook he did so
belabour, driving him to many hard and narrow shyfts, that being past hope of
any longer continuance, when he saw the staff of his hook cut in sunder,
he strone yet to outbraue the Knight if he could, and showed all the uttermost
he was able to devise: whereto the Knight had likewise a very special care,
and marking all the fetches and slights of the Giant, that he had now got the
mangled hook into his left hand, yet always made his proffers with the right,
thought surely to give him such a maime as should clearly acquit him. But
herein he found himself very much deceived, for the Giant watching his
advantages at every turn, at last prevailed so much in his policy, as he
caught hold of him again by one of the branching fangs, and so would have pu^^
him from off the wheel again, but by maine strength he got loose from his
hook, and nimbly turning him, at one stroke with his Sword smote off his left
hand.

At this very instant, came in the Lady with her Savage Monster, who be holding
what had happened, thus spoke unto him. Right worthy Knight, well may thou
vaunt of ending the rarest adventure that ever was, if now in the very last
attempt thou prove as fortunate: for thou must cut the beam whereby the
wheel turns, and fight with such as shall hinder thee from it, having still
an especial care to the Giants, for they will withstand thee so much as in
them lies.

The Knight of the Sword, to whom no adventure seemed beyond possibility,
boldly struck at it to cut it with his weapon, laboring himself exceedingly
till he was almost out of breath, and yet all his blows proved not to any
purpose: whereat the Lady laughed heartily, knowing well no Sword was able to
enter it, which the Knight perceiving, and resting himself a while, espied at
last the Giants Holbard lying upon the ground, and gessing it served to some
purpose about the enchauntment, suddenly catching it up in his hands,
therewith he presently cut it in two parts, and forth of it came a new strange
kind of Monster, resembling a great Eagle crowned, with tallents long and
strait, but marvelous piercing, having legs so large and long, as her very
breast reached as high as his helmet, her beak extended the length of ones
arm, but fashioned like a Smithes pair of sheeres, and her wings appeared
like two spread sails, having arrows in them in sted of quills, which she used
to dart from her as she flapt her wings. This Monstrous Foul, at the very
first seized upon his arm with her beak, and bit him in such piercing
manner, as he verily imagined she would have bit it quite off: whereon striking
angerly at her with his Sword, he cut away half of one of her wings, which
forced her to let go her hold on his arm.

Now wexed the Eagle extremely furious, and the blood did issue abundantly
from her, which made her let fly the arrows from her other wing like hail,
and gave him wounds in diverse parts of his body, which though they were not
deep, yet they much pained him: besides, she did greatly annoy him with her
tallents, for she had torn one side of his Cuirasse, which made him refrain
from hazarding himself over desperately, least she should get off the rest of
his Armor: notwithstanding, as she stood thus tyring upon him, with a winding
stroke about his head, he cut off one of her legs, when she leaping from
him, and lighting on the leg, seemed to feel the torments of ensuing death,
yet would she not give him over so, but hopping from place to place, bit him
sometimes by the legs, otherwhiles by the arms, albeit the Knight had sore
hurt her in many parts of the body.

At last he got hold of her fast by the neck, and with mere strength had
near hand stifled her, but that by biting his hand she got away from him, when
being thus releast she mounted on the wheel, where sprinckling both it and
the Giants with her blood, by means thereof the wheel began to turn round
again a little, and the Giants recovered part of their former vigor,
according to the nature of the enchauntment, and so at one instant they all
began a fresh to oppose themselves against him, though but slenderly provided
for their own defense.

The speed of the Knight in his passed actions, made him imagine the adventure
to be almost ended, and being withal very much wearied, he grew the more
desirous of a little ease and rest, which perceiving he could not as yet well
compass, but that the wheel was set on going again, and the four Giants
prepared a new to assail him, which admitted no place of quiet for him, he
cast by his Sword, and taking up the Holbard again, began to lay about him in
such furious manner, that the Giants, who were no longer secured by power of
the enchauntment, had many grievous wounds given them, so that he which before
had lost his hand, fell down dead at his foot.

Now stood the wheel still for ever moving more, and Leonato feeling his
strength increased with very great courage, intended with the Holbard to kill
the other Giants, least by their former slights they should take hold of him
again: but they (not a little wondering at his dexterity and valor) feigning
to set all three upon him together, suddenly turned their backs and ran out
of the Vaulte, which he perceiving, and being more desirous to perfect the
labor, then to follow after them, went and sat down on a stone to rest
himself a while, when presently he heard the wheel broken in pieces, but
could not discern by who^ it was done. So being of good hope, that now he
had not to deal with any other, seeing the wheel was thus broken in pieces,
the Ladies Savage Monster (who could not recover the shape of man again,
until a bone was taken out of his head, which in her former fury she had
therein enclosed, when she intended to let him live and die in that monstrous
deformity) getting near to the Holbard which Leonato had laid by the stone
whereon he sat, took it up, and gave him such blows therewith, as showed he
had forgot how the other had conquered him.

Leonato, who for any treasure desired not to be his death, gently bare off
his strokes, till feeling his arm much pained by the Holbards waightines, he
lifted up his Sword against the Monsters head, with intent to kill him, for
indeed he supposed he had too long forborne him: and entering into like
consideration (as like Champions in such cases commonly use to do) in what
part of him the enchauntments force consisted, saw the Monster defend no place
about him but his head only, wherefore he labored to be his death there, and
giving him a glenting blow on the head with his Sword, out fell ye enchaunted
bone on the ground. And then was a wonderful sight to be seen, how the
Savage writhing his head about him, began to receive his former manly shape:
the head and face first, next all the other members in their several
dimensions, and that with such sudden swiftnes and speed, as it was
impossible for sense to comprehend, how he became thus despoiled of his
monstrous form.

Then found they themselves all three delivered out of the Vault, the Lady
expressing her self highly contented, that her love had recovered the shape of
man again, then by a mighty wind was the wheel brought thither, which as he
stood studying how to convey it to Constantinople, he espied the three Giants
standing by a Tree, so sore bruised with the blows and wounds they had
received, that they were hardly able to stir themselves, and fearing he was
now come to kill them outright, they cried out to him, saying: For Gods sake
Sir Knight have compassion on us, and we will deliver all your friends and
companions safe and alive.

When Leonato saw them in subjection under check of his Sword, he answered:
I will first have all my prisoned friends restored me, and next you shall
promise me, to bear this wheel hence to Constantinople. This iniunction
seemed very hard unto them, but seeing in what desperate state they stood,
either to die presently by the Knights Sword, or of the hurts they had in fight
without speedy cure, they made promise to fulfill what he had enjoined them.

So all of them going to the Palace together, they were there with very great
diligence cured, so were the Giants likewise, by a Squire of their own, that
was the son to Arisdeno, sometime the Emperor Primaleons Dwarffe. In eight
days space they were all well recovered, which made them very iocond and
merry: for then they began to talk of nothing else, but the adventure in the
I Will of Carderia, the fame whereof was noysed far and near, and that many
worthy Knights of the Grecian Court, were there likewise detayned as
prisoners: so they took order for carriage of the Wheel thence to
Constantinople, but there happened a hinderance, by an accident which shall be
hereafter declared.

CHAP. XXXII. How Tarnaes coming to try his fortune in the adventure of the
Wheel, combatted with Leonato, and how by Orino they were friendly pacified.
NO sooner were the Giants cured of their hurts, but they set forward with the
Wheel, being bound to bear it thence to Constantinople, when instantly there
arrived Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, who came thither in hope to end the adventure
of the Wheel, but when he saw it in such readiness to be carried away, he grew
meruailously offended at the loss of such an honor, and wexing somewhat
arrogant in oppinion of himself, he called out aloude to them in this manner.
Whosoever he be among you, that has accomplished an adventure of so high
esteem, let him prepare to fight with me: for I shall gain greater glory by
the conquest of him, then if I had in person concluded the enchauntment.

The Knight of the Sword, who knew him very well to be Tarnaes by his fair
arms and devise in his Shield, returned answer, that the Knight which had
finished the adventure, would quickly be with him: so returning to the Palace,
he put on his Armor, and commanding two Lances to be brought forth, sent
one of them to his adversary, and kept the other for himself. Then without
using any words at all, because he would not be known by his voice, (which at
first he so dissembled as no one could descry him:) they met together in the
carriere with such violence, as either loosing their stirrops, were glad to
catch hold about their horses necks, and the beasts meeting breast to breast,
tumbled over backward with their Masters beside them, when both of them
enraged to be thus disgraced, lightly leaping on their feet drew forth their
Swords, vowing inwardly no peace, till each man was revenged.

The blows fell as thick as Summers hail, but by reason of eythers nimblenes
and good defense, they had not as yet received any hurt. Tarnaes was more
governed by fury then discreet regard, but Leonato, who in all points
resembled his Fathers kind of combatting, went to work more advisedly, which
kept his Armor still more sound and whole, and made him hold out the fresher
and lustier. Nevertheless, his enemy at last gave him a shrewd wound upon the
arm, by reason the buckle leathers of his Shield were broken, and so he was
feign to let it hang before him: but feeling himself hurt, he cast a thrust at
his adversaries Beuer, which breaking a little open, he gave him a wound full
in the forehead.

Now began the battle to be much fiercer then before, that the Knights
standing by to behold it, thought it the most cruelst fight that ever they had
seen, making certain account, that both of them would perrish ere they gave
over: yet durst they not offer to step between them, because they knew how
offensiuely either would take it. At one instant were two shrewd hurts
received, Tarnaes had his in his left side, and the Knight of the Swords was on
his head, when the fight continuing in this desperate estate, at last was seen
a far off a Knight come gallopping, in green Armor, figured full of golden
flowers, and a man's head in his Shield with fair spreading locks, signifying a
victory he had, against a Savage shagge-haired man. Being now come near
them, he understood by the other what these Knights were, who likewise knew
him to be Orino: whereupon he would needs adventure to part them, as loath to
see ye death of two so worthy men, whose loss would be great to the Empire of
Constantinople, so stepping in between them, he said.

My noble Lords, Leonato and Tarnaes, endanger not by your deaths the famous
Grecian Empire. Tarnaes, who imagined all this while he had fought with the
Knight of Fortune, to whom he bare a certain hatred in emulation of honor,
when he heard it was Leonato, whom he ever dearly loved, desired pardon for
his so rash provoking him to the combat, and so letting fall all injuries on
either side committed, they went to the Ladies Palace to be cured of their
wounds: where she used such careful diligence unto them (for her Giants sake
freed from enchauntment, and now dearly affecting her) as in very short while
they were perfecty recovered.

Tarnaes stayed there four days with the Knights, spending the time in
discourse of diverse adventures, till he saw himself past all perrill of death,
and afterward (although not thoroughly well) they would set forward to the I Will
of Carderia, where they understood so many Knights to be imprisoned, and there
make proof of their fortunes in that perilous adventure. So leave we them on
their journey, because it is very necessary, to remember in this place, the
Christian Army that went to Tubante, with Platir, Dragonalte, and Oliuanto,
who took in no mean case of displeasure, that Almaroll their friend was so
departed from them, contrary to the order given them by the Emperor: but
knowing not how to help it, they went on quietly with the Army, and were
above an hundred leagues and more from Constantinople, without encountering any
thing to be their hinderance: so the Knight that had parted Leonato and
Tarnaes, immediately left them, departing whether his own occasions guided him.

CHAP. XXXIII. How the Army of the Christians met with Tamerco and his power,
where he was taken, and his men joined with the Christian forces.
TAmerco, after yt Polinarda was taken from him by the Knight of the Sun,
remained in no mean grief for the loss of such a beauty, but yet ashamed
withal, because his sister Auriana was left in the Christians hands, whom
now he practiced how to get again by subtlety, since all his strength would
prove to no purpose, and thereupon made ready twenty sail of Ships, with
men sufficient for the burden, having likewise two of his Brethren in his
company, men of great valor and approved hardiment, the one named Torneo,
the other Sacro, and thus he would Pirate like proule on the Seas, watching
occasion to take some Knight of esteem of the Grecian Court, for whose
exchange he might recover his Sister.

This Army was descried a far off by the Christian Fleet, and because they
sailed scatteringly abroad, they seemed to be far more then they were.
Platir gave order that his Navy should draw together in a narrow strait,
where hardly two Shyps should front each other, appointing the choycest of his
Soldiers to be foremost, only for preservation of his men: for any Captain
that is desirous to pass through enterprises of perrill, will use all his best
means for safety of his men, because they are to stick to it in the heat of
the trial.

The enemies Army came with full sail against the Christians, and seeing into
what a narrow course they had drawn themselves, that they could by no means
get into the midst among them, began to take advantage as best they might:
Tamerco and Torneo fastening on two Christian Shyps, in one of which was Platir
and Oliuanto with two hundred of the best tried Soldiers in all the Band, in
the other Dragonalte and old Almaroll, with so many more, and seeing
themselves at handy gripes with such a puissant strength, stood upon their
defense with no mean resolution: yet got the Pagans into the Christian Ships,
and all the valor in the other not able to withstand the^, where Tamerco
fighting with Platir, expressed rather a dallying of the time, then any rough
have to overcome him, the like did Torneo with Dragonalte, for the Pagans
being thirty thousand in number, made full assurance of vanquishing the
Christians.

Oliuanto made admirable proof of his valor, slycing men down right through
the midst, which with such terror amated the Heathen, that falling on every
side slain about him, the rest strove who should still keep himself the
hindmost. Old Almaroll being in one of the other Shyps, and seeing the Pagans
there to prevail extraordinarily, gathered together the better of the men
that were in the other Ships, and came to assist where the heat of the
battle was.

Torneo, who could not temporize so well with Dragonalte, as Tamerco did with
his adversary, began to set him so hard, that Dragonalte loath to perrish
cowardly, began to answer him again in wars rough language, which speaking
ye resolved courage of eithers heart by their keen edged weapons, at last
Torneo was sore wounded in the head, whereon he would have drawn back, but
Sacro seconded him, and made so sternely at the King of Navarre, as he had
enough to do to defend himself. Yet nothing daunted with dismay (though he
saw their Ships so ouer-burdened with Pagans, as in very deed they seemed
likelier to sincke then otherwise) he so astonished Sacro with a violent stroke,
that seeing him fall as he had been dead, he catched at him by the Helmet,
then by the arms, thinking to have tumbled him into the Sea, but others
opposin^ themselves to his resk^e, he threw them into the Sea so fast as they
came: and no man durst put forth himself against the King, but presently he
was ouerturned headlong into the Sea, so that a number to escape this peril,
fell down before they would come near him, for safety of their lives.

This strange kind of success in fight still used by the Knig, gave no mean
encouragement to the Christians, when they saw him drown so many, and so
expeditious^ie withal, and terrified the Pagans in such sort, that they
severally cried out: I think this devil here will drown us all. Oliuanto
beholding this stratageme used by Dragonalte, followed his example in the same
kind, which proved the only means of discomfort to the Heathen, for Sacro
and Tamerco being left alone on the Christian Ship, saw themselves in
desperate estate, yet had Tamerco wounded Platir upon the eye-brow, which
Oliuanto perceiving, and that his vnekles sight was much hindered by effusion
of his blood, he stepped in before him, where he brought Tamerco into so weak
case, by reason of wearines and much expense of blood, that he fell down at
his feet, and Platir offered to smite off his head, but Oliuanto would not
permit it, for fear of offending his beloved Auriana, whose excellent
perfections even then surprising his thoughts, for her sake, and because she
had entiteled him her Knight, he help up Tamerco, and taking both his Sword
and Helmet from him, committed him prisoner under safe custody.

Sacro, who was now come to cope again with Dragonalte, when he saw his
brother led away as prisoner, at one leap he cast himself out of the Ship, as
willing rather to drown himself in the Sea, then to remain a prisoner among
the Christians: but his good hap was to light into a Foyste, where likewise was
his brother Torneo, and seeing all hope frustrate of recovering their brother,
determined to prepare for their own best safety, and sailed away with such
extraordinary speed, as it was impossible to overtake them.

Thus these two Brethren, though sad that Tamerco remained prisoner, having
(to their cost) made proof of the Christians valor, thought this course best
in such an extreamitie, and so sailed away toward India, leaving their Army
to the Christians courtesy: and they on the contrary part, beholding their
Leaders conquered and fled, without any great loss on their own behalf,
caused it publicly to be proclaimed among the Pagans, that free liberty of
departure was granted to them all, but such as would serve the Christians,
should have kind entertainment, without any compulsion of denying their
faith: Nevertheless, if any one among them would become a Christian, he should
have no mean degree among the Grecian Caualierie.

The Pagans, who before were possessed with a general fear, that they should
all be cast ouer-boord and drowned, as they had seen Dragonalte and Oliuanto
use many of their company, hearing so liberal and kind an offer, withdrew
to counsel, and electing a Cousin to Tamerco, (named Oltrando) as their
Captain, concluded to follow the Christian forces, because indeed they
verily doubted, that if they should have made choice of departure, the
conquerours (in whose power it consisted) would not have granted it.

So Oltrando, with two hundred of the woorthiest men amongst them, came to the
chief Ship, where by our Knights they were embraced and welcomed as
friends: and so much wrought this courtesy in the mind of the Indians, never
used to see men so stern in time of war, and yet so affable now in peace, as
all of them desired to be baptized, the like afterward did the rest by their
example. Thus uniting both the Armies together, they s^iled on toward Turkey,
where leave we them, and return we now to the Knight of Fortune.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How the Knight of Fortune chanced on a strange adventure, and
what ensued to him thereon.
THe Knight of Fortune, who departed with Dorina, to seek adventures in the
I Will of Fortune, rid on with her diverse days together, until at last they
came to an uncouth coast of the Sea, and there Dorina (as ever she was wont to
do, when she brought him where any adventure was to be attempted) vanished
out of sight, when the Knight looking on the water, to see what there was
likeliest to become of him, espied a ship a far off riding at Anchor, but yet
beheld no person in her. Whereupon he called thereto so loud as he could, to
try if any would make him answer, and having called thrice without any reply,
he beheld two Lions come up on the fore-decke of the Ship, and two other on
the poope behind, and descending into the boat that was fastened to the Ship,
loosed it, and set onward to him.

His Squire began to quake and tremble, when he saw the Lions draw so near
his Lord, wherefore he said, Alas Sir, let us not abide the coming of these
ravenous beasts, for doubtless they will tear us in pieces. I will not boudge
a foot, answered the Knight of Fortune, but see the utmost end of this
adventure, and conquer these Lions, were they as many more: but I advise thee
to go hide thy self in yonder wood, and doubt not but I shall return to thee
well enough: so lacing on his Helmet, he stood looking on the boat, which
joined close to the shore, and the Lions without making any motion of
assailing him, stood very still and gently.

When the Knight noted this, he imagined that the Lions looked he should enter
the boat, and they would be his conduct to the Ship, which made him
presently mount upon his horse, whom he could hardly govern through his fear
of the Lions: but having at last got him into ye boat, the Lions made it
return back again, and brought it close unto the Ships side, where they
mounting up first, made signs to the Knight that he should come up after
them. He that held himself not meanly favored by Fortune, without any regard
what perrill might befall him, mounted up presently, when the Lions immediately
rising up on their hindmost feet, caught him up in their claws, as if they
would have devoured him, and carried him so suddenly under the hatches, that
he had not the very least means offered how to defend himself, and there
leaving him, they returned up to the deck again.

Primaleon considering with himself, that there might happen some matter well
worth the noting, went on feeling for his way, through a dark passage, and came
at last into a fair Cabin or Chamber, the walls whereof was richly hung round
about with cloth of gold, and all the roof or upper part, was of Crimosin
silk, very curiously embroydered with silver Stars, and the Sun and the
Moon therein wrought so artificially, as they gave a shyning splendor to all
the Chamber.

In one part of the room stood a goodly bed, hung round with purfled
curtains of gold and silk, whereto presuming to advance his steps, and
drawing one Curtain somewhat aside with his hand, he saw there lie sleeping a
Lady of such wonderful beauty, that albeit his love was devoted to Victoria,
yet this fair face seemed so highly pleasing to him, as if they both had
stood in person before him, he could hardly determine where he should place
his election. Standing thus transported in his senses for a long space, he grew
so desirous to behold her bright eyes open, as touching lightly her snowie
breasts with one of his hands, he made her to start and awaken: but then her
heavenly looks did so mightily prevail with him, as hardly could he abstain
from that which honor forbad him, till remembering himself, that thither he
was brought about some adventure of moment, which made him modestly refrain:
and lending her his hand to help her rise, thus he spoke to her.

Beautiful Lady, I wonder as much at your rare perfections, as the
strangeness of my aduenturing hither: therefore, (so pleased you) I would
gladly know of whence and what you are, and why among Lions you have made
choice of dwelling thus on the Sea? The Lady seeming no way discontented with
his demand, replied in this manner. Aduenturous Knight, whose valor has
led thee to what others durst never attempt, but when they have seen the
Lions bring the boat to the shore, would cowardly fly away into the Woods:
I account you the only man, who dreadlesse of any perrill whatsoever in the
adventure, are desirous to understand the full nature thereof, wherefore, if
Fortune be so gracious a Mistress unto you, you shall finish the only
adventure of regard, that ever any Knight alone accomplished.

Know then fair Knight, that I am the daughter to king Frysoll, who sometime
governed the Morning Islands, til age setting heavy foot upon his back, made
him elect a servant of his own education, whom he had made Lord of the
Flowrie I Will, and in whom he reposed special trust and confidence: to his care
and custody was I and my brother committed, with such allowance of subjects
homage, and other dignities beside, as might well suffice to have made him very
respectful of us. All matters being so established, that when death was
controuler of the King our Father, my brother should remain under his
protection, till such time as by benefit of years he could lay claim to
his kingdom, and then he should have it honorably resigned to him.

Garnides, (for so was ye Knight put in trust called) promised much more then
our dying father could urge: so giving him the Ring and Staff of
Protectorship, the King (our Father) closed his eyes and died. Now was
Garnides in full possession of the government, having at his command all the
Forts, Castles, Treasuries, and every thing, there wanted nothing but the title
royal, and thereto ambitiouslie he began to aspire. My Brother, being the
maine s^umbling block in his way, within few days he was bereft of life, and
then in all the have he would call himself king: but seeing things not
succeed yet to populare satis-faction, but that more eyes and tongues went on
his proceedings then he willingly would have: then would he have me
(ouer-young in years as then) to be his Wife, to set a more substantial
ground on his tirannous usurpation, yet happily (when time served) to rid the
world of me to.

An Earl named Bernuccio, in whose Castle I was at that time kept by the
usurpers appointment, when he heard that Garnides labored to make himself
King, and knew himself ouer-weake to use any resistance, he being a
marvelous expert Magitian, thought yt the best way to keep me from the
Tyrant: wherefore he brought me hither in this Ship, enchaunting here
likewise the four Lions which conducted you aboard, limitting his Art to such
proportion, that none should be so bold as to come to this ship, except his
courage served him to undertake a great adventure, until which be ended, I
cannot be married, and Bernuccio, fearing least Garnides (for this) would put
him to death, enchaunted himself in his Castle in a very strange manner, and
he must combat with variable shapes, that shall be his deliverance.

At this instant (Sir) there remains nothing else for you to do, but to
fight with those two Lions on the prowe of the Ship: nor is there any necessity
of their death, but only to bind them fast, which perhaps will appear so
toylesome a task unto you, as may make you repent the understanding of the
enterprise. But that once done, the other two Lions will be obedient unto you,
and keep ye company through a Wood which we are to pass, and they will stand
us in very great sted, keeping us from being devoured of strange wild beasts,
whereof you shall see there such abundance, as else it were impossible to
escape with life.

The Knight of Fortune, stood with great pleasure to hear this strange
adventure, and was on fire till he came to try his valor in it, wherefore,
seeing the Lady in that sort to pause, he said. Procure (sweet Lady) that we
may be set an shore again, if I bind the Lions: for I know not how my
strength shall prevail being thus on the water. Do (answered the Lady) that
which appertains to you, and leave the rest to my direction.

He hearing this reply, went upon the deck, and ere he was half mounted, the
Lions on the prow began to assail him, one of them catching hold with his
teeth on his arms, the other grasping his Helmet with his claws, but
Primaleon got one of them fast by the leg, and pulled him in such sort, as he
made him tumble over backward, and to the other he gave such a blow with his
left hand, as one of his eyes fell out of his head. Yet for all this, when he
would have stepped upon the deck, where he was to bind the Lions, one of them
caught him fast by the thigh, and griped him so hard, as the Armor which he
wore on that part for his defense, was rent in pieces, and the pain of the
gripe entered to the very bone: but to avoid further oppression by these
beasts, he caught one of them by the shag-hairde maine, and the other by the
tail, wherein appeared his admirable strength, for lifting them both thus from
the ground, he stepped up with them upon the hatches, and there would have
thrown them into the Sea, till remembering himself, that he was but to bind
them, and not to kill them, he stood there still, holding them fast in that
manner, in despite of all the resistance they could use, till the Lion which
had lost his eye, fell down upon the deck, and if the Knight had been
provided of any thing wherewith to have bound him, the fight between them, had
then been concluded, but while he loosed the cord that bound the boat to
the Ship, the Lion recovering himself, made at him again in far fiercer
manner then before, that he was glad to snatch up a club which lay on the
stern of the ship, yet therewith he had care how he fought, least he should
chance to kill them, lamming them both on the back and sides with such
blows, as made them keep back from coming near him, yet had they wounded him
on the shoulder and on the breast, and torn his Armor very shrewdly, which
enforced him diverse times to ye greater fury against them, and many times he
could have cast them into the sea, but he only desirous to conquer with the
least harm, so handled the fight, as he got bound the beasts feet that most
annoyed him. All which while, the other bit and scratcht him in such sort, as
the leathers of his Cuirasse was broken, and he received a hurt in the flanck,
whereof he made no reckoning at all, but seeing he had but that one beast to
bind, made at him with such extraordinary courage, as the Lion seeing he
wanted his companion, became quite out of heart, and so he bound his legs with
such facility, as the Lady admired it very much, albeit at the beginning of
the fight she shed many tears, as fearing least so good a Knight should
miscarry. But now when she saw both the Lions fast bound, she grew thoroughly
confident, that there was no enterprise (how dangerous soever) but by his
virtue and valor it would be accomplished: where-vppon she said.

Trust me Sir Knight, you have gone greatly beyond mine expectation, because
I held it as a matter most certain, that it was possible for no one man alone
to bind these two Lions: but since you have so well therein prevailed, the
other two will be obedient to you. As she spoke these words, the other two
Lions came from the poope of the Ship, and falling down at the feet of the
Knight of Fortune, permitted him gently to bind them both likewise, which
pleased him not a little to behold: So returned he with the Lady into her
chamber, where with precious unguents she dressed his wounds.

CHAP. XXXV. How the Ship went to the shore, and how the Knight of Fortune,
accompanied with the Lady and the Lions, departed thence to the adventure of
the Castle, and what chanced unto them by the way.
THe next day following, the Lady being very desirous to go on shore, and
perhaps the rather for haste of her marriage: made certain Carracters, which
the County Bernuccio in secret had taught her, whereby the Ship had power to
stir and move, when suddenly one of the Lions (creeping along to the
stern) as if he had been a skillful Mariner, gouernd it very orderly, while
another of them spread the sail, and in this sort they sailed onward, and came
to the shore, when one of the Lions leaping forth on land, held fast in his
mouth the Cable that was tied to the Ship: another of them shaking off his
bands, took up ye Lady lightly between his paws, and in that manner carried
her easily on Land, then followed the Knight after, glad that he had so well
recovered the shore again, where taking his horse out of the boat, he began
to look about him for his Squire, and at last espied him come forth of the
Wood, running toward his Lord very iocondly, the rather because he saw the
Lions so obedient, whom now he had the less reason to fear, in that he
beheld how gently they were ruled.

Some little discourse passed between Primaleon and his Squire, of those
occasions which had befalne him, then mounting on horseback, they rode on
toward the Earls Castle, being called Trasino, and built in a place of
very great strength. There was another noble County, who never showed any
willing obedience to Garnides, but always continued loyal to his deceassed
Lord King Frysoll, and was now become so poor, by the long and tedious war of
the Tyrant against him, that oftentimes he determined to fly from thence, and
implore assistance in the Court of Constantinople. But as he stood one day
looking forth at a window of his Castle, he espied the Knight, the Lady, and
the two Lions coming thetherward, wherein he knew consisted some great
mystery, especially because for twenty days space together before that
instant, a walking fire had likewise gone round about the Castle, which
witnessed some apparent sign of ensuing good success.

Heere-uppon arming himself, least it might be some train of the Kings to
entrap him withal, he purposed to see the effect of this marvel, and going
down to the gate let fall the draw bridge, whereon the Knight approaching with
his horse, and gessing him to be the Lord of the place, he courteously saluted,
desiring that he might have lodging in the Castle, because he was wounded,
and somewhat sickly. The Lord of the Castle seeing him so young, and the
Lions to walk so gently by him, saw no reason why he should be afraid, but
guided them into his Castle, where after some little conference together, and
the Knight of Fortunes wounds viewed and bound up, they sat down to meat
there prepared for them.

The Lord of the place, musing in his mind what Lady that should be, carrying
noate of high and honorable descent, marking her advisedly, espied between
her locks of hair a little rosy cullord spot, wherewith she was borne, and
which was well known to all that inhabited the I Will, whereon he knew for
certain, that this was the daughter to his deceassed Knig, and Master. The
dinner being ended, and all the servant commanded thence, falling humbly on
his knee before her, he thus began.

Gracious Princess Filena, your hap and mine I account most fortunate, that
your first arrival here should be thus in my Castle, which I have ever
defended against the tyrant Garnides, as the true loyal Standard bearer to the
King your Father, which yet you may behold displaied upon my Castle. I am
verily persuaded, that this Knight has delivered you from the enchauntment in
the Ship, and now goes with you to the Castle of Bernuccio, therefore let me
tell you, that you can hardly pass thither but by mine advise: for the Tyrant
Garnides, having understood by his Soothsayers, that the adventure once
finished at Bernuccioes Castle, he foorth-with shall be dispossessed of the
kingdom, has caused to be brought into a Forest (through which you must pass
if you go thither) such abundance of Lions, Bears, Tygars, Leopards,
Panthers, and other wild beasts, as a huge mighty Army is not able to
withstand them, therefore if you would pass in safety, it behooues you to
defend your selves with these Lions, as I will direct you.

You shall meet some pretty distance hence, with above an hundred Lions, and
as many other beasts, against which you have no other defense, but to make an
Armor both for your self and horse, all thick set with sharp steel
points a handful long round about, which covering your body, you shall pass
by them safely, for when the beasts feel themselves hurt, either in the mouth
or pawe, without daring to endure any other wounds, they will presently
withdraw from further offending you.

This counsel seemed scant pleasing to the Knight, for he held it base and
vile to proceed by policy, in any action where valor far better beseemed
it: but considering that he could conduct the Lady in no other manner, and her
presence must needs be had, else Bernuccios enchauntment was not to be ended,
he gave order for making him such a kind of Armor, and in mean while
attended the healing of his wounds.

Within eight days the Armor was finished, according to the form delivered
by the Lord of the Castle, and the Knight being thus armed, and the Lady and
Squire also after the same manner, the Lions were brought forthwith armed to
them, who seeing that strange kind of Armor upon them, began to roar with
such extremity and fury, as all the people in the Castle were greatly
afraid of them.

The Lord of the Castle seeing every one prepared, was ready himself
likewise at the stairs foot, both he and his horse armed according to the
rest, and thus rid they on toward the Forest: whereinto they were no sooner
entered, but they presently beheld infinite numbers of wild beasts, that without
any show of fear at all, immediately set upon them, and doubtless they could
not by any means have escaped, but only through that strange invented kind
of Armor, which nevertheless grew yokesome and burdenous to them, both by
the weight and labor of making resistance.

And albeit the beasts found by very good proof, that their best safety
consisted in keeping furthest off from these passengers, yet such as had not
made this experience, in heat and rage would needs run upon them, although
they saw their fellows sore wounded, and themselves to speed no better as
fast as they came.

The Knight of Fortune having his Sword drawn, laid fiercely about him upon
the wild beasts, and the Lions that attended on them, seeing their Master
bestir himself in such sort, ran likewise upon the beasts, but could not
tear many of them, by reason the Armor they had on was a let to their
nimblenes, only they went secure from hurting, and besides did wound as many
as came near them. So being rid of these, they rode on very quietly together,
and at last descried such a huge troop of beasts before them, as they imagined
the number to exceed twenty thousand, which made them doubtful how to escape
from all these, where-vppon, riding close with the Lord of the Castle, while
the Lions made way for the^ among the beasts, they found themselves much
troubled and tormented by them: for the Lady being fallen from her horse among
the heard, thought verily now to be bereft of life, for two Lions had caught
her fast by the feet, and dragger her along after them upon the ground, but
the Knight with his waiting Lions took to her in time, for the beasts had got
open the sight of her Helmet, and had they not come to aid her at the very
instant, no means was left for her to escape with life.

Now began the Knight so to bestirre himself among these wild beasts, that
the Lions left the Lady, and made directly at him: but see a strange accident
happening in nature, and for their great good in this extremity, for the Lions
seeing themselves so wounded by the others of their own kind, they began to
be fearful and timorous one of another, so that they refrained to come near
each other, as thinking they received no greater harm then from themselves. By
which successful chance, they rode on freely without their disturbance, yet
fought they with diverse Serpents by the way, which by reason their skinns were
hard and impiercible, their poynted Armor did them but slender service: and
here were they now in most danger of all, for when their own Lions saw that
Armor auayled the^ not, as it had done before against the other beasts, they
held backward as fearful of the Serpents poison, and their horses were so
affrighted with the fire and smoulder, as (do what they could) they would no
further onward.

This made them more dismaide then all the rest had done, in which desperate
case, the Lady (by good hap) remembered herself of a Ring, which the County
Bernuccio in former time had given her, to stedde her in a dangerous and
doubtful extreamitie: no sooner had she put it upon her finger, but the
Serpents (being not naturally bred in that place, but only brought thither by
the force of enchauntment,) came all gently to her hand, and grew in such
strife who should be foremost, that they fell upon one an other with wonderful
violence, and had so torn each other in pieces, that in very short while not
one of them remained alive.

This fell out to no mean advantage of the Knight, who questionless else had
never escaped with life, for an hundred as valiant men as himself, were not
sufficient to have undertaken this dangerous passage. The way thus well
cleared, they allighted at a fountain to refresh themselves awhile, and having
fed on such viands as they brought thither with them, lay down on the moss
and leaves to take a little sleep.

Bernuccio, who from his Castle saw the Knight of Fortune first bind the
Lions, and afterward how he had come along with the Lady even to that very
Fountain, turning himself into the shape of a Satyr, came thither suddenly
upon them, and taking the Lady up under his arm, she being in a sweet and
pleasant sleep, carried her somewhat further of, and then with his shoutes and
cries made her to awake: which the Knight hearing, and by casting his head up
suddenly espying, albeit he slept with his Helmet on, least any Serpent in
sleep might offend him, mounting presently on horseback, pursued the Satyr,
who (as if he made a scorn of him) one while ran, another while leapt, then
would he stand still till he were som-what near him, and suddenly with a skyp
be a great way from him.

Thus the Satyr flying with her, and all the other following him, they came at
last within sight of the Castle, whereinto entered the Satyr with the Lady in
his arms, whereat the Knight of Fortune was so displeased, that stepping on the
Bridge, with injurious speeches he challenged the fight, threatening to ruinate
all ye whole Castle, except he might have the Lady deliuerd him again: such
is the humor of a mind enraged, to speak oftentimes beyond the bounds of
reason.

CHAP. XXXVI. How the Christian Army, before they could take landing in
Turkey, were constrained to deliver Oliuanto to a Dwarffe, that came and
demanded him at their hands.
ON sailed ye Christian Army, with a prosperous wind, and those that belonged
to Tamerco in their company, when entering into the Turkish Seas, a strange
unlooked for tempest suddenly arose, which most of all wrought upon the
Admiral Ship, wherein the Lords and chiefest princes were, bearing it so
far off from the rest, that a little more it had quite lost the sight of all
the Navy, there were they in danger every minute to be lost, for the Ship
ran twice or thrice against a Rock, and still they feared to be bruised in
pieces.

Being in this perrill, there suddenly joined with them a little Barque,
wherein was the most ill shapen Dwarffe that ever had been seen, who stepping
aboard the Christian Ship, closely put a Letter into Oliuantos hand, saying he
must perform what therein was contained, the contents of the Letter was as
follows.

The Letter which was brought by the Dwarffe, to the young aduenturous Knight
Oliuanto.
The Superscription. To the only, and fair flower of Chivalry.
YOung bud of honor, a namelesse friend is bold to salute thee, and believe it
as infallible, that in vain thou think to enjoy the Lady, whom thou have
elected as patroness of thine affections, till first thou hazard thy life in
an honorable adventure, which renewes his own worth wheresoever it is noysed:
Aduertising thee moreover withal, that he which loves the Lady with as
endeared regard, will make like war against thee at all times. And so farewell.

Thy friend, the unknown.


Platir, who had promised Miragarda to bring back her Son with him, by no
means would consent yt he should leave them: but the Dwarffe urging important
speeches, and threatening their present miscarying except they consented, made
Oliuanto to arm himself, and entreating license of his uncle, without more
ado leapt into ye Barque with the Dwarffe, who immediately vanished, and the
tempest ceased about the Christian Ship, but continued still violent with
the little Barque, so that Oliuanto seeing no other likelihood but imminent
death, knew not how to behave himself, and so mainely was he carried along
the Ocean, as he thought he should be borne to the Antipodes.

Platir was so full of grief, to see him carried thus away, as oftentimes he
would have thrown himself into the Sea, but being comforted and persuaded
by Dragonalte, they shaped their course to their intended Turkish voyage, and
gathering the dispersed fleet together, without any other hinderance they came
to the Port of Tubant: where they landed, to the great contentment of the
Knights, that daily expected the coming of this supply, for their speedy
departure to the conquest of Niquea, but especially Blandidon, as well in hope
of regaining his kingdom, as for the great esteem he apparently perceived,
which the Emperor Primaleon made of him, whereupon he made provision for the
war, where now a while we mean to leave them.

Oliuanto, perceiving he suffered no other disadvantage, but only that he was
carried he knew not whether, began to be of the better comfort, and before
night drew on, he saw himself in the view of an Island, which seemed to him
in shape of a Theater, thrusting two arms forth into the Sea, with such an
admirable constructure and building, as the like was never seen before. The
Barque put it self into this Island, and being fastened to the shore, the
Dwarffe (who all this while had been invisible in the Ship) appeared in his
former likeness, saying: Now is to be manifested the reason of the name that
was given you, at the instant when you received your Knighthood, which though
then perhaps you took no notice of, yet now understand it for your further
benefit. You are entiteled the Knight of the Lion, and must now oppose your
self to such an enterprise, which if you prevail in, you shall have your
desire, but failing in it, never shall further tidings be heard of you: go
then accompanied with your own valor, and I (if Fortune so much favor you)
shall be better known to you.

Oliuanto, dreadlesse of any perrill whatsoever, which by the hand of man was
to be undertaken, when he saw himself so well on Land, and freed from the
blustering hazards on the Seas, began to climb up the bancke, where (the way
of passage being very steepie and narrow) before he could come to the sight
of any house, he was enforced oftentimes to sit down and rest himself.

Having recovered the height of all, he saw himself encompassed with so many
fair Palaces, as humane eye had never beheld any comparable to them, and the
more did he admire them, because he discerned no inhabitants in them: yet heard
he peoples whisperings, and saw the tract of their footing, even as in a
frequented and populous City was to be noted. Beside, he heard ye knocking at
doors, as if some were enclosed that would be at liberty, and was diverse
times shouldered as he went along, as if the street had been full of people
to hinder his way, yet could he not see any living creature.

Passing thus on through the very chief street, he came to a sumptuous
Palace, which stood very solitary to his eye, yet heard he much muttering
and whispering of people, and some that were indifferent plain to be
understood. Standing still awhile to listen what he could hear, he saw the
Palace gate open, before which was a long pair of stayres, and a huge Lion
came forth, as high in stature as a great tall Cammell, the beast grumming and
grinning at the Knight, began to menace him with his pawe. Oliuanto remembering
the Dwarffes words, that the reason of his knighted name was now to be
manifested, imagined that he was to combat with this Lion, wherefore mounting
up the stepps, and being vnskild in the nature of the enchauntment, never
stayed to try whether the Lion would assail him or no: but having his sword
drawn in his hand, stepped by the beast and entered the gate, where, in the midst
of a goodly Hall he beheld a bright shining Pillar, with a fair Idol on the
top thereof, holding an engraven labell in his hand, containing this
inscription. Such as seek honor here, are sure of death. And another whereon
was written thus.

Virtue may conquer me, but force will fail. The Knight, making no account at
all of these two inscriptions, passed on further, and saw in a high mounted
chair of estate a very aged King, who seemed as if he sat and slept, and the
Knight not knowing of who^ to demand the quality of the place, meant to awake
him for further resolution. But as he advanced his foot upon the first
step, suddenly rushed forth at a door standing half open by the King, the
Lion, and caught hold of him so unprovided for resistance, that at one thrust
he ouerthrewe him a long on the ground, and then walked over him twice or
thrice, that he thought he should die with the weight of the beast: but
remembering himself how cowardly it were to die in that manner, he leapt up on
his feet, and brandishing his sword against the Lion, the beast declared no
fear at all of him, because he could not thus prevail against the
enchauntment, and out of the Hall al his blows were bestowed but in vain.

The young Knight seeing his sword thus still to rebound back, without any
offense done to the Lion, began to grow doubtful of his fights success,
wherefore, shifting his steps from place to place, to avoid the gripes and
paws of the beast, he gave backward in ground the value of some ten paces,
so as he was come just before the door where the stairs descended. There
arose the Lion up on his two hindmost feet, and with both his paws gave him
two such blows on the breast, as made him tumble backward about nine or ten
stepps, when if the Lion had followed upon that advantage, the strife between
them had soon been concluded. But the Lion returned back again into the
Chamber, and the Knight (being in open air) recovered fresh vigor, seeming
to himself so freely disposed, as if he were now but to begin an encounter.

So entering into the Hall where the aged King s^ept, he saw he was turned now
upon his right side, which gave him encouragement of better speed then before,
and recommending himself to God, in whose fear and reverence he purposed to
hazard his life, he set his foot again upon the nethermost step, and as he
would have ascended the second, the Lion rushed forth again, but the Knight
now experienced by his former assault, knew the better how to prevent him, and
casting a full thrust at his hindmost part, the Lion nimbly turned, and with
his tail beat by the blow, without receiving any danger at all, so did he
twice or thrice award his strokes, and made all his labor be but bestowed in
vain.

Oliuanto, laboring in his thoughts very busily, which way he might soonest
attain to wound the Lion, thought if he could hurt him in the side, then he
should easily compass the victory, which made him bestow his strokes in that
manner: but the Lion perceiving the Knights intent, was so ready in his
turnings and windings, that he could by no means prevail in his purpose, for
one while with his paws, another while with his teeth and tail he so
ouer-laboured the Knight, that he felt himself in great extremity, whereupon,
he drew back toward the door again, to rest himself awhile, being unable
to give one stroke more he was so weary: but the Lion, unwilling he should
have so much as a breathing space, stood overthwart the door, still laying
mainely at him with his feet and tail, having now brought the Knight into
such weakness and debilitie, as it was very doubtful what should become of
him. Notwithstanding, he intended, since he must needs die there, yet to die
valiantly, and casting a manly thrust at the beasts side, he could not so well
award it, but that thereby he received a small hurt, which making him stagger
half out of the door, and the sword continuing still within the wound,
striking with his foot to get out the weapon, the beast threw himself quite
out of the door, whereby he lost all the power of the enchauntment.

Oliuanto, glad that he had found the ways to prevail against the Lion,
stepped forth of the gate, where he found himself so refreshed, as if he had
not combatted at all with the beast, and because he saw the night approaching
on, which he knew not how dangerous it might prove to him, he went into the
Hall again, and going toward the King, he found that he remained still fast a
sleep, but had lift up his head, and leaned it upright, backward to the Chair
wherein he sat. Oliuanto being ignorant how to interpret this marvel,
would now needs mount upon the third step, when suddenly he was again
assailed by the Lion, who caught him so furiously by the shoulder plate, as the
buckles breaking in sunder, that part was quite disarmed.

Even in this instant the sleeping King awaked, and albeit his white beard
declared him to be very aged, yet started he up so lightly and nimbly, and
wounded the Knight so often with his royal Scepter, as he now thought himself
quite lost for ever, the Lion one way assailing him, and the King another, his
case was very dangerous and desperate: at last, giving a full blow at the Kings
Scepter, it presently fell out of his hand, and he distressed of further
force, with easy steps departed thence into a chamber adjoining. The Lion
feeling more and more the grief of his wound, as being in the place most
offensive unto him, went away lamely, and because he had hurt the Knight sore
upon the shoulder disarmed, it made him reach another stroke at him in his
departing, which made the Lion fall down to the ground, delivering such a
fearful cry in his fall, that he made other Lions that were in the Palace,
roar to him again: which when the Knight heard, and doubting least he should
be newly assaulted in that weary estate, he stepped out again at the gate, and
presently returned as cheereful as at first, yet could not put on his
Pouldron, which lay there before him.

As he stood awhile devising with himself what were best to be done, he heard
his name called by a woman, at which voice he suddenly started, because it
seemed as if she had been violenced, and passing through the Hall, he saw
there a goodly Lady, who at first sight he took to be the beautiful Auriana,
but when he came a little nearer her, he perceived his error, and refused to
accost her: because whosoever loves a Lady entirely in his heart, is not easily
carried away with the pleasing baits of any other new intising beauty. The
Lady (with very cheerful countenance) took him by the hand, and led him into
a very rich Chamber, whereas a sumptuous table was prepared, and sitting down,
they feasted very kindly together. Supper being ended, he saw enter at the
door the aged King with his Scepter in his hand, accompanied likewise with a
Giant, the King using these speeches following.

Knight, well may thou boast of thy good fortune, that thou have combatted in
this house in the night time: but if thou do not fulfill whatsoever this
Lady gives thee counsel in, to morrow morning thou shall loose thy life by
this Mace, poynting to that which the Giant carried in his hand, and so they
departed again.

Oliuanto was somewhat abashed at their first appearance, but hearing that he
should not fight in the dark, he was the better pleased: then the Lady
showing him a very rich bed prepared for him, departed thence very pleasantly,
though much suspected by the young Knight, who feared he should be further
assailed by her, for her looks seemed to him somewhat wanton and lascivious.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of whence and what this King was, and what passed between
Oliuanto and the Lady, likewise how he accomplished the adventure.
THe Indian Histories do report, that a King, the graund-father to Tamerco,
having a daughter of exceeding beauty, he did not respect her with that care
and diligence, as was necessary to be used to a Lady of such merit: and her
self being likewise less mindful of her own reputation, then became those
perfections wherewith she was endued, grew amorous of a Prince, (yet a subject
to her father) and permitted the follies of idle love to proceed so far,
that the key of virginity being lost, she grew with child by him: but when
she could conceal her shame no longer, by reason of the apparent witness
delivered by her grossenes, she concluded to trust a Nursse of hers with this
secret, who as she was willing to pleasure her Lady in such an urgent
necessity, yet she handled the matter with such indiscretion, that when the
very exigent came of best stedding the poor Princess, it fell out to be her
greatest hurt, for the child being heard to cry, only through the Nursses
negligence, from diverse parts of the Palace the Ladies and Gentlewomen (not
accustomed to hear so unlooked for an accident,) came running to the chamber,
and chanced to meet the King by the way, who demanding the reason of their
running so amazedly, though they were in a manner much daunted with his
presence, yet they told him what a cry they had heard, whereat he not a little
meruailing, offered to enter the chamber where his daughter was, yet modestly
staying till the Women were entered: and standing where he was not easily
discerned, he heard the Nursse speak, (as standing now upon her own
justification) and these or the like were the words she used.

Alas Madame, what have you done? have you had no more regard of your honor,
but thus to shame your father, and stain your own credit for ever? Has your
private conferences with Rouino, (for so was the other party offendour called)
sorted to this end? Why then you may boldly make this conclusion, that his
shame and life shall end together, and your blame and life depend upon the king
your Fathers sentence.

The King (upon these speeches uttered by the Nursse) became acquainted not
only with his daughters offense, but likewise with the man that had so heavily
trespassed, which made him enter the Chamber with more then common rage, and
catching her fast by the hair of the head, drew her from off the bead along
upon the ground, and so would have strangled her with her own locks, but that
the Ladies by, seeing the young Princess in such a dangerous case, cried all
out so loud, as their noise was easily heard through the Palace.

This cry brought the Queen with all speed thither, where hearing the
wretched estate of her daughter, she fell into such extremity of passion,
knowing well how implacable the King her husband was, and pitying the severe
castigation he would inflict upon his daughter, as the very conceit hereof
rent her heart strings in sunder, and so she fell down, and presently died.
The King confounded with this lamentable spectacle, left his daughter, and ran
to embrace his Queen and comfort her, but finding life gone, and no hope of
recovery, he appointed his daughter to be presently imprisoned.

News hereof was presently carried to Rouino, who being in suspect of some
strange disaster, that might be inflicted on his elected Princess: in rage and
mad fury went directly to the Court, where being foorth-with apprehended, he
was committed unto another close prison. The next day following, the Nursse was
brought face to face before the Princess, where she remaining as the sole
accuser, at length Rouino was sent for, who stoutly denying all matters
alleged, was enforced afterward by torments to confess, and the child being
brought in public presence, resembled the true father in all such evident
manner, that as the fault caused in sort a just detestation, yet ye child's
goodly form, and the parents kind love, pleaded on the other side as much
compassion.

Nevertheless, the King ouerswayed by too much fury, taking the infant by
both the feet, made it be cleft through the midst before the Father and
Mothers face, whereon, forgetting all duty of a daughter, in heat of blood
she used these speeches to her Father. Thou monster and murderer of thine own
flesh and blood, why with life did thou let me see so inhumane a spectacle?
In justice of the cause, thou should first have slain me, rather then after
ye death of my infant to leave me perpetually tormented.

Rouino likewise, seeing his child thus bloodily disseuered, dreadlesse of any
extremity, (for he knew some violent and was intended him) gave all the
injurious speeches he could imagine to the King, that he might ^ashly in his
mad mood f^^e upon him, and murder him to with the weapon which he held in
his hand. But the King, who could not be contented with so speedy a dispatch
of them, committed them both again to prison, and sent for a skillful
Negromancer, which dwelt in a vast place of old ruined Babylon, where, though
he was environed with numberless wild beasts, yet lived he securely among
them all.

The Wizard understanding the mind of the King, that these two Lovers were to
suffer a lingering kind of death, to ye end they should not endure such
implacable torments, went thither with the Messenger, where being by the King
entertained with great honor, and very serious discourse past between the^
upon the matter already reported, the Sorcerers advise was required concerning
the offenders, and in his answer replied as follows. My Lord, if you would
punish this offense according as it deserves, yet not to keep from your sight
their bodies in affliction, because your spleen will hardly be satis-fied with
tormenting them, I will enchaunt them in such sort, that you shall ever behold
them before any punishment be imposed, and yet to eithers grief be with
violence endured.

Your Majesty is now so aged, that I gather by the celestial aspect at your
nativity, you cannot live above the space of two years, yet will I make you
survive an hundred years by an enchauntment which I will order in manner
following. Rouino will I first trans-forme into a most fierce Lion, of whom the
Princess your daughter shall ever live in fear, and when time comes that he
shall be vanquished by a Knight, then shall he assume the shape of a Giant, and
the Lady be changed into a V^per or Serpent, by which means they shall never
have any kind community together: for altering their shapes so often, and then
overcome by that warrior himself, they shall always live in such
dissimilitude, as the one shall ever abhor the other. As for your self,
because you have no hand in this transgression, you shall spend your days in
this Palace and in the Garden: but when any one comes to combat with the
Lion, you shall be fast a sleep in your Chair of estate, and the Knight whose
fortune shall favor him so much as to mount the third degree of your throne,
that man shall give end to the whole adventure.

The King, desirous to see Rouino and his daughter in continual torment,
yielded the more willingly to be thus enchaunted, taking hold of his former
promise withal, to enjoy the benefit of life for so long space: and leaving
the kingdom to a Nephew of his, the Graund-father to the Princess Auriana,
came thus into the Castle. But by reason this adventure continued long time,
and few Knights were so hardy as to undertake it, he would needs have all
the people of the Castle enchaunted to in such sort, that they might see and
negotiate their affairs among themselves, yet not to be seen or heard of any,
but only by soft murmurings and whisperings: which strange kind of invisible
noise, made many so timorous, as when they were engirt with these audible
whisperers, they would presently turn back again, without attempting the
adventure.

The Lady that was daughter to the forenamed King, endued with exquisite
beauty and behavior, having seen (for many years together) no other living
person but her aged offended Father, who always used threatenings of worse and
worse extremities to her, and the fierce Lion, of whom she lived in continual
fear: durst never be so aduenturous as to walk about the Castle, only to
avoid the causes of her terror, and yet Rouino, albeit he was thus
trans-formed into a Lion, loved the Lady still exceedingly, offering diverse
times to sport and play with her, but she would fly from him in regard of
fear: so much to acquaint you with the whole course of the history, now
return we to the place where we left before.

When the Lady had well noted this gallant young Knight, seeing him to be of
such virtue and admired valor, she grew greatly enamoured of him, hoping by
his means to get out of that enchauntment: wherefore, about the midnight hour
she went to the bed where he slept, and laying her hand gently upon his
breast, awaked him, and then used these speeches. I come to do kind offices
to thee fair Knight, whose good stars have been thy guide to so high an
adventure, which when thou have finished, thy recompense is to enjoy me in
marriage, being daughter to a king, and only heir unto the Crown of India.

Oliuanto, who never let slip the least minutes space, without continual
remembrance of his beauteous Auriana, perceiving this Lady so much to resemble
her, grew half persuaded that it might be she indeed, till viewing her more
advisedly, and checking his own error, he thrust her aside from him, which
she taking very vncurteouslie, and hardly restraining her womannish fury,
being likewise now upon the instant of her trans-formation, (because Rouino
was already become a Giant, and she to alter within certain hours after)
which happened even then in this discontented mood, for she felt her neck to
shoot forth in length, and her parts to change in aunswerable proportion, so
that suddenly she was become a very fierce Serpent, when without any
intermission of time, she leapt upon the Knight, and doubtless had stain
him, but that by good hap he quickly drew his sword, wherewith he delivered so
many strokes at her, as she was glad to shift for her own safety, without
any further damage to the Knight, then immediately he armed him, as expecting
to be further assailed.

The old King and the Giant came running thither upon this tumult, and finding
the Knight armed, the King stood and leaned himself against the door, but the
Giant entered with his Mace, yet otherwise quite disarmed, whereat Oliuanto
meruailed not a little, but when he came to belabor him with his sword, he
found his body impenetrable, and himself very strangely beaten with his Mace,
because he had not in the beginning well looked to himself.

Heereon, growing somewhat doubtful of his life, he leapt forth of the
Chamber, to try if in larger compass he could better resist his enemy: at
which instant he bagan to imagine in his thoughts, that the Lion had thus
assumed the shape of a Giant, which made him ye more diligent and respective,
in what part of his body he might soonest attain to wound him, as not doubting
but some place or other was to be offended: but the blows of the Mace so
showred upon him, that he needed Argos eyes in attendance to avoid them.

The fight continued between them about two hours, and Oliuanto finding his
breath to fail him, remembered his former help in that case, which was, to get
forth at the Hall gate, and then he should be as fresh as ever he was,
whereupon, he labored thither so much as he might: but the Giant perceiving
it, hindered him from it so much as possibly he could: nevertheless, Oliuanto
casting a full thrust at the Giants face, by good hap sore wounded him, which
put him in good hope that the adventure was finished, for the Giant did nothing
now but stand wiping away his blood, which gave Oliuanto the better means to
get out of the Hall, where he felt his courage in such sort restored, that he
thought himself able to conquer two Giants.

Being entered the Hall again, he met the old King coming toward him with
his Scepter, and the Viper or Serpent with him, which diverse times offered to
wind her self about him, whereby she did endanger him very often, but still
the young Knight prevented her valiantly, and albeit the King gave many maine
strokes, yet by his dexterity he still so avoided them, that he could not
fasten one stroke upon him. The Serpent, notwithstanding all her subtle
slights, was yet glad to keep off from the keen edged sword, and one blow
happening to strike the Scepter out of the Kings hand, he presently vanished:
whereupon, because he would loose so little time as might be, he made at the
Serpent very resolutely: but she leaping up suddenly at his Helmet, biting the
laces thereof in sunder, grypt him so violently by the throat, as his immediate
death was much to be doubted.

Oliuanto, seeing himself in such extremity, so strongly gryped her about
the neck with his hand, that the Viper in humane voice thus cried out: Put me
to no more pain, for indeed thou can not kill me, but if thou give over and
let me go, the adventure for this time is concluded. By the voice, Oliuanto
knew the Serpent was the Lady, that was before so enamoured of him, wherefore,
pitying her hard fortune, he let her go: when presently the King came with
the Giant into the Hall, and mounting both upon the Viper, flew altogether
forth of the window, but the King first used these speeches to him.

Think not (Sir Knight) that thou have fully finished with us, nor that our
patience can permit, that Auriana, descended of our Indian blood, shall ever be
thine, if we can hinder it. So fled they thence to another enchaunted Castle,
where Oliuanto had afterward toil enough with them, as in his own history is
more at large declared.

Great comfort in mind brought these words to Oliuanto, yt yet he might hope
to enjoy Auriana at length, though some difficulties might long time be his
hinderance. Now began the Castle to shake and tremble, yea, and ye whole Island
likewise, as if it would have suncke into some bottomless depth, and within
less then an hours space, he might see out at the windows the people of the
I Will, walking and talking upon the Marketplace, and hear the noise of diverse
artificers at their handy trades, whereby it appeared manifestly unto him, that
the enchauntment there was fully ended.

So descending down the stayres, he met the Dwarffe which had been his
conducter thither, who using great reverence to the Knight, guided him back
again to the Barque, whereinto they were no sooner entered, but the Dwarffe
vanished as before, and in one night the Barque arrived at the Port of
Tubante, among the Christian Army, and being come on Land, by Platir and the
Christian Princes he was most kindly entertained, and they desirous to know the
reason of his absence all this while, at large he discoursed to them the whole
adventure: so entered they the City together, and then took order for the
wars preparation.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Leonato caused the wheel to be carried to Constantinople,
and afterward went to the I Will of Carderia, where he remained enchaunted for
defense of the place.
THe wise and learned Aliart, of whom much is chronicled, which in this History
is omitted, when he perceived that his Art had so outstript him, as many
things failed of his expectation: he grew into such dislike of his own
judgment, that he would by no means now go to Constantinople, fearing
least his ignorance should be objected to him, which made him oftentimes
ready to burn all his books, but that Argentao dissuaded him to the
contrary, so there they continued in the Perilous I Will, expecting the passage
of some envious and ill opposed influence of the heavens, whereby the skillful
man was much crossed and encountered, and hoping one day to work the advancement
of the Grecian Empire again.

But leave we him to his studies, and return we now to Leonato, who being
departed from Tarnaes, commanded the Giants to carry the wheel to
Constantinople, with charge that it should be presented to the Emperor, and
afterward, that the Giants (as conquered by him) should humble themselves
before fair Candida, and there remain at her further appointment.

Great joy was through the Court at the arrival of this wheel, especially
Polinarda his mother was not meanly pleased, and ye young Lady Candida, who
seeing such a present come from her Lover, could not conceal with all her
cunning, but plainly expressed how enamoured she was of him: but the Emperor
not respecting his own aged estate, affecting this Lady very entirely, showed
slender acceptance of the present.

Leonato, with Don Rosuell, Almaroll, Caro, and Estrellant, taking leave of the
Giant and the Lady, rode toward the I Will of Carderia, where (as it was famed
abroad) they should find diverse Knights of the Grecian Court imprisoned. And
it so came to pass, that Tarnaes likewise coming thither, after he had
expressed great valor in the fight, was by the enchaunted Knight carried also
in as prisoner: this happened before the other Knights arrival there, Tarnaes
thinking to forestall them in the honor of the adventure, but speeding as you
have heard, and the Knight returning to look for more fresh customers, espied
all the other making toward the bridge, and Caro being the foremost, alighted
from his horse, because he saw that the other was on foot.

When they buckled together, and that Caro (as others had done before) thought
one of his sides to be quite parted from him, though indeed he received no
wound at all: his heart began to fail him, and not able any longer to weilde
his sword, was caught up by the Knight, and carried into prison. He stayed not
long but returned again, and coming hand to hand with Estrellant, so
confounded his senses with his blows and gripes, that he knowing no way how
to avoid them, was likewise carried into the Island. When Don Rosuell saw his
son so borne away, overcome with grief, he ran to assist him, and passing
quite over the bridge, entered the Island, where he was suddenly taken of his
horse: but by reason he was taken perforce as the others were, he was not
carried to prison, but remained there near to the bridge, which indeed proved
a great help to the finishing of the adventure, as you shall perceive in place
convenient.

Almaroll presuming of himself, would needs gallop over the bridge, where
loosing all understanding, entered of his voluntary accord into the I Will, and
was there found on foot where Don Rosuell abode: so did Orino enter after the
very same manner. Leonato now only remained, with whom the Knight of the
Island coming to handie grypes, and he feeling (as the others had done) a
kind of tearing his body in diverse parts: Nevertheless, it was given him as a
natural instinct at his knight-hoode, that his heart should no way be daunted
with fear, and being of such invincible courage, he buckled with the Knight
in such honorable manner, as he made him glad to shun and avoid him, for
his good sword had pierced through his Armor, and wounded his body in diverse
places, whereby he seeing himself overcome by this Knight, said. It is ill
for thee that thou art of such valor, because the nature of the enchauntment
is such, as whosoever has ye power to vanquish me, must remain here
enchaunted for the Islands defense.

Much displeased was the Knight of the Sword with these words, as gathering by
them, that he should not accomplish this adventure: whereupon, he strove with
himself not to conquer the Knight, because he would not remain there
enchaunted: yet giving a stroke (against his will) at the Knights head, it
seemed to him as if he had cleft it in twain, whereby he fell backward upon
the bridge, and suddenly was carried away he knew not by whom. Now began the
Knight of the Sword to grow forgetful of the cause why he came thither, and
desired that Knights good store and numberless would come to the I Will, that he
might hinder them all from concluding the adventure. Suddenly he beheld a
goodly Tent erected for him at the foot of the bridge, with all things
necessary and behooueful in it, whereinto being entered, great store of Lances
were reared up by him against trees: then went he to search further into the
Island, but he could not pass any distance of ground, because the
enchauntment filled his mind full of doubt, least any should come to end the
adventure. Diverse Knights came thither in short while after, among whom were
none of noate or name material to our history, yet all detained among the rest
as prisoners. But leave we Leonato here for the Islands defense, and return
we to the Knight of Fortune, whom we left before the Castle of Bernuccio,
desirous of recovering the Lady again.

CHAP. XXXIX. How the Knight of Fortune entered the Castle, where, by advise of
the Lady, he accomplished the adventure.
BErnuccio, after he had carried the Lady into his Castle, returned to his
former shape, to comfort the Lady in her extreme fear, where he let her
behold, that he could change himself into infinite forms, by means whereof
the Knight should never overcome him. Then told he her, that he would first
send a defiance to Garnides, and when he had slain him, he would make such
scorn of the Knight of Fortune, (being so assisted by his variety of shapes)
that he (void of all hope to finish the adventure) should depart thence again
with loss of his labor: then would he enjoy her quietly in marriage, and so
come to the absolute government of the kingdom.

The Lady, who entirely affected the Knight of Fortune, and was in good hope to
possess him as her husband, dissembled to be well contented with all his
speeches, and cunningly obtained this secret of him, that whenever he
should be wounded in ye right eye, he had no further power of trans-formation.

The Knight of Fortune stood calling without the Castle, to have the gate
opened, and entrance admitted, which he urged with many threatening speeches,
and Bernuccio craftily intending his death, by sending him unarmed to Garnides,
let him enter the Castle: where taking him very kindly by the hand, he
brought him up into the Palace to the Lady, where he was very joyful to
behold her, but much more was she contented with the sight of him. Bernuccio
perceiving it, grew greatly displeased therewith, and but that he could not
make himself King before Garnides were dead, he would there have murdered the
Knight in the night time.

But to prevent them of any suspicion, he left the Lady there with him, where
she acquainted him with Bernuccios intent, and what multitudes of shapes he
could transform himself into: the help whereof only consisted in wounding
him in the right eye, whereby the enchauntment would fully be concluded, and no
other means left of affecting the adventure, because the Magitian could
assume so many shapes, and was not to be wounded, but in the eye only.

Bernuccio, in the mean while caused a sumptuous supper to be prepared, and
having gathered by his Art, that the Knight was Nephew to the Emperor of
Constantinople, he thereby stood in the greater fear of him: but Supper
being ended, after much table talk and familiar discourse, he spoke in this
manner. Sir Knight, you may now (so please you) go take your rest, and call up
all your manly spirits together, for to morrow you are to undertake such an
enterprise, as if Fortune favor you with accomplishing thereof, then shall you
easily conclude this adventure.

Primaleon, being by the Lady forewarned of all, answered: that he was ready
to undergo any labor whatsoever, where (honor being the object) he should
find employment. So departed he to rest, but the Lady, imagining herself right
kindly affected, by him who expressed such affability to every one, when she
perceived that all in the Castle could not but be fast asleep, she went to ye
Knights chamber, where disrobing herself of all her garments, she lay down by
him, and with her soft hand gently awaked him.

Now, whether the heat of youth, or her sweet intisings most prevailed in this
amourous skirmish, I know not, but she quickly was trans-formed from a maid
to a fair young woman: belike with no great unwillingness in her self,
receiving this favor as an earnest of further hope, that having been so
liberal of this kindness to her, he would not refuse to accept her in
marriage. But herein she deceived herself, not knowing how dearly he loved
Victoria, the daughter to Don Florian, and Leonarda the fair Queen of Thrace:
whereof the Knight likewise remembering himself, became so penitent for his
passed folly, that willing to have the Lady stay there no longer, he said. Be
wise, fair Lady, and return to your Chamber, least any suspicious eye should
behold you, and so I be the cause of your scandle and infamy.

The Lady, ouer-swaied with her own imaginations, after many sweet kisses and
kind embracings, departed from him, and the Knight thus left alone, began in
this manner to chyde with himself. Oh divine Victoria, with what face can I
crave pardon of thee for this offense, which indeed does merrite no
forgiveness at all? Sentence me therefore in the severity of thy justice, deny
me thy love, and hide from me thy heavenly beauty, which is the surest and
readiest way to my death: for what can I otherwise justly expect at thy hand,
but the rightful doom and award of death, for this treason to thy beauty,
and treachery in mine obliged faith?

In these and such like passions he spent the rest of the night, even as if
his Lady had been there present with him, but when the morning appeared, he
arose and armed himself, expecting when the time of his employment should
come: and Bernuccio entering the place where he was, said: Sir Knight, you can
never attain the height of this adventure, till first you have slain the
Tyrant Garnides, for he remaining alive, little shall it avail the Lady, if
you could disinchaunt this Castle: therefore prepare your self to go
thither, in such secret manner as I will advise you.

Primaleon knowing how the enchauntment was to be ended, thus answered: I had
rather first conclude this perrillous enterprise, and afterward let me alone
for killing Garnides. Bernuccio suspecting by these words, that the Lady had
instructed him for his carriage in the adventure, grew timorous of his own
success, and willingly would have been rid of his company: wherefore rushing
forth of the room, before a man could think the very least thought, he was in
the broad Court beneath in the shape of a Satyr, with two drawn Rapiers in
his hand.

The Knight, not a little joyful hereof, because he earnestly desired to try
his fortune in the fight, that he might set free the Lady, enstall her in her
kingdom, and so avoid all further dallying with her: descended the stairs,
and coming against the beast, he found him to leap so lightly here and there
about him, as he could not devise how to fasten a blow upon him, for
knightly courage and skill in weapon, seemed nothing to him, wherefore, all he
could do, was to shun the slights and tricks of his several subtle offers,
which seemed indeed very marvelous to him. The Satire having the advantage
of his two long Rapiers, let fly his thrusts so quick at the Sheeld of
Fortune, as all the Knight could do would hardly award them: whereupon, he
seeing that the fight might thus continue all day, and yet no benefit to him
thereby, marking withal, how the beast still defended his face with one of
the weapons, with a maine stroke he cut one of the Rapiers through the midst,
and so it fell out of his hand to the ground: so ye the Satyr being now very
fearful of his face, and not daring to fight any longer with one weapon,
turned his back and fled.

Soon after he returned in a contrary shape, seeming a very strange deformed
Giant, with a huge broad hand which served him as a Sword, and a mighty
Club in the other, both seeming incorporate, as growing naturally out of his
body. He was all naked, which Primaleon shamed very much to behold, and
thought it small manhood in him, if he should fight with him upon this
advantage, and therefore made offer of disarming himself, to the end he might
not be disparaged by any inequality: but the Lady, standing in a window above
to behold the fights success, advised him to the contrary. The Giant seemed
thereat to be very wroth and angry, and albeit he seemed naked, yet was his
flesh so hard and impenetrable, as the Knights Sword rebounded still back
again, as if it had fallen on Armor or steel: but Primaleon heedfull of the
Giants defense, still noted that he best guarded the right side of his face.

For more then half an hour the fight endured, and the Knight had so well
awarded the strokes of his enemy, as he felt very little endamagement by
them, wherefore giving a sudden thrust very near his right eye, the Giant
seemed so amazed thereat, that Primaleon aduantageously running upon him,
forcibly wrested the Club quite from him: then had he nothing but his broad
hand left, to make resistance withal, which he likewise striking at with the
Club, thought he had smit it quite off, when finding himself deceived, he
gave a snatch at it with his Gauntlet, and pulling it strongly from the body,
found that he had it fast in his hand. Now the Giant having nothing to defend
himself withal, turned and fled again, and stayed not so long as one would
go twenty paces, but he heard a door suddenly rush open, and saw a
Collomne therein with an Idol upon it, holding a labell with this inscription.

Except thou cast me down, thou art but dead. Presently came forth a huge
beast like an Elephant, but far more agill and nimble in show, with ten
swords by his sides, which were held directly out by certain hands, turning
and winding every way with marvelous facility, as if they had natural use
and motion, and the beasts body had certain bones resembling scales, fashioned
after the manner of an Armor. This beast went diverse times about the Pillar,
appearing to be the Guardian thereof, and handled the swords every way with such
admirable dexterity, as Primaleon could not devise where best to offend him:
but remembering his right eye was the place of certainty, as he made his aim
thereat, he foorth-with saw two swords suddenly shoot out of his forehead,
and two other out of his temples on each side, having like agilitie and motion
as the other swords had.

Notwithstanding all this, commending himself to God, courageously he went and
assailed the Monster, and it was his good hap, that at the very first stroke
he smote off two swords, of those which were upon ye beasts side, which gave
him some hope of victory in the end. But yet it stood him on to be very
heedfull, otherwise by those swords his death was threatened, for should he
have stepped between the Collomne and the beast, both those starting up, and the
other making directly at him, it had been impossible for him to have escaped
with life: therefore, ever as he came near the Pillar, he felt himself thrust
back he knew not by whom, and when he made at the beast, then all the swords
were opposed against him: so that at one instant he was brought to such
distress, that he thought the huge Monster would have fallen upon him, and so
have nailde him to the earth with the swords: which to avoid, and loath to be
so violently murdered, by virtue of his generous and unconquerable spirit, he
threw himself at one leap upon the neck of the beast, and was so suddenly
prepared withal, that with a slicing blow he cut off the swords that served
as a defense to his temples, and to his right eye.

Now began cheerful comfort to seize upon his soul, which made him send stab
after stab directly to ye part, but the beast nothing oppressed with his
burden, turned the left side of his head with mad fury toward him, and there
he saw two other swords newly started forth, which put the Knight to worse
perrill then the other before had done: nay more, the beast began now to take
the advantage of his back, so that Primaleon was enforced to get away from
him, least with his fall upon him, he should be pressed to death, yet forgot he
not still to aim at his eye, which the beast well perceiving, used the more
circumspection.

Notwithstanding, having but three swords now left to make resistance withal,
he got near to the Pillar, and setting his head close to it, put out his
hinderpart to be his defense, whereon Primaleon laid innumerable strokes, but
all to no purpose: which when he plainly perceived, and that he might hold on
so God knows how long, yet reap no benefit by all his endeavor, he purposed
now to hazard life, or win the victory, and taking another leap, cast
himself upon the right shoulder of the beast, and as he made an offer to fall
that way on the ground, to the end he might so get the Knight under him, he
hapt to turn his head toward him, which opportunity not neglecting, as being
the especial occasion he had so long striuen for, he stabt him in the right
eye, and the huge beast staggering forward and backward, had fallen with the
Knight under him, but that he gave a sudden leap toward the Pillar, and ran
against it so mainely with recovering of himself, as he fell quite over
backward, where lying in some little quandarie for a pretty while, had not the
beast been manfully dispatched before, his life had perrished at that instant.

But coming to himself again, he went to the Pillar, with intent to hew it
down in piece, but the Lady cried to him that he should forbear, because
the Pillar was to be kept whole and sound: only he should bring it into the
Palace, and set it on a goodly base, where a thousand before it had been set
by a King of that Island, who was a marvelous skillful Nigromancer, then would
ensue out of the place a furious mad dog, whose nails would pierce his Armor
as easily as wood, and if over him he could get the victory, then the
adventure was fully accomplished.

The Knight without more adoo went strait to the Pillar, and taking it upon
his shoulder, it seemed as if he had been laden with a Mountain:
notwithstanding, to perfect the glory of so great an enterprise, he lustily
ascended the stairs, but before he was half way up, he was met by a man in
the likeness of death, who caught hold on the Pillar behind, and held it so
strongly, as had he not been endued with extraordinary valor, he had
been tumbled over backward with it. But because he would conquer all
impediments whatsoever, he laid about him cheerefullie with his sword, that
the fleshlesse bones flew all in squanders diverse ways, and being so rid of
that disturbance, he went up the stairs, where just at the door as he would
have entered, he met with a furious dog of wondrous hugeness, which snarled at
his legs, tore and rent his armor, and would not let him set a foot forward:
all this being done to make him let fall the Pillar, which when he could not
compass, he leapt upon his shoulder and got upon the Pillar, where standing
upon the head of the Image, he counterpoizde it in such sort, as himself
could hold no longer footing.

Then ran he to the base where the Collomne should be set, where, when all
his labor proved to no purpose, the dog leapt out at a window of the
Palace, and fell down broken all in pieces. So set he up the Pillar, and so
ended the enchauntment, whereat the Knight received such exceeding contentment,
as it seemed to him that he had endured not travail at all.

The Lady very joyfully came running to embrace him, but he (not unmindful of
the former wrong he had offered his own Mistress, repulsed her so
disdainfully, that she, who was in hope before to enjoy him as her husband,
began to conceive such hatred against him, as her vehement affection toward
him, was now quite forgotten, and changed to a plotted piece of treason, to
have him murdered by the Tyrant Garnides: for women loath extremely, where
they loved extraordinarily, especially when no more fruit follows their
amourous purposes.

CHAP. XL. How as the Christian Knights at Tubante were setting forward to the
conquest of Niquea, Florendos despayring because he could have no cure for
his lamenes, departed away with a Damsel, and what he understood by her.
FLoraman being confirmed General of the whole Army, which should go to the
conquest of Niquea, prepared all his forces in readiness that were to accompany
him thither, appointing every Officer his charge and limitation, according as
he thought it most convenient. But Florendos, to who^ his impediment of lamenes
seemed very offensive, could give no patience to his disturbed thoughts,
because whenever he ran at ye Lance, he found his right knee so to fail
and deceive him, that withdrawing himself from the others company, as
intending to undergo no charge at all, he purposed privately to depart and
leave them. But even in the heat of his determination, there suddenly entered
the Palace gate a Damsel Dwarffe, having two men Dwarffes with her that were
her Brethren, and doing a duteous reverence to all there present, thus she
began.

I (a poor and wretched Lady) do bring hither no tidings of any adventure to
be accomplished, but seek means to be revenged on the very strangest injury,
that ever was offered to any Lady. The Knights beholding her to be of most
admirable beauty, although in stature so low and little, had the more
compassion of her cause: and Oliuanto, being the youngest Knight of all, made
tender of his service on her behalf: but his father delivering a discontented
countenance thereat, caused him to sit down again, and returned this
answer to the Lady. I take it as most agreeable with reason, that my self,
being the only unfortunate man in this assembly, should be your companion in
this cause, either that we may both remain in equal misery together, or both
be freed at once of so insupportable a burden.

The other Knights, who had long noted the discontented state of Florendos,
thought it ill-beseeming courtship to cross and dissuade him: whereupon, the
Knight arming himself immediately, took leave of them all, having first in
secret advised Oliuanto, to set his eye on the admired chivalry of
Palmerin, and Don Florian his brother, whereby they had attained to such a
height of reputation. The Lady not a little pleased that she had such a Knight
of worth in her company, embarked her self with him and his attendants, and
sailed thence with such swiftnes, as in short while, they which stayed had lost
the sight of the^. And floating on the billows of the maine Sea, the Lady
imagined in her own thoughts, that the Knight could not choose but be very
desirous, to know whether she intended to conduct him: whereupon, sitting down
very modestly by him, she began to deliver her mind in this manner.

Sir Knight, that you may understand the injurious disgrace done to me, first
let me tell you, that I am daughter to a King of India, and that part of the
country which is under his government, is peopled with none other then
Dwarffes, such as we are. Long time did peace live and flourish among us,
without any wrong offered to a nation of such weakness: till another Indian
King of great stature, descended (as he vaunts himself to be) from that king
Porus, which was conquered in battle by great Alexander, hearing some fame
spread abroad of my beauty, made means to enjoy me in marriage, promising to
make me Queen of his Land. The King my Father, divining before hand what
might ensue heereon, and perceiving more perrill therein, then my shallow
discretion could reach unto, in silence showed himself unwilling of such an
alliance: yet was he loath to withstand what-soeuer pleased me, because I (as
all women are wont to do) could not content my self with one of mine own
condition, but thirsting after change, contrary kind and novelty, thought
every hour a year till I was with him.

Oh how can men's golden promises beguile weak women? My poor self, crediting
too much his liberal protestations, in no place could enjoy any quiet of
mind, until the match were thoroughly concluded: then sollemnelie he came
(with thirty of his chief attendants) to espouse me, a thing unlikely in my
simple opinion, that with so few people he aimed at usurpation of a kingdom,
which he shadowed with all smooth semblances that might be, and had
continually twenty of them about him, armed after their custom in platted
coats of shells. The wedding was sollemnized, and he so full of humanity and
courtesy, that my Father began to repent his former hard co^^ecture, and
thought it a happy and fortunate marriage, no way to be doubted or feared
afterward.

After we had spent some two months in feasting and delights, to general
contentment, but especially mine, five hundred of his people, armed after the
same manner as the other were, entered my Fathers kingdom, pretending that they
came to wait on him home, because some dissension had happened among his
subjects during his absence, and could hardly be pacified but by his presence.

Saboco, for so was this Indian King my husband named, when he saw that he had
men sufficient there to kill us all, (for I was the tallest in stature in all
our Country, being a cubit and a half in height, and every one feared me in
regard of my greatness) he labored to have me home to his own kingdom,
whether (God knows) I went with no little willingness, little suspecting any
treachery toward me: and this he hastened with the more speed, because he
had gotten intelligence, that my Father (by these armed troops grown
suspicious of his son in law,) had held conference with a neighbor Nation
confining upon us, requesting assistance if occasion should urge it.

Our departure was celebrated with all possible joy and triumphs, and being
come to his kingdom, I was received with exceeding honor, and all maiesticall
dignities beseeming a Queen. But eight days were not fully past, till I
beheld my husbands countenance strangely changed, which pierced my heart with
such inward affliction, that in his looks I might read the presage of my
ruin. Within some few days following, I sitting alone with him in his
Chamber, and doubtful of some imminent ill fortune, he suddenly caught me by
the hair of the head, and pulling me from my seat, after he had shaken and
tugde me as himself pleased, he threw me against the ground, giving me so
many spurns with his feet, as the breath was ready to fly out of my body.
When he saw me in such an affrighted and distracted estate, as he judged I
durst not deny what soever he demanded, with words full of fury and bitter
despite, he spoke to me in manner following.

Isota, (for so am I called) look what I enjoin thee, perform upon thy life,
as thou will avoid worse torture then I have yet inflicted on thee. Write to
thy Father, after thine accustomed course of enditing, and tell him thou lie
sickly at the very point of death: in regard whereof this is thy desire, that
accompanied with thy eight Brethren and four Sisters, he would come and see
thee before thy death. And because thine own attending Dwarffe, who (in
respect of his credit with the King thy father) shall carry the Letter, may the
better assure him by word of mouth likewise, that he saw thee very sick: when
thou have written and sealed the Letter, thou shall betake thee to thy bed,
feigning and dissembling extreme sickness indeed. I perceiving at what mark
Saboco made his level, though I was shrewdly shaken, and very sore with
stripes, told him, that the unnatural dealing he had used toward me, might
well enough suffice his unkind inclination, without making me the means to
betray mine own kindred and Father.

Then like a mad man, he flew into a more violent fury, exceeding the former
cruelty extended to me, and haled me by the hair along the ground so
outragiously, treading on me, and beating me so unreasonably, as he brake
diverse veins in my body and arms: and bringing me in his arms to a great
bay window, proffered to cast me headlong out thereat, saying: Thus die
thou, if thou yield not to what I have enjoined thee. So much prevailed with me
the fear of death, yt I cried out to him, saying: Dear Lord, save my life,
and I will perform what soever you would have me.

Heereuppon, setting me on my feet again, he showed himself to be highly
contented, and with a countenance pleasing, and words most perswasiue, he
brought me pen and incke: then on such a leaf as the Indians use to write, I
set down the purpose of what soever he willed me: and the Letter being
closed up, I was conuaied to my bed, where I needed not to counterfeit or
dissemble sickness, his rough usage had brought me into extreme sufficiency,
both in bodies debilitie, and affliction of mind. Then bringing the Dwarffe to
me, in whom I reposed no mean confidence, I gave him the Letter, with speeches
suitable to my present estate and his appointment, desiring him beside, to be
very earnest with my Father, to delay no time, least I dyed before his coming.

The King my Father, believing the Letter, and the messengers testimony that
brought the same, within ten days space was come unto me, and finding me in
that weak estate, expressed a kind Fathers true sorrow for his child.
Saboco dissemblingly entertained him with great honor, till so many days were
out-worne as his fury could allow, in which time, diverse Lords that came in
company with my Father, by his direction were returned to their own houses,
(because my Father would attend my death or recovery) and the Lords failed
not to report their royal usage by Saboco, which made every one free from
mistrusting his treacherous intention.

When he saw time fitting with his long expectation, he caused my Father,
with six of my brothers to be laid hold on, and likewise my four sisters:
but these two, forewarned by me at that instant to respect themselves, and
laboring to advertise the other, but could not compass it, whereupon they
fled with all possible speed, not a little grieved to leave their Father and
brethren in a tyrants courtesy. Saboco, bringing my Father and Brethren to my
beds side, with menaces and torments did enforce them, that my Father should
write to the chiefest in his kingdom, to deliver the Castles of defense,
treasuries, and what soever else him pleased, to such as Saboco should send to
demand them.

Now, because the Indians never used to contradict any thing their King
commanded, all that the Letter imported, was forthwith performed, and those
Princes who before were our confederates, by this means remained desperate of
their own jurisdictions. News being brought to Saboco, that every thing
sorted to his own direction, he brought my Father and his six sons into my
Chamber, where before my face he first murdered the aged King, and afterward
his sons without any compassion: then causing my Sisters to be severally
brought thither likewise, he deflowred them one after another in my fight, and
my self, which had delivered such a wealthy Kingdom into his hands, he
delivered over to ye rascalitie of his Court, to dishonor me first with
abhorred luxury, and afterward with wild beasts to be torn in pieces.

But heaven beholding my intolerable injuries, exceeding the ability of any
living creature to endure, raised me up one friend among so many monstrous
inhumaine villains, a Gentleman of his Chamber, who seeing me left to violent
prostitution, pitying a Kings daughter should be so brutishly disgraced,
considering my beauty pleaded for far better respect, devised this shift in
hope to do me good: that (to avoid contention who should enjoy me) fortune
should be descided by lotterie, and lots being cast, his was the honor first
to possess me, which he (craving that the eye of day might not look on an
act so detestable) purposed to perform me (as he said) the night ensuing: but
indeed he promised me to convey me thence, and set me safe with some tried
friend in my Fathers kingdom.

But Fortune yet not satis-fied with my so many injuries, crossed us again in
this determination, for by the way as we rode (with all circumspection we
could devise) we met with certain of Sabocos friends, returning from taking
possession of my fathers Realm in his behalf. They knowing me, and out-facing
me that I laciuiously fled from my husband with the Gentleman of his
Chamber, who (for my defense) had brought twenty friends along with him, fell
to such discention with us, that in the fight few on either part were left
alive, and I being mounted on a tame Heart, (according as the Queens use to
ride in those Countries) doubtful how the issue of the fight would prove,
fled into a wood not far distant, for I had no reason to expect good of
Sabocos followers.

As I rode on still, looking where I might most conveniently hide my self, it
was my good hap to meet with these my two brethren, that by my means had
escaped with safety of life: they espying me a fa^re off, and knowing me to
be their poor distressed Sister, met me with the greatest joy that among so
many miseries could be expressed, especially, by my wretched and despised
self, who never thought (after our parting) to see them any more, and the like
oppinion held they of me, imagining I could no way escape with life.

They mounting upon the Heart behind me, because in such need no time was to
be lost, we gallopped away amain through the wood, and came at length to a
certain City of my Fathers kingdom, where Sabocos people, as yet had taken
no possession. There we assured our selves of some security, for when we had
advertised the people, what had happened to the King and his sons, we found
them so loyal, ready, and diligent, that they made liberal offer of their
own lives, for preservation of ours.

The news of our arrival there, was soon spread through the kingdom, which
was extremely ruined by Sabocos followers, yet in mighty troops (abandoning
their goods and houses) they flocked to us daily, with minds resolved to
maintain us in the justice of our cause. Certain Lords belonging to Saboco,
who held the royal City and forces thereto belonging, in short time gave
intelligence to their King hereof: and he falling to his wonted mad fury,
slew three of my Sisters upon report of the news, but the fourth, being the
fairest, he kept still with him as his Concubine, and levied ten thousand of
his subjects, to get us again once more into his possession.

All which notwithstanding, our people continued their faithful resolution,
desiring rather a thousand times their undoing and deaths, then that we should
fall again into the Tyrants hands. Yet we, perceiving our strength to be
small, and doubtful beside least any treason might be wrought, in conference
with ye chiefest of the City where we were: we thought it most convenient
for us to escape thence, so might they find grace and favor of Saboco, but
detayning us, and fighting for us, endanger both the Cities ruin and their
own destruction.

Upon this consultation, the next night ensuing, disguising our selves in
garments for our purpose, and mounted all three upon my Heart, we took our
leave, departing whether good fortune might guide us. The Heart, who naturally
shunnes the haunt of men, especially those of great stature, because he had
been bred and made tame among our little race, brought us safely through whole
Armies of our own Nation, but avoided all resort of greater people. In this
manner we escaped safely, and coming to ye Seaside, turned off our Heart into a
wood adjoining, and hitting by good hap on this little Bark, directed our
course thither where we found you, understanding that the flower of the Grecian
Knights were then in Turkey.

This most dishonorable iniur^e, kindled such a desire in Florendos to revenge
ye Ladies wrongs, that he thought he should never get soon enough into India:
but after they had sailed diverse days together, at last they put to shore,
where she with her brethren first took shipping, and looking awhile about
them, they saw the Heart to come again to them out of the wood: which they
taking as an argument of some good success to ensue, mounted on the beasts
back as before they had done, and so set forward with the Knight on their
journey.

CHAP. XLI. How Florendos met with a strange enchauntment, and afterward
ouer-came Saboco, with great perrill of his own life.
SAboco, having done diverse odious and barbarous trecheries to the Indians,
grew to be so generally hated of every one, that for getting an others
kingdom in such bloody manner, he was now in good forwardnes to loose his
own. Wherefore, hearing how the Lady was so secretly departed, to provide her
self of some Knight that might punish his villainies, growing suspicious
withal of the Grecian Caualierie, whose fame was dispersed quite through the
world: fearing to enter combat in so unjust a cause, he went to a Magitian of
an hundred and foure-score years old, living there in his kingdom with good
esteem and favor, and held with ye best as a man of great experience, to him
he imparted his mind, setting this down as a full rest and conclusion, that
who soever should come to combat in the Ladies defense, must by his skill be
kept back and impeached.

The old Wizard, who knew that no enchauntment could continually endure, but
that justice will prevail against all sorcery whatsoever, advised Saboco to
restore the Lady to her kingdom, and fly all occasion of resisting against
right: but he, more respecting worldly authority and pomp, then the
punishment due to deeds of injustice, with a stern countenance returned him
this answer. I come not to demand any counsel of thee, but help,
therefore speedily determine with thy self, that least any Knight should come
to check my hopes, that thou hinder his passage by some powerful incantations:
and because I see thee scant willing to pleasure me, I will not let thee
depart, until I see my self free from all dread of danger.

The old Magitian, seeing himself in power of the Tyrant, performed such an
enchauntment as shall hereafter be declared, but with small hope of life,
because he knew it by sound experience, that against the progeny of worthy
Palmerin, the greatest enchauntment would prove of no force: thus much as an
inducement to that which follows.

Florendos being mounted armed upon his Courser, and the Lady with her
Brethren upon the Heart, which they found by chance there attending for them,
rode directly toward the kingdom of Saboco, and scarely had they ridden the
length of two leagues, but they beheld before them a far off, a Mountain so
shining, as if it had been of the purest silver: whereat the Lady not a little
meruailing, because she saw none such in the time of her flight, desired the
Knights oppinion thereon, who being well acquainted with Magical illusions,
immediately gessed what it should be, and said. Fair not Lady, Knights have
many times met with such enchauntments, and they are borne to conclude far
greater adventures.

The Lady perceiving him to make no more reckoning thereof, began to forsake
her former dismayed countenance, so rode they on still, until they came to
the foot of that glittering Mountain, where Florendos saw about some half a
miles distance above him, a woman, that seemed of thirty years in age, and a
young maiden of fifteen whom she held by the hand, both of them crying out
aloude to him for help. The Knight noting them very advisedly, thought the one
to be Miragarda his wife, and the other Victoria, daughter to Prince Florian,
going along together hand in hand.

Florendos could no longer contain himself, but dismounting from his horse,
prepared to climb up the mountain after them: but by reason it was of fine
pollished silver, when he seemed to have attained the height of ten paces,
he slid down again to the foot where he ascended. Yet still he heard the
voices call unto him, the one of them he took assuredly to be his wives: and
so standing devising how he might get up, he espied a poor fellow with such
shoes as they used in that Country, having diverse sharp poynted steeles
fastened to the soles, which would pierce into stones, or any thing whatsoever.
Taking hold on that benefit, he presently provided himself a pair of the
like, and so clambred up much better then before, albeit oftentimes with very
great perrill: and coming near the place where he heard the voices call him,
he felt the mountain to tremble under him, and the silver to break in pieces,
as though it would have opened to swallow him.

The sight hereof made Isotas heart to dismay, fearing least the Knight should
there perrish: but Florendos trusting in GOD, who never forsakes him that
undertakes a cause of justice, still held on his way, and coming to a fair
plain, he could not see the women whom he hoped to find there, but there
only stood a goodly Collomne or Pillar, with this inscription graven upon it.

Here, death for honor may thou soon exchange. Florendos reading this
brief, and scorning all frivolous threats of Magical charms, sat down on
the bases that supported the Pillar, to rest himself awhile, and to try if he
could get a sight of the women once more or no. He had not sitten there half a
quarter of an hour, considering with himself what he was to do, but he felt
himself pulled backward, as if some man's hand had shot forth of the Pillar and
done it: and starting up to see the reason thereof, he beheld that the great
Collomne was changed into a Giant of like height in stature, leading two
Griffons in a leash, as if he had been a Hunter.

This Giant flew upon him so fiercely, as the Knight reputed himself but a
dead man, but yet to loose nothing of what was in him, he purposed to sell his
life at a very dear rate: one while delivering some assurance of his valor
to the Giant, and then severally to the Griffons, who much annoyed him with
their sharp gryping tallents, yet such was his strength and nimble dexterity,
as he got from them still, though they held him nere so strongly. The Giant
followed him so eagerly with his Club, that he knew not how to shun his
manifold heavy strokes, til watching fit advantage, striking by a blow meant
very dangerously at him, he got within him, and gave him such a wound in the
throat, that he fell down therewith, as if he had been slain. When the
Griffons saw the Giant fall, and themselves gotten at liberty out of the
leash, they seized upon the Knight with such ravenous fury, as if they meant
to tear him in pieces.

But he, perceiving himself in such extreme perrill, by good hap smote off
the right wing of one of them, and wounded the other upon the leg, as they
could no longer keep aloft upon him: so the one being unapt to fly, and the
other to hold footing upon the ground, he was in good hope he had gotten the
victory. But suddenly he heard a great door open, which seemed to shut up
the mouth of a huge deep cauerne, and the Griffons entering thereat, he beh^ld
the Giants body likewise taken up, and carried into the self same place.

Then setting him down upon a great stone there lying, to mark the end of so
strange a marvel, as he looked round about him, there rushed forth a
contrary way a great wild Boar, with two dogs eagerly pursuing him: the
Boar running mainly at the Knight, rent a piece of his Armor off, and hurt
him in the side, and one of the dogs catching hold with his foot on his
Shield, brake it off from his neck, by reason the buckled leathers had no
strength ^^hold, the other dog caught fast his Sword with his teeth, and h^ld
him from using it with wonderful might.

Florendos, seeing himself in this desperate estate, perforce got loose his
sword from the dog, but the Boar coming fiercely upon him again, so labourd
him with his sharp claws and tuskes, that he was constrained to fall down,
and the dog got the Sword again, tugging it so violently, that the chain
which held it fastened about his arm, brake in twain, and so he was forced
to let it go out of his hand. The Boar trampled upon him, even as he pleased,
and one of the dogs getting fast hold on his foot, trayled him up and down
along on the ground whether he listed: in which extremity, albeit Florendos
could have but little hope of life, yet did not his courage fail him a jot,
and getting the Boar by one of his tuskes, by mere strength plucked it out of
his head, which made the beast, seeing himself disarmed in that part, to be
less extreme then before he had been, and to keep a little further off from
the Knight.

Nor stepped he upon this fortunate advantage, but fastening hold with his hand
upon one of the dogs legs, it proved to him very successful: for the
dog pulling and tugging to get his leg loose, by that means plucked the
Knight up on his feet again, where looking for somewhat to defend himself
withal, he espied the Giants Club lying on the ground, which as he stooped
to take up, the other dog got hold upon his Helmet, and the laces breaking
through the violent pulling, do what he could it fell off his head.

This needs must be very displeasing to the Knight, to be thus disarmed where
was most danger, but hope of victory still comforted him, and the Giants Club
at liberty in his hand, he first laid at one dog, and then at ye other, with
such maine strokes, that they ran toward the Cauerne so fast as they could.
Florendos looking in at ye Caves mouth, espied there his Sword and Helmet,
which he being desirous to enjoy again, without more adooe stepped in to fetch
them, when presently the door shut, and enclosed him within it.

As he went groping in the dark to find his way, he heard great clattering
of Armor, as if there were some multitude of armed men, and that he should
be there enforced to fight with them: hereupon there happened suddenly a
mighty earthquake, which made the Cave to open very wide behind him, where he
did discern twenty armed Knights, all prepared with their naked Swords to
come and assail him, which he awaiting when they would do it, and they not
moving at all, he perceived it was but a Magical phantasma, to terrify such
as were not skilful in the like accidents.

Now began he to imagine in his mind, that (since they stirred not any way to
molest him) that adventure was finished, whereupon, stepping to them, they gave
him each one a light touch with their Swords, and presently vanished he knew
not which way: when Florendos saw himself off from the Mountain, which seemed
Silver no longer as it had done before, going on a little further, he found
his Sword and Helmet lying together, as before he had taken them from the dog:
then arming his head, and taking his Sword ready drawn in his hand, he went
about devising with himself, where Miragarda and Victoria might be, whom he
thought to be the women whom he had seen before.

As he looked about him here and there, he beheld ten Knights upon the
plain, and one who seemed as Lord and commander of them, all riding a pace
toward the Mountain. This was Saboco, who understanding by the aged
Nigromancer, what Florendos did from time to time, and how he proceeded through
the enchauntment, when he heard that he had finished the adventure, in a mad
rage he killed the old Wizard, because he did no better protect him by his
skill. Then riding on toward the Mountain, he came thither even as Florendos
had newly descended, not knowing readily which way to take, but desirous by all
means he might to shun the man, who had brought to end so strange an
adventure.

Florendos, by reason of his late passed turmoiles, being weary, went a softly
pace, and finding his horse there at the Mountain foot, and mounting on his
back, rode to understand what Knights those were, as also to enquire for his
Wife and Niece, which very courteously he enquired of Saboco himself. But he
being very much troubled in his mind, as willing to avoid all occasions of
danger, returned him this answer. Thou should be some pretty youthful
Ganimede, that demaundest for women among Knights in Arms.

These scornful words made Florendos check his horse with the bridle, and
give the signal yt he would ioust with him, which Saboco made no refusal of,
thinking him to be a man of no merrite at all. But such was the encounter, as
Saboco bare away Florendos his Helmet, because (the laces being broken) he
could not well fasten it on, and he was run quite through the arm with the
others Lance. The other Knights wondered at this valiant course, and made offer
of assistance to their Lord: but he, who imagined him self not meanly
honored, if he could get the upper hand of such a brave gallant, cried out to
them to stay and not stir, and drawing his sword, he went against Florendos,
using these words. Thou should be he that has finished mine enchauntment,
if thou be the man, before we part, I Will make thee to repent it.

Florendos would return him no answer, but delivering a down right blow at
him, cleft his Shield, and wounded him a little in the breast, and immediately
after in the side. These two hurts coming so together, made Saboco use all his
cunning at the head of Florendos, which being unarmed, he defended with his
Shield and his sword thwart over it, because he perceived Saboco had valor
in him: Nevertheless, the stroke given was such, as cut quite through his
Sword, pierced part of the Sheelde, and hurt him a little upon the head.

When Florendos felt himself wounded, and but half a sword left him, he
perceived death apparently before his eyes, if slothfully he neglected to make
conclusion of the fight: wherefore, giving the spurs to his horse, he got
hold of Saboco in his arms, and Saboco did the like by him, so tugging and
pulling by very mere strength, they fell beside their horses to the ground,
where Saboco falling with his wounded arm against a great stone, brake it in
shiuers, by means whereof, Florendos got above him, and in unlacing his
Helmet, was hurt by him in ye throat. whereon, lifting up his dagger to have
stabb him, the Pagan humbly entreated for life, which Florendos (being much
offended at his last hurt) had not granted, but that he saw the other ten
Knights preparing themselves to reskue their Lord in such a necessity. And as
they were going toward him, Saboco (sore grieved that he had lost the honor of
the day,) taking hold on his coat of Maile, said.

Ah worthy Knight, I repent now my base begging of life, therefore I pray thee
kill me, since thou art the first that have obscured all my passed glory.
Florendos, who was glad of any occasion to pardon him, answered. I will never
kill the man that is desirous of death, as well to shun infamy, as to let him
behold the misery of his own condition, and what it is for men to do such
things as are unbeseeming them.

When the Indian saw he would not kill him, he disp^sed himself to do
whatsoever the Knight pleased, and submitting to his mercy, they all mounted
on horseback, ryding to have their wounds bound up and cured: where a while
let us leave them, and now return to the Knight of Fortune.

CHAP. XLII. How the Knight of Fortune went to combat Garnides, and being
taken of him, was by one of his Daughters set at liberty again.
PRimaleon, after he had overcome Bernuccio, and fully ended the enchauntment,
prepared himself suddenly to depart thence, because he would offer no more
injury to his Mistress: and having rested him sufficiently, without
returning up the stairs any more, he had farewell unto the Lady, who stood
beholding him with very disdainful looks. So parting thence with Trasino,
Lord of the Castle where he was first entertained, and accompanied with his
Squire only, he purposed to go find out Garnides: and make him restore the
kingdom to Filenia, being the true and rightful heir thereof, and coming
to a Fountain, he allighted from his horse, to feed on such provision as his
Squire had brought with him.

Here he felt himself so weary with his passed travail, as being unable to
keep open his eyes, he laid him down to sleep: which aptly fitted the
purpose of discontented Filenia, who having converted her former affection to
unappeased hatred, intended to fore-warne Garnides of the Knights coming, that
he might have the more time to provide for himself, whereupon she wrote to
him in manner following.

The Letter of Filenia the displeased Princess, to Garnides, for betraying the
Knight of Fortune to him.
The superscription. To her royal and kingly friend, Garnides.
WEll may I curse that Traitor Bernuccio, (high, mighty, and most honorable
Lord) who so long has been the hinderer of my happy fortunes, shutting me up
in his deuillish and damnable enchauntment: whereas else I might have been your
Queen diverse years since, and we two have swayed the Kingdom in peace and
tranquillity. But now there is come a Knight inuinsible, who has finished the
magical charms of Bernuccio, and comes by force of Arms to compel you, (as
at his command) to deliver me my Kingdom, which I had rather jointly enjoy
with you, making you Lord both of it and me. Hazard not your self in a single
fight with him, but promise him whatsoever he shall demand of you, to the end
you may the better get possession of him, which being cunningly compassed, you
shall afterward hear more from me.

Yours* Filenia the Princess.


This Letter was conuaied to Garnides, two days before Primaleon could get
thither, and not a little welcome to him I warrant ye, but when the Knight
came, keeping off from his Castle a bow shoot and more, he sent his
faithful Squire to challenge him the fight. Garnides dissembling, as if he
had received no former intelligence, armed himself only, and coming into the
field, gave fair salutations to Primaleon, whose errand being other matters
then bare talk only, somewhat roughly thus he spoke to Garnides.

I know not Sir, what reason you have, to usurp another Kingdom, without any
intent (me thinks) of restoring it again: I am therefore come to tell you,
that either you must win it, or die, justice sits on my sword, intending to
restore right, and punish wrong.

Garnides pulling off his Gauntlet, showed his naked hand, which was a sign
that he would peaceably confer with Primaleon, and Primaleon perceiving it,
dreadlesse drew near, when Garnides returned him this answer. With patience
(Sir Knight) I hope you will hear me, I have held the kingdom belonging to
Filenia, by such order as the King her Father appointed me, because her brother
dyed by a fatal accident, which Bernuccio falsely and maliciously imputing to
me, as if that I had either done or procured it, got hence the Princess, then
but very young, and enchaunted her in a Ship with certain Lions, which (it
should appear) you have by your valor ended. If then I have not done what
you deem expedient, herself being now at liberty, I will perform what
soever you would have me: for by no means will I adventure the combat with
you, both in regard of your renowned virtues, as also because no good success
attends on ill actions.

These speeches delivered with very good looks and calmelie, so prevailed in
the mind of Primaleon, that believing faithfully what he said, he went very
kindly with him into his Castle, though much against Lord Trasinos mind that
was there with him: nevertheless, he was very graciously entertained, and the
Knight expressed equal courtesy, being glad Filenia should have her kingdom
quietly restored, without combatting with a man so full of affability, as
Garnides outwardly declared himself to be.

The dinner was served in most sumptuously, and the more to secure him from any
imagination of ill meaning, he sent for a Lady his Daughter of very exquisite
beauty, commanding her to sit right before Primaleon, which so highly pleased
him, seeing her so beautiful and virtuously modest withal, as suddenly he
became much enamoured of her.

Dinner being ended, a fair Violl de gamba was brought her, whereon the Lady
so rarely and cunningly played, and sung thereto with a voice so sweet and
heavenly, that Primaleon, though his thoughts forbad him to affect her, yet
was he well contented to hear her, and the better to hold out conference with
her, often would he urge her to play some lessons twice or thrice over, and to
sing again diverse of her ditties, especially these two following, wherein he
very much delighted.

The first Dittie of Laurea, daughter to Garnides, sweetly sung to her Violl
de gamba, in the presence of the Knight of Fortune.
In love there is no greater bliss,
Then when desires do kindly kiss.
EYes and thoughts, why do ye gad
From the bounds are you assignde?
You that made your Mistress glad,
Will you now pervert her mind?
Then my mothers words be true,
Greater foes are none then you.
In love there is no greater bliss,
Then when desires do kindly kiss.
Eyes, you first did tell my mind,
There could come no harm by gazing;
That my thoughts too false does find,
Madly now they run amazing.
Never felt I this before,
I Will never trust a liar more.
In love there is no greater bliss,
Then when desires do kindly kiss.
Make amends for eithers wrong,
Eyes, when as my thoughts do sterue,
Feed your selves with looking long,
Lend them hope, they may deserve.
So either shall prove others friend:
And in peace this war shall end.
In love there is no greater bliss,
Then when desires do sweetly kiss*
FINIS.
Her second Dittie to the Knight.
Love of late lay all alone,
begging alms at Beauties gate:
He was aunswerd: There was none,
all was gone, he came too late.
Yet he would not from the door,
begging still for pitties sake:
But the rich upon the poor,
would but little pity take.
Yet would Love not so leave off,
hoping pity still to move:
Then he aunswerd was in scoff,
Beauty had no look for love.
And she cast him such a frown,
as did such a fixing prove her:
That he fell in such a swoune,
as he never could recover.
While in silence sorrow cries,
in behalf of his behoue:
Curssed be those cruel eyes,
that will hide a look from love*
FINIS.
With these, and sundry other well composed Ditties, did the Lady both please
her own thoughts, and the Knights attention, being not only very skillful in
hand, but as excellent and delicate in her voice: and these songs agreeing with
her own conceits, soupled also with some persuasion of the Knights affable
nature, that he was not made of Adamant, but by such allurements might be
drawn to love, caused her to spend the whole day in those amourous devises,
hoping to enjoy him as her husband. At night, Garnides, (less advised then he
was aware off) suffered his daughter to come again into the Hall, when among
other passages between her and Primaleon, not being heard by any, she said
thus to him. If any disaster do happen to you by my Fathers means, it shall
cost my life before you be iniuried.

These words moved some suspicion in the Knight, that doubted no inconvenience
or treachery at all, until he heard these speeches from the Lady. Supper was
prepared with most royal pomp, which being past over, and some pretty space
spent in Music, songs, and other pleasing pastimes, Primaleon was afterward
conducted to a princely Chamber, where the King, purposing to be surely
possessed of the Knight, stayed holding discourse till he saw him in bed, and
then with a dissembled conge departed.

Primaleon, bethinking himself of the Ladies words, lay awake till past
midnight to see what might ensue: but not hearing the very least noise or
stirring at all, disposed himself to rest, and slept so soundly, that the
door was opened, and fifty men entered encompassing his bed, before he knew
any way how to defend himself, and there menacing him with their drawn
weapons, they took him, and bringing him before Garnides, he was threatened
with many injurious speeches, and committed thence to a close strong Chamber,
where he purposed to have him secretly murdered, because he would not loose
his kingdom, nor be punished by the Emperor of Constantinople for so great an
offense.

That day, and the two next ensuing, he spent in consideration, which was the
safest way for him to take, and Laurea, for so was his Daughter named, hearing
that her Lover was imprisoned, was ready to die with very conceit of grief:
but setting a smooth brow upon her sad sorrow, the best way to labor for him
and further her own love, she began to study how he might be delivered. So
calling one of her servant to her, she sent her for Trasino the Lord of the
Castle, which had accompanied Primaleon thither, but by no means would come
into the sight of Garnides, by reason he stood doubtful of his life. She
advised him, that he should suddenly get the horses into a wood near
adjoining, because she intended to fly thence with the Knight, whom her
Father so trecherously had made his prisoner.

Afterward, getting unseen into her Fathers study, she found a Letter lying
open which had lately been sent him, wherein she read these words: Primaleon,
Nephewe to the Emperor of Constantinople. Then her thoughts diuined, that this
was the name of the Knight whom she loved, so taking it with her into her
chamber, she read it at large, and found it was written by Filenia, the
Daughter to King Frisoll, who laid the platform of the treason whereby the
Knight was taken.

Now began a certain kind of jealousy to apprehende her thoughts, afflicting
her beyond all sufferable course, suspecting that Filenia affected her Lover,
because he had done so much in her deliverance, and perhaps through denying
her kind solicitations, she entered into this displeasure against him, which
made her now the more earnest in procuring his liberty.

Heere-uppon, she called a trusty Cousin unto her, who waited on her as her
nearest gentlewoman, and promising her rich and stately advancement, if things
might sort to her expectation, they both became confederate in this enterprise.
So the night following, they went to a window but of slender strength, whereof
her Father (it seemed) had no knowledge, yet it abutted upon his daughters
lodging, and therein was Primaleon enclosed as a prisoner: where knocking
softly on the glass, Primaleon being awake, and remembering the promise which
Laurea had made him, started up to see who it was that knocked, and stepping
upon a table before the window, laid his head close to the glass, when the
Lady (without holding him in any tedious suspense) said.

Behold my Lord, now am I as good as my word, here am I ready to die for your
deliverance, take this Pikaxe, and employing it as by your strength you very
well can, get forth of this ill harbor, and for the rest leave me to provide.
Primaleon, beholding the Lady before him, and so happy a means to free him
from death which he hourelie expected, was both glad and sad: glad of his own
safety, but sad withal, when he considered, that when he was escaped, he
could not requite the Lady to her expectation, hazarding her fame and life so
prodigally for him. Notwithstanding, being bound to the best advantage in a
case so desperate, he took the instrument, and wrested out the iron bars in
such sort, as he made a fair large wide window, and thereout came forth. So
all three together getting up on the Castle wall, by the help of certain
cords fastened together, which purposely had been left there by the King
himself, if a dangerous hazard should betide him, so to escape away unseen of
any.

The Women descended with very great difficulty, and mounted the deep ditch
again with as much labor, but having with safety passed both, they entered ye
wood, where they found Trasino attending with the horses, and to prevent all
loss of time, away they galloped toward his Castle.

Now it came to pass, that Garnides (considering what a great person he had
seized on) all the next day was so doubtful in his mind, as he forgot to
give the key as he was wont to do, for carriage of food to the prisoner:
beside, Laureas waiting woman, seeing her Chamber shut that was gone with her
Lady, imagined her Mistress to be there with her Cousin, about a curious piece
of embroiderie whereon they wrought, and often used to be thereabout so alone
by themselves.

All things thus continued on till dinner time, when seeing they came not
forth, neither made answer to such as knocked, upon a sudden an outcry was
made, which calling the King thither, the door being opened with certain
engines, no body there found, and the chamber window (though cunningly closed
again) yet appearing to be broken, the Pikaxe there lying, and the bars of
iron that had been wrested out, the^ he perceived, that by his daughters
means the Knight was delivered. Now was he in more extreme suspicion then
before, not knowing what course was now best to be taken, yet at last he
concluded, that he would not send after them, but thus discoursed with his
thoughts: Since Laurea had done so much for a Knight of such nobility, it
seemed likely, that doubtless he would accept her as his wife, and so in
marriage she should be highly advanced: then flying from this conceit, by
craft he would make out to catch him if he could, so was he blinded with
fear of loosing his kingdom.

Primaleon, with a company thought convenient, purposed to return and ambush
themselves in the Wood, to take Garnides if he should stir out of the
Castle: so leaving Laurea safely in the Palace, he caused Trasino to select
twenty valiant Knights, every one being allied to him in blood, and so they
parted thence into a wood, which was four miles distant from where the King
lay. Not fully two days had they there remained, but they took a Spy that
affirmed to them, that Garnides was not displeased at the Knights loss or his
Daughters, but prepared his men to depart from thence.

Primaleon fore-thinking what the King should intend thereby, kept it to
himself, and about some two hours after, he beheld an hundred Knights, which
divided themselves into three parts or companies, because Garnides (not knowing
that Primaleon had recovered Trasinos Castle) imagined, he had hid himself
in those woods adjoining, and being unarmed, he might there the easier be once
more possessed of him.

These three bands of Knights, having diverse hounds attending on them,
searched all about, dispersing themselves so far each from other, as they
could hear what was done by the noise they made. The Kings company hearing
the hounds at a bay, made have to the place, where Primaleon couching his
Lance against Garnides, who knew not him, pierced quite through his Armor
into his shoulder, and cast him quite beside his horse.

The King thus wounded and laid on the ground, so amazed all his other
followers, that seeing Trasino come upon them with his twenty Knights, they
betook themselves to flight, leaving their King behind them: who being taken
by Trasino, and bound upon his own horse, they conducted him safely to his
Castle, where being committed to his daughters custody, for care and
dressing of the hurt he had received, they would afterward determine what was
to be done with him.

CHAP. XLIII. How Primaleon caused Laurea to be married to Trasino, making him
King of the Morning Islands, and gave Filenia likewise to Garnides.
GArnides, seeing he should be detained as a prisoner in Trasinos Castle, to
whom he had done innumerable injuries, thought verily now there was no way
but death with him: but when he was committed to his daughters custody, he
conceived the better hope of life, importuning her very often and earnestly,
to entreat the Knight for safety of his life. The Lady, desirous to shield
her Father from death, albeit he had most worthily deserved it, at night first
showed Filenias Letter to Primaleon, wherein was set down all the treason
devised by her against him, and afterward solicited him very instantly, to
spare the life of the King her Father.

This Letter was highly welcomed to Primaleon, as being an especial means
to further his purpose, and to quittance both the Traitors in their due kind,
even with such chastisement as he deemed most convenient: Nevertheless, he
caused Laurea to dissemble with her Father, that he must suffer death according
to his treasons deserts. The next morning, he wrote unto Filenia, that she
should come to Trasinos, where he held Garnides as a Traitor: these news
were nothing pleasing to the Lady, yet imagining that Primaleon knew nothing
of her plotted treachery, and hoping to repossesse her Kingdom again, she
iournied thither, securing herself with her Lions: but they were no sooner out
of ye Castle, when presently the Lions forsook and left her, in regard she
was become a traytresse, and broken her princely faith, and like entertainment
found she there at her arrival, being shut up like an offendour in a close
Chamber, and used as if she had been a prisoner.

Now in the time of ordering these occasions, and the Ladies expectation for
repossession of her kingdom, when Garnides was indifferently recovered,
Primaleon taking Trasino with him, and Laurea with Filenia, who gave the other
many a scornful and jealous look, in regard of her former love to the Knight
of Fortune: they all entered the Chamber of Garnides, where suddenly he became
so full of grief to behold them, in that all his cruel hopes were so crossed
and overthrown, as his senses failing him, he fell down in a swoune.

Laurea being present at this grievous spectacle, moved with natural
compassion of her Father, went and recovered him, prevailing so well with
diversity of good arguments, as she pacified his perturbations in very
reasonable manner, when Primaleon taking Garnides by the bosom, and Filenia by
the hand, thus spoke.

Let me now tell ye, that like two Traitors you ought to be dismembered alive,
which the rather I should consent unto, more for observation of justice then
any revenge of mine own injuries: but confessing my self in some sort
obliged to Filenia, for her good advise in the enchaunted Castle of Bernuccio,
makes me the more willing to save her life, and the debt I confess as due to
Laurea, for so kind delivering me from imprisonment, commands that I likewise
pardon her Fathers life. Nevertheless, because neither of the trecheries may
pass without some punishment, this is the sentence that I impose on Garnides:
here do I disgrade him of his title and kingdom, because he never held
possession thereof by any just claim or right, and the like award set I down
for Filenia, for in practicing to destroy his life, who with no mean perrill
thereof labored to regaine it for her, she has made herself utterly
unworthy of any such dignity. But because in her Letter (which he then took
forth and openly read) she has elected Garnides to be her husband, she
shall have her desire, and both of them enjoy the Castle which was enchaunted
by Bernuccio, paying yearly homage to the King of the Morning Islands.

Filenia was hardly contented with this division, but seeing how her lives
perrill stood on urging the contrary, she willingly condiscended: the like
did Garnides, who thought his desperate adventure had made a happy return, in
gaining fair Filenia whom he dearly loved. Hereupon, they were immediately
espoused together, and sent to the Castle which he had assigned them, all
which being finished, he called Laurea to him, saying: I will never deny, but
that my life is a due debtor to you in any occurrences whatsoever, but because
I cannot satis-fie your hearts desire, which (in plainer terms) is to be your
husband, and a reason of importance does directly stand against it, namely, my
bounden and dutiful service to a Lady long since engaged, wherein, though
hitherto my deserts have been slender, yet since my fortune is no better, I
must rest content therewith. Notwithstanding, because I would acknowledge in
part, though utterly unable to come near your merit, my forward readiness to
do you service, let me entreat you to accept a person more worthy then my
self, the noble County Trasino, descended of the royal progeny, and for his
loyal faith kept to King Frisoll his Lord, far better beseeming you then
any other: with him shall you enjoy the fair kingdom of the Morning Islands,
and hold me in dutious service ever as your Knight, so far as I offend not
my gracious Lady and Mistress.

Laurea, who little expected such an answer, with the tears in her eyes,
said. My Lord, you have such power and sovereignty over me, as not daring to
deny whatsoever you command, I rest satis-fied with your appointment: and
albeit your promise gave me greater hope, I will bury all in silence. For I
know by experience of my own loves fire, that you cannot easily give over
affection, where the chain of especial liking has entirely lincked you:
keep this then in memory, that hereafter I may boldly call you my Knight.

Primaleon was exceedingly contented, hearing the Lady so kindly to accept
his offer, because he should now well reward the County Trasino, (to whom as
yet he had not made this known) for all the favor and good will he had found
by him: and having Garnides his Ring, whereby all the Forts should be
surrendered up, they levied two thousand men, with whom they went from Island to
Island, having Laurea likewise in their company, the people doing great honors
to her, because there was neither City, nor Castle, but held firm
remembrance of some benefit or other, which by means of her intercessions
they had before received.

Having thus the full state in their own power, and being entered into the
chief royal City, ye night they lodged in the Palace, where Primaleon lying
that night with the County Trasino, none being near but themselves alone, he
thus spoke. I have daily labored in my thoughts, which way to requite so
honorable love and kindness, as to me a poor unknown Knight you have
extended: wherein yet at length the heavens have favored me, and though it
reach not to your worthy deseruings, yet accept it as an earnest of a greater
good will. You see how Madame Laurea is beloved of these people, who
notwithstanding can never rule them well without a husband, therefore will I
bestow her on you in marriage, and the kingdom likewise with her as her dowry.

Trasino hearing such an offer made him, whereof he never had hope or
expectation, suddenly fell on his knee, and kissing his hand, said: Now is it
seen for an evident truth, that the famous race of Palmerin d'Oliua, is not
only powerful in gaining kingdoms, but even as prompt in giving them: it were
dishonor in me to refuse the gift, coming from so royal a hand, enjoying
thereby so fair a Lady, and a kingdom so wealthy and populous.

Primaleon being well pleased with this answer, the next morning wrought so
with Laurea, that she caused to assemble there many armed Knights, those in
whose trust she might best rely, least the people should enter into any
commotion, and in two days they had gathered in one company above two
thousand, who joining with them belonging to Trasino, cast themselves in a Ring
about a Scaffold erected before the Palace, whereon Primaleon soon after
showed himself, having the Lady Laurea and Trasino in his company, with more
then twenty of the chiefest Lords in the kingdom, who were well contented to
have such a King, being familiarly acquainted with his faith and honorable
disposition, as also that he was descended of the progeny royal.

The people there in this manner assembled, and Primaleon commanding silence
by a sign made with his hand, he thus began. You have already found by very
good proof, what difference is between a good King and a Tyrant, and albeit I
could acquaint ye with the benefits ensuing by the one, and sad desasters
attending on the other, yet do I not now hold it so necessary, because your
own last trial of either is sufficient. It is enough for me to tell ye, that
the Tyrant is chased hence, and she to whom the Kingdom in right appertained,
turning Traytresse to her own just title, and her defenders damage, stands
likewise deprived of her prerogative: and that you need make no doubt of
Filenias treason, here is the Letter written to Garnides under her own hand,
which whosoever shall make any scrupulous question of, at any time the sight
thereof shall more at large resolve him.

Now, in regard I would not leave you subjected to any other Kingdoms
emperie, though partly by desert, but most of all by justice, the disposing of
this estate consists in me: I commit both it and you to the noble County
Trasino, whom you all know to be a man of especial merit, favored and
esteemed by this Lady, well loved of you all, and these do I appoint to be your
King and Queen.

No sooner had he thus spoken, but the Crown of leaves and flowers (used of
long antiquity in those part) was brought unto him, wherewith having first
dignified the King, he afterward placed it on the Lady Laureas head: to the no
little contentment of all the people, right glad to see themselves so freed
from the Tyrant, and likely now to enjoy much peace and tranquillity, so with
loud shoutes they celebrated the names of their King and Queen.

This was as pleasing to Primaleon, because his mind ran still on the
adventure of Fortune, which Dorina was to conduct him unto: wherefore, he would
needs have them immediately married, and passing on royally to the chief
Church, after a solemn Mass sung by an Arch-bishoppe of very holy life, the
marriage was performed, with greater content of the King then the Queen, who
with much better will would have had Primaleon. But after better consideration,
that she could not enjoy him whom she so dearly affected, Trasino, being the
very noblest and most esteemed Knight of the Kingdom, she began to respect
him with a more regardfull eye, and in their return back to the Palace, she
showed him such gracious and delightsome looks, that Trasino (doubtful before
of her grace and favor, beholding an alteration so strange yet pleasing)
accounted his happiness beyond comparison. The feasting was sollemnly performed
at the expense of the treasure royal, even that which Garnides had (with
mighty taxations) gotten together: for he being still doubtful what should
befall him, made provision of treasure to carry with him when need should
require, evermore thinking to escape thence by flight, but it sorted not to his
expectation.

The feast continued for eight days together, and longer the King would have
had it in the honor of Primaleon, but he whose mind was laboring else where,
full of heat and hasty expectation, that he might the sooner see his Victoria,
first made the King and Queen swear to execute justice, and that Garnides nor
Filenia should raise any more commotions, but justly and truly perform their
homage, likewise, all the people vowing to do their loyal allegiance, he
prepared to depart on his journey.

Many means were made for his longer detayning, yet all would not serve to
hinder his determination: but ye next morning following, taking the King by the
hand, and kissing the Queens forehead, as the custom there is, she showed
herself much displeased for his departure: Which she perceiving the King to
noate, turned back to him with these speeches.

Be not suspicious my Lord, if at the departure of this Knight, (whom indeed
I once loved far better then you) I express some outward disco^tentment,
because I thought to have enjoyed him as my husband: but my fortune therein
failing me, by reason of his love else where addicted, give me leave a while to
grow forgetful of him, which by little and little I shall easily attain unto,
and then let this be your settled persuasion, that I shall affect you as
entirely, as I doted on him fondly. These words were delivered with such
gesture and majesty, that the King both admired and highly commended her: so,
after some small discourse concerning state affairs, he descended with
Primaleon down the stayres, where after an honorable kind embracing, he
mounted on horseback, and so departed.

CHAP. LXIIII. Of that which Florendos did with Saboco and Isota, and how after
he had subdued a Serpent, he returned to Tubante, even as the Christian Army
was preparing to depart.
FLorendos and Saboco had their wounds well looked unto, and the danger of life
on neither side now to be doubted, whereupon, Isota was sent for and her
Brother, who came together, yet very fearfully, as timorous of Sabocos cruel
handling: but when they came to the chamber where they both lay wounded, Saboco
showed such affable signs of love and kindness, as the Lady grew into good
security of her self, hearing that he would fulfill what-soeuer was enjoined
him, and restore the Kingdom of Dwarffes to her elder brother named Pigmeo, the
other to have honorable respect beside.

While thus they attended their hurts recovery, Florendos was very desirous to
know, whether any Ladies were hidden in the Mountain or no, because that two
had there appeared to him, whom he thought to be his wife Miragarda and the
young Lady Victoria: but being resolved by the Lords there present, that all
those illusions were done by the Magical wizzard, he forbear to question any
further in the matter.

Before ten days were fully passed, by good care and diligence they were
thoroughly recovered, then were diverse Chariots of Ladies prepared, only to
accompany and attend on Isota: so rode they honorably to the chief City of
the Kingdom, where their feasting and entertainment was beyond comparison,
and Florendos (as a man going beyond all other in famous deserts) welcomed,
and very honorably respected. Thence departed they to the Kingdom of the
Dwarffes, where Pigmeo was created King, and there they gave themselves to all
kind of pleasures, but most of all they delighted in hunting: wherein Florendos
still bore the chiefest praise, for killing the fiercest and wildest beasts.

One day among the rest, when they were preparing to go to the woods, Pigmeo
ordained that every man should arm himself, because there lived a Serpent so
bloody and cruel, as of whole multitudes that had gone to encounter him, not
one could be known to return back again. That morning, Florendos, being
desirous to deliver the Country of such a devouring Monster, sent for an iron
maule that Saboco had, with certain pykes extended out at the clubbe end,
about some four yards long, and making it fast at his saddle pommell, on he
rode with them toward the place: huge numbers of people following very
joyfully, not a little proud of having the Knight in their company, by whose
valor they had good hope to be freed from the Serpent. Dispersing themselves
severally through the woods, it was Pigmeos hap to meet first with the Serpent,
from whom he prepared himself speedily to fly, for he was mounted on the Heart
he had used to ride on: but by overmuch have he fell beside his beast, and so
the Serpent got him up in his mouth, till perceiving he was a man of so little
stature, as scorning a pray of no bigger moment, he threw him from him again,
so that what with fear and force of the fall, he lay still as quite bereft of
sense, being hardly able to recover him self again. When the Dwarffes at
first saw their King in the Serpents mouth, they gave such a lamentable
outcry, that Florendos and the rest presently gallopped thither: where the
Serpent came very proudly against them, all the Indians not daring abide to
behold him, but only Saboco and a Cousin of his, who were gotten up into a high
standing, to see how Florendos should speed against the Serpent.

He, having the forenamed Maule in his hand, and the Serpent making furiously
at him, escaped the Monsters first proffer, and wounded him in the left wing,
striking off diverse of his hard scailes: whereat the Serpent grew so angry,
that suddenly fetching his tail about, he got ye Knight fast by the Helmet
therewith, and making him turn round giddily three times together, smit him
down at last against a great stone on the Mountains side, and such was the
unhappiness of the stroke, that he fell down backward, and the Serpent (as
vaunting of already gotten victory) passed quite over him, thinking (as others
had sped before) that he had given him his latest payment. But the Knight,
nimbly recovering footing again, nothing at all dismayed with the stroke he
had received, made out into a more spacious part of the wood, where by his
active dexterity, he might the better help himself.

The Serpent perceiving his labor not ended, followed him with exceeding rage
and fury, where the Knight so plied him with the poynted Maule, that strewing
ye ground plentifully with his hard scailes, he gave him diverse little hurts
and wounds, albeit the Monster held out so against him, that he would not
permit him the very least breathing while. At length, by overmuch labor and
expense of blood, Florendos perceived the Monster to wax weary, whereon, he
advanced himself the boldlier before him, and gave him a very shrewde wound
in the face: whereat he showed himself so enraged, that wheeling again his
long tail about, he got the Knight fast by the midst, and throwing him on his
back betwixt his wings, ran so away with him. Saboco being much grieved to
behold him in this danger, prepared to follow him, but it auailed nothing, for
the Serpent ran exceeding swiftly, leaping over bushes, rocks and hillockes,
where a horse had not the power to pursue.

Florendos, feeling no other discommoditie, but that he was thus borne from
the ground, after he had with much ado vnwound himself out of the Serpents
tail, leapt valiantly on his feet, and gave ye Monster such a stroke with his
Maule on the head, as, though it slaunted somewhat aside, yet it smitte him to
the ground: and thinking then to step upon him and dispatch him, the Maule
fell out of his hand so near the Monster, that he could not recover it
without manifest perrill, which made him then to use the benefit of his sword:
and coming therewith against the Serpent, he ^ound him risen up so mad and
furious, as had not the Knight stood well upon his guard, his case had then
been very desperate: For the Monster (making no reckoning at all of his sword)
caught him with his teeth about the head, and much did the goodness of his
Helmet steed him, for else he had undoubtedly bitten his head quite off.
Florendos feeling this gripe to be (in a manner) mortal, flourished about with
his sword he could not tell how, but by good hap it lighted upon the Monsters
throat, where the skin was somewhat tender and void of scailes, and
passing quite through it, they both fell down together, the one stark dead,
the other in a trance or swoune.

Saboco, who with his Cousin had followed the poisoning smoulder of the Serpent,
came at the instant, when a far off he saw the Monster fall, but not seeing
Florendos, his heart became so full of grief, that mending his pace with
greater have, he came and found him lying like a man dead. Taking off his
Helmet, and perceiving that he breathed not, he gave forth many dolorous
complaints: whereat his Cousin breaking forth into a laughter, said. Now do
thou evidently prove thy self to be a fool, in bemoaning his death, that
deprived thee of all thy former honor: me thinks thou should rather draw
forth thy weapon, and smite off his head, then abuse time thus with childish
lamentations: if I were as thou, I would do it immediately. And so would I,
(said Saboco) if I were as thou art, a man of no honor nor respect at all:
can thou imagine it any way reasonable, that I should vanquish him by
villainy, who overcame me by manly valor? and once more loose my good name by
breach of faith, in murdring an honorable man already murdered?

During these speeches, Florendos recovered, and Isota with the other Ladies
were likewise assembled, whence they parted with Florendos in a royal Litter
to the City, where Isota used many comfortable speeches to him, such as
indeed did well content him: and Saboco caused the Serpent to be brought
thither, and the skin to be taken off, that Florendos might send it to
Constantinople, as a monument of his perpetual honor, and the body being
divided into several parts, was hanged up in diverse especial places of the
City.

Isota, who till this time was very doubtful, least her husband should fail
in his promises to Florendos, when she saw, with how much love he showed the
care of the others life and honor, she cast off all suspicion, and the day
following they had another kind of disporting, whereat Florendos (being not
wounded ouer-dangerously) was likewise present, the Dwarffes showing all the
delights they could devise after their manner. Some few days being spent in
these contentments, a book was strangely brought into the Court, by a Nephew
to the old Nigromancer yt was slain by Saboco, and making a present thereof to
Florendos, told him that he must not read therein, unless upon some important
occasion, whereof he could not otherwise resolve himself. Now Florendos,
whose lamenes was not a little displeasing to him, and being minded never to
see Christendom again, until he found some means for his recovery, would needs
see how he should gain the happiness to become well again, and finding his own
name in the Book, read under it written these words.

Knight, all thy searching is in vain,
For (who most ought) shall ease thy pain.
This mystery wrought so in the mind of Florendos, that presently he
concluded on his departing, and causing the Serpents skin to be stuffed full
of straw, commanded that it should be brought to the Sea side, where (with
tears trickling down the cheeks of every one present) he went aboorde a man
of war belonging to Saboco, and hoysed sail, having the Dragon so stuffed,
lying on the prow of the Ship, which struck terror in all they met by Sea,
for the dead shape showed as fearful, as if he had been still living, so
sailed they on with a prosperous gale of wind. Now the wise Aliarte, who had a
long time kept him self in silence, until a cross encounter of the stars
should be past over, which he found very contrary to his great knowledge, and
had made him vary in diverse rules and principles: would once more yet have an
eye to the Christians safety, and reuoluing over both precedent and the present
occasions, and finding the news were already come to Constantinople, how
Florendos (in a desperate humor) was gone to India, since when no other
tidings could be heard of him, which made the Emperor and all the whole Court
very malecontent, but most of all Miragarda was deprived of all comfort,
hearing no news of her son Primaleon, and now likewise all hope lost of ever
seeing her husband again, the tears streaming abundantly down her fair
cheeks, she could do nothing but sweetly embrace her young daughter Concordia,
speaking words of extraordinary passion and affection to her, whereat all the
hearers were much moved to compassionate her case.

The wizzard perceiving them in this confused alteration, purposed to send the
Serpent to the Grecian Court, without imparting any knowledge thereof to
Florendos, who intended to bring it thither in manner of triumph: and framing a
Letter, which every one that knew the writing of Florendos, should absolutely
rest persuaded to be by his own hand done, then snatching the Serpent from off
the Ship, without perceauing by whom it was taken thence, and tying the
Letter fast about the neck thereof, he caused to be carried through the air
in such sort, that it appeared to every eye as if it had flowne.

I leave to your conceits, to think with what admiration it was seen to
pass over the walls of Constantinople, and what amazement the people were in,
beholding the wings to flap together, in all respects as if it had been
living, judge then the fear and dismay that was suddenly among them. And more
to augment this terror, they beheld it to direct his full course to the
steps ascending the Palace, where it squatted down with an inexpressible
noise, which made many Knights come forth to understand the occasion, where
(at first sight) they were resolved that it wanted life, so, some returning to
advertise the Emperor thereof, he came immediately thither, accompanied with
the young Emperor Trineus, (whom as yet he held in kind association in his
Court, till certain disordered commotions in Allemaigne were qualified) and
all the fair young Queens and Princesses: where beholding how strange an
accident had happened, the Letter was first taken off that hung at the Serpents
neck, and being commanded to be publicly read, the sum thereof in brief
thus follows.

The Letter sent from the wise Aliarte, as if it had come from the royal
Florendos.
To the high and mighty Emperor Primaleon, at Constantinople, etc.
SAcred Majesty, and you most gracious endeared Empress, with her that is my
lyfes and loves intirest companion, receive in your royal acceptance this
infallible intelligence, that in my going to Tubante, I was otherwise drawn to
a part of India, where in the service of an iniuried Lady, I have accomplished
a very important adventure of a silver mountain: and afterward prevailing in
fight against this Serpent, as a witness of my labor. I send you his case.
But because I am presently to prepare for Tubante, let me entreat you to
expect thence, more certain and assured tidings of me.

Yours only, Florendos.


The Emperor, who well knew his son to be more ready, in vnder-going the
very greatest enterprises, then public report or talk to be made of them:
gave no credit to this Letter, but silently sat quiet. Miragarda, who
expected some other intelligence of her husband, taking the Letter into her
own hand, read it to her self very considerately, which being done, she spoke
thus openly. Florendos my husband is either dead, or in such estate that he
cannot write, and this Letter is sent but only to comfort us in the case, else
why should this dead Serpent be brought hither, no one being able to render a
reason for it? thus was the Court in a far greater confusion then before.

Trineus seeing that there was now in the Court none of the young Knights, that
might have undertaken to clear this doubt, craving license of the Emperor,
went presently and armed him self, because he was enamoured of fair
Argentina the Infant of Spain, and returning again to them, after he had
taken farewell of all the other Princesses and Ladies, he came and fell on his
knee before her, and requesting her hand to kiss, spoke in this manner.
Madame, my speeches to you must be after the blunt Allmaigne fashion, such is
your beauty, as it gives me courage, to maintain against any that dare deny
it, that you are the very fairest Lady this day living, and worthy the service
of all other whatsoever: grace me then with so much favor, that I may entitle
my self by the name of your Knight, only to add luster to the first
enterprise that I shall undertake, wherein I doubt not, but being armed with
your gracious regard, I shall gain immortal renown, all which you may justly
claim as your own, because it was achieved under the virtue of your name.

The Infant, in the deep reach of her own discretion, perceauing the young
Emperor to eye her with affectionate regarding, began to dispose her thoughts
to the like, as well in respect of his fair and gentle demeanor, as also to
reach the height of an Empress: for women are ambitious by nature, and often
times do strive to out-goe others in beauty and rich ornaments, rather then in
discreet and virtuous reputation, but returning to Argentina, thus she
replied.

My Lord Trineus, unworthy is my beauty, to be respected, and by so great a
personage as your self, but seeing you please to confess it of such esteem,
as it merrits in your eye an affectionate opinion, and in your self more then
any other: I were no Lady of civil demeanor, if I should not accept you as my
Knight, whereof that you may have the more cheerful assurance (taking a
Diamond that hung bound in her tresses, with four great pearls thereto
pendant) I give you this jewel. But thus far understand me, that I will not
endanger any jot of mine honor, by whatsoever courtesy I use to you at this
instant: for all my fortune remains in the hands of the Emperor Primaleon,
and the sacred majesty of the King my Father. This her most honest and
courteous behavior, was generally commended, and the other Ladies, who had
expressed little kindness to their amourous servants, disposed them selves to
a more gentle humor after this, especially respecting the care of their
honors.

Trineus departed highly pleased, and embarked him self with a thousand
followers, men ready to adventure on any occasion: but leave we him to his
journey, and return to Florendos, who after he saw the Serpent was carried
away, grew full of doubtful suspicions, but not knowing what to think of it,
followed his voyage, and arrived soon after in the port at Tubante.

CHAP. XLV. How the Christian Army departed from Tubante, and what happened to
them by the way, in their going toward the Kingdom of Niquea.
DIrdan, otherwise named Eduardan, (for the love which Maiortes the graund Cane
always bare to the Prince Don Edward,) after he fled from Tubante, went first
of all to his Kingdom of Paraz, where (in the place of his father) he was
created the great Cane, a title only belonging to those Kings, and setting the
state in firm condition, he mustered together fifteen thousand men, and had
likewise a younger brother of his with him, named Cagnino. With these men he
arrived in the Realm of Niquea, where by Tirrena (who had the general favor
of the people) he was received into the City: which kindness was the sooner
affoorded him, because he had renounced his Christian faith, a Religion which
in all those parts was greatly abhorred.

So Dirdan espousing the Lady, and ruling over the whole state, enjoyed the
same peaceably for two months space, albeit he daily expected war, for
resistance whereof, he made all provision possible. And that he might have
some other good Knights in his company, he wrote to a Giant called Palurdan,
who was King of Turben and his Cosen, son to Brondione the Giant, that was
brother to his father Maiortes: entreating him to come in his assistance,
remembering him beside, what slavery his kindred had endured by the Grecian
Empire, and that now in recompense of their blood shed, as also his own father
slain in their service, the very cheifest of the Empires Caualierie was
coming upon him, to deprive him of a Kingdom, which not only his good
fortune, but likewise the love of a beautiful Lady had enriched him withal.

Further aduertisements he thereto annexed, as to be forward in his aid to his
uttermost, least him self should chance to repent it, for if they overcame
him, meaning him self, yet could they not but account him also as their
enemy, because he stood as a neuter, and leaned to neither side in
assistance: which yet would return him but slender advantage, because the
Christians being naturally foes to Pagans, if they should once be possessed of
Paraz, they would hardly be drawn to pardon Turben.

Palurdan, who was further entered into years then Dirdan, considered with him
self iudicially on this motion: but the true kindness of the Christians, more
prevailing with him then the alliance of Dirdan, made him resolve to send him
no aid at all. Notwithstanding, by reason he kept the Letter in no greater
secrecy, two stearne and moodie Giants his sons, the one named Lanfranco,
the other Broco, all on fire in their thoughts till they were seen in arms:
whether their father would or no, provided them selves of ten thousand
Soldiers, and all in have they would go aid their Uncle. But first they
advertised a bastard son of the Giant Gataru, called Gargante, who took
possession of his fathers Signeuries, after that Cardigea was married to
Almaroll. He and three thousand of his followers, joined with them, and with
this strength they came to Niquea, where Dirdan very gladly entertained them,
not doubting but by the valor of these three Giants, boldly to withstand the
Christian forces.

Nevertheless, remembering that there was Palmerin, Florian, Florendos, and
Dramusiande, of especial courage among the other brave gallants, he thought
it requisite to be fore-guarded by a strong enchauntment, wherein if they found
some intricate labor, he might finish his hopes with the less contention.
Heere-vpon, bethinking him self of Drusa Velonna, (the same Enchauntresse that
set the magical spells, for carrying away the Princess Leonard^, where
Florian (notwithstanding the wise Aliarts help) sweated sufficiently ere he
could get her thence, as is declared in the second part of this History:) he
wrought such means, as he prevailed for her coming to Niquea.

Now, because it was a fruitless labor to offer her riches or treasure, in
regard she made no reckoning thereof, as being able by her Art to store
herself sufficiently when she pleased, he promised her what she much more
esteemed, to wit, to keep her in his Court secure from all perrill, so that
she would provide him of such an enchauntment, as should hinder those so
farre-famed Knights from doing him injury. Drusa, being a deadly enemy to the
Christians, answered, that she would fit his turn in such manner, as him self
should rest contented therewith: but she knew very well, that all opposed
resistances whatsoever, could not keep the Grecian Knights from success in
the end.

Dyrdan replied, that he would rest satis-fied with her utmost employment of
Art: so without any more words, Drusa departed thence, and in the midway
between Tubante and Niquea, she wrought the strangest enchauntment that ever
was heard of.

The Christian forces, that daily thirsted after the war at Niquea, seeing
Florendos returned to them again, became so desirous of their departure, as no
other voice could be heard, but away to Niquea. Wherefore Floraman commanded,
that the very next ensuing morning, the Army should set forward, and leaving
Dragonalte King of Nauara to govern and take charge of the City with
Targiana, they mustered in open field thirty thousand in Arms together, and
so travailed on six days in martial equipage, without any occasion worthy
rehearsal. Upon the seventh day, they might discern a far off, a thing
like a green Curtain, seeming to be two hundred paces in length, and three
hundred in height, which began in such sort to raise and spread it self, as
the light of the Sun could not be perceived, by reason of the obscurity this
Curtain made.

Oliuanto, who strove to make himself famous, by any aduenturous attempt
whatsoever, imagined (as well he might) that this would prove to be some
strange enchauntment: whereupon, withdrawing aside on the left hand of the
Army, he advanced himself forward beyond all the rest, and then he might
discern it like the shape of a Tent, whereof none of the Christian Knights but
himself (as yet) had any such sight.

When he had strayed from the rest about a bowe-shoote, he gave his horse the
spurs, and riding all night very hard, the next day by noone he came near
to the Tent, where beholding nothing but certain points of Lances, which were
thrust through a door that seemed fast shut, he would needs yet venture so
near to ye Tent, that he might hear (as to him it seemed) the rustling of men
at Arms beyond it some small distance. Hereupon he stood still, and called
out aloude, but neither seeing any body, nor hearing any answer returned,
he could no longer contain himself, but coveting to end this adventure
before the other Knights arrival, he knocked hard at the door, which
presently he beheld to open, and withdraw the Lances back in such sort,
that his entrance was very easily admitted.

No sooner had he stepped into the Tent, but he felt himself changed by force of
the enchauntment, and nothing else could enter into his thoughts, but that the
only reason of his coming thither, was to keep the passage there, against
all comers, and to try their valor by iousting, whatsoever they were. And
such indeed was the intent of Velonna, to prove if these Knights (whom none
else could overcome) would here work the wrong one of another: and God knows
how earnestly Oliuanto thirsted, yea, and thought every hour a long year,
till he might meet with any one, whose valiant courage durst offer to deal
with him in this action.

The next day following, as he stood armed in the door of the Tent, he might
a far off, easily behold the Armies Lances, before whom (some pretty
distaunce) bravely managing his horse, came Berolde, King of Spain, and
drawing near the Tent, he knew Oliuanto, by the Lion in his natural color
figured on his Sheeld, whereby he was called the Knight of the Lion: but he was
now grown forgetful of his friend, such was the nature of the enchauntment,
to bereave a man quite of his former knowledge, especially, such as came the
way from Tubante.

Berolde, riding toward him with his Lance in his hand, cast it from him on
the ground, as thinking it no courtesy to violence his friend: but Oliuanto
drew his sword upon him, as intending to kill him except he yielded, which
indeed the other in mere kindness did, and was no sooner entered the door
with him, but he became altered in mind like to Oliuanto, striving to be the
first, that should defend the Tent against the Christian Army. Forth came he
again gallantly, as the other before had done, and meeting Pompides at the
Lances full carriere, both were dismounted, and Pompides being offended at
this injury, drew forth his sword, and began to lay about him so furiously,
that Berolde was quickly drawn back by the enchauntment, wherein the death of
any Knight was not purposed: for such incantations have not the power to kill
any man, but only to astonish, and take them prisoners, as was the Sorceresse
drift in this: so Pompides seeing the other to retire so fast, would needs
pursue him into the Tent, and there became as forward as the other, to
maintain the ioust for defense thereof.

By this time the whole Army was there arrived, which (by reason of the hasty
approach of the night) lodged themselves very near to the place enchaunted:
but Dramusiande going forth unarmed to behold the Tent, knew Oliuanto, and the
other two in his company: who taking no knowledgement of his nakedness without
Arms, made all very furiously against him, even with as great violence as if
they would have slain him. But he would not abide them with so great
disaduauntage, but retired back from them, and they, as ^earing least any
other should take guardance of the Tent, betook themselves likewise to their
undertaken labor.

Dramusiande gathering by apparent likelihood, that these Knights (being his
true affected and endeared friends) were deprived of all knowledge of him, by
the force of enchauntment: was glad that he went forth so unprovided of arms,
and returned again in such safety, without any prejudice either to his or
their honor. And being come back to the royal Pauillion, where Floraman
(their chief Captain general) had conuocated all the Princes together, as
holding a sollemne council about the view of this strange Tent: he found
Florendos to be much troubled in mind against Oliuanto, fearing least he had
strayed abroad to take notice of the Tent, and so unhappily remained therein
enchaunted. In the depth of their weighty and serious reasonings, Dramusiande
discoursed all concerning the three Knights, and how hardly he had escaped
with life, by reason he was unarmed.

This strange and unaccustomed kind of enchauntment, gave all the Princes
matter of deep and ponderous consideration, wherein they could not set down
any certain resolution. As for Florendos himself, this was his grounded and
settled opinion, that his own son would never dare to come against him,
whereon he determined to go forth the next morning.

No sooner did bright day peep her fair forehead forth, but being armed by
his Squire, he mounted on horseback, and trotting bravely before the Tent,
Oliuanto with his other two companions (enforced thereto by the enchauntments
vigor) all three together encountered him with their Lances, so that he fell
on the ground under his horse belly, and before he could free himself out of
their power, he was carried in prisoner, and possessed with the self same
humor as they were, yet none of them there all this while knowing one another.

Our brave resolutes amongst the Christians, were not a little offended, when
they understood that Florendos was taken prisoner, but much more it displeased
them, when they beheld each one to stand amazedly looking upon another, as
strayning courtesy, who should next adventure the combat at the Tent: and
albeit these accidents seemed so strange and unaccustomed to them, yet the
chiefest distraction amongst the Christians, was the general care they had of
their Army, which being bereft of all their chiefest knights, might so much the
sooner be endangered by Dyrdan.

Blandidon, perceiving so fair an Army in such hazard for his cause, desired
license, that he might undertake the Ioust: but Floraman would not consent
thereto, but gently returned him this answer. My Lord Blandidon, I am
persuaded that this enchauntment is only devised for the speedier and safer
apprehension of your person, and we having commission to seat you in your
right, what answer can we honestly go back withal, suffering you to fall
into Dirdans power? Let me therefore entreat you to rest pacified, for I (as
being General of the Army) will hold ye more strictly to mine own company.

Dramusiande who could not endure to stand so long idle, obtained license to
go thither, where he found himself smitten with four several Lances, and
in so strange a manner beside, as he began to repent his overmuch
forwardness: but he had vnhorssed Oliuanto, by shouldring in so rudely
overthwart amongst them, and no sooner was he fallen to the ground, some pretty
distance out of the Tent, but the enchauntment had left him, where knowing his
father, Dramusiande and the rest cried out aloude to Florendos, that he should
forbear to hurt him, but all was to no purpose, his rage was great, because
they three had wounded Dramusiande, so they returned back again toward the
Tent, and Oliuanto with them, using mighty persuasions to his Father: So all
five entering the door of the Tent together, they became all of one mind,
resolved to stay there in defense of the Tent.

Palmerin and Florian would very gladly have gone thither likewise, but that
they were loath to incur the displeasure of Floraman their Commander, who
paused thereon very advisedly, for better apprehension of this enchantme^ts
danger: and so much the rather, because if they two should oppose themselves
against Florendos, Dramusiande, Oliuanto and the other twain, nothing else
could be expected, but that some one either part were sure to miscarie, and of
such a perrill it behooued him to have no mean care.

This day passed on without any more combatting, and Florendos (with the rest
of his company) would often come to challenge the chief of the Army: but they
never went further then a small trench which was but a little distance from the
Tent, whereat our hardy Caualiers did very much marvel, but return we now
to the wise Aliarte.

CHAP. XLVI. How Palmerin and Florian would needs go combat with them of the
Tent, and how the enchauntment was concluded: Also of a strange accident that
suddenly happened.
THe learned wizzard Aliarte, searching by his skill into the nature of this
enchantment, found hardly any immediate remedy for it: because Drusa Velonna
well remembered, that the spells wherewith she had before exorcized the
Princess Leonarda, was disappointed and defeated only by his art, which made
her now to order this Magic in such manner, that except he could find out an
absolute remedy in deed, his uttermost endeavor would serve him to no
purpose. Wherefore, finding himself this extraordinarily hindered, he grew
into great impatience, until at length he happened to remember those Books,
which he found hidden in the garden of his Island, and going to the place, where
with no mean care he kept them, turning them over one after another, he
chanced at last to light on this very same enchauntment, receiving thence such
rules and directions in the case, as were sufficient to make it of no account,
whereof thus provided, he departed well pleased.

Now come we again to Prince Palmerin, who could not bear so many
challengings and prouocations to the fight, but (fired with vexation) would
needs go arm himself, the like did noble Florian his brother, both
earnestly striving which should be the foremost, not dreading any danger that
might befall them from the other, and when they were armed, Floraman, Gratian,
Blandidon, and Francian, came to dissuade them, using these or the like
speeches.

My Lords, do ye not account it as a matter well worthy blame, for you two to
go hazard the combat against so many hardy Knights? And look you with no
more judgment into this enchauntment, which differs from all other in so
strange a quality, that it requires as many resisters, as shall be found
defenders of the Tent? Be better advised we entreat ye, and let us take this
course: Lord Blandidon, whom we ought most especially to preserve from this
Magic, he shall abide here for Commander of the Army, and we three (being
armed) will go along with you to the Tent, so shall we be sure to equal our
friendly adversaries in number.

This counsel, as being indeed very discreet and reasonable, was by every
one commended, and when they had put on their Armor, they went toward the
Tent, beseeching God to guard them all from perrill. Florendos and the other
with him (without giving any attention to Palmerin, who wafted them toward him
with his hand unarmed, as desirous first to have some speech with them) placed
their Lances in their rests, and ran against the other with the very swiftest
carriere of their horses, when Palmerin, having no respite at all to receive a
Lance, was taken tardie by Florendos thus unprovided, and loosing his
stirrops, lacked but little of being dismounted. Florian encountered with
Dramusiande, and lay both along on the ground, with their saddles between
their thighs: Floraman with Oliuanto, receiving by him some small
disadvantage: Gracian with Berolde blow for blow, but meeting very roughly
with their Shieldes, both horses and men tumbled all on a heap, and recovering
footing again very hardly, prepared to combat with their swords: Francian and
Pompides brake their Lances, and drew their weapons for further trial of
manhood.

The fight grew to such terms on either side, as the death of some of them
must needs ensue, yet Palmerin and his company, remembering that they fought
against their blood and friends, used the more mild and gentle respect: but
the Knights enchaunted, grew to all extremity, so that evil success must one
way needs be expected. For, Florendos, cutting in sunder ye bridle of
Palmerins horse, wounded him also on the left hand very shrewdly: which making
him forgetful of his former patience, returned such angry strokes back again
in requital, as Florendos was sore hurt on one shoulder, and likewise on the
left side. The like hurts passed between Florian and Dramusiande, so was
Floraman wounded in the right arm, and Oliuanto in the face, and as much
mishap befell the other four: the field being indifferently dyed with their
blood, and prettily spread with the pieces of broken shieldes and mayles of
their Armor.

Floraman still cried to those on his part, that they should but only award
their adversaries strokes, as hoping of help from some one quarter or another,
that would disturb and break of this fierce conflict: albeit it was now an
hour and more past noone, in all which time they had never respited, so that
either side was grown so weary and ouer-laboured, as hardly could they weild
their weapons with any disposition.

As thus the case continued, suddenly at the door of the Tent, appeared an
armed Knight, having the beuer of his Helmet lifted up, who was no sooner
espied by the Knights enchaunted, but they made furiously toward him, as hoping
right speedily to be his death: but herein they found themselves much
disappointed, for the nature of the incantation was such, as it wrought not
against them that came from Niquea, but only stood in force for such as came
toward it, for otherwise it might have offended as well friends as enemies. When
Florendos and his consorts had better knowledge of their friend, they ran and
embraced him, which Palmerin with his part perceiving, and knowing him for his
noble brother and friend, they followed the other in kindness and embraces, the
like did more then an hundred of the chiefest Knights in the Army, who had
stood all this while beholding the combat.

Florendos and his crew (who first saw him enter out of the Tent door) would
have returned in again with him: but Aliarte calling to Floraman, willed him,
that he, and the hundred Knights there with him, should seize on the Knights
which were enchaunted, to prevent what else might happen worse to them, and
afterward he would find the means to free them from the enchauntment. So
cirkling them round as in a Ring, they took and unarmed them, dressing their
wounds, which being somewhat dangerous and chilled with cold, made them scarce
able to stir themselves, and now they seemed as if they had no knowlede one of
another.

Palmerin and his companions, had their hurts likewise looked to, for they knew
not how soon they should have need of employment, then caused they the Army
to pass on by the advice of Aliarte, least Drusa Velonna should work some
worse impeachment, and hinder them from passing any further.

That night, Aliarte by certain of his carracters and spells, wrought so
studiously, as he found wherein the strength of the enchauntment consisted:
Whereupon, the next day, as Knights came still toward the Tent, and were
enchaunted for defense thereof against all other comers, he caused them to be
taken and bound, then did he make the earth to be dug in the same place, so
deep as it might co^taine the stature of a man, when suddenly there started
forth an huge angry Bear, which immediately had there rent Aliarte in pieces,
but that by good hap Blandidon stood armed by, who only of all the chief
Lords had not been wounded. He interposing himself with his sword drawn,
had a very strange kind of fight with the beast: for diverse times he was fast
between his paws, and griped with such strong and intolerable pinches, that
well might he doubt the issue of his bold enterprise.

In this time, Aliarte brake certain glasses, which fuming there continually,
maintained the enchauntment, but leaving to fume or smoulder any more, the Tent
vanished, so did not the Bear, but only grew by the exorcismes weakening, to
be spent and wearied with contending against the Knight: and being unable to
use any longer resistance, Blandidon thrust his sword through his belly, which
made him forthwith fall dead at his foot.

No sooner was the Bear dead, but Florendos and the rest enchaunted with him,
recovered their former senses, and knew their kind friends, who praising
greatly the wisdom of Aliarte, grew careful now of their hurts recovery:
and this they found by good experience, that if Aliarts coming thither had
been deferred but two hours longer, Drusa Velonna might safely have vaunted,
to have utterly ruined the Court of Constantinople.

Before four days were fully passed, by Aliarts diligence and skill they were
soundly recovered: whereupon he advised them, with all speed now to set on
toward Niquea, before Drusa Velonna should compass a worse enchauntment then
the former, whereto already she had given an indifferent assay and beginning.

Floraman chief Captain of the forces, the next morning commanded the Army
to march on, and (by Aliarts counsel) kept in so narrow a compass together as
possibly they could, because Velonna practiced by her uttermost means to
mollest the Christians: and being able to sted them no further by his art,
Aliarte departed home to his Island.

But Drusa Velonna perceiving he was gone, wrought a very rare and admirable
stratageme: for Miragarda being ridden abroad from the Court to solace
herself, with Victoria and Argentina in her company, in the night time as
they slept, she took them so softly out of their beds, as neither was she
discerned by any, nor had they the power to awake. Hither she brought them,
where Palmerin was with the Army, and set them down before him in such
apparent manner, as they were seen and known of all the Princes, but
immediately rapt out of sight, and carried away again.

Florendos, Florian and Berolde, beholding them thus borne thence, the first
his Wife, and the other two their Daughters, became incensed with such rage, as
taking their Arms, but asking no license, because so short time would not
admit it, they pursued the Enchauntresse, who conuaied the Ladies to ye abiding
of Queen Melia, where the Princess Leonarda had been before enchaunted. But
let that matter pass for this time, and return we to our Army, riding on in
good order toward Niquea, and Oliuanto waiting for apt occasion to follow his
Father, that the one or other might be so happy, as to regaine his Mother and
the Ladies.

Floraman fearing, least the principal Knights of the Army would pursue this
adventure, as a matter importing no mean quest of honor, caused it
publicly to be proclaimed, that no man (on pain of his heads loss) should
presume to depart without his license. So became they the better quieted, that
in their thoughts had before purposed speedy departure: and then came they
within two miles distance of Niquea, where as yet they intended to lodge
themselves.

Gargante of whom we spoke before, a deadly enemy to the Christians, suddenly
rushed forth of a wood where he lay ambushed, and four thousand hardy
followers at his heels: where, had not our principal Leaders been armed, and
two thousand of their boldest spirits well appointed still in the vaw-ward, all
the whole Army had been in a confusion. For Gargante, in regard of his great
stature, and weight of the Armor he daily wore, finding no horse able enough
to bear him, rode upon a fierce angry Bear, wherewith he ran up and down
among the squadrons, none being able to hinder his way, but throwing both men
and horse to the ground, and meeting at last with Palmerin, gave him such a
rude overthwart encounter, that he and his horse tumbled over quite backward,
and soon after he did the like to Pompides and Oliuanto.

Floraman beholding such a disordered proceeding, made forward with a squadron
of well appointed Pikemen, who placing themselves in due order of resistance,
abated the fury of the Giants forwardnes, which gave the dismounted free
liberty of horsing themselves again. Palmerin full of anger and high
disdain, went up and down seeking the Giant Gargante, to pay him some
recompense for his former fall: but Dramusiande being of higher stature,
sooner (then he) got eye of the Giant, and making forth manfully to
encounter him, gave a full proffer of resistance, adding for further testimony
thereof, a very furious and strong thrust directly at his breast: but the
Cuirasse falsing the expectation, though not so much as the other wished, yet
was he in two places indifferently wounded.

Gargante, who (till this instant) had never been so prodigal of his blood,
came speedily against his adversary with such fell and impatient outrage,
that aduauncing his huge unwieldy Clubbe of Lead, he smote therewith
Dramusiande full on the Helmet, forcing him with the blows strength so to
wheel about and stagger, as very hardly could he defend himself from
falling. This set such a scarlet shame on Dramusiandes cheeks, that how he
grew to a resolved spleen, either to die with more disgrace, or at least to be
the death of his enemy: but at this very instant the bridge of the City was
let down, and thence issued forth the Giant Lanfranco, with five thousand
strong and able fighting men in his company, who being all fresh and unwearied
gallants, spared not to set cheerfully on the ouer-laboured squadrons.

Dramusiande perceiving this unexpected supply, and willing (as much as in him
lay) to imbolden the courage of his followers, gave suddenly a maime to the
Giant Lanfrancos horse: whereby he was driven of necessity to make use of his
feet, and could not gadde so dangerously about the field, nor urge such
disadvantage to the Christians as when he was mounted. But Lanfranco was so
speedy on foot, that notwithstanding all ye have Dramusiande made, he
recovered him, and got his horse fast by the bridle, forcing him to kick and
fling with such unruliness, that Dramusiande (not to be controuled by his
horses stubbornnes,) threw himself quite beside him, and then began a
hardy battle between the two Giants, with no spare of Armor, flesh and all.

Blandidon, who stood like a provident Sentinel, to prevent the large extent
of this war, got to him four thousand of his own native Countrymen of
Niquea, who being all faithful and endeared to their Lord, upon this his
personal appearance before the City, came and submitted themselves to him:
and he joining them immediately to six thousand of the Army, went with them
to the guardance of a gate, which because it allowed the road-way to Paraz, had
slender eye of watch (or none at all) upon it, and so much the rather, because
continually came that way, such people as were ayders and assisters to Dirdan.

Having made themselves thus Masters of that bridge, Gorgoneo King of Romata,
the Nephew to Tomano, who was with Palmerin in the war against the Soldane:
came that way marching onward with his men, and making passage for his troops
as he went along, perforce he would through their strength that kept the
Bridge, and being come hand to hand with Blandidon, cried out to his
Soldiers, there to kill him, using these persuasions to this end: that if he
were slain who pretended this right to Niquea, this trouble and war would
soon be finished. These speeches so prevailed in the ready yielding minds of
the Pagans, that Blandidon (being suddenly engirt with two hundred good bold
Knights) had there instantly perished, if Pompides, Gracian, and Francian, had
not immediately joined with him, who compelling the hardiest withstanders to
give them way, stepped close to Blandidon, cirkled in (as ye have heard) with
Gorgoneo and his men, and where he had breathd his last, but for the showers of
blows their swords rayned down on them.

Pompides, who was foremost with his sheeld well advanced, awarded the sharp
thrusts of many Lances, and slew Knights every way round about him, or made
them tumble headlong from off the bridge. Francian sided him with like valor
and performance, and Gracian on the other wing kept even course with them both,
all of them bearing such a breadth with their manly blows, that but for some
immediate fresh resisters, they had cut the laces of Gorgoneos helmet: which
(in despite of all contrary opposition) at last they performed, and one of
them had stabd him to the heart with his dagger, but that he entreated his life
for Palmerin d'Oliuaes sake, for whose honor and his friends, the Kingdom of
Romata was ever to be commanded.

When Blandidon heard that name, as yet so grateful to all the Grecian band of
Knights: he let him live, and aduauncing him self to further employment,
entered upon a fourth part of the City, which stood divided as into four
several Cities, with walls, bulwarks, and ditches, and therefore required
time to take the whole, part after part. Gargante and Lanfranco, perceauing the
maine aim to be now at the City, began to shift for them selves, both being
sore wounded, for Palmerin would never suffer Gargante to be out of his sight,
but turned and winded him many times together: till at last Palmerin was
shrewdly astonished with the Giants huge Club, and Gargante dangerously hurt in
the right hand with his sword, which wound then help to save Palmerins life,
for the blows with the Club had so amazed him, as Gargante might have slain
him at his own pleasure, but that have to be gone, but more especially his
hurt in the hand, made him save him self with the rest that retired into the
City. And the like did Lanfranco, albeit Dramusiande was evermore at his
heels, yet now he took this opportunity of safety.

Floraman withdrew the Army, to that part of the City which Blandidon had
before surprised, where the people (in great triumph) elected him their King,
and gave entrance to the Christian Army: for which, no man's life whatsoever
was called in question, either for former disobedience, or revolt to the
adversary, and this proved to be the utter ruin of Dirdans cause, for he had
there born him self with extremest cruelty, to such as he knew any way did
favor Blandidon.

CHAP. XLVII. How Oltrando and his men of India, came and joined with the
Christian forces: how Niquea was besieged and Tirrena taken.
OLtrando, who was vanquished by Platir and his power in the war at Tubante,
did not come thence along with Floraman, because he stayed in expectation of
more aid, which should have com from those parts of India, where him self
commanded: but when he saw that his stay was fruitless, with those forces
he had, he departed from Tubante, and arrived at the Christian Army, even as
the Giants were newly entered the City.

Heere-vpon the siege began at three several places, making still their
entrance on the quarter where Blandidon had prevailed: which (by advise of all
the Princes) was daily supplied and stronger fortified, because Dirdan held it
as the place of weakest ability, and that there he could control even as him
self pleased. The next day following, Broco, the other son of Palurdan, came
forth very near to the Christian camp, in an Armor of Ash Color, without
any bases, and the devise in his sheeld, was a Giant strangling a Serpent,
because him self being assailed by a Serpent, strangled it. He exceeded his
brother in mightines of stature, and because there could be found no Horse to
bear him, he used continually to fight on foot.

The news of this wondrous Giants approach, was quickly spread through all the
camp, and Dramusiande (being one of the first that heard it) presently armed
him self, and by license obtained of his Captain, ran valiantly against
him: but when he perceived the Giant was on foot, and a huge strong Halberd in
his hand, turning back his Horse, he entered his Tent again, where taking a
keen battell-axe, which he used to bear ever when he hunted, being
dismounted from his Horse, he turned courageously toward his enemy, and
without any other Drum or warlike noise then their own blows, they began to
hack and hew one another, slicing their Armor off in such large scantlings,
as their flesh felt the temper of their keen edged weapons.

After that Dramusiande had tasted two of Brocos strokes, which made him
stagger giddily here and there, he purposed to shun them as much as he might,
for Broco delivered the heauiest strokes, that any Giant in those times was
able to do: marie he was more surly minded then Dramusiande, and also by
nature much more chollericke, for when so ever he faild a blow at his enemy,
he would bite his hands with rage and anger.

Dramusiande taking advised note of this his furious disposition, received
thereby the better hope of good success, and therefore held him play with
tracings about, managing his Axe still with such sleights and dexterity, that
evermore he put by or rebated his blows, and having a sharp long pike in the
head of his Axe, by unexpected doubled strokes, often wounded the Giant,
renting the Cuirasse and flesh in many places on his left side. All which Broco
seemed to make no reckoning of at all, but continued his furious and mad
manner of fight, till at last it was Dramusiandes ill hap, in avoiding a very
dangerous blow of his adversary, to have the staff cut in two pieces by the
Halberd, so that now (perforce) he must stand breast to breast with a deuillish
enemy, a mishap which would have daunted a very resolute spirit: but he
chearing his hopes with this comfort, that Christian Knights are most admired
in extremities, bated not an inch of courage, but kept Broco off so valiantly
with the pike of his Axe, that at length it was his good hap, to stab it into
the sight of his helmet, and wounded him just between both the eyes: now as
great an inconvenience followed this success, for he could not recover his Axe
back again, but was constrained, to leave it there sticking in his helmet,
which loss of his weapon did much displease him.

Notwithstanding, to make use of time (as he thought for his best advantage,)
he ran and caught the Giant about the midst, of which boldness he had but
little cause to boast, for Broco, whose embrace was larger then his by a whole
arms length, gave him such knocks on the helmet with the pommell of his
Halberd, as but that it was of exceeding pure temper in deed, he had cleft it,
and then you may guess the others danger: for with these blows he was so
giddied and amazed, that if the Giant had had the reason but to have perceived
it, Dramusiande had fallen, but that his adversary only supported him.
Nevertheless, recovering him self so well as he could, while thus the Giant
had him within his enclosure, he gave him so many stabs with his dagger in the
left flank, that he was glad to let him go at liberty: and beside, he
recovered his Axe again, wherewith he once more wounded him in the very same
place, that the issue of blood blinding his sight, made him rave with madness,
and run up and down stamping like a desperate lunaticke. Then drew he forth
his sword, because in this raging he had lost his Halberd, and his sword
exceeded Dramusiandes a full yard in measure, whereof it stood the other upon
to be wary and circumspect, because such an ods was beyond all indifferency:
notwithstanding, Dramusiande avoided all perrill with good discretion, and for
any one wound received, returned his enemy three.

Lanfranco standing on the Cities battlements, and perceauing his brother to
be in very desperate hazard, staggering, and almost unable to stand, but that
by setting his swords point to the ground, he made thereof often use as his
best supporter: with an hundred bold Knights issued forth of the City, to
recover him back again least there he should perish. At which very instant,
Oliuanto fell on his knee before Palmerin, who was pressing forward to be gone,
but that the young Knight stayed him, saying.

Most honorable Lord and Uncle, suffer me to gain that glory, which you now
go for, and are certain to enjoy: as ever you respected chivalry, or will
further the desires of a hopeful spirit. Palmerin, who knew not well how to
gainsay him, granted his request, so trotted he forth with his Lance to
meet Lanfranco, whose Bear carried him with such wild and giddie trauerses,
that the Christian Knights Horse startling at sight of him, carried his Master
amazedly quite thwart the Bears passage, whereof Lanfranco taking the
advantage, with a cross thrust wounded him a little, beside dismounted him
from his Horse. But the young Knight was so ashamed of this fall, that quickly
recovering footing again, with bold courage he turned to the Giant again,
who still imagined to affright him with his Bear: and making him to raise his
former paws, as coveting to seize fast hold on the Knight, Oliuanto with his
keen edgde sword, wounded the beast in both the feet at once, so that as the
Giant would have turned him in have for better opportunity, he fell down on a
heap and his Master under him, which good hap admitted ye Knight to revenge
his former fall, and to quittance the Giant beside with two hurts, one on the
shoulder, and the other under his right arm, albeit they were wounds of
slender importance, in regard of his mighty stature and corpulence of body.

After that Lanfranco had got on foot again, he laid about him with his long
sword, that Oliuanto had work enough to do, by nimble turnings and sleights
to award and defend them: till at length, the Giant being a huge body, and
very unwieldy, found himself so ouer-wearied with the Knights active windings
and abouts, that indeed it turned to his great disadvantage, for Oliuanto by
his agil dexterity, gave him wounds in six several places, though not so
deep and mortal as had been more necessary, and his hurts proved the
slighter in giving, because the Knight had care to shun the Giants long heavy
sword, the proof whereof had been so dangerous to him, that it had robbed him
of the better part of his Shield, and given him (beside) a wound in the right
thigh.

Dramusiande also on the other side, entreated Broco in such sort, as the
victory twixt them, was most apparent on the Christians side: but they were
both so ouer-wearied with fighting, as little harm could they do to one
another with their swords. Gargante, with two noated Knights of the Kingdom of
Paraz, who were Cosins by affinity to the revolted Dirdan, came forth of the
City, and grew so forward in their bold enterprise, that at length they were
in hand with Palmerin himself, little thinking to be so roughly encountered:
for the Knight with his Lance, had pierced quite through Gargantes armor, and
wounded him somewhat though little to effect, and contrariwise, himself was
well astonished with the shocke, albeit, by reason of his admired valor, he
quickly recovered his senses again.

Gracian iousted with one of those Knights named Mameo, and Francian with the
other, called Tresino, but Francian was dismounted, and so was Mameo by his
horses fault, the other, passing the encounter with equal success, with their
Swords fell to the combat very stoutly hand to hand.

Now was the battle between five and five, and continued with such eager
violence, that they of the City, (finding themselves not handled to their
liking) withdrew (as it were) with one consent together, the better to sheeld
themselves from our hardy Knights: and speaking in their own language,
concluded to retire into the City, whereupon they resisted very sparingly,
euer-more giving backward, as their best advantage.

Floraman, perceiving our Knights thus to pursue their enemies, and doubting
least their retire intended some treachery, caused Pompides to make forward
with ten thousand in their rancks, and part of them grew so hardy in their
proceeding, that they came to the bridge foot, whereon the Pagans stood
proudly aduauncing themselves. Our Knights likewise would needs up on the
bridge, and being thus seconded by Pompides and his men, strove to enter the
gate, where Dirdan with diverse hardy gallants stood to make resistance.

Now here you must think was work enough to do on all sides, for Dirdan
considering with himself, that already the fourth part of the City was
surprised, had made a strong Bastione within the City, which reached in a
roundure as a forefence to the gate: and this was the only hinderaunce to our
men, that they could not go onward as before they purposed, but were there
compelled to fight confusedly. Palmerin knew Dirdan by his imprese of the Dog,
whereon he cried out to him, saying: Ah traiterous Renegado, and gave him such
a stroke upon the Helmet, as tumbled him to the earth in great amazement.

A Knight of Niquea, who before had been a servant to Tirrena, beholding him
fall, ran presently with the report thereof to his Lady, who as one newly fallen
beside herself, went with him to see where her Lover lay, and not knowing then
whether to betake her course, because Dirdan (before her coming) was
recovered, and with-drawne for new provision, to keep the Christians from
entrance: she happened into the hands of Floraman, who fastening hold on her
disheueld hair, which in her madding mood herself had so dispersed,
threatened her with immediate death, except she forthwith declared of whence
and what she was. I am (quoth she) the unfortunate Tirrena, which Floraman
hearing, and perceiving it was a thing impossible to take the City, being
defended by such multitudes of people, and night now drawing on, the enemy
would work to fortefie his strength: caused retreat to be sounded, and then
withdrawing toward the Castle, took Tirrena with him to his Pauillion, where
leaving her under assured guarde, he went back to call in his men together.

There found he Palmerin, Oliuanto and Francian (weary and well near spent
with travail) shouldred off from the Bridge by the as wearied enemies,
Pompides and Gracian still backing them onward, which doubtless had ensued to
their great danger, if Dirdan (fearing that part where Blandidon kept, to
whose aid was Oltrando newly come) had not retired to make that sure. Which
being done, and he come thither again ere this contention was ended, the
taking of Tirrena was reported to him, whereof he seemed to make but slender
account: not unlike that man, who taking a wife for her worth and dignity,
enjoying what he would have, cares not how quickly he is rid of her again.

So he, either in this respect, or perhaps reputing it as a matter impossible,
to recover her back from so many hardy Knights, because indeed he wanted his
Giants and kinsemen, who in this last conflict were all sore wounded: would
venture no further upon the Bridge, but turned back again like one
despayring. Our Knights, so many of them as were wounded, took the best order
they could for the more speedy recuring of themselves, and Dirdan (to withstand
further danger) shut himself up within the City.

CHAP. XLVIII. How Primaleon went to the adventure of Fortune, and what
happened in the first days attempt.
PRimaleon desirous to see Dorina, for conducting him to the adventure of
Fortune whereof she had made him promise: took his farewell of King Trasino
and Laurea his Queen, leaving them much discomforted by his departure. And
coming to the Seaside with his Squire, he found there the Ship, wherein
Filenia had been before enchaunted, and going aboorde, Dorina, who had there a
whole day awaited his presence, forbear to chide him, but entertained him in
this manner.

Fair and right fortunate Knight, on whom good hap gives attendance as a
servant, this Ship has here waited in expectation of your arrival, to carry
you to that part of the world, where your company will be very welcome: for
which, my self have hear attended, to guide you to the adventure of Fortune,
whence you shall either depart with honor, or perrishing in the enterprise,
live for ever eternized. No sooner had she thus spoken, and he returned her
kind gratulations, but striking the Mast of the Ship with her wand, the sails
were spread immediately, and they rid at pleasure cutting through the waves,
without any interruption for two days together.

Dorina at last looking up into the air, beheld it with some show of
admiration, and used these speeches to Primaleon. Young Prince, now shall thou
discern the strength of incantations, for three great Ladies of royal
parentage, are by a Sorceresse shut up in the strangest enchauntment, that at
any time hitherto has ever been heard of: and one of them shall be released by
you, but it will be long first, therefore you must expect the help of the
wizzard Aliarte, which at this present you cannot have.

These Ladies, were they of whom we spoke before, that were carried away by
Drusa Velonna: but she would not impart so much to the Knight, who so dearly
affected the fair Infant Victoria, that should he have had knowledge of her
imprisonment in such sort: he would have put off all hope of this enterprized
adventure, and immediately have followed the recovery of his love: wherefore
being asked of him what Ladies they were, she was glad to answer him, that
she could not tell. So sailed they on still with a prosperous wind, and it
happened one day, even in the very blush of the mornings arise, the Ship closed
with the Isle of Fortune, which presently he knew, and (not a little ^ocond
thereat) leapt forth upon the land never dreaming what dangers were there
prepared for him.

After they had likewise brought their Horses on shore, they mounted, and rode
on through the wood, until they came to the self same place, where Primaleon
first beheld the Tree changed into the form of a Theater: which as he now
looked for to find again, he espied there a very fearful grotte or vault,
for Fortune was departed from that place, and had made this Cauerne before the
track of her foote-steps, to see who durst be so bold as to follow her. When he
came to the mouth of this frightfull hollow, he felt himself suddenly
dispoiled of his Armor, and left there in his doublet with his sword only,
whereat he grew very highly offended, and seeing no way to get thence again,
he beheld a famished Lion start out of the vaute, the beast (lifting up his
foot to a pillar standing there by) showed him this brief fixed there-vpon.

Seek not thy death in this unhaunted Wood. Primaleon knowing how easily he
could conquer a Lion, because as he usually hunted, he evermore killed and
overcame them, stepping boldly to the beast, gave him an angry stroke with his
sword on the head, which rebounded back again as lightly to him, as if he had
smitten on a rock of marble, whereat the Knight began to marvel not a little.
The Lion caught hold of him about the middle, and carried him so swiftly into
the vault, that the Squire standing by, (fearing when the Lion had devoured his
master, he would return again and fetch him too:) foorth-with fled thence,
leading along with him his Lords horse, and so rode he directly to
Constantinople, as in more meet place shall at large be declared.

Primaleon, who for all this strange rapture of the beast, failed not in the
very least jot of his courage, having drawn his dagger, thought therewith to
wound the Lion in the throat, but the beast (like one possessed of a reasonable
soul) in the voice of a man thus spoke unto him. My death will be thy
destruction, because of my blood shall arise so many Lions more, as thou can
not defend thy self against them: Permit me then to carry thee to the place,
where thy lost Arms shall be restored again unto thee.

It seemed a matter of no slender moment to the Knight, to hear a Lion speak
in this manner, but yet he held it much more strange, that he should suffer
himself to be carried away in this sort: nevertheless, not dreading the
imputation of any vile esteem, either by neglect of courage, or other
behavior best beseeming a man, he thus replied. Carry me whether thou will,
for in all occasions whatsoever that may happen to me, fair Fortune and mine
own valor shall sufficiently defend me.

The Lion holding him fast between his fore-pawes, bare him above a miles
length through a mighty darkness, until at last they came to a goodly large
plain, so thick beset with high spreading trees, that they hindered ye sight
of a round bright-shining Tower near adjoining, to which the Lion brought him
so near, that he wondered he had no sooner espied it, there did the Lion set
him down, and suddenly departed.

The Knight not seeing any body, by whom he might be informed what was there
to do for him, stood sadly pondering to himself, and having so continued for
a good half hours space, yet never the nearer of his expectation, he coasted
about to come to the Castle, and more then an hundred paces had he spent about
it, yet could not discern any gate for entrance, but only diverse high-built
windows, out of which he seemed to hear a disordered noise of people,
resembling rather to be of Giants, then such as were of his own stature or
proportion.

Standing doubtful awhile what he should do, two Siluane young men, cirkled
and wrethed with Iuie both alike, came suddenly before him, and one of them
spoke in manner following. Indiscreete and ouer-audacious Knight, know that
Fortune has conducted thee hither to thy death. This which thou see, is
called the Dreadful Tower, for the fair Queen Melia, Sister to the King
Armato, who in his soul abhorred Christians, and contended in the Magical
Sciences with the wise Vrgando, erected this tower where thou see it stand,
the place all solitary and unfrequented, and circkled with such a powerful
enchauntment, that whatsoever Christian dares to enter it, immediately he falls
down dead, except he first be possessed of the means, to make void and of
none account this incantation, which we esteem to be impossible, because many
Knights have already come hither, and suffered themselves to be carried into
the Tower, (as annon thou shall see by us the manner how) and died so soon as
they set foot within it, whereof least thou should make any doubting, look
in that large ditch upon thy left hand, and see the bones of the dead that
here have perrished.

No sooner had he thus spoken, but a strange kind of Tun or Dryfat
descended down the Tower, whereon the two Siluanes presently mounted, and in a
trice were rapt up immediately. This marvel made Primaleon to study a
little one it, but yet fearelesse of it, or any thing else whatsoever, he walked
on again about the Tower, to try if he could find any help for the
finishing of this adventure. As thus he went on, he heard the treading of a
man directly before him, yet could discern nothing at all, but a great iron
Sledge lying just in his way, which he held to be very convenient for his
purpose, either for compassing his entrance into the Tower, or for expelling
such as he should find within it.

So taking up the hammer, which seemed to him to be very weighty, he began
to knock therewith against the wall, with as loud strokes as a Smith upon
his Anuile, and the wall being of bright shining metal, delivered such a
strange high kind of sound, that the beasts which were in the wood near
adjoining, hearing ye noise, fled thence with fear.

The wall (with his long battering upon it) began to open a little, but not to
any purpose for entrance, albeit (by the rift) it appeared not above a fingers
breadth in thicknes: nor could he make any larger rupture, notwithstanding he
used his very utmost strength, and labored till he was all on a sweat, when
suddenly he saw the Tun descend again, and out of it started a huge Giant,
with his face like a dogs, and of horrible stature, not having any use of
speech, therefore his language was barking only. As he was going toward him,
one of the young Siluanes descended again, crying aloude to the Giant, that he
should stay, whereon he presently stood still, and the young man being come to
the ground, went to the Knight with these speeches. Sir, the fear of your
perrill by this monster, does much afflict me, for this is a Caniball, a
people of that part of the world, where the Antipodes are, and fifty such as he
is, are within the Tower, with all which you must hazard your self, if you
abide there.

Queen Melia fetched them from that Country to this place, enchaunting them in
such a sort, as they cannot die till the Tower be taken: all which may seem no
more then a jest in the eye of your valor, but far greater dangers will
assail ye, then you are aware of. This spoke the young man, as thinking with
great words to send him thence: but ever when the Knight struck on the wall,
the Siluane trembled, doubting least ye adventure would now he concluded.

Primaleon remembering he was unarmed, consulted awhile with his thoughts,
whether he should deal with this strange creature thus hand to hand, or stay
in expectation of his Armor, which (as you have heard before) was promised him
again. As thus he stood musing, there came forth of the wood a Knight in
yellowe colored Armor, with a border or list or black about it, in his
Shield was a hammer or sledge as his devise, and Primaleons Armor he bare
upon a Lance, in manner as Trophies are borne before Conquerours, and being
come to him, he said. Here Knight, take your Armor, and this young man shall
help to arm ye: as for my self, expect no favor at my hands, but fiercest
hatred. Nevertheless, I will not see you in any such perrill, that you may
have any just excuse to color your vanquishing, and having thus said, he
parted thence again.

The young man (with looks full of grief) foorth-with armed him, and then was
quickly drawn up into the tower. When Primaleon saw himself armed so soon,
he wished to have present dealing with the Caniballs, rather then to loose
time against that one, and aduauncing his weapon, went to assail him, thinking
to kill him at the very first encounter: but he found himself deceived, for the
Giant, albeit he was unarmed, had such a massy Clubbe, as would endure against
the keenest edgde sword, without any harming: beside, he was so quick and
nimble, yt the Knight spent many strokes in vain, before he could wound him.
Which when he perceived, he began to make better use of his labor, and
watching apt occasion for his own advantage, striking at the upper hand that
held the Club, cut it quite off: so the Giant was now both without hand and
Clubbe, which made him run rauingly upon the Knight, and thinking to murder
him, bit greedily his Armor, but to little purpose, for Primaleon gave him so
many stabs, that at last he fell down for dead at his foot, and then he took
up the hammer again, beating therewith on the wall, as he did before, which
seemed to open wider then it did, although indeed it was very little,
nevertheless it somewhat increased his comfort.

While thus he stood beating against the wall, two Giants were let down
together out of the Tower, and they came very suddenly upon the Knight, who was
so extremely wearied with lifting the hammer, that one would have thought he
had been dead: for the one gave him a mighty stroke upon the Helmet, and the
other smote him so soundly upon the right shoulder, that he staggerd and reeled
from the^ above twenty paces. But recovering his spirits quickly, and
perceiving two such fierce enemies upon him at once, he bravely buckled to
them, and ran one of them with his sword through the right side: at the other
he reached a slaunting stroke, which he very well avoided with his Club, and
returned him such a requital upon his Shield, as if it had not been that
belonging to Fortune, it would have been squandred in many pieces.

Now was he beset with much extremity, and indeed had fallen into irresistable
perrill, but that good hap so well befriended him, as from the one he smote of
his dogs head, and the other (being wounded before) had little ability of
defending himself, but fell down dead after his fellow. This success made
him so desirous of entrance into the Tower, that again he ran to his hammer,
and charging the wall with no simple strokes, beheld a far larger opening of
the breach: but he saw it defended by three furious Caniballs, which from the
Towers top were let down on the other side, and they with huge Maces stood
raising up the wall against him.

But he whose desire was on nothing but victory, seeing them to be unarmed as
the other were before, threw his hammer at one of them, which breaking his
bulk, made him fall down dead: then with his sword he recovered the sledge
again, and spurned it by him, not willing to be dispossessed thereof as yet,
because he expected good success thereby, he cleft another of them from the
shoulder to the belly, and he fell down as spread in two part. The third
showed himself so gallantly disposed, that Primaleon (beholding the night to
have upon him) doubted least he should be most troubled with this Caniball: and
looking up to the top of the Tower, he saw a number of them stand barking
at him, which made him the less reckon what his enemy could do, but doubling
his strokes courageously upon him, at last he fell down dead among the other.

Now began all the Caniballs aloft on the Tower, to howl and cry in very
fearful manner, because this last Caniball which Primaleon had slain, had
there his Wife and eyghteene children, who would all have descended snarling
together to revenge their Fathers death in their doggish fury: but the Knight
before spoken of, who (albeit inuisibly) brought him the hammer, came again
out of the wood, and made such a sign to the Giants above, that they left
whyning, and withdrew themselves, then stepping to Primaleon, thus he spoke.
Although the nature of the enchauntment be such, that no kindness or courtesy
should be shown unto you, nevertheless, Fortune reserving you to more
glorious enterprises, commands me to bridle all displeasure, and not to use
you as in just rage I might: withdraw your self therefore into that little
Cottage, and there you shall find what is convenient for you.

Primaleon feeling the last Caniballs blows most offensive to him, the more
gladly yielded to this inuiting, and being entered the Cottage, he found there
a table daintilie furnished, and a goodly bed for him to rest in: there supt he
without any dread of suspicion, and seeing none to hinder him, went afterward
to bed, and there slept soundly.

CHAP. XLIX. How Primaleons Squire arrived at Constantinople with his horse,
and there witnessed, that a Lion had devoured his Lord in his presence: and of
another sad news there happening also.
THE Court of Constantinople was full repleate with grief, for Miragardaes
loss, and the two fair young Ladies that were with her: the Emperor beside
was much malecontent, because he could have no use of his Armor, only
through the lamenesse of his right arm, which thus (on mere constraint) kept
him in Constantinople, quite contrary to his knightly resolutions and desires,
albeit both the wise Aliarte and Dorina, had given him hope of recovery, and
still he remained in expectation of that promised good fortune, nor did any
imbecilitie or age abate one jot of his courage, but continuing his former
youthful disposition, often wished himself in the fiercest and bloodiest
battles.

Now in this idle loytering from the exercise of military employment, a softer
temper had beleagerd his affections, and carrying them in doting error toward
fair Candida the Daughter of Belisart, provoked him to diverse private
visitations of her: all which notwithstanding, the discreet and fair natured
Empress Grydonia, (never minding the becks, nodds, and other ceremonies of an
old enamoured husband,) delivered apparently that she discerned nothing,
whereat the Emperor was not a little contented, albeit he would not for all
his Empire, yt the world knew his vain desires, as his in very deed Empress
did.

Time passing on in these and such like occasions, the Knight of Fortunes
Squire happened to arrive at the Court, leading in his hand his Masters
Courser, and tidings he brought of certainty withal, that he saw when a Lion
devoured his Lord. These heavy news flewe quickly through the Court, and the
Empress, with the fair young Lady Concordia, (who duly kept within her
lo^ging, ever since the loss of Miragarda her Mother) ran as bereft of their
wits about the Palace, finding the Emperor (in like manner) nearer death then
life. But the Empress Grydonia, being of great spirit and womanly discretion,
weighing in the equal balance of her thoughts, what grief a man might take
for loss of such a Nephew, kindly embracing the Emperor, spoke unto him in
this manner.

Right royal and my most esteemed Lord, by the virtue of that love which you
truly declared, when delivering me your sword, and laying your head on my
lap, you prostrated your self to death, and bad me revenge my wrongs for
Perequin of Durace: let me entreat you to forget these passions, and live with
me in honors league as you ought to do. Admit you have lost a noble Nephew,
yet comfort your self in Oliuanto his brother, and doubtless his Mother will
also be well recovered again: for assurance whereof, take this as a
testimony, that in the heauiest and most disconsolate afflictions of all, the
Divine favor preserved and restored you to your Empire.

The Emperor being come to better patience, was so inwardly comforted with
these pleasing speeches, that folding her in his arms, he declared himself
to be contentedly satis-fied: commanding all the other Ladies and young
Princesses to his presence, with whom he sat discoursing on matters beseeming
their assembly, the better to expel these sad tidings which so much afflicted
him, yet the death of his dear Nephew often interposing it self, compelled
many broken (yet well shadowed sighs) which (nevertheless) the Empress with
heedfull eye observed, and made her very hardly to refrain from tears. But
now the hour of dinner being come, a general feasting together in the hall
was commanded: whereto the Emperor was the rather induced, because he held
it as a matter worth general respect, that a Knight so favored of Fortune,
and so full of fair hopes, should so untimely be taken away, even in the
freshest flouring of his youth.

This dinner was very sumptuous, and honorably performed, in which time, many
iocond humors and fantasies ran in the Emperors thoughts, that he could
hardly believe his Nephew was dead: and dinner being ended, he called to him
sundry Princes of good years, to whom he imparted his private oppinion, which
sauouring as likely in their conjectures as his, they fell to this conclusion,
that the Squire should be delivered over to torments, thereby to understand the
truth of his Masters death.

So without any long delaying, he was taken and tormented in such sort, that
he confessed the reason of his saying so, was, because he thought him for
certainty to be dead, and in excuse of his own returning thither without him:
for how could it be otherwise? his eyes were witnesses, how a Lion carried him
into a deep vaulte, against which beast he could not well defend himself, his
Armor being before taken from him at the Tree of Fortune. The Emperor
advertised the Empress hereof, and sending kindly to entreat her company, so
soon as she came, thus he began.

Madame, cherrish your good hopes, for questionless my Nephew is living: for I
dare affirm (according to some Magical incantations, which I have both seen
and heard of,) that the Lion is so friendly a beast to the progeny of
Palmerin, that this carriage away of our Nephew by a Lion, will sort in the end
to his fame and glory.

Now began all former sad oppinions to be quite banished, and nothing but
courtly pleasures only prosecuted: but see a sudden unexpected change
again, Franardos Squire (whose Lord never parted from the I Will of Carderia,
since his surprising there by the Knight) awaiting his freedom by some other
man of merit, and perceiving Almaroll with the other Knights there to be taken
likewise, and Leonato enchaunted for defense of the place, the Squire (bereft
of all hope that any one now could deliver them:) returned also to
Constantinople, and there reported how many Knights were there thus strangely
retained in the I Will of Carderia.

This fresh allarum of unfortunate tidings, raised such a new discontent in the
Court, that now they began to credit the former report, comparing present
successes with passed accidents: that Fortune now strove to weaken the Court of
Constantinople, and reduce it into the like desperate estate, as when Don
Edward the Prince of England was imprisoned: but this new cross stood on
far worse conditions, by reason these Knights could not be delivered, without
the intended death of Leonato, which admitted no hope in so hard an extremity,
but rather caused a more confusion in grief generally through the Court.

The Empress outstanding the first affliction, with more then manly courage,
being assaulted now again with such a weighty oppression, could no longer
contain her former disposition, but lauishly sent forth a whole Sea of
tears, and the Emperor likewise fell down half dead with grief: so that
the City was in such a sad turbulence, for the loss of so many famous
Princes, as it near hand now resembled an unfrequented desert place, all
bemoaning entirely Trineus the Emperor of Allmaignes departure, and the
wanting of the other flourishing company, for if now an Army had set upon
Constantinople, it had been no matter of difficulty to take it, being thus
dispossessed of all her defenders.

These greefes growing to more discreet moderation, and the Emperor (making a
better recollection of his thoughts) began to consider, that the strongest
inchauntments which in those times could happen, did but give apparent
instances of such Knights future valor, as should (by them) eternize their
names to posterity: which might sort out as well to his Courts honor, as any
other, and make it as much feared, as ever it had been before, therefore he
began to be of better comfort, knowing that true noble Knights would not
fail in execution of their duties, as for all care else, he referred it to
heaven.

In which resolution, he cheered up the Ladies young and old, but Polinarda
the mother of Leonato, and fair Candida, (who was deeply enamoured of him,)
they could take little truce with their tears, and the heavier was this cross
to the other Princesses, who albeit their sons were prisoners, and nature
made them as desirous of their liberty, yet none of them would purchase the
same at so dear a rate, as to buy her sons life with Lenatos death. The
Emperor seeing himself thus left alone, and the Empire standing on terms of
hazard, if any hostile enemies should arise against it: wrote to Don Edward
then King of England, that he should bring what power he could with him to
Constantinople, for the better withstanding all dangers what-soeuer: but he did
not acquaint him with the case of Primaleon, neither the disaster allotted to
Leonato, because he might journey the more contentedly.

And till the time of his arrival, he gave order for the fortifying of such
places as were weakest in strength, so that (in a manner) the walls were newly
reedified: but return we now to Tubante, to declare a molestation that there
chanced to happen.

CHAP. L. How the Monster released himself and Ristorano in Tubante, after
that Tirrena was sent to Constantinople.
FLoraman, after that the whole Army was drawn back to their place of lodging,
appointing a provident and careful watch, commanded every man to his rest:
but the next morning he called the Princes to counsel with him, and Blandidon
also, who leaving Oltrando to his charge in the City, came to consult on these
affairs with the rest, where every man should freely deliver his mind, what
was to be done with the imprisoned Tirrena.

Blandidon, who^ this case did most of all concern, would have his Sister put
into the hand of justice, and punished as her offense had worthily deserved:
upon which opinion he stood so peremptorily, that Palmerin grew somewhat
displeased thereat, but Floraman being discreet and wise, returned Blandidon
this answer. I must confess my Lord, that a just cause of grief mooues you
to the chastisement of your Sister: but let me entreat you to remember, that
the Lady is become prisoner to the Emperor of Constantinople, not to you or
me, and I being by him and you deputed as general commander, (surprising her
my self) do hold it most convenient, that she be sent hence to
Constantinople, there to endure what shall please his Majesty to appoint her.

Blandidon knew not how to answer this sentence, perceauing how every one
leaned to that course, therefore it being thus concluded on, and wanting but
execution, so soon as Pompides was well of his hurts received, with two
hundred for her guard, they were dispatched thence to Tubante, where afterward
they should embarque themselves for Constantinople. In their marching, they
were discerned far off from the City, and Dragonalte (being on the chiefest
Turret) not well acquainted with the Scottish Arms they bear, armed him self
to prevent the woorst, going more then half a mile out of the City to meet
them, where knowing each other, and kindly embracing, as they walked on,
Pompides reported the whole success of the war, as also the present case
concerning Tirrena, and how she should be sent to Constantinople.

Thus passed they along into the City, where Targiana awayted their coming,
with longing desire, to hear tydinges of the Christian Princes, but most of
all of noble Florian. Pompides in his serious and well couched discourse, came
at length to tell her, how Victoria, with two other Ladies, were carried away
to be enchaunted, and that Prince Florian followed for their recovery. So full
of grief did these news make Targiana, that she was ready to fall down
dead, but bearing it out (with a good spirit) so long as she could, at last
she took leave of the Knights, withdrawing into her private chamber, where
giving more scope to her hearts oppression, she remembered the hatred which
Drusa Velonna bare to ye Christians, holding it now for most certain, that she
had thus carried away those Ladies, to endaunger the Knights by some hellish
enchauntment, and knew not herein how to comfort her self.

Dragonalte and Pompides, not knowing Targianaes inward agonies, gave them
selves to rest, and so did the other that came with them, because there
appeared no perrill to be suspected. But Fortune, the daily enemy to the very
least quietness, wrought in such sort, yt the Monster (which was taken before by
our Knights, when they combatted the Kings that came with Ristorano) had
labored so successefully with his sharp nails, that the strong gives were
broken which bound him fast by the feet: beside, he had wrenched out the yrons
which grated the window, where Ristorano was kept prisoner with too much
courtesy, for he was neither manackled on hands nor feet: and then passing so
on together, through door and door, they came at last to the uttermost, which
(by good hap) they found open, and not guarded at all, where Ristorano assuring
him self now on liberty, gave signs to the Monster to be very quiet. So
escaped they thence to a kindsman of his, whom he before had acquainted with
his means of freedom, hoping that but few Christians were as then in
Tubante, (for he knew nothing of Pompides arrival) and now was the time for
the deliverance of his Country.

But his kindsman, having already seen the two hundred valiant Soldiers when
they came, and a Captain of so worthy reputation withal, stood a while
doubtful what were best to be done: but being ouer-weyed with Ristoranos bold
speeches, he would needs make venture of his fortune, and dealing closely with
ten other of principal reckoning (secret sworn enemies to the Christians)
they wrought with such politic subtilty, that they were assured of two
thousand Turks in their assistaunce, making this course their hope, that if a
tumult were suddenly raised, they should want no hearts nor hands to help them.

Ristorano (with his elected company) went to the place where he had left the
Monster, and engirting the Palace where the Christian Caualierie were, (only
such excepted as guarded the gates and kept the Castle) crying out, murder,
murder, murder the false Christians: they forcibly brake through the doors
where the Knights lodged, and there had suddenly murdered them all, but that
the Monster (ouer-greedy in his forwardnes) shook the door of the room where
Dragonalte and Pompides slept. Now was there heard such a terrible noise, as if
the Palace had been shattering in pieces, so that the Princes awaking, and
their Armor evermore by them, they were immediately armed: Targiana likewise
armed her self, and perceauing she could repose no trust in her Turks,
henceforth would secure her self among the Christians. Thirty of the best
knights in the Palace were speedily in a readiness, and fifty more came by a
secret vault under the Castle to them: Dragonalte with these fourscore
resolutes, having left Targiana in Pompides charge, with twelve of her best
affected servants in company, all vowing to loose their lives in her defense:
went on to the gate, where needed no labor to open it, for the Monster had
made so large an entrance, that our men might easily rush forth upon them, but
the Monster could not get in thereat, being only hindered by his huge greatness.
When Dragonalte beheld such a wide rupture, which (though the night was dark)
he too plainly perceived, he imagined such a breach could not possibly be
made, but doubtless it was the Monster that did it, wherefore, holding it not
requisite, to respect a beast with manly courtesy, he caused three Lances to
be bound together, because the Monster had such strength in his hands, as with
ease he could crack one in pieces: and as the beast stood crouding for
entrance, he ran with the Lances against his side so strongly, yt gashing his
ribs, it rent away a good deal of his flesh. This wound was so full of pain
to the Monster, that he forsook the door, and running down ye stairs,
overthrew every one he met withal. Dragonalte with his followers issued forth
on the stairs, and here he found work enough to do, for Ristorano had set
down his rest on death, rather then longer to live in prison: therefore (well
armed) he was amongst the foremost, and defended ye passage with such bold
resistance, that Dragonalte by no means could descend the stairs, albeit he
heard the Christians pitiful shriekes, who were mercilesly slain beneath by
the Turks. Pompides regarding the lives of his Soldiers, left Targiana with
her trusty servants, and went to company him self with Dragonalte, where in
little while they made such a lavish slaughter, as ye enemies were glad to give
them away, and there did Pompides wound Ristorano in the sword hand, yet
nevertheless the fight was fiercely continued, for four thousand Turks more
were raised in his aid, and joined there with ye rest even at that instant.

Our Caualieres with their handy blows had so dishartened the foremost rancks,
that with very good will they gave them passage, and (thereby) releast their
passage into the open Court, where being seconded with new supplies of fresh
friends, and comfort of others which were in readiness preparing, the enemy made
a present recuile out again, so that there might be easily numbered two thousand
slain, even in this forcible retire of the enemy and his troops.

The Monster being stark mad with the wound he had received, ran through the
City, overthrowing and killing all that he met withal, making such a
confusion among them which favored Ristoranos proceedings, as very many of
them (growing doubtful what success would ensue) drew back closely into their
houses, as fearing now to be held rebellious, by reason whereof, Ristorano made
not his part so good as before he hoped of: nevertheless, very fiercely and
desperately he maintained still the fight, and the Monster returning again
where he was, crowde^ in so furiously among our troops, that before he could
be withstoode, he was in the midst of all the Horsemen, where he did
mischief enough, beating men and horses on every side to the ground, but he
was wounded in many places with their sharp pointed Lances, whereof still he
seemed to make no reckoning, but proceeded in as much outrage as ever he did.

Pompides seeing such damage done to his men, came in person to encounter him,
but the Monster running at him with all his might, thwarted his passage so
unluckily, that tumbling his Horse and him quite over backward, the beast fell
likewise upon him, and there (with his huge weight) he had been pressed to
death, but the Monster (having lost much blood out of his side and other hurts)
fell faintly beside him, when Pompides, having quickly recovered footing
again, commanded him to be taken by mere strength. While thus the heat of
the broile continued, Ristorano remembered Carino King of Illium, who was close
detayned in an other prison: his company he thought would now greatly sted
him, whereupon he caused him to be fetched from prison, and armed with as much
speed as possibly could be. Now began the skirmish in far fiercer manner
then before, for Carino was a bold hardy Knight, and many well-willers of his
dwelled in Tubante, obtaining such favor in the time of his imprisonment,
only to wait opportunity for his deliverance.

Pompides being very weary, and somewhat sore with his unhappy fall, meeting
with Carino, had there by him been slain, if Targianaes good hap had not
conducted her thither, attended by her twelve faithful followers: where
beholding her state and rule in a very desperate hazard, if our Knights of
repute should so be discomfited, both she and they fought so gallantly,
clearing their way with such valor before them, as they saved Pompides life,
even in the narrowest peril, and brought him where he might breathe and rest
him self.

Dragonalte (on the other side) labourd with such success, that wheresoever he
smote about him, at every stroke it cost a life: nevertheless, the enemy came
still so freshly upon them, that every moment their ruin was expected. But
Targiana, like an advised and provident Princess, helping where most need
required with new supplies, cried out all the way as she went with her troops,
that who so ever had taken Arms against her in the favor of Ristorano, if now
they would forsake him, and witness true duty to their lawful Princess, free
pardon was granted, without any after remembrance of their passed offenses, so
that every one might safely betake him to his abiding.

And Targiana was reputed so faithful of her promise (as indeed it becomes
any Prince to be,) as therefore she deserved highly to be reverenced: and
(except the kindred or near friends of Ristorano and Carino) all the rest
departed presently to their habitations, so that those two Princes were there
left now, with not above an hundred men to help them. When Dragonalte saw the
people part thence in such sort, he spent no time in vain against the small
remainder, yet Ristorano and Carino were withdrawn together, and stood upon
their own guard with very sprightly courage: but when Pompides and Targiana
came with fresh enforcement upon them, then they began to think the day lost,
and Carino, who meaned to be imprisoned no more, leaping forth of the circkle
wherein he was round engirt, ran into the thickest of the Christian squadron,
calling with loud voice for Dragonalte and Pompides, that he might die by the
hand of one of them. But because a Traitor deserves no honorable end, such
was the loud clattering of swords upon Armor, and the outcries of them which
were done round about him to death, as he was not heard at all, but falling
down among an hundred Lances, was there very cruelly slain by them.

Ristorano defended him self so well as he could, having no more then twelve
men now left with him, for the rest were departed to their houses, as loath to
loose their lives and possessions: but Targiana having round ringd him with her
power, considered with her self, that if he should yield, and be sent thence
to Constantinople, the Emperor was so benign and full of clemency, that (in
time) his life and liberty might be granted, whereof would arise a following
affliction to the Turkish estate: therefore, to prevent such an after danger,
she set upon him with forty of her best Soldiers, and there cut him in an
hundred pieces, with all the other that stood in his defense, and thus the
hurley burley was concluded.

Dragonalte and Pompides summoning their troops together, found that they had
lost three hundred men, which could not but be some grief unto them:
nevertheless, they were content that the rebels should be pardoned, for
otherwise there was no assurance in holding of the Kingdom. So order being
given for regard of the wounded, and good watch appointed for the Cities
safety, the Captains and Commanders went to have their hurtes dressed: the like
did Targiana, who albeit she were wounded, yet grew she so affectionate to the
following of Arms, as quite giving over the needle and distaffe, she would
try the fortune of sword and Lance like a warrionnesse, and became famous for
chiualry, as hereafter shall be shown.

The next day following, the Princes held a counsel together, to send Tirrena
and the Monster to Constantinople, and providing a Ship ready for such a
service, sent them a boorde, committing the trust thereof to Mirante, the
Nephewe of Maulerino, who went the more willingly, because he would make him
self known to the Emperor. The Ship set sail, having therein Letters from
Floraman the General, with others from the Princes and Targiana, which gave
intelligence of all successes and occasions, even to that instant.

Now began no little joy through the whole Court, especially for so happy an
attayning to knowledge, in whose custody Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina
were, whereat Onistalda her mother much rejoiced. The Monster was generally
beheld with wonder, because no such sight had been usual to them, and Mirante
had royal welcome of the Emperor, remembering what his Graundsire had done in
favor of his Father, and this joy qualified the grief for the former ill
tidings.

Tirrena was delivered to the change of the Empress, who kept kind company
with her in her own lodging, without her enduring any other coffeehouse,
but that she might not part thence at her own pleasure.

CHAP. LI. How Trineus arrived (by chance) with his Ship on a strange Island,
where he found labor enough to do: And how his Army sailed on to Niquea.
TRineus the Allmaigne Emperor, who parted with the Army from Constantinople,
to go for Tubante, when he had sailed diverse days with contrary winds, there
arose at last such a furious tempest, that the Ships (for fear of breaking
one against another,) were glad to make way as best they could. Trineus sorry
to see the Seas distemper, was suddenly carried far off from the Fleet, and
borne away with such celerity, that a quarrie never did fly swifter from a
bow, seeming to him, as if he had in short while dispatched six days sailing
together. At length the Ship entered a port made only by nature, and casting
Anchor where most conveniently they might, Trineus was the first that would step
a shore, being followed by three other Knights of his own Nation.

Passing on long, there was neither tree, herb, nor plant to be seen, but
only vast and naked gravel, which led on directly to a great water, wherein
there appeared to be both men and women, who seemed as if they knew not how to
live upon land, and on the bancks that enclosed this water, grew certain
little grafts or trees, the fruit whereof was like to Quinces, but much less
and very little indeed, yet passing pleasant and nourishing in taste.

This Country seemed to Trineus commodious enough, and dreadlesse of any harm
to harbor there, he put off his helmet, so did the other that were with him,
to refresh them selves with the sweet air. Standing to solace them selves by
this water, there suddenly came on the further side a huge number of wild
beasts, as Lions, Bears, wolves, Tigers, Panthers, and other such like: and
because there was no other water in the Island for them to drink of, thither
they came always to quench their thirst. Trineus was not tardy in clapping on
his Helmet, nor ye other Knights neither, to defend themselves from violence,
but such resistance was of no reckoning, for there were above thirty thousand
of the beasts.

Trineus being of an undaunted courage, made little care of so imminent a
perril: but such was the subtle quality of the enchauntment, consisting on the
other side of the river, that a little boat came floating toward him, guided
by a goodly Damsel, who spoke unto him in this manner. My Lady and Mistress,
beholding (a far off) your coming hither, intreates you to come and see her,
that she may give you such instructions, as may make your virtues for ever
immortal.

These last words carried such weight in the thoughts of young Trineus, that
without returning any answer, both he and the other Knights stepped into the
boat, being conuaied thence with unspeakable speed: and they beheld the men
and women in the water, expressing very passionate and mournful gestures, as
signifying that they were carried to some fatal misery. Trineus, not regarding
these signs of grief at all, stepped forth on the other shore, and presently
was surprised with such passion, that he must needs cast himself headlong
into the water: and indeed he had done, but for a Jewel he had about him,
given him by his Aunte Bazilia, which defended him from the force of the
enchauntment: but the other three Knights that went with him, threw themselves
into the water, where they stood dispoiled of their Armor.

Trineus much lamented the loss of his companions, but remembering the virtue
of his Jewel, comforted himself thereby: because (it freeing him from any
magical oppression) cheered his hopes with likely persuasions, that he might
accomplish this strange adventure. So going onward, he came where the
Sorceresse had taken out of the water two fair young women, to train him (as
was her custom) to lust and dalliance, then should they tumble into the flood
again: where loosing all former remembrance (of what-soeuer they had knowledge
of) to that instant, they could not declare what had happened to them by the
Enchauntresse.

This coming thither of Trineus, was so displeasing to the Witch, that she
started up on foot, and forgetting to cast the young Women into the water
again, she came to Trineus with these words. Thou rash and too bold
aduenterous Knight, ouer-late will thou repent this foole-hardie enterprise:
then suddenly withdrawing herself into a Tower, she so plied her spells and
hellish exorcismes, that immediately all the air was covered with darkness, with
such terrible breaks of thunder and flashes of lightning, as if the whole
world should foorth-with have been ruined. At the first, Trineus began to be a
little daunted, but when he called to mind, how the Emperor Primaleon had
often told him, that enchauntments (in their first apparition) delivered forth
seares, but afterward would sort merely to nothing, he concluded to see the
end of what-soeuer might happen.

The two young Women, who had recovered their former understanding, by reason
the Witch forgot to throw them into the water again, accosted Trineus,
reporting to him the base lascivious life, wherein the Sorceresse spent all her
days, she being descended of Malfada the Enchauntresse, that was slain by
nob^ Palmerin, when she had converted his men into diverse skapes of beasts, as
in the story is at large set down: be^de, they told him many strange
perrils, depending on the finishing of the adventure. Come what may (replied
Trineus) for the exercise of a dreadlesse courage, I shall be ready (through
Divine assistance) to award the very uttermost, therefore I care not, come what
can.

Now began the air to clear it self again, and the storm and rough wind
was more mildly calmed, when the Damsel, which before received Trineus into
the boat, coming once more to him, thus spoke. The powerful Lady Dircea my
gracious Mistress, taking kind compassion on thy towardly youth, gives thee
to understand by me, that if thou will depart hence with thy company, thou
shall be safely brought to thy scattered Navy: so shall thou freely escape the
inevitable dangers, included in this past-compare enchauntment, which to bring
to a full period or conclusion, the whole race of Palmerin are not suffiicient.

Trineus gathering by these speeches, that the Hag grew fearful of her
enchauntments ending, boldly thus answered. Signify from me to thy Lady and
Mistress, that I have set down my life's rest and final determination, but I
will break through her deuillish charms and coniurations, detaining so many
Knights and Ladies in so wretched a state of life, only to please and glut
therewith her own sensual appetite.

No sooner was the Damsel returned back to the Tower, but a mighty iron
door was heard to open, and that with such a dreadful roaring, as if it had
been a long roll of thunder, after which, issued forth of the Tower the
strangest misshapen Monster, that ever any eye before had beheld: for to the
girdle-sted he seemed like a man, but in such wondrous sort altered and
deformed, as no wild beast could be more fierce and hideous: his teeth stood
out like the tushes of a saluage Boar, but much more stretched forth in
length, and back turning again at the ends thereof: his arms very huge, and
extremely strong, bearing for his weapon, a long sharp poynted Forke made of
iron on one of his shoulders: and his feet were armed with such horrible
crooked bending tallents, as they could little he differed from those of a
Griffon: beyond all this, he appeared to be very speedy of foot, and most
agile and ready to perform the intended combat.

Trineus beholding a shape of such strangeness, making the sign of the Cross
on his breast, and aduauncing his Shield for his defense, stood to defend what
this deformed Monster durst do: who lifting up his tridented forke, struck
it quite through his Shield, and the blow falsing along his pouldrone, wounded
him a little in the arm.

The Knight learning heerby the Monsters fortitude and strength, purposed to
ward his charges with nimble slights of defense, so that having a more heedfull
eye to his blows, he breathed him well about with shifts and escapes: yet
could he not avoid a hurt now and then: for the Monster was so ready in his
turns every way, and so skillful in handling of his Forke, as it stood the
Knight upon to be very circumspect, if he meant to preserve both his life and
honor, nevertheless, he gave the Monster a shrewd wound in the left hand.
Whereat he waxing very spleenefull, stabbing the fangges of the forke into the
earth, he grapled and caught Trineus by the shoulder, griping him so strongly
with his sharp tallents, that brusing his Armor very much, he made him feel
extreme affliction, both with his huge weight and forcible pinching, for ease
whereof, the Knight thrust his sword at him, but the monster grasping fast
hold upon it, leaping lightly off from him, bare away the sword with him.

Trineus having thus lost his weapon, caught up the Forke to guarde himself
therewith, so that their former manner of fight was now quite changed: for the
Monster laid lustilie about him with the sword, which Trineus still well
awarded with the Forke, the length whereof did greatly avail him, and he gave
the Monster therewith such a stabbe in the belly, that hardly could he make
any more resistance.

The Witch (standing all this while at a window, to see what success this
combat would sort to) had in such sumptuous ornaments attired herself, that
she seemed a very goodly and beautiful creature: aloude she cried out unto
the Knight, not to kill the Monster in any case, promising in recompense of
sparing his life, that she would deliver to him all the men and women which
she there detained in the enchauntment.

Trineus being moved both with her beauty and pleasing speeches, stood still
to condescend to her request: but one of the young women thus cried to him.
Fair Knight, give no credit to the fained glosings of this damned Hagg, for
she will not perform whatsoever she promises, but only delude you with
frivolous devises, to hinder ye from finishing so important an adventure.

These words made Trineus step again to the Monster, hoping by his foil to
conclude the enchauntment, but he caught the Knight so strongly within his
arms, that he had much ado to fetch his breath: and in this manner he ran
with him toward the water, as purposing there to throw him in, to the end he
might be bereft of all understanding. But the Knight struggling mainely with
him, got at last out his dagger, wherewith he gave him so many stabs, that
he was glad to let him go, and then the Monster made offer of casting himself
into the Lake, but Trineus mistrusting no good meaning therein toward himself,
caught him fast by one leg, and held him so violently, that down fell the
beast and he together: then did the Monster catch him fast by the Helmet, and
had so bruised him with the fall, as also with his heavy burden lying upon him,
that he was well near past all remembrance of himself, and with his sharp
tushes he so beat him about the Helmet, that he shiuerd it in very many
places.

At last, recovering his senses again, by mere extremity of anguish he felt
in his head, he got the Monster so stiffely by the throat, that he compeld
him to tumble beside him, and then with his dagger he quickly dispatched him:
When suddenly the earth began to tremble very strangely, and opening with a
wide gaping rift, immediately swallowed the Monster and his Forke, nor could the
least drop of blood be discerned, but it was likewise devoured in this
opening of the ground.

Trineus being sore labored and spent with travail, sought for some
convenient place where he might sit to rest himself, and espying a low seat
a pretty way from the Lake, went presently thither: where he beheld the
garments and Arms of such, as had been before despoiled thereof, and
afterward were thrown into the flood. There did he put off his own Helmet,
because it was bruised and battered with many sore blows, and taking up an
other, made proof thereof, by diverse strokes given with his daggers pommell,
and not knowing where to provide himself better of a sword, took up a goodly
one, which indeed belonged before to one of his own Knights.

No sooner was he in this manner prepared, but he saw coming against him, a
Beast of an unaccustomed strangeness, being in stature as great as a Camel,
with two horns, which he turned every way at his own pleasure: his feet and
claws were like to a Lions, his tail above four times the length of ones
arm, and fashioned round like unto a roape, wherewith it seemed he made good
use of service, by binding such Knights as should enter combat with him.

Trineus stood awhile considering with himself, more doubtful of the beasts
tail then of his horns, though indeed both gave matter enough of admiration:
but because that was no place for fruitless expense of time, he prepared
himself in action for safeguarde of his life, practicing which way victory was
likeliest to be obtained.

The beast made at him furiously with his horns, and perceiving he could not
catch him within compass of his tail, because by his heedfull eyesight and
nimble leaping off he very well prevented it, he turned aside at him with his
left horn, and smote him so forcibly therewith on one side of his head, that
he tumbled quite over and over on the ground: and surely if the Beast had had
so much power as then to have stayed himself, the fight had there been ended
on Trineus behalf, but holding on his course, as unable to stay so suddenly,
returning back again, he found the Knight gotten up on his feet, but yet
so greatly astonished with the stroke and fall, as if the Beasts capacity
could have reached to the understanding thereof, the case had stood very hard
with the Knight.

But Trineus, perceiving (by this former trial) the Beasts assaults to be
very dangerous, with most circumspect and watchful care stood well upon his
guarde, that by no means he should come to close with him: and as the Beast
had knit round his tail, thinking to catch him fast therewith about the
neck, the Knight intercepted it with a reuersse blow, that cut it off above
an arms length. Now was Trineus in greater perrill then before, for the Beast
being mightily enraged through the anguish of this wound, began to fly
aloft above the Knights height, as seeking that way to seize upon, and get
him fast bound within his tail, so that now if he had not a very provident
foresight and heedfull respect to him, there was no remedy but he must be
slain.

Aloft therefore above his head did Trineus wheel his sword, with many sharp
thrusts amongst his flourishes, which wounded the Beast often as he soared
above him: yet still he perseuerd on crafty advantages, and chanced to fling
his tail so vnluckilie, that he bound the Knights legs so fast therewith
as he could not stir, and mounting up so aloft with him, gave his head diverse
dangerous blows against the ground: but the extreme pain he felt by loss
of part of his tail, made him not able to hold him long in that sort, and
Trineus feeling himself at liberty, quickly recovered his footing, following
the Beast at so apt an opportunity, that he quite cut off one of his hinder
legs, and (hoping of further success) still followed upon him, but the
Beast hurt him in the breast with his horn, and under the ribs with one of
his paws, where he had rent his Cuirasse open, but the wounds were not of any
great validity.

The Knight giving the beast as little respite as might be, gave him a great
hurt in the head, which he awarded indifferently with one of his horns, and
with the other wounded Trineus again in the breast, racing the Armor with
such a terrible graspe, as if he had rent it quite off from his body, and
indeed very much endangered the Knight thereby, who nevertheless held out
with inuinsible courage.

Now the Monster perceiving his death to be near, rose up on his three feet,
and leaping upon the back of Trineus, got him fast within his legs, and
writhde his tail so strongly about him, as he could devise by no means to
get from him: where-upon he was compeld to take hold on his horns, which he
held with such a violent power, as both grew weary of continuing in that
grapling: beside, the beast lacking one of his legs, could not so well guide
his footing as before, but being drawn every way by the horns, at last
tumbled backward, falling with Trineus directly under him, where, though he
oppressed him mightily with his huge weight, yet gained the Knight so fair an
occasion, that he lay stabbing his dagger into his belly, making a pretty
large entrance into it, in agony whereof, he gave him such a blow with his paw
on the Helmet, that brusing it to his head, he made him lie still as if he had
been slain, and the Monster (albeit his death hastened on) so dragde and halde
him along on the ground, as this very tugging had been sufficient to kill
him, but yt the Knights valor being beyond compare, gathering his better
spirits to him, and beholding in what extreme perrill he was, got from the
beast again up on his feet.

And now began the air to be so obscured again, as nothing at all could be
there discerned, which darkness continued the space of an hour, and then
recovered the former brightness: but no where was the Monster to be seen,
then turning himself about, he saw the people which were in the Lake, to
arise out of the water so high as their breasts, delivering outward signs of
inward rejoicing. Trineus gathered by this alteration in them, that the
adventure now was near conclusion, and hoping still of full effecting it, the
Enchauntresse Dircea came royally toward him, with such a garish and glittering
pomp, as it might be well reckoned for a miracle, that so young a Prince could
bridle loose wanton thoughts, and (as one quite forgetful of honor) not make
esteem of such beauty and worth, as in outward appearance was there presented
to him, which over many do seek with too much earnestnes, and afterward pay
the price of it with years of repentance: she being thus come to him, fell on
her knees at his feet, delivering these speeches.

Thou perfect Idea of honor and chiualry, behold me here obedient to thy
disposing, without any further opposing thy life to peril. But he who had
written on the table of his heart, the grave aduertisements of the Emperor
Primaleon, in such cases of allurements by magical phantasmaes, stearnely
returned her this answer. Labor not so artificially, in making me a witness
of your counterfaited beauty, for I know you have no real perfections in you,
or any thing worthy the respecting: but admit you had, yet were there no reason
why I should make any esteem of you, that detain so many here captive in
most wretched condition, declaring your self therein a vile detestable woman.
Dircea, who made full account to enthrall ye thoughts of Trineus, by showing
her self so beautiful and tractable, when she found him so far off from
amorous persuasions: swollen big with spleen and disdain, she arose on her
feet, saying. Thou base and villainous Knight, kneel I at thy feet to be so
slaue-like scorned? soon shall thou repent thy unmanly behavior: then
grasping her curled locks angerlie with her hands, suddenly it began to rain
down stones of such hugenes, as there had braind him, but that he quickly
stepped into the house where the Armor was kept. No sooner had this storm of
stones given over, but all the men and women came forth of the water, and ran
to the place where their Armor and apparel was reserved: which Trineus
beholding, he went forth least he should be smothered with their multitude.
And surely it was a wonder to behold, with what speed they were all clothed
and armed, and how quickly in warlike manner they issued forth again, as if they
meant to assail some adversary.

Trineus being sore wounded and weary, when he saw so many return like
enemies, (for they were above ten thousand in number,) he reckoned him self as
a dead man: but not to loose his life fondly and rashly, he stood prepared what
ever might happen, a testimony of his unconquerable spirit. The armed Knights,
provoked by the enchauntment, went on against him, but he moved not from his
place, and when they came near him, they stood all still, as if they had not
the power to hurt him.

The Witch, thinking verily to murder him among such a multitude, when she
saw not one of them stir to strike him, she ran to her spelles, and
finding that he had a Jewel, which defended him from her charms, contrived
another stratagem to endaunger him withal, and made a large bridge appear
over the water, whereon the wild beasts on the further side of the lake,
might have liberty of passage whether they would. No sooner was this bridge to
be seen, but the wild beasts (roaring and crying through extremity of
hunger) espying so many people together, ran a maine over the bridge toward
them, and the Hagge stepping for her own safety into her Tower, (never
remembering to warrant the armed men against the beasts, nor them against the
violence of their weapons) they being thus met together, every man stood
on his best defense against them, and Trineus stood securely as a mere looker
on, till beholding the beasts to have torn some few in pieces, he came to
their assistance, aduauncing him self foremost as their Captain, and there he
made such a bloody slaughter, that the beasts began to keep more backward,
the whole band of men meruailing at his gallant behavior, and being mightily
encouraged by so valiant a Leader, they killed such a mighty multitude of them,
as by good hap all the rest were forced to flight. The beasts being driven
away, nothing now remained, but only his entrance into the Tower, which was
all of fine Marble, and so smooth, as no hold might any way be fastened on it.

The men, who by the Witches commission came out of the lake, and received
their Arms for her defense: by this foil of the beasts, were freed from
enchauntment, and now desired to be revenged on her, who had held them so
long in such a wretched state of life: and electing Trineus as their General,
went on toward the Tower, but Dircea, perceauing her imminent case of perrill,
threw a deuillish spell abroad, that every one of them were stricken blind,
sight remaining only but to Trineus, by the Jewels virtue which safely
defended him. Whereupon, he studying how he might soonest vnenchaunt this
place, and drive the Witch thence to some other hellish habitation: espied on a
Tree hard by him, a horn hanging so low, as very easily he might take it
down, which when he had done and put about his neck, he began to wind it so
loud as he could.

Now was this the last and most dangerous act of the enchauntment, because
(soon after) issued forth of the rockie Tower, a Knight having the stature of
a Giant, his Armor being black, his Shield without any imprese, and mounted
on a dark bay Courser, with a Dwarffe following him, and armed in all
respects like him. This Knight, without using any other courtesy to Trineus
(who was one foot) ran proudly at him with his Lance, offering many
thrustes and blows at him, but none came near him: for our gallant Champion,
desirous to conquer now or never, avoided all his attempts with nimble
dexterity, delivering diverse fierce strokes at the Horses legs, to the end he
might fall down with his Master, but every blow seemed as smitten upon
brass, rebounding back without any other success, which made him grow
doubtful of the adventures conclusion, because he felt him self exceedingly
wearied, and the wounds in his breast did very much annoy him.

As thus he stood waiting some better opportunity, for his readiest departure
thence with honor, the Horse passing somewhat near him, he caught fast hold
on his bridle, and turning him often about, gave so many stabbs at the mounted
Knight, that he made him fall beside his back to the ground, casting him
self up presently into the saddle, but had no Lance to help him withal.

The Dwarffe, who all this while stood beholding this battle, when he saw
the Giant on the ground, and the Knight seated in the saddle: he leapt up on
the crouper of the Horse, and troubled Trineus about his neck very strangely,
and he (to rid him self of this apish burden) made diverse proffers with his
hands to take hold of him, but the Dwarffe was so skittish every where about
him, that he did nothing but hold him daliance, till the Giant had got up on
foot again, and came a fresh to charge him with his Lance, which evermore as
he made a thrust forward, withal with a quick hand, he still drew it back
again, whereat Trineus began not a little to marvel, proceeding on to this
conjecture, that therein the force of the incantation consisted, and making no
respect of any travail whatsoever, he opposed him self to the Dwarffes
shifts and sleights, the rather because he had no weapon to defend him, and
being watchful withal of the Giants Lance, as he thrust it at him and pulled
it back again, he made upon him with the Horse, and by good hap caught hold of
it with his right hand, when presently the Dwarffe skipt just before him, only
to impeach his hold of the Lance, and with the other hand he fastened on him
also: but the Giants strength was so powerful in drawing back the Lance, as
he felt great pain in the withholding it: nevertheless, he purposed rather
to forgo his life, then leave his hold of the Lance, and (catching the
Dwarffe at an advantage, between his arm and his body) he fastened his left
hand on the Lance likewise, and so haling it to him with both his hands,
still look how much the Knight recovered of the Lance, so much did the Giant
loose of his magical strength given him by the Witch, so that forgoing it all
at last, he fell down backward along on the ground, and the Dwarffe then
getting loose from Trineus, ran a pace toward the Tower, which began to
smoulder and smoke in such manner, as if it burned, and getting entrance, the
Dwarffe was never after seen.

Trineus leaving the Giant there lying, went nearer to the Tower, where
beholding the windows and gate to be open, he imagined that the Enchauntresse
was fled: the rather, because all the people which before were smitten blind,
had now recovered their sight again, and came running altogether to the Tower,
but being unable to enter, by reason of the smoke, some of them returned back
where the Giant lay, and stabbing at him with their Lances, least he should
arise again, found nothing there but the empty Armor. Within an hour after,
the Tower fell, and the smoke ceased, to the no little joy of Trineus, when he
perceived the adventure to be finished, so (withdrawing him self to bind up
his wounds) Dircea the Witch, flying aloft in the air over his head, stayed
her have a while, and thus spoke to him. I am not willing Trineus, to tarry any
longer in this Island, which thou have gotten badly from me: but hold it for
most certain, that to whatsoever place thou shall betake thy self, I will
still be by thee to hinder thy desseignes: but especially I will so plague the
course of thy love, as thou shall never quietly enjoy it: and having thus said,
away she fled.

Trineus made no account of all these threatenings, but calling some of them,
who had been held by the Witch in such a wretched kind of life, enquired
further of their condition, but could learn no otherwise of them then he had
done before. So remaining a while there under cure, those Knights and their
associates which had so long been there, were very desirous of visiting their
own native Countries: and standing on the Sea shore, they discerned far off
diverse spread sails, which (on their call) coming thither to them, thanking
Trineus and taking leave of him, many of them parted thence, so that in four
days space, all the Mahumetists were every one gone: two hundred Christians
remaining there with him, some belonging to the Empire of Constantinople,
others to Rome, and most of Italy. About ten days after, albeit Trineus was
not thoroughly recovered, yet went he aboard with these people into his own
Ship, which all this while had saild about the Island, the Mariners meruailing
what was become of their Lord and Master.

CHAP. LII. How Trineus found his Army in the port of Niquea, and how they
gave battle to the City.
THe Fleet and Army belonging to Trineus, after the rough tempest was more
mildly becalmed, not seeing their Admiral with their chief Commander, hulled
up and down two days in expectation of him, and neither far nor near
discerning any sail, prepared for departure thence, because other winds
threatened more storms were toward, and shaping their course directly for
Niquea, in four days space they put into the Port. Floraman having beheld a
far off on the Sea, a Fleet of so many Ships together, began to grow
doubtful, that they were people of Persia or India, and came in aid of
treacherous Dirdan: wherefore to impeach their landing, the Army was presently
put in readiness, and commanded to meet place for such employment, leaving
Oltrando with his Indians, and Blandidon with four thousand hardy men at
Arms, to hold the City enemy play, while the rest of the Army went to
withstand these fresh comers, as providence and policy necessarily required.

Dirdan being on the top of a Turret, and believing that these Ships were
come in his defense, gave order for his peoples present readiness, to trouble
our forces with some light skirmishes, while his supposed friends might the
better be landed: which charge being referd to Mameo and Tresino his Cousin,
they issued forth with the three Giants, and a bastard son to the Souldane
of Persia, named Leouino, who was come thither without his fathers commission,
with two thousand bold Knights in Dirdans favor, and to approve his
chivalry upon the Christians. He would needs be the first that should set
upon our Camp, and meeting with Blandidon, gave him such a hurt in the right
arm, as he could fight no longer that day, but withdrew him self for cure
into that part of the City which he held.

Leouino unhorsed Oltrando, and dealt very stearnely with his Indians,
whereupon Oliuanto, Gracian, and Pompides came to succor him with their
troops, in which time Gargante and Broco were entered the vaw-ward. Oliuanto
encountered the Giant Broco, and they met with such fury, that they were both
dismounted together, but quickly they recovered them selves again. Pompides
had such a shock given him by Gargante, that he fell from his Horse upon his
back, where he had been trodden to death among the Horses feet, but that
Francian stepped in with fifty men in his aid, and got him speedily mounted
again: Gracian came hand to hand with Leouino, and kept very even quarter with
him.

By this time the Fleet was come so forward, as Floraman and the rest could
discern the Cross in their banners, and the Arms imperial of Almaigne,
diverse noble Barons likewise making out in a Foyst, who were well known unto
our company. Now Palmerin and Dramusiande, fearing least some disaster might
befall those troops, which were in hot encounter with Dirdans men, among
whom were three such mighty Giants, drew back with a few followers to help
their friends.

Dirdan by his far distance upon the Turret, being not able to discern
whether this supply was of friends or enemies, when he beheld Palmerin and
Dramusiande make forward with their wing: sent Lanfranco in their resistance,
who did much injury among our men with his Bear, until he came face to face
with Dramusiande, where he was compeld to abide his blows, and Palmerin
singling forth Leouino, (who already had wounded Gracian, and made way to
meet a man of greater valor,) at his very first stroke hurt him with his
sword, and so cleft his helmet, that he was ready to fall down in a trance:
nor did Palmerin escape a light hurt in the arm, and being on both sides
sundred by their people, drew back to breath a while, which respite proved
well for Leouino, who having felt such sturdie blows, began to credit for
certain, that the fame of the Grecian Knights valor was not causeless
reported, and finding his helmet quite cleft, withdrew for another. Dirdan
perceauing no resistance at the Port, but that the Fleet had mildly struck
sail, began to imagine that they were Christians, and fearing least by them he
might be surprised, or his forces in fight suddenly disaduantaged, he sent to
advertise Gargante and the rest thereof, willing them to get into the City
again, till better opportunity might befriend them: but he being incredulous
that dealt with Oliuanto, and having received by him a shrewd wound in the
side, would lend no ear to Dirdans advise.

Lanfranco and Broco began to retire with their men, but Palmerin and
Dramusiande so nearly pursued them, as they could get their troops into no
order, for Gracian, Francian, and Pompides were on the one side, and Palmerin
with Dramusiande on the other, making such hauock and slaughter as was strange
to behold: at which very instant, Trineus forces came and joined with them.
Floraman being their leader, and thinking the game stood now upon the
winning or loosing, made up with this new supply against the City, to try if
he could keep the two Giants from passing the bridge: but Gargante, who by no
means would retire, was so beaten about the head by Oliuanto, that falling in
a swoune, he was taken prisoner.

Dirdan with a thousand of his valiantest Knights, among whom were Mameo and
Tresino, stood for defense of the Bridge, for the better retiring of his
troops: but on the arrival of Dramusiande, who now was on foot, with a
great battaile-axe in his hand, there was found busy work enough to do,
because on the other side did thrust in Palmerin, Oliuanto and Oltrando, who
now to recompense the blame of his fall, stepped boldly on the Bridge, dealing
hand to hand with Mameo, as Pompides did the like with Tresino.

When Floraman saw these two Knights on the bridge, and in such present
dangerous perrill, he gave a s^ddaine summons with a trumpet, whereon all the
rest of his Soldiers immediately made forward. Lanfranco stood at the
bridge-foote with a huge iron shield, awarding the mighty strokes which
Dramusiande gave him with his Axe, the like play did Palmerin hold his brother
Broco: but Oliuanto having his eye still fixed on Dirdan, when he beheld him
give back toward the City, stepped resolutely more forward upon the Bridge,
and being hindered by Mameo, with his sword he cleft his head to the teeth,
and Oltrando being there wounded, presently retired.

When Lanfranco and Broco saw the people rush in such heaps upon them,
fearing to be ouer-borne by their multitude, they gave somewhat backward on the
Bridge, and defending the passage so well as they could, still withdrew by
little and little into the City, being closely pursued by Oliuanto, who in
the heat of a youthful spirit, presumed on more forwardness then wisdom
required, and (in a vain oppinion) thought himself able to surprise the
City. No sooner was he entered, but immediately the Bridge was drawn up, and
there (as he with his enemy) so was Pompides fighting with Tresino, where the
Giants and Dirdan making fiercely upon them, they were constrained to yield
themselves.

Palmerin, who by reason of the peoples vnrepellable croude, could never get
footing upon the Bridge, when he heard that Oliuanto and Pompides were taken
prisoners, doubting least Dirdan would bloodilie dispatch their lives, drew on
the freshest troops of the Army, and being quartered in such order as
beseemed, he sent Francian and Oltrando (who came both but newly from the
Chirurgians hands) to beleager that part of the City next to Blandidons
possession, and then himself with the rest of the Army, (commanding
S^aling-ladders and other engines of war to be brought) gave a strong and
valiant assault upon the City.

Dirdan, not missing Gargante tell now, fell into such an impatient fury,
that he would needs proceed with violence aganst Oliuanto and Pompides: but
perceiving that the Cities defense stood him upon, the Giants were commanded
so mount the walls, where casting down great stones and logges of timber, they
calmed the ouer-forward approach of their enemies. Notwithstanding,
Dramusiande, taking a great Ladder, and aduauncing a large shield above his
head, mounted up the wall so hastily, that Lanfranco espying him, was once in
mind to meddle no more with him: yet he caused so many huge stones to be
cast down upon him, that even as he thought to get upon the wall, by his
maine struggling and striving, the ladder brake, and Dramusiande hanging by one
hand upon the battlement, might there have perrished, but that he got
footing in a rift of the wall, and there defended himself so well as he could.

All the Christian Army, seeing Dramusiande in such danger, gave a marvelous
loud outcry, which moved Palmerin foorth-with to catch at another Ladder,
and he ascended the wall with such speediness, that he seemed to some as if
he had flowne up, and finding he was resisted by Broco, thought yet to make his
part good enough, but then he was in perrill to be cast down with diverse
Lances, which out at the loope-holes were bent against him: Nevertheless, he
laid so valiantly about him with his weapon, that he sliced the Lances in
sunder as fast as they came near him, and getting up at the last hard by
Dramusiande, defended him from the danger of his enemies, with incomparable
courage.

Now indeed, because the wall was well furnished with men, which came still in
fresh supplies, to prevent our Soldiers from their entrance: the multitude
of Lances darted at them, and showers of stones falling every way on them,
had questionless there concluded their lives, but that it fell out so well and
luckily, that Blandidon had begun a fresh charge in his quarter, whereto
Francian and Oltrando (neighboring with their forces) raised an unexpected
assault on those parts of the City. This sudden allarum so amazed Dirdan
and his men, that they were constrained to seek help for them, which there
labored to maintain resistance, by means whereof, Gracian, (with above
fifty Knights) mounted on the wall, which they the more easily compassed,
because Lanfranco and Broco, were very greatly busied with Palmerin and
Dramusiande, and in some good hope there to have slain them both. Dirdan
accompanied with Leouino and others, were gone in succor of the place where
Blandidon assailed, as striving that way to conquer the three other parts of
the City.

Now began the rumor and noise to wax very great, and every way came the
enemies troops violently upon our forces, so that (despite their hearts) they
were still kept back: but see how graciously Fortune favored them, even in
this heat of trouble and perrill, Trineus with his Ship was arrived in the
Port, where without any trifling or vain expense of time, both he and his
Knights marched toward the Army, which he beheld had besieged the City on
each side, and judging it to small purpose to mount the wall, went directly to
Floraman, who by reason he was the general Commander, did not himself
intermeddle in the skirmish, but (to avoid all disorder that might happen,)
gave directions still to supply with fresh power where most need required.

Upon some conference had between them together, Trineus used these speeches to
Floraman. My Lord, under control of better advise, I am of this mind, that
here we may make a breach through the wall, and gain our entrance with
security, considering so many of our men are already ascended, and none of
them as yet dismounted again, it is a sign no doubt of their good success,
and we are much too blame if we no way second them.

Floraman, not disliking this advise, caused certain Rams and other engines
to be brought, which being employed against the wall, with such sufficient
strength as was requisite, in a little while they made so large a breach, that
the Pagans in the City (being no way able to hinder them) the Christians
forcibly entered like to a maine current.

Lanfranco and Broco, seeing they were thus entered the City, leaving the
former task they had in hand, presently forsook the Wall, beginning to make
spoil among our people: but Floraman and Trineus so valiantly withstoode them,
that Palmerin, Dramusiande, and Gracian, had leisure to descend, and came to
assist them with their friendly succor.

When Dirdan had gotten intelligence hereof, leaving Leouino and Tresino to
defend their quarter, he hastened to help where was more need, and seeking
for Palmerin to die by his hand, he ran like a furious mad man up and and
down, till at length meeting with him, he thus spoke. Thou cruel enemy, I
come to die on the point of thy weapon: but first, I purpose to let thee know,
how much I hate both thee and thy race: with which words, he began to lay
furiously at him.

Palmerin being willing to save his life, because Primaleon had so requested
him, using no other resistance but defense of his strokes, delivered many
gentle speeches to quiet him withal: but perceiving his kind labor was spent
all in vain, and fury getting the upper hand of longer forbearaunce, striking
a maine blow at him, he cleft him from the shoulder down to the breast,
which grieved Palmerin more for so doing, then it did Dirdan in the suffering,
condemning greatly his own rashness in the act, knowing that the Emperor would
much bemoane the death of Dirdan, because his Father Maiortes, died in service
of the Grecian Empire: but who would take it more grievously then his Father
Don Edward, who had so well known the fidelity of Maiortes, since he went
under the shape of a dog, but seeing now it could be no otherwise, he
suffered his Soldiers to carry him into one of their Moscheaes, where very
soon after he gave up the ghost.

When the Warriors for the City saw the death of their Lord, and that
Blandidon had gotten entrance likewise in the quarter which he held, they
would very gladly have desired mercy: But Lanfranco, Broco, and Leouino,
cruelly menacing such as offered to yield themselves, made forward among the
thickest, being loathe to fall into the the Christians power, as knowing that
they justly merrited the names of Traitors, because their Father Palurdan,
held his Kingdom by favor of the Grecian Empire, all which they now made no
account of, but hartened on the Soldiers that were under their charge, and
continued the fight with undaunted resolution.

Gargante, having been all this while bound in the Generals Pauillion, by a
Pagan Page, (of whom no man had any suspicion, watching his apt and convenient
opportunity) was suddenly let loose, and speedily armed, then came he running
along through the City, and entering among the thickest of the Christians,
made havoc of them in pitiful manner, which Trineus with grief beholding,
albeit he was so weary with fighting, that hardly he could stand upon his
legs, yet would he needs step forth against him, but he had such a stroke
with the Giants huge Mace, that he fell down astonished, and Gargante made
forward, to encounter with a stronger enemy.

Lanfranco having a far of discerned him, began to buckle close to
Palmerin, because (indeed) he knew not well how to get from him, and the
Knight knowing what a tough companion he had, gave with all his might such a
full blow at his enemy, that seuering his shield in two parts, it did likewise
quite cut off his right arm. This maime was so full of anguish to the Giant,
that making now no more reckoning of his life, with his other hand he got
Palmerin fast by the Helmet, shaking him forward and backward in such rude
manner, as by no means he could get loose from him, but there had had his
breath shaken out of his body: for the Giant (feeling sharp death approaching)
so boystrously flung and threw him about, as if Francian by good hap had not
been near, who gave him a speeding stab in the flancke, (which wound coming
altogether unlooked for) made him leave Palmerin, and use what extremity he
could to Francian, when grapling fast with him, his weakness (with expense of
blood) did quite ouer-beare him, so that down fell Francian and the Giant upon
him, where he had undoubtedly died under his heavy weight, but that certain
Knights being by, and espying the danger wherein he was, did quickly recover
him.

Broco, combatting this while with Dramusiande, yet seeing when his Brother
fell down, spoke as follows: Brave Knight, if thou be as courteous as
valourous, permit me to go and comfort my Brother, whom thou see yonder
fallen to the ground, and wounded (to death I think) by one of thy company.

Dramusiande, being ever of a gentle nature, stepping back from him, said:
Go, and (if thou can save thy brothers life) do, thou shall not say, but
thy foe can affoorde thee that honest courtesy.

This kind answer, did Broco as kindly commend in his heart, and kneeling
down by his Brother, found he was dead: whereupon, knowing that was no place
for fruitless lamentation, he returned back again to Dramusiande, and thus
spoke to him. I feel not my self to spent or wearied, but that I can stand
boldly breast to breast with thee, and hard it is to guess, which of us two
shall be victor: notwithstanding, so highly do I prize thy kindness shown me,
that I am enforced to love and honor thee, offering thee my company, and very
best ability of service, so that my brothers dead body may be no further
mangled.

At these speeches Dramusiande threw by his sword, and catching him fast in his
arms, accepted him as his loving Brother, agreeing thence-forward to hold
constant amity together.

By this time was Palmerin face to face with Gargante, between whom grew such
a fierce battle as the like was never seen, and Leouino, (after he forsook
the wall toward Blandidons quarter) came and met with Dramusiande, against
whom a while he bare himself valiantly, but in the end, he was so
ouer-laboured with the Giants sturdie blows, and so faint with long
continuance of the fight, being also wounded under the short ribs, that he
fell to the earth, when Dramusiande (quickly unlacing his Helmet) had smitten
off his head, but that he cried out: Sir Knight, for Gods sake spare my life,
(and kill me not) do with me otherwise whatsoever seems good in your own
liking.

The Giant took from him his sword and Shield, ordaining that he should be
carried thence to Broco, and then afterward they went together to the place,
where Oliuanto and Pompides were detained as prisoners, where the door of the
Chamber being opened unto them, they were both foorth-with armed as before. So
returning back again to the fight, making passage with their swords along as
they went: the already dishartened enemy, beholding Lanfranco lie there
slain, and Broco with Leouino yielded to the Christians, held up their unarmed
hands in sign of submission, so ceased the battle, only Palmerin and
Gargante excepted. For Palmerin having fought from Sunne-rising, til now the
near approach of the evening, and so wearied withal, that he could hardly
regard the Giants blows, his Horse and he falling down backward, one of his
hind legs by mishap trod upon him, whereof Gargante taking the advantage,
delivered a very fierce stroke at him, thinking to make him sure from rising
any more, but Oliuanto perceauing such a discourteous part, received the blow
upon his Shield, saying Well do thou show thy self to be a bastard and a
vn^^ine, that would harm so good a Knight at so apt an advantage: leave him,
and turn to me, and thou shall find that I am not faint or weary. Gargante
returned no answer, but fetching a furious reuerse stroke, had feasted
Oliuanto but little to his liking, had not the Knights knowledge in Arms right
heedefully prevented it, and turning with a cheerful spirit on his
adversary, requited his offer with so sound a greeting on the helmet, that he
batterd it close unto his head. But Gargante, being altogether governed by his
great valor, without any sight or judgment in evident perrill, continued his
fierce rage of laying about him, till in deed he was so far ouer-gone with
travail, that whatsoever blows he smote, could do no more damage.

Oliuanto (all this while) making use of the others fury, and knowing assuredly
what it would sort to at last, spared his own labor till occasion better
served: and then his blows (like thunder) fell on his enemy, that making him
to reele and stagger round about the place, at last he fell backward, when
Oliuanto, taking off his helmet, and demanding whether he would yield or no,
perceauing no answer was returned, presently he parted his head from his
body. And thus was the battle fully concluded, with absolute possession taken
of the City, which being performed with the nights arrival, each man (as
need required) betook him self to rest. Floraman having first visited the
wounded Princes, and took good order for their quick recovery.

CHAP. LIII. How Tarnaes combatted with Leonato, and remained there prisoner,
and how many other Knights were taken, and of a disgrace which happened to the
wise Aliarte.
THe next day following, Floraman created Blandidon King of Niquea, in name of
the Emperor Primaleon, but bound him not to pay any homage, because the
Emperors of Constantinople, desired not to have Princes to be as their
vassailes, but rather their loving friends and familiars, binding them rather
by gifts and kindnesses, to all kingly intercourse of league and amity. All
things being ordered to the benefit of the Kingdom, and Blandidon seated in
quiet possession, the rest returned thence to Tubante, where they found, that
Dragonalte had reduced the state of Turkey, under the quiet obeisance of
Targiana, with pardon and favor to such former enemies, as had been drawn to
rise with Ristorano.

When Gracian saw the wars were thus ended, he took his farewell of the other
Knights, saying, he would now return home to France, and so parted thence
with a Foist, which was given him there by Tarneus. Pompides would likewise set
thence for Scotland, and so would Francian, Palmerin, and Dramusiande, even
whether their own affections best guided them: but Dragonalte, his mind was
most to Constantinople, to be in company of the fair Queen Arnalte, which
made him the gladlier stay with Floraman, who grieved not a little, that he
might not go thither, where (as his thoughts diuined) the others minds were
addicted. Therefore he would have sent home Oltrando to India, promising him,
when the Emperor had conquered those Kingdoms, he should be made chief Ruler
of them: but he, either to see the majesty of the Greeks Empire, or else to
free his Cousin Tamerco from imprisonment, (as afterward the success manifestly
witnessed) would needs go along to Constantinople, so, taking two thousand of
his worthiest men with him, he sent the rest back again into India, to those
places which were under his jurisdiction, and putting to Sea with the Army,
they had so prosperous a wind, as brought them within sight of Constantinople,
where Trineus (suspecting that the Emperor would keep him, in regard of the
great love he ever bare unto him) suddenly turned his Galley toward Macedonia.

But leave we them, and come to other, who have been somewhat ouer-long
omitted, namely Tarnaes, who after he departed from Leonato, passed by an
adventure of two villainous Knights, that had taken a Horse well munited from a
Damsel, and dissembling as if they meant to restore it again, conducted
Tarnaes to a fountain, where sitting down and putting off their helmets, they
gave such words of assurance to Tarnaes, as he made no doubt of their formal
promises. So spending a little while in pleasant discoursing, and some pretty
quips slighted toward the Damsel, who remained now more then half
persuaded, that she should have her Horse delivered her again: one of the
Knights (drawing from his side a long Poniard) thought to stab it into Tarnaes
head, which very easily he might have performed, because the man that is
ignorant in complots of treason, is far from the thought of any treasonable
action. But the Damsel perceauing the villains intent, cried out aloude:
Beware Sir Knight, whereat Tarnaes starting a side, received the stab on his
right arm so violently, that he could scarsely tell how to stir it. Wherefore
stepping up upon his feet, and getting his sword forth with his left hand,
covering his head with his other wounded arm, stood boldly against them upon
his defense. One of these false Knights (being the valiantest of them both,)
buckled against him with such fierce following, that he had good reason to
stand in doubt of his life, and albeit the pain of his arm much hindered him,
yet was he forced to shift hands with his sword, and (forgetting his wounds
anguish) stepped just between them, where thrusting one of them through the
side, he rent his sword forth with side and all, so that falling down along on
the ground, his companion was now left to look to him self: who being daunted
with the bad success of his fellow, desired pardon of Tarnaes, but he either
not hearing him, or reputing so vile a person unworthy of life, that made no
more reputation of honor and Arms, stabbing him quite through, there left him
also dead. Afterward, taking his Horse by the bridle, he mounted up into the
saddle, helping the Damsel up behind him, giving her the reins of her own
Palfray in her hand, and then he desired her to tell him, her cause of her
travail through those Woods, with a Horse so costly and ritchly furnished.

The Damsel, who began to wexe amourous of the Knight, with a cheerful
countenance thus replied. Honorable Sir, I am Sister to a youthful Knight,
Lord of a Castle, which anon you shall see, who being disposed to combat
with these Knights which you have slain, sent me to a Castle of mine Aunts,
to fetch this Horse of exceeding rare proof, and they most discourteously
took the same from me. When she had thus spoken, she used diverse affectinate
signs to the Knight, who having directed his fancy to a place of more height,
meant quickly to leave her, when he had brought her into better security:
beside, his Squires Horse had started astray, at the first affrighting of the
garboyle, and he was not yet returned with him: moreover, his arm beginning
to wexe cold, the anguish of the wound the more did pain him, so that he was
compeld to go with her to her brothers Castle, where he was with great
honor entertained, but indeed his welcome the more exceeded, when he
understood how he had slain the Knights in his Sisters defense. Being
unarmed, the best experienced Chirurgians were sent for, who applied such
precious unguents to his arm, that within three days he could wear his
Armor, and then he took leave of the Damsel and her brother: who held it as
a matter almost incredible, that he alone could vanquish two such hardy
Knights, for resolution whereof, him self would needs approve him, limitting
his intent to apt time and place. His amourous Sister, perceauing the purpose
he went about, would needs behold the issue of this attempt, and fearing by
wast of time to be prevented, her brother taking the further way about, she
made a nearer cut for her way, to be between them when they should meet
together.

Encountering at last upon a cross way, the young Knight cried to Tarnaes, that
he should stay, the^ taking his Lance, which he had reared up against a tree,
he came toward him using these speeches. Sir Knight, whosoever passes this
way, must pay a tribute, and yield contentedly to these conditions, either to
leave here his Sheeld and name, or that which he more dearer prizeth, I mean
his life and honor. These provoking words of the Knight, so fired the generous
thoughts of the brave Lacedemonian, that without shaping any answer at all,
giving the spur to his Horse, he gallantly ran to meet his enemy, who
making no refusal, as gallantly encountered him, breaking his Lance on Tarnaes
Sheelde, without stirring him a jot: but the young Knights hard adventure was
such, that falling backward from his Horse, he unfortunately brake one of his
shoulders. The Sister to the Knight, bearing mighty hatred to Tarnaes, for
rejecting her earnest proffered love, stepping forth of a little thicket where
all this while she had hid her self, began to cry out against him in this
manner. Thou vil^aine, and no Knight, shamest thou not so unkindly to entreat
thy friendly Host, who gave thee so honorable entertainment in his house? my
tongue shall not let to report thy villainy, and acquaint the world with so
inhumaine a discourtesie, exciting all Knights errant whatsoever, to revenge
such an important case of justice.

Tarnaes would have defended him self, by allegation of not knowing him, and
that her brother had highly wronged him, in assayling him without any cause of
offense: but the Damsel, whose tongue ran a little at too much random,
multiplied her injurious speeches in such sort, and went so far in womannish
weakness, that he (not to be seen in so shameless a contention,) turning his
Horse, left her there railing at her own pleasure. The Damsel, being named
Pandina, causing her brother to be carried to curing, mounted on her Palfray and
pursued Tarnaes, arriving before him at the I Will of Carderia, whereas she fell
in arguing with Leonato, and boldly desired him to revenge her on a Knight,
that bare for his devise a man's head in his Sheeld, declaring withal, that he
wanted an eye, and shaped such a sound tale to him, as Leonato verily believed
it for an undoubted truth, and there-vpon grew so encensed against Tarnaes, as
nothing but death was his determination, and (within less then an hour after
the Damsels departure) Tarnaes came trotting his Courser thither.

Leonato seeing him make toward the Island, being ready armed for all comers
whatsoever, rode forth to meet him, saying. Knight, it was ill done of thee, to
offer wrong and greeuance to a harmless Lady. Tarnaes, who understood not
this word greeuance, declaring the bold spirit he ever carried about him,
replied. I come to undergo the adventure of this Island, and to conquer thee,
except thou know how better to forbid me.

I can and will forbid thee, answered Leonato, and so (without any more words)
they fell to the encounter, finding little difference in the virtue of eithers
strength, save only Tarnaes appeared to have the most disadvantage, by a
slight hurt received on the shoulder, which only happened by power of the
enchauntment: which he never minding, came to try his enemy at the swords
point, saluting him so soundly on the helmet, that it seemed as if he had cleft
it in twain. Now albeit his strokes were given with great manhood, and able
enough to stagger a settled judgment: yet the false appearance of believing
themselves to be wounded, grew to such a perturbation of mind between them,
that either fell into a mighty suspicion, which way the victory was likeliest
to incline.

Heere-vpon, Leonato gave back still toward the Island, and Tarnaes with
undaunted courage followed, so that before he was half aware of it, he found
him self to be upon the Bridge, and there he was surprised with a sudden
violent wind, which carried him to the abiding of Don Rosuell and Almaroll,
where changing his former thoughts to a contrary alteration, with the rest, he
gave him self to solace and pastimes. Scarsely was Leonato returned to his
Tent, but Gracian was come thither, and required the combat, when the other
(leaving his Pauillion) ran presently against him: but Gracian, who had more
need to let his Horse have rested, then in such have betake him to the Ioust,
at the Lances encounter fell to the earth, and Leonato stepped upon him, where
threatening him with death except he yielded: he (which could do no otherwise
by the force of the enchauntment,) gave him self as prisoner, and so by the
other was led into the Island. Even in that instant Pompides arrived there, and
very soon after him did Francian also, both being conquered by Leonato, and
both led prisoners in to the other.

Many Knights came thither from diverse Provinces, sustayning the like fortune
at Leonatoes hands, and carried by him into the Island. So far spread the fame
of this adventure, that from all Countries came gallants to combat Leonato,
who maintained his undertaken charge with such hardy valor, as whosoever
hazarded his fortune, he remained still the conqueror.

But leave we him thus busied in this bold employment, coming now to noble
Florendos and Berolde, who having beheld Miragarda, Victoria, and Argentina led
away, followed in their rescue, and were advertised by the wise Aliarte, that
their endeavor was spent in vain, because the conclusion of so high a labor,
was only reserved for him, who should enjoy Victoria as his wife. So promising
them no further assistaunce, he returned back to the Perilous I Will, where he
bent his care against the so-suddaine Drusa Velonnaes drifts: who awayted but
opportunity to be revenged on him, because he gave such aid to Prince Florian,
in ending the dangerous enchauntment of the Princess Leonarda.

One day as he was riding about his Island, she had made ready a Cage of iron,
and seeing his coming, hid her self closely, and raised such a sudden dark
cloud, as he (being unable to see which way he rid) was glad to alight, as
fearing least his Horse should carry him into some steep downfall. Heereat
began Drusa Velonna to cheer her spirits, and glad of this good hap, issued
forth of the thicket where she had hid her self, and taking him by the hand,
shaping her voice man-like, thus she spoke. Go with me courteous Knight, and
I will bring thee to rest under a fair Pine tree, till this muddy dark
receive cleerenesse again. Aliarte who now began to distrust him self,
because he remembered how his skill was crossed, in the bloody war at
Constantinople, as at large is declared in the end of the second volume of this
History: permitted her to guide him, and she led him to the Cage of iron,
locking him up so fast with carracters and charms, as he should never get out
again but by force of arms, and none but the best Knight that ever guirded on
sword, could be the means of his deliverance. Then fastened she the Cage to a
huge high Rock, and so leaving him hanging there in hourly dread, least the
Cage and he should fall together into the Sea, she parted thence about her
other serious affairs.

CHAP. LIIII. How Florian, Florendos, and Berolde sundered them selves, for
better recovery of the Ladies, and how (thinking he had found the Palace of
Queen Melia) Berolde arrived at the I Will of Carderia: And how Florian finished
a strange enchauntment,
FLorendos, Florian, and Berolde, when they had lost the sight of the Ladies,
followed their pursuit two days in vain: because Drusa Velonna, (after she
had let the Knights once have but a sight of them,) engirt them with such a
coale-blacke cloud, as it was impossible any more to behold them, until the
Witches pleasure were woone thereto. So seating them selves all three by a
Fountains side, upon an advised consultation, they concluded each man should
travail alone, not doubting but it might fall to one of their haps, to find
the place where the Ladies were enchaunted: so, having well refreshed
themselves, with such provision as their Squires could get, friendly they took
farewell one of another.

Berolde not knowing in what Country he was, took (by chance) the way toward
Macedon, and in very few days (without any questioning after the soil,
because he rode on sad and melancholy) he arrived at the I Will of Carderia:
where suddenly beholding a goodly Palace, and an armed Knight prepared to the
Ioust, he thought he had found the enchauntment of Velonna, so riding to the
man, to be resolved in his hope, he thus spoke. Sir Knight, let it seem no
matter offensive to you, to let me understand the quality of this place, and
whether any passage must be bought by the perrill of your power, or no.

The quality of the place (answered Leonato) you may not know, but concerning
the danger of your passage, that consists in your self: either by turning
back again, or leaving (as vanquished) your Shield and name. Neither of these
conditions (said Berolde) can I accept of, except my hands were bound behind
me, and with these words, he turned his horse for the trial.

The encounter was sharp and furious, Leonato loosing his stirrops, but
Berolde was dismounted, imagining that he received a hurt in his side, and
being on foot again, prepared to enter combat with the sword, but a violent
wind carried him into the Palace, and there stayed he prisoner in Carderia.

Florian took toward the Mountain of Steel, only through the bruited fame
of that enchaunted place, where look how many happened thither, were
trans-formed into Steel, yet keeping the shape and form of men, and al such
Knights as coasted this Country, remained there in like sort enchaunted. The
difficulty of this hazardous adventure, so labored the forward desires of
Florian, that hoping to find his daughter there, he went to the Seaside, and
finding convenient passage, he should be brought within a miles distance of
the Mountain, but further they durst not bring him, as dreading (if they went
nearer) to be changed into steely shapes.

Two days they sailed, beholding the Mountain to glitter where the Sunbeams
touched, and the next day in the morning, they found themselves so near, that
the Mariners cried out with fear, doubting they should never more part thence
again, and therefore by no means would put to shore: but Florian, not
willing to be thwarted in his desseignes, seeing they would bear him back
again whether he would or no, drew forth his Sword, threatening the
Mariners with immediate death, except they landed him where he appointed the^.
The Mariners little dreading with who^ they contended, prepared to stand upon
their own defense, but a Turk of Tubante being in company, that very well
knew Florian, and (for his own safety) had held his peace: advertised the
Mariners, that this was one of the high esteemed Knights of the Grecian Court,
and there was no wisdom in meddling with him, except they were all a-wearie of
their lives.

This counsel prevailed in such white-liuerd fellows, so that (in great
terror) they put to the shore, where he with his horse and Squire went
quickly a-land, preparing toward the foot of the Mountain: but the Ship
forthwith departed, and the Turk wrought so advisedly, yt he stood still
upon the Anchor, to see what would become of Florian, that he might give
intelligence thereof to Targiana his Lady, who he knew had accepted him for her
husband. Florian, who took no heed of such idle matters, leaving his Squire
somewhat short of the Mountain, where was no danger of alteration, went on
about his business, and as he set foot upon the Mount, all those Knights,
(which had been there before metamorphosed to steely shapes) began to stir
their arms, as if they purposed to oppose themselves against him: but when he
perceived they moved not out of their places, he smilde at so vain and
causeless a fear, hoping all the rest would prove no otherwise, wherein he
soon found himself deceived, for he had not gone up the quantity of half
a mile, but he came to a quadrant plain, of thirty paces every way, where
before his face he beheld a door of Steel, which seemed to belong unto a
Cave, and over it was a Tomb of the selfsame metal.

Standing still to regard a matter of such admiration, as that hollow vast
place appeared to be, the couerture of the Tomb was suddenly lifted up, and
thrown to ye ground, when presently arose upon her feet, a Lady with
disheueled hair and moodie looks, having a Sword thrust through her neck,
tearing a wound that seemed freshlie to bleed, and she leaping forth upon
the ground before Florian, began to utter these speeches.

Foole-hardie Knight, right ill for thee is this thy b^lde coming hither,
except thy valor be equal to thy presumption: Know that thou art to combat
with me, and until I am vanquished, make thou full account to enjoy no rest.
So concluding her speeches, she drew another sword from her side, and began
therewith lustily to lay at Florian, who (blushing as ashamed of so infamous a
conflict) awarded her strokes with his Shield, not drawing forth his sword to
strike again: but one blow being given by her at his knee, he felt it to
cut quite through his Armor, whereon he imagining her to be no Woman, but
rather some infernal Hagge or Fury, drew likewise his weapon, and gave the
Lady such a stroke upon the shoulder, as might easily have entered those men of
Steel, yet made no sign at all of hurting her, whereat the Knight meruailed
not a little, feeling his body in many places payned, where the Ladies blows
had lighted on him, and when their swords chanced to meet together, he
feared least his own would fall out of his hand.

Greatly did it abash and disgrace Florian (in his own thoughts) to hold this
kind of difference with a Lady so long, yet since his wonderment in bootlesse
resistance, and also her weighty strokes in sufferance, perforce constrained
him so to do: he shaped an aduantageable blow at the wound in her neck,
which the Lady with agile and right speedy defense avoided, whereupon, the
Knight in present judgment gathered, yt in her neck lay the hidden means of
her conuincing, which made him aim every stroke directly at that part,
forcing thereby the Lady to cunning retires, which Florian ouer-slipped not,
but with heedfull care and diligence followed, until he had driven her to
the door before remembered, which (suddenly of it self) opened, and the Lady
catching Florian fast about the middle, carried him with her into the Cave, and
presently the door closed again.

When Florian saw himself in such a hellish darkness, and on every side
smitten all the way he went, he began to flourish his sword about him, yet
feeling nere a stroke of his to light on any thing: but still the more he went
forward, the more it seemed to him he descended, and still the Lady laid on
him, whom in this darkness he could by no means discern, yet at last, his
fair stars so fauouringly smilde on him, that his weapon happened into the
wound in her neck, and hearing her fall, at the instant he heard these
speeches delivered: Fortune has favored thee, but Art shall overcome thee.

Florian, whose high spirit aimed only at victory, spurnd at these
threatenings, as matter of no moment, but passing on still, and still
descending, he began to discern a great light, which very much comforted him
in this obscurity, hoping now to be delivered from so long a stay
underground: but his apprehension was erroneous, for it was a Basiliske which
thwarted his way, and came mainly against him beating his wings, flying round
about him with such celeritie, as Florian could fasten no blow to offend him,
yet did the Basiliske sweep at him in such sort, as he was enforced to fall
down back-ward, when houering still ever him, and flapping him with his wings,
he tumbled him still down and down, above fifty steps in estimation. All
which not diminishing a jot of his valor, at last he got footing, and
awayted the Basiliske, that came with a fresh intent to overthrow him again,
but the Knight standing advisedly on his guard, scaunced aside, and (in his
passage by) gave him such a stroke, as seuerd from his body one of his wings:
which maime was so grievous to the Basiliske that turning furiously upon him
again, he got fast hold on him between his feet, and terribly cut his
Helmet with his sharp beak, though that was nothing (in respect) to the venim
that came forth of his eyes.

Florian well perceiving, that except he bestird himself the speedier, he
must needs end his life between the Monsters feet, wheeled his sword about
with all the nimblenes he could use, and chanced to give a blow at the bright
stone, which the Basiliske bare on his head in stedde of a creast, which
falling down on one side of him, so did the Basiliske on the other, quite
bereft of all sense and power of further offending. Florian caught up the
stone, and placing it in the forepart of his Helmet, proceeded onward, being
no more impeached by the dim darkness.

The way euer-more descending by degrees, made him grow suspicious, that he
should at length go down to hell, but suddenly he espied a Chamber door
open, whereinto boldly entering, he saw that it was hung round with black, and
in the midst thereof a couerd Tomb, out of which appeared the handle of a
Sword: there stood like-wise beside it a goodly bed, with Curtains drawn
round about it of black Velvet, which he presuming to open a little, beheld the
Lady there lying, with whom he had fought before, having the sword still thrust
through her neck, which urging him to exceeding compassion, made him deliver
forth these speeches.

Alas sweet Lady, if there be any thing, that may redeem you from this
wretched condition, do but declare it, and rest undoubtedly assured of it. Sir
answered the Lady, it is in you only to ease my misery, now you have
obtained that rich Stone from the Basiliske, and if your fair seeming courage
answer but the shape, to imbolden you against a Monster which will appear to
you, you shall deliver from inexpressible affliction, the two most loyal
Lovers that ever lived: to wit, a courteous and faithful Knight, enclosed in
that Sepulcher, with a sword stabd through his breast, the handle whereof
presents it self to eye, and my self am the other, whose drieriment more at
large you shall then hear discoursed.

Florian defying all danger what-soeuer, opposing his life to the very
uttermost perrils, for freedom of any that suffered distress, as he stood
leaning himself against the bed, there entered with a dreadful noise into
the Chamber, a Monster having the face of a man, his arms and breast like to a
Lion, but his claws much longer then that beasts, then (in all respects like
to a Griffon) was his body covered over with great broad scailes, surpassing
any Steel in hardness, his legs were longer then any man's, but in like
manner armed as his body, and a huge tail he had, which ever (as he moved it)
flung forth smoke: but far worse then all this, he led a dog in a leashe,
of strange form and stature, the most misshapen and ilfauouredst Curre that
ever was seen.

The Lady seeing the Monster, began to tremble, entreating the Knight to
defend her from the dog, as being the deadliest enemy she had. Florian
keeping them both off at his swords point, went first to the dog (being the
foremost) and smiting him on the head at his own pleasure, made him give
back, but did him no hurt, whereat he began to marvel not a little. The
Monster leapt upon Florian, and hitting him with one foot just on the breast,
made him stagger so strangely back to the Tomb, that the couerture thereof
fell quite beside it, where he might behold the sword fixed in a Knights
breast, which had so continued the space of thirty years, and he still
breathing forth most doleful lamentations.

Florian blushing to be so weakly thrust back, delivered many sound strokes
on the Monsters scailes, but could make no entrance whereby to wound him: and
the dog rising up upon his hinder feet, caught hold with the foremost on
the Knights Helmet, biting him by the shoulder, then snarling at his legs,
and racing his Armor with his horrible paws, that it pained him very much to
endure it.

Much trouble did he endure in this fierce fight, and saw no likelihood of any
good success to ensue, for the fierce rage of ye Monster was such, as no
humane strength could have conquered him, if the means wherein the
enchauntments force consisted, were not by good hap first found out. Therefore
having made proof of many strokes, but all to no purpose, he now would do
nothing else, but only give thrusts and foynes at him, whereof both the dog
and Monster seemed to be fearful: which Florian well noating, gathered that
this might be the way to overcome them, wherefore continuing his foynes and
thrusts still, he found himself not so sharply assailed by them as before.
The Lady seeing the Knight to take so good a course, said: Hold on so still,
thou honorable spirit.

The Monster hearing these words, let loose the dog out of his leash, which
presently catching the Lady by the foot, drew her beside the bed, and dragd
her along with him forth of the Chamber, the Monster likewise stepping to the
Tomb, took the Knight up on his shoulder, and went away with him.

Florian seeing them both borne thus away, whom he had so resolutely purposed
to defend, prepared to follow them, and the bright stone still guiding him the
way, brought him where the dog and Monster were in a Meadow, which had but
one only entrance into it, and was so rounded with steep hills on every side,
as whosoever was once entered, could not get forth again but by the same
entrance. Florian made little account of this passage, but entering the Meadow,
went toward the dog and the Monster, who had put the Knight and Lady into a
corner of the Field, where they stood wayling for the grievous hurts they had
received.

The fight began now again more dreadful then before, Florian persuading
himself, that his strength was redoubled, and defending himself courageously
both against the one and other, remembered his former advantage of thrusting,
whereby his enemies gave back to the Mountains, but turned again upon him
more freshly then before: therefore when he likewise wexed weary, as he saw
the dog and Monster lean against the rampirde hills, even so did he, and
found his courage much thereby increased.

Thus came he to be acquainted with the means, how the Monster and dog
renewed their violence, so the fight holding on still in this manner, his
Armor was so bruised about him, what with the Monsters paws and the dogs
sharp teeth, that he felt himself much afflicted thereby. Wherefore, upon a
breathing advantage against ye hill, not regarding the dog, he went against
the Monster, and it was his good hap to hurt him in the throat, and the sword
passing quite through, made him fall along backward, when Florian made offer to
smite off his head, but the Lady cried to him, not to do so: and presently the
sword fell out of her neck, where now no hurt or wound could be discerned, but
she appeared right iocond and joyful, hoping to see her Knight likewise
delivered.

Upon the Monsters fall, the dog began to fly so furiously on the Knight,
that he thought the strength (of both together) was now in the dog, but
serving his necessity with stout thrusts and foynes, and resting him still as
occasion gave liberty: at last, (resolved to live or die) after a conflict of
some long continuance, the dog rising up to catch him by the Helmet, and
biting him in diverse places as before he had done, the Knight espying apt
advantage, made a full stabbe at the dogs breast, which pierced quite through on
the other side, whereon the sword fell out of the Knights breast, and he was
then in as good estate as ever he was before.

The Lady beholding Florian full of painful appearances, by the oppressing
blows and gripes of two such enemies, conducted him thence into a Chamber,
where stood three sumptuous beds, the Curtains of Crimosine Velvet frindged
with gold, and such were the hangings about the Chamber, in sign of cheerful
joy and gladness. Into the richest bed was Florian laid, and his wounds right
carefully dressed by the Lady, who was strangely altered from her former
condition, when at first she fought against the Prince, for she appeared now
to be of incomparable beauty, and also of right royal behavior.

Soon after, were the dog and Monster, brought likewise into the same chamber,
where (before their eyes) they both suddenly changed, the Monster to a man of
forty years age, and the dog to a youthful gallant, about four and twenty,
the one wounded in the throat, the other in the breast, and both so feeble,
that they began to lie down.

The Lady expressed no pity at all toward them, albeit the old man called her
Daughter, and the youth Lover: but bending all her care to the cure of Florian,
cheered him kindly with hope of his health, and made no account of the two
other at all.

CHAP. LV. What and who the Monster, the dog, the wounded Knight and Lady
were, and how the enchauntment was fully concluded.
THE day ensuing, Florian felt his hurts less painful to him, and the Lady
with the Knight, standing by his bed, holding familiar discourse with him: he
earnestly entreated them, that they would tell him of whence they were, and the
reason of the strange estate wherein he found them. The Lady, being desirous
to do him any honorable service, said: Stay my Lord a little. And going to a
corner of the Chamber, opened there a little door, out of which came a Serpent
some five foot long, of a very fresh green color, and when it drew nere the
bed it leapt upon it, putting the head thereof near to Florians face,
thinking to terrify and affright him: but he who was never capable of fear,
moved not at it, but taking it to be some house Serpent, began to stroke it
with his hand, and look where his hand had touched, the Serpents skin
immediately fell off, and humane flesh began to appear, so that by passing
all through his hand, the Serpent altered to a very beautiful Lady, but
younger then the other, yet very like in countenance to her.

No sooner was this strange mutation made, but the first Lady thus began.
Understand (thou perfect mirror of honor and Arms) that I and this my
Sister, are daughters to the King of Carpatia, which is the old man that lies
there, and by our guilty destenie it was appointed, that we should both become
enamoured, my self, of this Knight named Cauno, and my Sister, of him lying by
my father, called Spinalo: folly, love, and ignorance so far prevailing with
us, that to them we were not sparing of our honor and persons.

Two years together our practice continued, but with such secrecy, as no eye
could blab our sweet felicity, till Fortune, the common enemy to happy quiet,
made Spinalo grow regardlesse of my Sister, and with such fiery temper become
affected to me, that he sought all means possible to compass his desires. I,
who had dedicated my whole love to Cauno, and held it as worse then abhorred
sacrilege, that one man should have knowledge of two natural Sisters: with
discontented looks, and thoughts as spleenfull, thus answered him. Thou
should ( Spinalo) remember, how furtherous I have been unto thee, in the
silent possession of my Sisters love, of whom (beyond opinion) thou did
seem enamoured: but now I see thee so far different from thy self, that
contrary to all law of honor and respect, thou labourest, to make me turn
traitor, to mine own deere-reckoned delight: distaste not thy (reputed good
judgment) with such inciuilitie, nor suffer thy earst-moderate temper, to be
swayed by so base and vnmanlike behavior: but keep thy faith unstained to my
Sister Silinga, whose esteem of thee, is beyond my weak ability to express:
so shall thou justly perform the office of manhood, and we (without impeach)
still enjoy the benefits, of that which Fortune privately has enriched us
withal.

These honest and effectual persuasions, might have removed him from so vile
a sin, if but with discretion he had ballaunced his own worth or ours: but
they rather spurd him on to a more violent prosecution, exceeding the limits of
any respect at all, so that turning to me (with an ill-appearing countenance)
he said. Imagine not, that thou can escape me so, or that my desseignes will
brook this anticipation: rather will I adventure the King thy fathers
indignation, by being the trumpet of our secret stolen pleasures, to inflict
the heavier punishment on thee and Cauno.

Now think (gentle Knight) what extremes assailed me, either I must do a
deed of damnation, or loose lover, life, and honor together: heere-vpon I
flung from him, and went to acquaint Silingo with these vnwelcom news,
appoynting time, place, and apt conuenience, when her own ears (twixt him and
me) should drink this balefull potion. When she (too evidently) perceived,
how far Spinalo was become estraunged from her, having hid her self in a
little thicket, while thus the traitor assaild my constancy: he gone, she
issued forth, and came unto me with a mind so shaken, as very little differd
she from the pale Image of death.

One conclusion was, to advertise Cauno thereof, that he might the better
forestall his peril: but this course of ours proved, as (for the most part)
women's counsels do, worse and worse, for Cauno, who in his Loves privation
could carry no patience, made his iustly-conceaued displeasure known to
Spinalo, charging him to desist from so dishonorable a pursuit. But he who
aimed still at his purpose with me, made no outward note of any such
prohibitio^, but goes and works with my Sister Silinga, that she should labor
me on his behalf, vowing never to forget so great a kindness: protesting
withal, it was but a capricious humor that thus ouer-ruled him, which if (but
for once only) he might enjoy, he would never move it after any more: where
contrariwise, if she could not win me to affoorde him this grace, he would
publish our stolen sports to the King our father.

The miserable young Maiden, beset on each side with such weighty oppression,
promised to undergo so unkind an office, and awayting fit opportunity,
proved so preuayling an Orator, alleging the unavoidable peril, wherein we
both stood, that (as heaven knows) with mighty unwillingness, I yielded to her
importunate persuasions. Behold into what state loose love now brought me, my
Sister gave intelligence to Spinalo, that (at her entreates) I had
condiscended, and he (not a little proud thereof) thought every minute a month
till the time, which was concluded to be the morning following, when Cauno had
appointed to ride on hunting. The hour being come, a most unhappy hour for
us, she brought Spinalo by an unusual passage, being a private way through my
Garden, and then Silinga (whose love I know not how justly to term, that (for
his sake) would so highly thus offend her self) having likewise accompanied me
to the place: without using any words, with-drewe into her own adjoining
lodging, to bemoane her own hard hap and my disgrace.

Spinalo having shut the door, enjoyed of me what he most desired, and as I
lay by him upon the bed, he loath to leave my company so soon: Cauno, who had
purposely staid from hunting, to awaite an occasion so hateful and accursed,
having a key, which evermore brought him to me, without the knowledge of any
one, suddenly rusht in upon us. How pleasingly he took it, to find me in
that sort, you can better imagine then I express, but I leaping from the bed,
and he aiming all his malice at me, ran his Rapier through my neck, as your
self lately beheld: and Spinalo, having likewise his weapon drawn, with
enraged fury past it through his breast. My Sister (whose sorrowing thoughts
foretold her some fatal mishap,) upon my cry, came running into the chamber,
and seeing the sword so through my neck, lamenting my hard lot, cried out
aloude: Oh come and help us miserable wretches. This noise drew present
concourse to us, first our waiting Gentlemen, and afterward the Guard of the
Court, who foorth-with laid hands on the unfortunate young Lords. And the King
being called thither by so great a rumor, beholding an accident so unexpected
and unpleasing, would needs be immediately satisfied therein: when, every one
being silent, I like one desperate, from the very original declared the whole
discourse, whereat the King grew so displeased, that (for a while) he seemd
like one distraught of his senses: but recovering better judgment, breathing
forth a sigh (as if his heart had broken,) he began in this manner. I will not
with present death finish your offenses, but inflict more pain for a further
punishment, until such a Knight of valor may be found, as dare to undertake
and accomplish the ending of a fierce enchauntment, which shall be right
suddenly and strangely devised: then turning him self to me, he said. Thou
that art fallen in the very greatest offense, which no shames blush can serve
for, nor will ever be forgotten: shall have that weapon so thrust through thy
neck, until my magic spells can be confounded. And thou Cauno, for offending
against thine own honor, and concealing the vile purpose of Spinalo from me:
shall likewise have that sword abiding in thy breast, till like date of time
may expire thy punishment, then calling Silinga, he said. As for thee Silinga,
reaping the just harvest of thy fond sown folly, and wounding thy Sisters
soul, to sheeld thy self from thy idle fancies reiection: shall become a
Serpent, but so timorous and hurtlesse, as thou shall shun every ones sight,
and desire to approach near none, yet shall the Knight be of vnequalled
courage, that shall dare to touch thee with his hands, and thereby make thee
receive thy woman's shape again. For thee Spinalo (whom he could not behold
but very impatiently) that according to the brutish nature of a dog, have
made no distinguishing of human society, but had the knowledge of two royal
borne Sisters: I will have thee trans-formed into the shape of a foul
ill-proportioned dog, but to withold thee from so brutish straying,
restrain thy liberty under check of a leash.

Now come I to my self, to whom I will not be partial, in a case so mightily
and mainely importing: but for my too-much neglecting the office of a father,
not carrying a stricter eye on my daughters loosenes, I will metamorphise my
self to an ugly Monster, for the safer defense of mine own enchauntment, and
have the charge of thee Spinalo in my leash.

No sooner had he spoke these words, but making certain signs and
carracters about us by his Art, he caused this mountain to appear as covered
with steel, bringing hither the Basilisque which you have slain, and carrying
us all in an obscure cloud, brought us to our several places, me into the
Toombe before the gate: Cauno in the other Sepulcher in the chamber: Silinga in
the little enclosure where she came forth: him self and Spinalo in those
other monstrous shapes, to the place where they assaulted and set on you: and
so for many years have we continued, in which time sundry worthy Knights
have here arrived, but being unable to accomplish the adventure, have been
changed into the form of Steely men, but yet may recover their former shapes
again, if you will bind my father to break the force of the enchauntment.
More then an hours space, lasted the discoursing of this History to Florian,
who when he saw the Lady had fully concluded, rose out of his bed, and taking
the aged King by the beard, said. How far have thou swarued from a fathers
discretion, in punishing thine own children to the hurt of others? thou
might have chastised them in other manner, then by the overthrow of so many
valiant Knights: but end all now, and let them be delivered, or (despite thy
devils) I will be soundly revenged on thee.

Solco, for so was the King named, seeing he grew so hasty with him, replied
thus. Think not Sir Knight, that albeit (by mine Art) I have wrought so rare
an enchauntment, I can therefore finish it at mine own pleasure. No Sir, your
valor as much as my skill is required therein: for there are two fierce Lions,
which guard a little Turret, where they keep a Glass continually smoking,
and thereby is the enchauntment maintained: you must first conquer those Lions,
and afterward do somewhat else beside, which perhaps will be troublesome
enough unto ye. A Gods name, said Florian, let us go to it when thou will, and
likewise (to him) commit our whole success: heerevpon the Lady said to
Florian. Oh my Lord, give no belief to this speenfull old man, who would have
us (poor souls) continue still in this his hellish enchauntment: beside, be
be very careful of your self, that you part not with the Basiliskes bright
stone, for then we are all in danger of destruction. Florian took the leash,
wherewith before Spinalo was led bound, and fastened the one end about the
Kings neck, reserving the hold of the other part to him self, so did he
drive him along before him, commanding Spinalo likewise to follow just behind
him, who (alas) did so, but with no little grief, as knowing the fatal hour
drew near, when he must (for ever) be trans-formed to a continual Statue of
Steel. Having thus left the chamber, they went up on the very highest of all
the Mountain, where (a far off) they discerned the little Turret, and drawing
near unto it, the other two began to stay, and Florian now went foremost him
self, but could not perceive the Lions to stir, until he had attained a
little nearer them. Forthwith (together) they set violently upon him, one of
them catching such hold with his paws on the Knights sheeld, that he rent it
from about his neck, and the other disarmd one of his shoulders with his teeth:
this fierce assault damped Florian a little, yet knowing that death could but
be the woorst, would set some dear price on it ere he parted with his life,
returning such a manly stroke to the first beast, that he gave him a deep
wound on ye shoulder, and bestowed the like hurt on the other in his flank.
These two wounds did put him in present peril of his life, for (at one
instant) both the Lions so graspt him about the legs, that down he fell
whether he would or no, and then they so trod and scratcht him with their
paws, as the like was never seen before: but he beholding him self in such
danger, gave such a glenting blow with his sword, that (from the angriest
beast) he cut off one of his feet, then holding up his leg, as expressing his
sore pain, he gave back and ran into the Turret. The other Lion caught the
Knight fast by one of his feet, and dragd him so violently along upon the
ground, as his sword could do him now but slender service, he found such
mighty inconvenience by the beasts haling him.

In this wonderful peril, occasion yet so favored Florian, that he caught
hold about the stump of an old Tree, whereto keeping fast with all his
strength, he suffered much distress and anguish, by the Lions stretching him
forth to his utmost length, as if he had been drawn out upon a Rack: yet
hoping this way to preserve his life, so long he held, till the Lion growing
weary of his strong tugging, let go his gripe, to get some better hold of him,
when presently the Knight leapt up upon his feet, and gave so valiant a stroke
at the beast, that it pared away a good part of his head, and questionless had
foorth-with slain him, but that he ran back and got into the Turret.
Beholding now none other to gainsay his passage, he went on to the Turret,
where he found the Lions grinning and murmuring at him, but seeing they were so
hurt, as they could do him little harm, he began to enter: whereupon, the
beasts (having lost all power and virtue of the enchauntment, even at the
Knights setting foot on the Turrets foundation) ran away with all possible
have upon the mountain.

Florian having broken the bolts and locks of the Turret, opened the door, and
as he put forth his hand to take the Glass which he saw smouldring, there
appeared a man with a huge Axe in his hand, who when Florian made offer to lay
hold on the Glass, smote such blows at him with the Axe, as not only had
been sufficient to cut off his arm, but likewise to cleave him quite through
the midst. Then heard he Solco (being behind him) shut the door of the Turret,
locking him in, in such a manner, as he was not to get out again during the
enchauntment.

Now was the Knight very hardly bested, when he knew neither how to come by the
Glass, nor how to recover his Sheelde for his defense, for still as he
profferd to take the Glass, he with the axe boldly resisted him: and there
might he have so continued for many years together, but that (by good hap) he
remembered him self, that he which thus withstoode him, might be a living man,
and subject to the danger of his weapon, defending the Glass by treason and
deceit. As this happy thought had thus possessed him, taking his sword in the
one hand, and making offer as before with the other to the Glass, when the man
made resistance, he gave him a stabbe directly in the forehead, that the blood
issued forth and blinded his sight: by means whereof he had liberty to seize
the Glass, and giving him other stabbes in the mean space, made him fall
down along at his foot.

Now were Solco and Spinalo come to the grated window of the Turret, where
with cunning speeches they labored him, that by no means he should break the
glass, assuring him that if the glass were broken, there was no way for him
to get out of the Turret. Florian taking up the huge great Axe, answered: Then
this shall serve me as a key, and make an end of the enchauntment, which he
had no sooner said, but he dashed the glass in pieces against the iron grate,
when suddenly was felt such a terrible Earthquake, as if all the Mountain had
split in sunder, which being ceased, all the Knights (before trans-formed
into Steelie-shapes) returned again to their former condition: but Spinalo, as
one well worthy of all severe chastisement, was presently set on a pillar of
the Mountain, and there converted into a Steely substance, with a spacious
brief fixed over his head, declaring the whole history at large of his
lewdness, as a meet example for all wicked men, forewarning them thereby to
abstain frem such base and luxurious desires.

These things being thus done, and none remaining there now but Solco,
rejoicing at the metamorphosing of false Spinalo, Florian took the great Axe,
and began to lay such load therewith upon the grate, as (in little while) he
made a window large enough to get out at, and being not so wary of Solco as
the case required, (who dissembled absolute contentment at all which had
happened) he snatched from him suddenly the Basilisks stone, and ran away so
speedily therewith, that Florian (little inured to swiftnes of footemanship)
scant knew how or which way to follow him.

Solco stayed not till he came where the Basiliske lay, upon whose head he
first placed ye creast, and then also fixed the stone therein, where-upon it
returned to life again, but much more furious then it was before. The Lady
with Cauno and Silinga, quickly came thither, and knowing that this would
prove a harder conflict, then any that ye Knight had yet endured, they stood
all very pensive, nevertheless, Silinga said: Now my Lord, raise up your very
sprightfull valor, for this is the last action of the enchauntment.

When Florian heard those words, he felt such a cheerful vigor disperse it
self through his veins, as if (before) he had not travailed at all, and
assayling the Basiliske in despite of all his fury and fiercenes, he made him
give back above twenty paces: for having made trial before sufficiently of
the Knights virtue, he betook him to his wonted flying aloft, and sweeping
often over him, at last, smote him in the Helmet with his tallents in such
sort, that he fell down groueling upon the ground, and but that his flight
carried him away so swiftly, as he could not turn quickly to seize upon the
Knight, he must needs have killed him, ere he could have risen up.

The quality of these flights altered the condition of the battle, the Knight
being still below, and the Basiliske aloft, whereby Florian sustained many
disaduantages, and lost diverse good blows delivered to no purpose:
notwithstanding, loathe to leave a labor (of such consequence) imperfect, and
having run through the maine, it were endless shame to shrink now in the
rere, he began now to cast a wary eye on all opportunities, suffering the
Basiliske to beat out his fury, whereof he had so emptied himself in less
then an hour, and so lagd his wings with over tedious labor, that very often
he was ready to fall down flat.

Florian (not heedlesse of so fair an occasion) perceiving him not to bound
aloft with his wonted violence, nor his wings to bear him with so ready a
flight, pursued every advantage, still as it was offered, and (in his
turnings) so sliced away his hard scailes, that the sword made incision
through flesh and all.

When the Basiliske felt himself mortally wounded, and that his former
strength was much impaired, he would now part with his life at a very disperate
adventure, and flewe against the Knight with so maine a vigor, as if the blow
had hit him, it could not be otherwise but he had been slain: but he avoiding
it very dexteriously, and seeing the Basiliske fallen to the ground, gave a
speedy stroke at his creast, and down fell the stone again, whereupon, as
he made offer to fly away thence, Florian intercepting him, seuerd one of his
wings from the body, and likewise smote off one of his legs, whereat Solco
growing desperate to see his enchauntment fully concluded, fell down and dyed
with extremity of grief.

Daria, for so was the eldest Sister named, with Cauno and Silinga, were
greatly agreeued, to see Solco their Father die so suddenly, but joy, for safe
possession of their own liberty, exceeded the impressure of grief and
passion. Gladly would they have had Florian gone with them to the Kingdom of
Carpatia, but he, after he had reposed himself there four days space, and
questioned with the Knights restored to their right shapes, who (admiring his
memorable virtues) were not sparing of thanks for so inestimable a benefit
received: departed thence in search of his daughter, and not knowing which way
he rode, took directly toward the I Will of Carderia, where he remained prisoner
among the rest, only by the force of the enchauntment.

CHAP. LVI. How Florendos combatting with Leonato, was carried captive into
the I Will of Carderia.
FLorendos, who still followed that way which his mind persuaded him his Wife
was led before, travailed in vain for many days together, lighting still on
some adventures, but none of noateworthy mark or quality: and finding
himself at length to be in Macedonia, he remembered the so far-famed adventure
of Carderiaes I Will, and to try if he could give end thereto or no, he shaped
his course that way.

Now it happened, that his Son Oliuanto, whose mind ran on the
accomplishment, of all occasions whatsoever the world yielded, or dye with
disgrace in failing thereof, chanced likewise to journey that way: but without
any ensign or imprese, because he would pass as one unknown, as in like
manner did his Father Florendos, and so they met both together at the entrance
of a Wood, where courteously they saluted one another. Oliuanto, who knew his
father to be a good Knight, albeit he little thought that this was he, doubted
of this man's going to the I Will of Carderia, yet desirous therein to be resolved,
entering into discourse with him, said.

You (Sir Knight) that bear so fair a presence, what, are ye travailing to
the I Will of Carderia? Yea marie am I Sir, answered Florendos: whereupon,
Oliuanto (suddenly laying hold on his arm) said. Then Knight you very much
err and mistake your self, if you think to be there before me. Florendos,
not wonted to be so iniuried, forthwith gave back, saying: Thou show thy
self a villain, and no Knight of gentle blood, in offering to fore-stall the
forwardnes of any man's virtue, but I will so chastise this presumption in thee,
as thou had been better (with quietness) to have suffered me pass from thee.
So turning quickly his horse, he ran against his son, but yet with a
sudden inward attaindour of grief, foretelling some future sadness to ensue.

Oliuanto, by being more furious then needed, failed in the encounter, but
received such a welcome, as made him forgo his stirrops, and set him in a
pretty forwardness of falling: but courage quickening his spirits in the
shocke, kept him still in the saddle, and turning gallantly with his sword
drawn, made him give his Father a wound very shrewdly, which afterward he
not a little lamented, when he came to knowledge of whom he fought withal, for
the blow entered somewhat deep into his arm, yet he escaped not without a
just requital, himself receiving as much in the right side. For two hours
space the combat continued, both their horses being so wearied, as they could
hardly stir up and down, and Florendos horse had received a hurt in the
head, so that both were glad to alight, and settle themselves to their best
behavior.

Now began they to hacke and hew their Armor, often catching each other fast
about the middle, to try whethers strength could cast his enemy: in all which
appeared no other difference, but that Florendos had his arm most hurt, and by
reason of his lamenesse, he seemed to tread a little more stiffely.
Notwithstanding, both their lives had questionless there perrished, but that
the Enchauntresse, who supported the mystical spell of Carderiaes I Will, made an
irruption in this hot skirmish, sending Leonato to the place where the Knights
fought, who stepping between them, said.

Lords, it neither agrees with honor nor arms, that Father and Son should
sley each other, therefore all this toil of yours is fruitlesly bestowed: for
either of you is to combat me, who do guarde the passage, where none must
obtain what is only due to me.

Oliuanto, being unable to make any evasion, from the fault which he had so
peremptorily committed, perceiving his adversary altered to a Father, and
compassion (for his hurts) to flow abundantly from him: suppressed with natures
inward touch, and true feeling of so manifest a disgrace, he threw his sword
from him, and prostrately offered to kiss his Fathers foot. But he who was
double wounded, both in body and affection, the one not streaming more blood,
then ye other the entire pity of a Father: chaining him fast in his arms,
desired reference for such accomplement till sitter leisure, and their
Servant (having prepared two knightly Beeres) carried them along into
Leonatos Tent, where the Sorceresse caused them with all diligence to be
cured, because she would have none to miscarry in this adventure.

Eight days were scarcely past, but their lost blood was thoroughly recovered,
and they found themselves in full state of health, so that now they began to
cast lotts, whether of them first should combat Leonato: it fell to Florendos,
who being soon armed, came forth in hope to finish the adventure, and
passing the Ioust with Leonato, both were dismounted: then going to the trial
of the swords fight, they hurt one another without regard, which outward
appearance of wounding, at length so moved Florendos to distraction, that
(coveting only the adventures conclusion) he seemed then to fight with much
more discretion. And because he would hazard his hopes together, he caught his
adversary about the middle, and carrying him about without any provident
respect, they fell both together (beside the Bridge) into the River, where
Leonato getting loose from him, suffered him to be carried into the Island, and
he returned again, swimming to Land: where hardly had he got on shore,
but Oliuanto, greeuing that his father was surprised by the enchauntment, with
his sword set upon Leonato, where now happened as firce a battle between
them two, as ever had been seen before.

And although it appeared to Oliuantos judgment, that every stroke of his
enemy right sharply wounded him, yet resolute courage made him careless
thereof, because he felt not his breath to fail him: but earnestnes swaying
him more then heedfulnes, and his adversary still driving him toward the I Will,
no sooner set he footing upon the Bridge, but the wonted violent wind seized
upon him, and quickly conveyed him into the Island, where seeing himself
among so many good Knights together, he could not devise what was best for
him to think of it, albeit this was the general supposition and doubt among
them, that this imprisonment of theyrs, would prove the ruin of the whole
Grecian Empire.

The Squires that attended on Florendos and Oliuanto, noating such success as
others before in their Masters had seen, returned to Constantinople, where
they declared the mishaps befalne to their Lords, which caused such disquiet
through the whole Court, that the Emperor Primaleon was ready to die with
conceit of grief, seeing he had so lost his Son and his two Nephews. But
this sad storm was indifferently ouer-blowne, when the Army from Turkey
arrived there, with Floraman and Dragonalte, who first of all advertised the
Emperor, of the wars success at the siedge of Niquea, the death of Dirdan,
and pacification of all troubles in Turkey: letting him understand withal,
the departure of Florendos, Florian, and Berolde, for regaining of Miragarda,
Victoria, and Argentina, who were strangely shown to them, by an Enchauntresse
called Drusa Velonna, according as the wise Aliarte before had told them.

Then did the Emperor requite their sad discourse, with report of his Nephewe
Primaleons reputed death, as also such Knights, as were before imprisoned
there, among whom Florendos and Oliuanto now help to make up the number.
Oltrando of India was brought to the Emperor, and kissing his hand, swear
loyal alleagiance to the Empire of Constantinople.

During the time of these so little pleasing reports, there arrived from the
Perrillous I Will a Son of Argentaoes, named Sarasto, and he gave addition of
the heavy tidings, how the wizzard Aliarte, was by a Witch shut up in an
iron Cage, and fastened to a Mountain hanging over the Sea, whereas no other
Land could be discerned: and when any Ship came to succor him, if they drew
within less then half a miles distance of him, suddenly he would be snatched
away in such strange manner, as no way could be imagined how to come at him.

These news touched nearer then all the other, and made his Majesty ready to
droope down dead: nor could the Empress and the Ladies conceal their
passions, having lost the only anchor-hold of their comfort: and doubtless
some strange inconvenience had happened in ye Court, but that at this very
instant (as good hap would have it) a Letter was seen come floating on the
Sea into the Port, which being directed to the Emperor, was (by the finder of
it) brought strait to his Majesty, who knowing it to be the wise Aliartes
hand writing, right joyfully opened it, the contents whereof in order
follows.

The Letter that came floating on the Sea, from the wise Aliarte, into the Port
of Constantinople. THE DIRECTION. To the high and mighty Monarch Primaleon,
Emperor of Constantinople.
The Contents.
TRouble not your Princely thoughts (most powerful Emperor) for mine
imprisonment, which can last no longer, then the expiation of certain
maleuolent aspects, which a while will eclipse the faces of my fayrer-shining
stars. Your Nephew Primaleon lives, and is he that shall enritch you with
future joys and felicities. But as for the Ladies, their recovery cannot so
expeditiously be performed, because my assistaunce will greatly be wanting:
having hear such a powerful spell set upon me, as no human might can
prevail against it, without enforcing Drusa Velonna her self first to undo
it, or awayting her more serious employment, all which will be accomplished in
time. The adventure of Carderiaes I Will, is full of peril: but he only must
finish it, for whom it is reserved. So humbly kissing your royal hand, I take
my leave.

Yours ever, Aliarte.


This Letter caused such a general comfort through the Court, that all grief
and melancholy was quite abandoned, even as if (the promises in writing) had
been already performed, when the Army, being for a respite discharged, they
had leisure now to meditate on good happes ensuing. Floraman being greatly
enamoured of Clariana, the beautiful widdowe so deceased Dramian, was
ouer-swayed by the extremest folly which lightly has been seen, equalling
his carriage (...) this new affection, as when he despised all love and (...)
upon his dead Altea, which you may read (...) at large in the first part of
this History. ^agonalte also grew as affectionate (...) his fa^re Arnalte,
(...) ten days being now already past, and his own thoughts (...) his honor
in question, ta^ing it with loss of time and slothful negligence, in omitting
his utmost employment for their release, that were detained in the I Will of Car^,
or (at least) to suffer imprisonment with them: ^^a^ing license together of the
Emperor, likewise of the Empress, the other Princesses, and their
harts-deuoted Ladies, they purposed their journey toward Macedonia. But when
Floraman took his farewell of Clariana, entreating that she would term him
her Knight: he was publicly by her so scornfully rejected, that (casting by
all hope of ever compassing her love,) he departed with this resolution, to
seek some such way of death for his fruitless love, as his memory (thereby)
might never be forgotten. But come we now again unto Primaleon, whom we left
at the Tower of the Caniballs.

CHAP. LVII. How Prim^leon, otherwise called, the Knight of ^ortune,
accomplished in two days the adventure of the Tower.
Scarce was the morning wedded to the world, when Primaleon heard such a
barking and howling from the Tower, as would quite have dismayed any heart but
his: notwithstanding, he whose courage was altogether enclind to conquest,
began to meditate with his thoughts, by what means he might vanquish so many
Monsters, and gain his entrance into the Tower. As thus he stood pondering on
the likeliest persuasions, the Knight how the Wood came to him again unto him,
saying. Prepare your self Sir, in regard you are forthwith to be assailed:
and because your life is not to miscarie in this enterprise, take this
direction from me: these Caniballs defense consists only of their faces,
therefore make thereat your mark and aim, and so be assured to part with
victory.

Primaleon presently armed him self, and taking his hammer, went forth of the
Cottage, where beholding not any one to offer him resistance, he stood
beating against that part of the wall, where before he had made some slender
rupture, and such were the blows he gave, that the fracture extended it self
now above an hand breadth, more then before it had done, from which labor he
was quickly countermaunded, by six Caniball brethren, who were come to revenge
the death of their father: wherefore bethinking him self of the Knights former
advise, he made a thrust full at the nose of one them, passing the sword quite
up into his brain, whereby he fell down dead at his foot. The other pestered
about him terribly with their Clubbes, but still as they were hurt in the face,
they fled away from him toward the Wood, where turning back at the very
entrance, they did nothing but stand barking at him, so that there he slew two
of them, and the rest ran away wounded.

Soon after were descended above twenty Caniballs together, which set all
upon him at once, offering to engirt him round as in a circkle: but he setting
his back against the wall, defended him self still with speedy thrusts,
whereof they expressed fear, and kept off from him, nevertheless his labor
took so good success, that ten of them he had wounded in their faces, all
which retired, and would no more come near him. In little while after, the
rest were glad to fly with bloody faces, and he remaining now alone, leaning
to breath him self against the wall, was (...) snatched into the Tower, but by
whom he knew not, and the (...) the whole shape being scattered on the floor,
each part (of it self) went thither whence it came. Not long had he stood
still, but (from under the Toombe) came creeping forth a very long Serpent, so
fierce and furious in assayling him, as his lofty leapes and snatches at him,
made him scarce quick enough in his own defense: and still the Serpent (...),
to wind his tail about the Knights legs, which ^o well avoided by his manly
strokes, for the Serpents in^nt was to make him fall, which if it could have
done, the ^night had immediately been there enchaunted, and thereof was he
forewarned by the Lady, during this sharp conflict, Fortune (evermore
favorable to Primaleons enterprises, and willing to make him generally
famous,) caused him to give such a stroke on the Serpents head, that it reeling
fell down, when passing his weapon quite through the paunch thereof, it
suddenly vanished out of his sight.

As he stood leaning a while to rest him self, the door opened, and the
Lady taking him by the hand, went forth with him, but there came a huge beast
against him, little less then an Elephant, which he hardly knew how to
resist, because he could scarce reach his belly with his sword, Then he
bethought himself of the great Partezane, which he fetching in have, came
again toward the beast: who had two horns, each of them above three yards in
length, as (...) as brass, and very sharp, with one of them he hurt (...) in
the shoulder, forcing him to stagger, and very (...), but supporting him self
with the Partezane, (...) it as he could, in regard of the weightines, (...)
blow he smote therewith, the beast still rebated with his long horns, often
making the Partezane ready to fall out of his hands.

Primaleon well perceauing the beasts fury and strength, thought it best to
temporize his own resistance, till he could (...) some place of this Monster
apte^t for wounding: so keeping him off as conveniently he might, till his
vnweldi^es and violence soonest should weary him: at length, be^ ^sed face to
face with the beast, he gave such a thrust at his brows between the horns,
that blood issued forth in great abundance. This gladded him (not a little)
that he had wounded the beast, having given above twenty other strokes at him,
yet could by no means enter his skin, which putting him now in some hope of
victory, made him watchful of like advantage, for his further hurting: but by
reason his horns were still dangerous to him, he was constraind to keep off,
and spend many a stroke in vain, till more auayling success might better sted
him.

Now grew the battle to such desperate condition, that Primaleon (like one
prodigal of life and honor) set down his rest on the utmost hazard, and
holding his Partezanes staff on the ground, with good regard to the beasts
fury, his mind half persuaded him, that good hap would direct his swords
point, to the very tendrest part of the Monsters skin, as in deed it followed
in the proof: for the weapon entered under the blade of the shoulder, and
passed along to his very heart, whereon the beast staggerd toward him, which
the knight perceauing, leapt off from him, else had he fallen full upon him, and
so might have endangerd him by his huge weight: the Lady not a little glad of
such success, said. Sir Knight, let us return the same way we entered, so
shall we get forth of the Tower, otherwise, there is no place for resting you,
but the Caniballs will fiercely again set on ye. Primaleon followed her
direction, and then they beheld the Tower to open, just on the same side where
he had entered, so they issued forth, and went into the aforesaid Cabben or
Cottage, even as the Sun was at his descending: finding there the table ready
furnished, and two goodly beds severally to rest in, which (to him) seemed
highly pleasing. Then entered he into consideration of the Lady, reputing her
to be of quality and greatness, by making such esteem of him in this
enchauntment: but he might not know of whence or what she was* because the
force of the Magic would not admit it: notwithstanding, among some other
gentle conference, she spoke to the Knight in this manner. Most evident and
apparent is it, what happy fortune Palmerin d' Oliua left to his offspring, in
that your gracious stars pleased to guide your hand, to the only direct
place for confounding the beast, which else, all the strength in the world
could not have conquered. But to morrow, there remains a far greater
adventure for ye, as never could you desire a matter of more esteem: thereby
may you gain an unguent, which can cure the Emperor Primaleon, Don Edward of
England, and your father Florendos, marie the purchase of it, will cost you
much labor and peril, and perhaps will make you repent, that ever you
undertook it. So exceeded Primaleons joy, that these Princes (by his means)
might be recovered, as he thought every hour a year till the next day came,
and having supped, he went to his rest, until the bright morning early saluted
him, when being risen, he found the Lady in devout prayer for his safety.
Now began he to consider with him self, that the Sledge or Hammer might stand
him in some sted, wherefore taking it up on his neck, he went to the place
where he issued forth, which he found to be open, and (dreadlesse of any
peril) he entered with the Lady, who (for her security) kept still by his side.

No sooner were they entered, but the wide-open rift closed again, and then
began the terriblest noise that ever was heard, which all the remaining
Caniballs made together, as they came descending down the stairs: but
Primaleon, to keep so many brutish savages off him, laid at them with his
Partezane, opposing him self at the foot of the stairs, where making his
aim still at their faces, at last he wounded the oldest of them, upon whose
life depended the enchauntment of the Tower, and the weapon passing quite
through his brains, immediately he fell down dead, where presently the wall of
metal sunk deep under the ground, and Primaleon stood with the Lady on the
low pauement, somewhat abashed, because they beheld such a strange
alteration. As they staide there still to see what would ensue, they saw the
top of a goodly house arise out of the earth, and afterward the walls and gate
appeared, over which was written in golden Letters as follows: The house of
the fair princess Melia, wher-into whosoever enters, loses his life.

Primaleon smyled at this severe threatening, and taking up his great hammer,
went to beat against the gate therewith, when pausing a little, he heard a
noise of people within, as if it were of such as meant to defend it:
nevertheless, the strength of the blows he laid on it were such, that the
gate shaking and tottering every way, at last fell down, and Primaleon
received such a sound greeting on the head, as (if he had not suddenly set the
hammer to the ground, for his support) he had lain along, but stout courage
never forsaking him, boldly made him leap forward in at the gate, where he was
immediately snatched up in the arms of two Giants, who carried him by mere
strength to an Altar, which stood not far off from the entrance, and then
one of them said. Let us sacrifice this man here, to the soul of the
Princess Melia.

Agreed (quoth the other) and his hammer that lies yonder, will greatly stedde
us, to break his bones in pieces at a blow. Thou say true (quoth the first
Giant) therefore go fetch it, and leave the Knight alone to me. Primaleon
perceiving in what danger he was, drawing suddenly his dagger, gave the Giant
(that held him) a stabbe in the side, which made him let go his hold, and
Primaleon recovering his feet, got forth his sword, and laid about him so
furiously therewith, that the Giant found he had no idle labor in hand.

By this time was the other come with the hammer, which seemed of no poyse or
weight in his hand, so he with that, and the other with his huge Club, laid at
the Knight with such fury and violence, as never before was he in the like
perrill: for he beheld it most evidently, that if he avoided not the blows of
the hammer, his life must there immediately perrish, beside, the other so
canuast him with his Clubbe, that he staggard here and there like a
drunkenman: and scarce knowing in this extremity how to behave himself, he
set his back against the Altar, to keep both his enemies directly before
him, when calling to remembrance, how much heere-to-fore thrusts and foynes
had befriended him, he did nothing else but give outright thrusts and
stabbes, which made the Giants keep the farther off from him, but he was so
spent and ouer-laboured in this combat, that the end of the fight seemed
doubtful unto him.

The Giant that fought with the hammer, grew so outrageous and transported
with violence, that his blows flew about without any discretion, beating the
ground, and doing no harm else, till mere fury made the hammer slip
suddenly out of his hand, so that then he was constrained to be-take himself
to his Clubbe again: in which small opportunity, Primaleon (with a thrust) had
hurt the other Giant in the face, where-uppon he retired back to the Altar,
and vanished presently out of sight.

Then to keep play with the other, least by breathing he should grow fresh and
lusty, he followed him close every way about: but he seeing his companion was
gone, and that the Knight very hardly set him, did what he could to with-stand
his enemy, till receiving likewise a maine thrust in the face, he quickly fled
after his fellow.

Now went Primaleon (as glad of a little rest) to lean awhile against the
Altar, but thereof he was prevented, for he saw come forth from under the
Altar, two Serpents hissing, appearing as if they were knit together.
Primaleon considered with himself, that as the one Giant fled, so the other
failed in his strength, therefore he would fight with one of the Serpents first,
hoping his success that way would prove the like: but they were so closely
combined together, as he knew not by what means to compass his intent,
whereupon, he aimed with thrusts at them both, which with their wings they
still put by, and gave him many a violent stroke.

While this fight thus continued, he heard the clattering of Armor, as if he
were to be assailed by an host of men, a matter wrought by force of the
enchauntment, only to dismay and terrify his thoughts: but he made no
reckoning of all this terror, because he was prepared for any danger
whatsoever, seeking first to end the task he had in hand, and delivered such a
stroke at the one Serpent, as (lighting where the wings were joined to the
body,) did cut them quite off, and then redoubling the blow with a thrust,
ran him quite through the head, whereby he fell down, past all ability of
harming any more: which did so lagge and weary the other yet living, to defend
himself, and dragge the other Serpent about to, as the Knight (taking
advantage offered) dispatched him after his fellow for company.

Now thought Primaleon that his labor was concluded, and going to the Altar,
he espied (in an iron Chest) a Box of stone, preserved there from the
knowledge of any one, which (when he had broken the iron Chest) he purposed to
bear thence away with him: and as he proceeded with this intent, he beheld
the figure of a Woman upon the Altar, whose years of age seemed to be about
fifty, which as he stood awhile beholding, the figure began to speak to
him in this manner.

Perhaps thou think (Sir Knight) to carry hence this unguent, which I never
made for any Christians help, but for the race of Armato, King of Persia, and
my brother: if such be thy persuasion, it is merely in vain. At which words,
suddenly arose a Table before the Altar, where under (as in a deep Cauerne)
were to be seen Bears, Lions, Wolves, Tigers, Panthers, and diverse wild
beasts, then spoke the Image again, saying: Thou must first fight with these
and overcome them, before thou can obtain thy desire.

When Primaleon perceived such an inevitable danger, he conferred with his
thoughts, which way were the likeliest to compass victory, then did the Table
on a sudden descend again, and he beheld there a lock with a key, and a
Trumpet hanging by it: Heere-vpon came the Lady to him, who had learned many
particularities (concerning the enchauntment) of two young Ladies she met
withal in the Tower, and therefore spoke thus to him again.

Lock down the Table with that key Sir Knight, because it only is the door
of the Cauerne: then sound the Trumpet, for therein consists the means of
ending the enchauntment. Primaleon was not slow in locking it down with the
key, and taking the Trumpet in his hand, meant to sound it: but a Spirit
exceeding any humane stature, came and caught hold of him, and a very strange
kind of wrestling grew between them, for Primaleon could fasten no hold on
the Spirit, but was so violently hurld about every way by this phantasma, as
very hardly could he keep himself on his feet, but supporting himself so
well as he could, he sounded the Trumpet, and then the Spirit vanished in a
smoke, likewise all the wild beasts beneath in the vault, breaking a door
on the Mountains side, ran altogether mainly thence, to be out of the
trumpets dreadful noise.

Now remained the Altar without any defender, and Primaleon turning to thank
the Lady for her good advise, presently knew her to be his Mother Miragarda,
whom the enchauntments force would not let him know till now, and she not a
little joyful of his presence, said. Most honorable and aduenturous Son,
heaven and thy fair fortune has highly blessed thee, how many times did I
fear to see thee dead, when (albeit I knew thee not) yet had I a Mothers
compassion on thee: now may thou safely take the unguent, and afterward I
will acquaint thee with ye estate of my fortunes.

Primaleon laid his hand on the Chest, but could not find the way how to open
it, whereat wexing som-what angry, he would have broken it with the great
hammer: but Dorina and the two young Ladies of the Tower, came presently to
him, saying: Hold your hand Sir, and break not the Chest, for then you will
sincke down whether the Tower is fallen.

The one of the young Ladies stepped unto him, and showed him how he should undo
(by strength) an iron bar, that was fastened a hand breadth above the Chest,
and there he should find the key to open it. Primaleon, though he thought it
impossible by might to undo it, yet because he was thereto thus advised,
kneeling down close to it, he began to pull thereat with such force, as was
fore-graunted to the race of great Palmerin, even as if his veins and sinnewes
had cracked in sunder, and getting off the bar, a little key started forth,
which Dorina took to her, because Primaleon was fallen into a swoune, by the
extreme labor of opening the bar.

When Miragarda saw her Son in such a trance, she was ready to die with
conceit of grief, cursing the unguent to be bought so dearly: but being in
short while come again to himself, he called for the key, which was no sooner
put into the little lock, but it immediately opened, and easily he took forth
the box of ointment, whereupon the Altar and all things else vanished, except
the old Palace. So Primaleon with his Mother, the two young Damosells, and
Dorina, went forth again to the Cottage, because it was late, where they
found the Knight that first gave him directions, who in regard of some enmity
between him and the Princess Melia, made his continual aboade there in the
Wood, until such time as the only knight should come, (descended of
Palmerins noble race) to make a final end of that enchauntment: the Knight
(being now without his Helmet) they perceived him to be very aged, there he
invited them to a sumptuous supper, and afterward he prepared several beds
for them, whereto each one went and quietly reposed.

CHAP. LVIII. How Primaleon understood that the fair Lady Victoria was kept
in an enchauntment. And how (upon the arrival of Trineus,) Primaleon
prevailed so much with him by persuasion, that he granted to turn back to
Constantinople, for the conuoy of his Mother, and the precious unguent.
Fair Aurora, being freed from the murkie mantle of the sad and sullen
Night, raised the old Knight, and guiding him to the lodging of Primaleon,
Miragarda, Dorina, and the rest, after a kind mornings salutations, he sat
down by them, and thus began. Sir Knight, I know that your desires are
boundless, and carry you to search of matters which no limits can contrary:
therefore (though not to whet the Rasor, already keen enough) vouchsafe
attention to what I shall tell yeu.

Know then, if you would find the fair Lady Victoria, she remains
enchaunted in the Palace of the Princess Melia, even there, where the Lady
Leonarda was so long detained: but if you would (you cannot) be her
deliverance, till first you have freed from imprisonment, almost the whole band
of the Grecian Knights, as also ye wizzart Aliarte, who is kept in such a hard
and narrow strait, as except he be set at liberty, and his aid mightily
assisting you, no humane power can compass what you are to pass through. And
because occasion is offered of your return to Constantinople, in regard of
this Ladies happy delivery, know likewise, that a Knight will ere long arrive
here, of whom when you have begd the grant of one boon, you shall send him
back again to Constantinople, and with him your Mother and the precious
ointment.

It grieved Primaleon not a little, to hear his beloved Victoria was
enchaunted, and that her deliverance might not foorth-with be undertaken,
wherefore, when the hour of dinner was come, they feasted again merrily
together, and no sooner were they risen from the Table, but they espied a
Knight come riding under the wood side, whom Primaleon (unarmed) went forth to
meet: the Knight being Trineus, when Primaleon drew nearer him, he presently
knew him, and raising up his beuer, alighted from his horse, enterchanging kind
embraces and salutations together. Primaleon remembering the old Knights
words, and covetous to attain the height of his disseignes, said: Most
honored Trineus, if ever you loved me, express it now, in granting me one
request, which not only will much enlarge your reputation, but likewise
redound to my Lord the Emperors especial contentment.

Trineus, not knowing what he would enjoin him to, without any exception,
franckly granted it: whereupon, Primaleon taking him by the hand, walked on
with him to the Cottage, where he greatly meruailed to behold Miragarda, but
being resolved in all the passed accidents, Primaleon thus proceeded. My Lord
Trineus, be not displeased with me, if I bind you to the performance of your
promise: because I stand in some right of duty obliged, to go and free our
dear friend the learned Aliarte, out of an iron Cage wherein he is imprisoned,
the trust then imposed on you, is to conduct the Princess my Mother to
Constantinople, and likewise to take with ye this precious ointment, the virtue
whereof is, to cure my Lord the Emperor, Don Edward of England, and my Father
Florendos.

This so speedy return, greatly discontented Trineus, because his thoughts
labored on the adventure in the I Will of Carderia: but respect of honor strictly
tied him to his promise, whereupon the old Knight made ready two fair Litters,
placing the Princess Miragarda in one of them, and the two Ladies in ye other,
himself likewise mounted on a milk-white Palfrey, to accompany Trineus in his
journey. Thus Miragarda (showring down tears, to part in this sort with her
son Primaleon,) commended him to the guard of Dorina, and sollemne leave
being severally taken, they heavily parted, holding on two days travail by
Land, till the old Knight had prepared a good Foist, well stored with victuals
and all things necessary, whereinto they were no sooner entered, but of it self
it put from shore, and in four days space arrived at the Port of
Constantinople, where right soon was bruted abroad the news of Tri^eus and
Miragardaes landing, which proved so highly pleasing to the Emperor and the
whole Court, as without any scrupulous observation of state order, they ran on
heaps to meet them, the Emperor himself being the first that came thither,
where meeting with his dear esteemed daughter in law, right joyfully he took
her by ye hand, saying. Heaven be praised (fair Daughter) that I see thee in
safety, now hope I that my Court shall recover her former flower and majesty.

By this time Don Edward was come likewise to them, who (not a month before)
arrived there from England, and Trineus stepping forward to salute his most
esteemed friends, taking either of them by the hand, thus spoke to the
Emperor. Be of good comfort (most sacred Majesty,) for your Nephew Primaleon
is in good estate of health, and has sent unto ye the sovereign unguent,
which the fair Princess Melia her self did make, for the cure of her brother
Armato King of Persia and his race: and has wone it by no mean hazards and
endeavor, wherefore he sends it, to heal Prince Edward and your self, of
those vnrecured hurts which do yet annoy you. These speeches (beyond measure)
contented the great Lords, but especially the Empress Grydonia, Polinarda,
Arnalte, and the other Princesses, who cirkling Miragarda in the midst of them,
could never be satis-fied with kissing and embracing her, and so walking along
into the City, she declared to them, how the young Ladies Victoria and
Argentina, were enchaunted in the place where Leonarda was so long time
detained.

Nevertheless (quoth she) believe it as a matter most certain, that they
shall both be set at liberty: the one by Primaleon, after he has given end
unto two great enterprises, and the other, by the noble Prince Florian. Then
presented they to his Highness the ancient Knight, whose name was Helizabat,
sometime the husband to the wise Enchauntresse Vrganda, and now so aged, that
his years amounted to above two hundred: as he made offer of kneeling to the
Emperor, his Majesty (moved by so reverend an aspect) held him up in his
arms, desirous to know of whence and what he was, wherein him self so
discreetly resolved him, as both he and Don Edward were highly pleased,
understanding by him so many strange matters past, as also diverse other that
were to ensue.

These and such like discoursings beguiled the time, until they were arrived
at the Palace, where the Emperor and Don Edward, to honor the reverend age
of old Helizabat, would needs (by each hand) guide him up the steps, when
happened (by the unguent) a matter almost miraculous: for within less then an
hours space, the Emperor stird at pleasure his stiff benumbed arm, feeling
it in as good estate as ever, and Don Edward turning to see the Emperors happy
recovery, felt his head (leaning before a side upon his shoulder) to stand up
right and move as readily, as if it had never been in any such condition, to
the wonder and amazement of all the beholders.

Now to express the feasting and reuelling through the City, for joy of these
so happy events, is a thing whereof I am no way capable: but let it suffice,
that Princes (ruling by justice and humanity) do reach so far into their
subjects hearty affections, as continually they receive from them the tribute of
so gracious deserving, yea, sometimes with an ouer-flowing largess and bounty,
as people right proud of their Sovereigns love and kindness. Such was the
general joy in Constantinople at this time, man, woman, and child applauding
Trineus, for bringing thither that virtuous ointment: but much more they
extolled the Knight of Fortune, whose honorable labors had obtained it.
Trineus, whose desire was after strange adventures, the next day conferred with
Bazillia, concerning the government of Allmaigne, and taking leave of her,
without using a word to any other, being armed, he departed from the City,
carrying no devise or imprese, because he purposed to travail unknown: so
rode he toward the I Will of Carderia, where he arrived within few days after,
joyful and glad beyond conceit, that Primaleon was not come thither before
him, making no doubt of finishing the adventure, by help of the Jewel he bare
about him, which kept him safe from all enchauntments.

Staying some little while a-loofe from the place, to ease his Horse (well
near spent with travail) at length when he saw time best befitting him, he
went toward Leonatos pauillion, even as he had newly vanquished a strange
errant Knight. Without any idle or talking daliance, they made trial of the
Ioust, and such was the encounter, as Leonato lost his stirrops, and Trineus
was lifted out of his saddle on the trooper of his Horse, very hardly keeping
him self from falling: but recovering his seat again quickly, he came
against his enemy with his sword drawn, who entertained him with as
cheerful a spirit, Trineus having this advantage in the fight (beyond all
the rest) that no hurts or wounds appeared to him, as to the former adventurers
they usually did, which only was caused by the virtue of his Jewel. The
combat continued above two hours, and there might they have fought two days
together, or else have miscarried by wearines, their equality of valor was so
correspondent, and their knowledge in fight so aunswerable, as (albeit they did
little harm to each other) yet grew they breathless and quite tired.

Now the Sorceresse, not coveting the death of any knight in this adventure,
knowing no other means to appease this contention, sent forth a Damsel
heavily countenanced, wrapped in a mantle of white Satin, ritchly fringed with
gold, sitting in a saddle of green velvet, on a very gallant Palfray
sumptuously caparisoned, and coming to them with mournful dejected looks,
she spoke in this manner. Which of you (fair Lords) will take pity on an
unfortunate Lady, to whom has happened a disgrace beyond comparison, and only
through the fault of a false and most disloyal Knight.

Leonato, being tied by the enchauntments power to that place, least any should
come to end the adventure, took no heed of her words: but Trineus, (exempt
from such an ouer-ruling oppression) taking compassion on the Damsels tears,
said. Sir Knight, since I perceive no such readiness in you, I will go revenge
the wrong of this iniuried Lady. That's nothing to me (answered Leonato) nor
will I be offended whether you go or stay: only the charge imposed on me, is
to keep any man whatsoever from concluding this adventure. Upon this reply,
Trineus turned his Horse, and rode thence with the Damsel, of whom he could
never learn whether she would conduct him, but still she enticed him on a
whole month together, and so far from the I Will of Carderia, as he could not
return thither again, before the expiration of the adventure.

But come we now to Primaleon, who parting with his Mother, as you have
already heard, entered conference with Dorina, concerning his best means, for
arriving at the I Will of Carderia: she (as one well acquainted with the nature
of the enchauntment) told him, that he should have need of the great
Hammer, which taking with them, and entering afterward into their little
Barque, they sailed thence away, and came to the River which engirted the I Will
of Carderia. But before their departure, Primaleon well liking Dorinaes advise,
made a deep search before the Palace, and found there a huge wide Cave or
pit, wherein he beheld a number of the dead Caniballes, as also a Golgatha
of dead men's bones: by it lay the great Hammer, which he casting on his
shoulder, went aboorde with Dorina, launching out thence into the maine Sea,
with earnest desire to reach the I Will of Carderia: and scarsely were they entered
the Barque, but the waters grew so outrageous and turbulent, as Dorina knew not
by her Art the reason thereof: yet more and more the tempest increased, the
Ship often times ready to split in sunder. At length, drawing near unto the
Island, where Primaleon reputing more safety to be on land then on the water,
he suddenly leapt out on the shore, the Barque putting off again very
expeditiously, and he espying a goodly Tower in the midst of the I Will, walked on
thether-ward: but remembering he had left the great Hammer behind him, and that
Dorina told him he should have need of it, he turned back to go fetch it. As
thus he walked on, Leonato espied him, who meruailing to see him pass thus
a-long the Island, contrary to any of the other before enchaunted, began to
think with him self, that this man was likely to finish the adventure,
whereupon, he began to give him very injurious speeches, challenging him to
the trial of the combat. For all this, Primaleon was not offended, but
coming to the Bridge, told him his name and cause of coming thither: for he
so dearly affected Leonato, as he was loath to enter the fight with him,
whereupon they concluded not to combat at all. But the Enchauntresse,
perceauing the finishing of her Magic spells so near at hand, to prevent the
same as long as she could, she came in person between them, saying. Knights,
far off are you from the valor of Polendos King of Thessalie, who made no
exception of any person whatsoever, to attain the height of his own
disseignes.

These provoking words stirred a desire in either of the Knights, presently to
undertake the combat, and it had likewise followed in action, but that Dorina,
being acquainted with the mighty spleenes of them both, which might so far
endanger their lives, as the adventure thereby would remain unperfected,
suddenly raised the Island water so high, as all the bridge was covered
therewith, so that they had no place for their difference, when the
Enchauntresse (thus ouer-taken in her own intent) grew so displeased thereat,
as she could not devise what to do or say. The Knights were very willing to
have come together, and practiced all the ways which possibly they could: but
seeing the high water would not permit them, Primaleon went toward the Island,
and Leonato held it now for certain, that Primaleon was so respected by
Fortune, as he only should extirpate the enchauntment, for this enchauntment
of Dorinaes (fore-stalling the other) gave him good reason so to imagine, so
went he to his Tent again.

CHAP. LIX. How Primaleon slew the savage wild Bear, and finishing the
adventure, set all the famous Knights at liberty.
PRimaleon perceauing there was no passage for him, and that Leonato returned
back as one malecontent, because he could not proceed to the combat: it
greatly contented him, to have so well avoided the peril of his very dear
friend, so taking the way toward the goodly Tower, the Enchauntresse smilingly
met him, accompanied with the Knight that combated Leonato first of all, who
was his son, that Polendos left there as Lord of the Island, when he delivered
the fair Francelina from enchauntment, and walking along with Primaleon, she
thus began. Think not Sir Knight, that this great enchauntment was made to
ruinate the Court of Constantinople, but this is the reason of it: the last of
those three Fairies, which holy great Palmerin to the precious water, kept on
the mountain Artiferia, was our Aunt, and left here as strange an
enchauntment as ever was heard of, yet with such a condition, that it should be
concluded by one of Palmerins progeny, and there are other adventures beside
left by that Fairie, which will renown that family to all posterities.

After our aboade was appointed in this Island, we strove to get hither so many
Knights as possibly we could, because it appeared by manifest proof, that no
one man was sufficient for so important an enterprise: and we expected the
coming of Palmerin of England, with Don Florian his brother, the Knight of the
savage man, the Emperor Primaleon and Don Edward, who are recovered to their
former condition, hoping that one of them would cease this long dated trouble.
But seeing you are so happily come hither, if you purpose to undertake a
matter of such moment, it were good that you took your rest this night, and to
morrow morning begin an attempt of great honor, wherein we will give ye no
discouragement, but wish that all good success may attend ye.

Primaleon seeing that night drew on a-pace, the gladlier yielded to take his
rest, and entering with them into the Tower, they brought him to a ready
prepared table, placed by the goodly sumptuous Fountain, where Polendos first
had a sight of Francelina: there was he served very royally, and when he
desired to know somewhat concerning the enchauntment, she answered him that
he might not, for (quoth she) such is the nature and quality of it, as no man
must be acquainted with the estate of his peril, but at all adventures must
under go it.

Supper being ended, they betook them selves to rest, and Primaleon rising
early the next morning, remembered what Dorina had said unto him, concerning
his employment of the great Hammer, wherefore going for it, he found it lying
upon the shore side, and returning with it on his neck, he was forthwith
armed. Then did the Enchauntresse and the Knight guide him from the Tower, to a
certain quarter of the Island, where (without bidding him adieu) they suddenly
left him, as fearful of a savage wild Bear, which kept in a Wood very near
adjoining. Primaleon held on his way into the Wood, which he found to be
maze-like and full of turnings, thick set with great Oaks, broad spreading
Elmes, and other goodly trees, as if no Axe had ever come near them: and
because their thick branches hindered his passage, he beat them down before
him with his Hammer, so that his blows were easily heard quite through the
Island, and when (by much labor) he had gone about half a mile by estimation,
he came forth into a fair plain, about forty paces every way in largenes,
where standing to behold a curious Fountain, suddenly rushed forth the
savage Bear, which he neither hearing nor perceauing, the beast reard up upon
his shoulders, and gript him so strongly about the midst, as he thought there
was no way now to escape with life, because he could not turn to hurt the
beast in any place, he held him so forcibly between his huge paws.

As he strugled and strove to get loose from the Bear, by chance he got up
one of his arms, and catching one of the beasts ears fast in his hand, he
hung thereon so mainelie, as willingly the Bear let go his hold: but he had
so soyled and anoyed the Knight with his frothy foame and slauering, that he
was overcome with the foul sent and dampe thereof, falling to the ground
bereft of his senses. But Fortune protecting him as her dear esteemed
fouorite, made the Bear drag him along to the Fountain, and tumbling him into
it, such was the virtue of the water, as the filth being washed off him, he
found him self very fresh and lusty, whereby he gathered, that this water
would sted him against the Bear, whenever he sought in that manner to stifle
him again. So leaping out of the Fountain, he made toward the Bear, which now
held off, and would not come near the water, then assayling him with his
sword, the beast ran at him on such an advantage, that passing between his
legs, he once more ouer-threw him, giving him many violent strokes with his
paws, and foaming upon him as he did before, had almost choakt his senses
again, but that recovering upon his feet, he threw himself quickly into the
water, and becam quite altered from his senseless surprising.

This strife thus continuing the space of two hours, the Knight grew doubtful
of his success, because he could give no wound to the Bear, his course of
advantage prevailed so still against him: at length, he devised how to cast
the beast into the water, thinking that way to rid him of his so noisome
foaming, and determining heere-vpon resolutely, he trauersed about, awayting
opportunity, till the Bear was reard up again on his hindmost legs, when
taking him at that advantage about the middle, the beast likewise caught him
fast about the neck. Here found he now work enough to do, and never in all
his life did he endure like travail, for the Bear used all his might not to
come near the Fountain, and Primaleon strove as stiffly to bring him thither.
Above half an hour this kind of wrestling lasted, and Primaleon being face
to face with the Bear, his breath and filthy driuell entered through the sight
of his helmet, making him almost as mad and furious as the beast, which proved
the only way for him to gain the victory: for seeming now rather like a
frantic body, then a man possessed of any civil parts, he took up the Bear
by very mere strength, and carrying him forcibly to the Fountain, they both
fell together into the water, where each of them forsaking his former hold, the
water carried them one from another, and took away all their fury and madness.
The Bear was the first that got out of the Fountain, resting him self upon
the bank side, but with such a mild and gentle look, as witnessed his savage
nature to be quite changed. Primaleon came out of the water far off from the
Bear, and prepared once again to assail him, but beholding him to s^and so
still and quiet, he drew the nearer him, when he might perceive the beast to
beckon him with his pawe, as seeming that he would have the Knight to follow
him, which he not refusing to do, took up his Hammer upon his shoulder, and
the Bear (leading him a narrow crooked path) brought him at length to an
ancient building, which seemed to have been sometime a goodly Tower or
Castle, but it was now deep sunk into the earth, so that not above the
ground was to be seen of it, the quantity of more then six foot in height.
Passing round about it, he espied a door made all of Glass, with a key ready
placed in the lock, by the transparance whereof, they discerned within, a
Chapel furnished round with Idols, in the midst of it stood the statue of a
Giant, with a mighty Axe in his hand, and seemed to menace such as durst offer
to enter at the door.

Primaleon being thoroughly persuaded in his mind, that he should absolutely
finish the adventure, since he had so well rid the Bear of his wild
saluage nature: went to the door and took down the key, and scarce had he
half turned it in the lock, but the door opened, and he felt a beast to glide
in between his legs, but saw not what it was, wherefore he went toward the
Image with the Axe, which at the first sight seemed to be immooueable,
nevertheless, it stirrd and came against him, and smiting with the Axe upon
his Shield, brake his imprese of Fortune quite through the midst, which
Primaleon took as a bad presage or augurie, imagining thereby that Fortune had
forsaken him, whereas (indeed) the reason of it was, that he should now stand
upon his valor and manhood, without expecting any favor from Fortune, who
(notwithstanding) left him no more now, then before she had done in his very
greatest perrils.

This blow showed him how he should govern himself against the Idol,
wherefore bestirring himself round about as occasion best served, and
delivering diverse strokes at the Idol, the sword still rebounded back, and
did no other harm, albeit the Image was unarmed: but he perceiving the Axe
had too much advantage against his sword, began to awaite some apter means of
help, doing nothing in mean while but defend the Idols maine strokes, and when
the fight had continued above an hours space, and no more benefit received by
his labor, then he had at the first, he found himself to be so
ouer-trauailed, yt he could not shun a blow which smote him on the head, and
made him fall backward in a swoune.

Upon this advantage, the Idol caught him up in his arms, and ran a pace with
him behind an Altar, where was a great fire ready prepared, and there the
Idol strove to cast him in: but by this time his senses were well again
restored, and his good hap was such, that (in the fall) he lighted on his
feet, and leaping quickly out of the fire, laid about him lustily upon the
Idol, who wanting the Axe, stood still and stirrd not, like an Image of stone.

The Knight having bestowed many blows and thrusts, and seeing all his
endeavor proved but in vain, he went toward the Altar, where, as he offered
to ascend up the rising steps, he saw a fierce dog come forth from under it,
and after him another of like resemblance, but both of them were armed all
over. At one instant they flew very eagerly upon him, and sought to gnaw in
sunder the buckles of his Armor, which he prevented so well as he could,
though euer-more one of them was upon his back, and their Armor appeared to
be stronger then steel. He saw that his sword now served him to small use,
the dogs did cling so near about him, wherefore he fought with his dagger
only, which he could by no means pierce through their Armor: but one of them
rauenously gaping before him, he stabd him in at the mouth, and the weapon
passing through his heart, made him fall down dead at his feet, and the other
dog by being thus alone, wanted the strength of the enchauntment, which made
him draw back to the great Idol, as accounting there his place of safely.

Primaleon again began to mount the steps, and when he came near the Altar,
he beheld a Knight to lie there wounded, humbly desiring mercy at his hands,
and he not thinking it to be a phantasma, gave forth his hand to raise him on
his feet, and bring him nearer to the Altar: but as he stood upon the
pauement, his former weak estate was suddenly changed, and he getting up the
Axe in his hand, began to lay lustilie at the Knight, with quicker speed and
greater cunning, then any the Idol before had used. It much displeased
Primaleon, that he had raised up so fierce an enemy, but seeing his own folly
justly scourged, he must amend it as he can or may, till some better occasion
might happen to end all this labor.

The Knight with the Axe was so wondrous ready, that Primaleons skill very
hardly could avoid his strokes, which (albeit they entered not but slightly)
yet did they pain him very grievously, and perceiving he could not get the
Knight from the Altar, but when himself retired, the other refused to follow,
and the fight (this way) would never be concluded, he (at last) so doubled and
trebled his blows on the Knight, that he constrained him to move from his
place, pursuing him still with such sprightly courage, that the Knight (aiming
a dangerous stroke at Primaleon) ye blow glaunced by in vain, and the Knights
legs slipped under him, by reason the pauement was very slippery, so fell he down
the steps, and the Axe tumbling out of his hands, he lay there deprived of
all further power.

Primaleon advanced his foot upon him, with full intent to smite off his
head: but he craving mercy once more, said: Sir Knight, if (with life) you
mean to escape this enchauntment, take up the Axe, which was made to be the
ruin of this place, for by no means else can it be compassed. Primaleon
taking the Axe in his hand, felt himself so suddenly freed from his former
wearines, as if he had not combatted at all, and passing through the Temple or
Chapel, without any other offense or resistance, he went behind the Altar
to the fire, where-into the Idol so feign would have cast him: there he
beheld it gather it self together, and (by little and little) receive the
shape of a Lady, the saddest in countenance that ever was seen, she falling
on her knees before him, said.

Most evident it is (right worthy Knight) that in you is contained the whole
worlds virtue, for the Enchauntresse would not permit till this instant, that
any of Palmerin d' Oliuaes race should come to this adventure: yet would you
have found toil enough to undergo it, if you had not been possessed of that
Axe, which will be ye means of your happy victory. While thus she spoke, the
Bear (which lost his former wildnes) standing up on his hindermost feet, was
changed to a Knight, who taking up a batte of wood which leaued behind the
door, it altered likewise to a fair long sword, and the humbled Knight (that
twice before had craved mercy) became more fierce and violent then ever he
was: with these came also the dog and Idol, and set altogether very
furiously upon Primaleon, who using one while his Axe, another while his great
hammer, kept indifferent good play with them, enforcing them to keep fair and
far off him, till hitting the dog on the head with his hammer, he tumbled
backward and stird no more, hereby he gathered, that all the rest must be
wounded in their heads, (which he perceived them to defend with very special
care) or else he should never compass his intent.

But the first Knight was smote on the head ere he was aware, and presently he
fell down bereft of his senses, now the Idol, in regard of his great stature,
had the better means for his defense, the other Knight also held out as
furiously, as when he was before in the shape of a Bear, till Primaleon
striking at him with the Axe, by good hap smote the sword out of his hand,
which he stooping to recover, another blow lighted upon his head, which made
him fall down as if he had been dead. Now none remained but the Idol only,
who made the readiest turnings and windings, that ever in any fight had been
discerned, cunningly avoiding every blow that made any proffer at his head.

The battle between them lasted til the evening, when Primaleon (perceiving
the Sun was near setting, and doubtful least Leonato should come thither,
and rob him of some part of the honor) he began to labor the more
earnestly, and plied the Idol with so many quick doubled strokes, that
hitting (at length) where he most desired, he staggerd diverse ways, and
falling, smote Primaleon on the shoulder, as if a huge Collomne or Colossus had
light upon him, so that very hardly he kept on his feet, but reeled about as
if he were senseless, when the Lady (joyfully running unto him, and opening
his beuer to give him air) spoke thus cheerfully to him: Now Knight take
courage, for the adventure is accomplished.

These words revived him, and as they were going toward the Altar, they saw
it was vanished, and after it sunck down the Idol, whereupon, the two
Knights came to their senses again, and perceiving the veil of the Temple
fall toward the Tower, they knew that Primaleon had ended the enchauntment,
wherefore coming to him with great humanity, they kindly embraced him, and
guiding him forth, commended his rare virtues as they woorthilie merrited.

Being come near the Tower, all the imprisoned Knights right joyfully met
him, only Arguto excepted, who had rather have ended his life there in prison,
then to acknowledge any such benefit at the hand of his enemy: therefore very
sadly he kept behind the rest, and while they were busy in their salutations
and embraces, he slipped by over the Bridge, and so departed thence.

These news were highly displeasing to Primaleon, and in all have he would
have followed him, but for his Father Florendos, and his Brother Oliuanto, who
forcibly kept him back with mighty persuasions. Florian, Forzato, Franardo,
Almaroll and the rest, could never enough express their kindness to him, but
being all conducted to a ready prepared Table, Don Rosuell, who was next in
years to Florendos, desired the Enchauntresse to acquaint them with the
original of this enchauntment, which had so distracted the Emperor Primaleons
thoughts, and left his Court empty of so many gallants: to which request she
answered as follows hereafter.

CHAP. LX. The reason why this enchauntment was first framed. And how Primaleon
(going to set the VVizzard Aliarte at liberty) entered the combat with
Palmerin of England, and how they were parted by Dramusiande.
THE Enchauntresse having assumed her Fayerie shape again, abandoning now her
spells and exorcismes, turning to her knight (who was Lord of the Island) said.
Let it not seem offensive to you, if I discover the secrets of this soil to
this Knight, whose honor and virtue so woorthily deserves it, beyond all other
that yet have come hither: so sitting down with the two young Ladies, she
commanded the elder of them to tell ye whole story, whereto she obeying,
began in this manner.

Sir Knight, the hard allotted destenie to this Damsel my Sister, whom you
delivered out of the Temple, has been the cause of your so late-passed
travail, to free her from the I Will of Francelina, which albeit (in some sort)
it was well proceeded in, when Polendos gave beginning to the enterprise: yet
neither did his worth extend so far, nor her fortune merrite so much
happiness, as that all his pains could conclude a matter so important, such was
the weight of her transgression, and such the penalty thereon imposed. For her
ouer-fond transgression in neglect of her honor, first gave beginning to the
enchauntment, as briefly I will tell you the manner how.

The Knight whom you beheld in the shape of a Bear, became so deeply
enamoured of her, that (in hope of friendly advise and furtherance) he
disclosed his affection to another Knight, being the same with whom you lately
combatted. During the progress of this amourous purpose, whereto my Sister gave
kind co^senting, the second Knight (that knew his friends election in love)
never minding the faith and obliged duty in such a case required: became
himself extremely affected toward my Sister, and because he was better
practiced in loves negotiations, and could handle queint dalliances with more
pregnancie then his friend, he prevailed so far, that she, like a
lightheaded wench, (as for the most part young Damosells are no other, wanting
the experience in so dangerous a kind of traffic) left off her first Lover,
and gave entertainment to the second.

Here now (Sir) is a little leisure admitted ye, to spend some small yet
needful consideration, in imagining the just grief of the Knight rejected,
(having before received so many fair promises, and goodly instances of her
loyal meaning, that now the day of marriage being appointed, for far were
his thoughts from any other base purpose:) to behold his hopes so apparently
abused, his entire affect despised, his true meaning bafled, and his choice now
so ready at another command, even his, in whose trust he had reposed his
love and life, guess (I say) but the sorrow of so highly a wronged soul. Yet
nevertheless, bearing all this with more then manly patience, he dissembled
his distemper, and kept outward appearance of his love as earnest as ever,
only to see what it would sort unto.

The other false and periurd Knight, his aim was only at base lubricitie,
contaminating the fair and spotless cheek of chastity, without regard of my
Sisters honor, or any due respect to his own life. She continuing in this
hapless kind of course, affecting earnestly the one, and feigning cunningly
with the other, upon a certain day, when the Enchauntresse had betook
herself to reposed thoughts, after some former serious employment: my Sister
went with her Lover into a little thicket, where being set down together, and
she crowning his temples with a flourie chaplet, they fell to amourous
purposes and pursuites, and (enterchange of faith being equally plighted,
action confirming their former arguing,) the first Knight chanced to steal
upon them, where seeing his simplicity so haynously iniuried, in a violent fury
he would have slain them both, but the false Knight escaped, with a hurt in
his breast only, and she making away so fast as she could, was narrowly
pursued by him with his Rapier drawn. The people knowing her to be their
liege Lords Daughter, arose in her defense, and while they laid hold on the
Knight, she got with safety into the Castle.

Now did the rude multitude so threaten the Knight with death, yt he (more
overcome with true sense of his wrong, then any terror of theirs could any
way else move him:) fell mad and frantic, biting every one that held hand
upon him, and they likewise became mad by ranckling of his biting. The rumor
of my Sisters fear, and the Knights madness, awaked the sleeping Sorceresse,
and she coming forth at the gate of the Castle, even as my Sister was
passing by, commanding her to stay, would needs know of her the cause why
she fled: which she either could not, or would not manifest, as loathe to
blabbe her own shame, or else ouer-poysed with so desperate an affrightment.

Whereupon, the Enchauntresse going in with her, caused the frantique Knight to
be brought before her, being strongly fettered with cords and manacles, least
any more should be bitten by him: there did he reveal his true love to my
Sister, and how immodestly he found her with the false Knight, to whom he had
imparted his affection, and said, though not so sufficiently revenged, as he
could have wished himself, yet had he left him wounded to death in the Garden.

No sooner had he thus spoken, but the wounded false Knight was brought before
the Sorceresse, and to appease the confusion of judgments in this case, to
three distinct separate places the offenders were appointed, until the morning
of the next day ensuing, which being come, the Enchauntresse pronounced this
sentence following. First, that my Sister, for having no more respect to her
female dignity, should be confined to burn in a quenchlesse fire, as a just
punishment to the heat of her loosenes: and her wounded false Lover, should so
continue without any cure. As for the poor wronged and distracted Knight, who
(moved by the mere justice of his loyalty) was fallen into this miserable
frenzy, past any present recovery, because his madness had assumed the very
height of violence: he should be transformed into a wild Bear, whose nature
leanes much to furious madness. So the Wood and Temple were his assigned haunts,
and the Fountain (in compassion of him) was there erected, to free him from
that furious frenzy, when such a Knight should happen to come thither, whose
valor would embolden him, to drag the beast into the water.

Now as concerning the huge Idol of stone, the spell allotted thereto, was in
this manner, that whenever any one came thither to end this enchauntment, it
should have the motion of a living man, and the strength of a Giant. Thus were
the Knights assigned a lingering death in life, the one by his mortal wound,
the other in his trans-formed madness, and my Sister (who indeed should justly
suffer for them both) had continually remained in that fire, except your virtue
had allayed the vigor thereof, which ceased so soon as you took her forth
of it. Thus have you briefly heard the sum of this adventure, after which, may
it please you to go take your rest, because you must return to comfort the
Emperor Primaleon.

Every one took great pleasure in the Ladies report, understanding thereby the
scope of the adventure: so supper being ended, they severally went to take
their rest. In the morning, every man armed him self to depart thence, and the
Knight of the Island (kneeling before Florendos) would be instituted by him (who
was son to the Emperor) a Deputy governor of the Island, which was
performed on both sides with great love and kindness.

Primaleon, dreaming still on the wizzard Aliartes deliverance, to serve him
self with his aid in enfranchizing Victoria, especially in such occasions
appertayning to the enchauntment, as his courage and valor would but little
sted him in: after that he had advertised his Father, how he had set free his
Mother from an enchauntment, and sent her by Trineus to Constantinople, taking
his gentle farewell of them all, he parted thence, and arriving where Dorina
expected him, he entreated her to leave him a while to him self, and meet him
at the Perilous I Will, if he should stand in need of her help concerning the
enchauntment.

The reason why he would not now have her company, was because he hoped to
meet with Arguto again, to reconcile him from his peevish obstinacy, but he
found a quite contrary hinderance in his way: for Palmerin of England, whom
Fortune had conducted to Constantinople, entered there unknown to any but his
Lady Polinarda, and she perceauing his close intent, was as secret to him as
his part desired. There heard he of the Grecian Knights imprisonment, also the
mishappe and disgrace befalne the wise Aliarte, his brother, and having stayed
eight days thus secretly with his wife: he determined first to deliver his
brother, and afterward go to the I Will of Carderia, holding it for most certain
and assured, that all these things happened but by enchauntment, wherein his
brother Aliarte would highly sted him: so, causing his Horse and Arms to be
closely carried out of the City gates, he proceeded according to his resolved
purpose.

Drusa Velonna, who still awayted mishap toward the Court of Constantinople,
and to further it by her uttermost endeavor, so crossed this intended course,
that Palmerin being transported quite from his determination, unwittingly,
came first of all into the Realm of Macedon: where shunning all walled towns
or places of access, one day (about three a clock in the after noone) he saw a
Knight come riding toward him, bearing (as he did) the imprese of Fortune in
his Sheeld, but figured after a stranger fashion.

He meruailing who durst be so bold as to carry his devise, when he was come
nearer him, spoke in this manner. Do ye hear me Sir? What, are you of my
blood or alliance? or hold you some inward respect to me, that you are so
familiar with my Ensign of Fortune? Primaleon, who had approved his valor so
often, and against so many in other occasions, thought if he could now well
carry the case with Palmerin, he needed to dread no passage whatsoever: and
dissembling as if he knew him not, returned this reply. You should Sir, be but
simply seen in the profession of chivalry, that you dare offer to forbid any
man the bearing of your devise, I never yet combatted with any that carried this
imprese, nor will I be so arrogant, to impeach any man's free liberty in such a
case: notwithstanding, seeing your so uncivil and apparent discourtesie, I
have a will to try, whether I can take that Ensign of Fortune from you or no,
to the end you may live afterward out of her favor.

These words incensed Palmerin beyond all means of sufferance, and because
(for very anger) he could return him no answer, he gave present way to his
Horse for the Ioust. Primaleon repented, that he had so furiously provoked him,
as well in regard of his great valor, which he had never approved, as also
because he was his Uncle, toward whom (indeed) he ought to have been
somewhat more dutiful: but being unable now to shun the trial, without
blame and disgrace, committing him self to his euer-fauouring Mistress, he
gave the spurs to his Courser to meet him valiantly.

In the encounter, the earth trembled as if it had opened, and the Horses met
with such violence together, that they both were set on their buttockes on the
ground, and rising again by the quickening of the spur, the Knights Lances
being shiuerd in pieces to their hands, they were both mightily astonned,
Palmerin reeling twice, as if he would have fallen beside his Horse, and
Primaleon so shaken, as if his senses were quite bereft him.

In this amazement they continued a quarter of an hour, and recovering again
both at one instant, that it could not be iudgd which was the first, they came
against each other with their swords drawn, giving blow for blow, and hurt for
hurt. Palmerins first stroke was upon the helmet, which being of approved very
good temper, was notwithstanding cleft a little: and Primaleon had a blow on
the right side, which pierced quite through the Armor, and wounded him
somewhat. Thus continued the combat above two hours space, and by reason
either of them stood upon his skill and experience, the blows did enter the
sharper where they lighted.

Palmerin conceiting inwardly with him self, what he might be that set him
thus hardly, could not think it to be Don Florian his brother, nor yet
Florendos, because he carried no such corpulence of body: whereupon, he grew
into such fury, that crossing his sword arm over Primaleons back, and
thwarting the other directly before him, he thought so to get him forth of the
saddle. But when Primaleon perceived the peril, and what shrewde girdes his
adversary gave him, he caught fast hold about him likewise, their Horses
waxing so spent and weary, as hardly could they lift a foot from the ground,
but reeled every way, as their Masters strength drew them, till at last they
fell on a heap together: when either (being careful of his best advantage)
recovered footing quickly again, and fell to the combat as freshly as before,
making the field to ecchoe with the clanching of their weapons, and both of
them were wounded very dangerously, sorting near to Velonnaes damnable intent,
that they should have bereft each other of life, but that (by good hap) it came
to pass, when they were able to welde their swords no longer, a friend came
and kindly parted them.

Dramufiande being the man, (who after his departure from Tubante, to go for
the adventure of Carderiaes Island, where he heard so many famous Knights were
imprisoned, Franardo his son being one among them:) hearing the noise of this
fight a far off, followed the weapons sound, till he came to the place where
he found the Knights at handie gripes together, using all their skill and
strength to overthrow each other, and seeing in eythers Sheelde the devise of
Fortune, albeit with the blows they were pitifully mangled: he presently
knew Palmerin, but having no guess or apprehension of the other, he spoke thus
aloude to him. Believe me Sir Knight, you may well presume on Fortunes kind
inclination toward ye, that ye have outstoode the valor of noble Palmerin of
England.

Primaleon, who could not deny within his own thoughts, but that he knew his
Uncle well enough, hearing the Giant thus to name him, let fall his sword, and
offering to kneel, humbly desired pardon for his ouer-bolde transgression: but
Palmerin sustained him in his arms, and as they grew lavish in complement and
courtesy, they felt themselves so faint and weak, by the ouer-prodigall
expense of their blood, that they were constrained to sit down together,
Palmerin falling into a strange swound or trance. Dramufiande with his own
Squire, and the other twain belonging to the Knights, had quickly got ready
two comlie Beeres, whereon (very softly) they laid the wounded Knights, and
having bound up their hurts so well as they could, guided them to the nearest
hospitable part of Macedon, where they remained above twenty days, before they
could be able to bear Arms again.

CHAP. LXI. How Florendos with Oliuato returned to Constantinople, where he
found remedy for his lamenesse. And how the other Knights betook them selves
to several parts, finishing diverse strange and memorable adventures: among
which is expressed, what happened to Arguto in his travail.
AFter Primaleon was departed from the I Will of Carderia, his Father Florendos
having heard (by him) of the sovereign oil or unguent, would needs return
to Constantinople, to recover his ^amenes, Oliuanto was desirous to bear him
company, not altogether so much for his sake, but rather to see fair Auriana,
to tell her the successful adventure of the King and the Lady, whereby he
should be the more welcome to her. Franardo with Forzato and Almaroll, would
needs journey toward the bottomless Lake, to conquer that Island, because his
father Dramufiande could not compass it, being interrupted by Palmerin of
England, who made an end of the adventure. Don Rosuell, Florian, and the rest,
went whether themselves pleased, and Dramufiande, after he had accompanied the
Knights four days together, in which time he saw the dread of peril to be
past, he iourneyed thence to see his son, and keep him company along in this
conquest, because his desires were thereto invited.

Thus so many Knights strayed after adventures, encountering with diverse Ladies
and Knights, that endured wrongs in many several kinds, and were by their
prowess right happily delivered. But as the three Giants rode through a
Forest, they held an earnest discourse to each other, about a noise of hammers
which they heard, and labored (by separating themselves) to find out the
reason thereof: but all their endeavor was to no purpose, because this
adventure appertained to neither of them.

Franardo not knowing whether he went, turned directly back the same way he
came, and meeting with his Father, the sudden joy in either at their encounter,
smothered speech a while in dumb embraces: and riding to meet their other
companions, to take the course before concluded on, they chanced to hear the
voice of Almaroll, and so in short while met altogether. But speak we now of
Florendos again, who meeting by the way with no notable adventure, arrived in
a morning with his son Oliuanto at Constantinople, where the Emperor, Don
Edward, and diverse Knights being in company, welcomd them with no mean joy and
feasting.

Florendos, perceiving the Emperor his Father, and Don Edward of England to be
both in sound estate, was exceeding glad, in regard of the love he bare to
them, and good hope he had of his own recovery.

Passing on along the Palace, his Mother Grydonia the Empress, Miragarda his
wife, and fair Polynarda his sister, came all and embraced him, each
contending who should express most affection in their kind embraces. These
courtesies being grown to a milder kindness, Florendos entreated the Empress
his Mother, that she would vouchsafe to anoint the place, where the nerves of
his leg were contracted numly together: which was no sooner bathed with the
ointment, but his leg became as nimble as ever, each one rejoicing at so
pleasing an accident.

After that Oliuanto had tasted the kindness of his grandmother, and the other
Queens, he went and fell on his knee before Auriana, who nothing ashamed of
the honest love she bare him, made the less outward spare of her inward
affection. When he had told her his mighty labor at the enchaunted Palace,
she fetched a deep inward sigh, as knowing that such an enchauntment was never
begun, (the King being a Magitian of so great experience, and able still to
renew it at his own pleasure) but that he purposed severe revenge upon
Oliuanto.

Now come we to Arguto, who was ready to die with very envy, because so many
famous occasions fell to Primaleon, and still were concluded by his princely
valor, he happened into the Wood, so soon as the three (before named
Giants) were departed thence on their journey, and hearing what a noise the
hammers made, drew directly toward the place: but ever as he attained nearer
and nearer, so much the louder and more violent he heard the noise, making the
very earth to tremble under him, yet his bold courage could not be dismayed,
but still guided him onward, til he came where he might behold a goodly
Sepulcher or Tomb, which appeared by the principal image or figure made in
the midst thereof, to be prepared for some King, there to enjoy his royal
enterment.

Now by reason the hammers noise exceeded in violence, his horse (by no means)
would endure it, whereby he was constrained to allight, and going nearer, found
the place hemd in with a wall three pearches high, but not any door to be
discerned: as he stood musing heereon a while to himself, upon a sudden a
great gate opened in the Wall, whence issued forth a Knight, armed from head
to foot in black Armor, with a short Arming sword in his hand, who spoke to
Arguto in this manner. Proud Knight, hard is thy hap in seeking this Sepulcher,
which was made for Alexander the great, though he dying soon after in Persia,
could not here receive his burial. Nevertheless, the wise Magitian that
builded this place, was willing that no eye should behold it, as ashamed of
his own mighty error, that he should be crossed in the burial of Alexander:
therefore I see no other remedy, but thou must needs venture the combat with
me, and if it be thy hap to overcome me, thou will afterward wish that thy
self had been vanquished.

These words daunted not the heart of Arguto, where valor and arrogancy shook
friendly hands together, but drawing forth his sword, assailed the Knight, to
get within the gate, least it should be shut against him when he had
conquered his enemy, and many blows he delivered, but the other Knight was so
quick and expeditious, as he could not fasten one stroke upon him:
nevertheless, so many thrusts were returned upon him, as if he had not
broken them readily with his Shield of the Sun, the least of them had been of
force to have past quite through him.

Arguto could not devise what to think of the Knights agilitie, which made all
his labor sort to no effect when he smote at him, nor did he deliver any
downright or siding blows, but only foynes and thrusts, which still he
drew back again so far as he could, by reason they stood so close to each
other, which proved but little aduantageable to the strange Knight, for now
when he saw he could make no more thrusts, he was glad to smite any way as best
he might: whereof Arguto made no reckoning at all, because his adversaries
foynes had not hurt him, and these other strokes fell so lightly on him, as if
they had been the blows of a child, whereupon, letting fall his weapon, he
caught Arguto fast about the middle, and drew him into the gate, where the
Knight vanishing, left him shut up within the wall, and now no gate nor
sign thereof, was any more to be seen.

This raised some suspicion in Arguto, that there he was enclosed to be
famished to death, and walking about to see what might betide him, he beheld a
great iron door to lift it self up, which covered a deep hollow vaulte that
went under the Tomb, and he looking into it, saw that it was full of ravenous
Serpents, lifting up their heads, as if they would presently have devoured the
Knight: he not knowing in this case what was best to be done, a Lady appeared
to him, looking forth at a little window in the Sepulchers side, and thus she
spoke. Sir Knight, here art thou like to die with famine, except thou cast thy
self into this hollow vault, where (except heaven be the more propitious to
thee) thou art assured likewise to be eaten up of Serpents.

These two extreme choises seemed somewhat difficult, a present dispatch by
greedy Serpents, or a lingering death by hunger-starued famishment, nor blame
him, to consider a while on so hard an election: to yield to famine, beside the
shame and infamy of the death, it would bereave him of christian and
charitable patience, which is a man's chiefest glory in so fierce an agony: to
cast him self down among the Serpents, therein appeared a manly resolution,
and the dispatch of life would be immediate, but how reported of afterward,
there the question remained.

Having thus consulted with his silent thoughts, which were guilty rather of
too much forwardnes, then any base fear or sleepy cowardice, the self same
courage seized on his spirits, which never left his Graundfather Frysoll, and
without any dread of the very greatest danger, he cast him self at one leap
into the Cave: No sooner had he thus done, but he found him self so writhd
about with the Serpents, as he could stir no part of him but his hands only,
wherefore in such a strict distress, he trusted only to God and his manual
strength, catching the Serpents fast by the necks, and wroong them about with
such facility and ease, as he had killed above an hundred of them very quickly,
which could not but be great comfort to him, seeing his labor thrive so
successefully, and him self not so much molested as at his first entrance:
notwithstanding, there was one Serpent exceeding ye rest in greatness, that had
a crown upon his head, and he held the Knight to so busy a task, as by no
means he could get from him, yet did he often catch hand fast on the Serpents
neck, but all his strength was not able enough to hold him.

While this busy conflict thus continued, the Knight which before had vanished
from his sight, appeared now again above at the mouth of ye Cave, having a
goodly Lance in his hand, and therewith he gave so many thrusts at our
Champion, as he would not afford him the very least breathing while. Now
began Arguto to despair of his life, thinking no means were left for him to
escape, for still as he turned to resist the Serpent, that he should not writhe
his tail about his legs to overthrow him: the Knight above molested him
mightily with the Lance, putting him often times to very hard extremities. The
great Serpent holding out still fiercely against him, at last caught the Knights
head (helmet and all) in his mouth, so that Arguto was ready to fall: and had
he not stiffly graspt the Serpents neck, whose filthy breath and savor
well-neere choakt him, he had presently fallen down dead, but this gripe made
the Serpent let go his hold, and flying off from him to recover breathing, the
Knight above then laid at him with the Lance, so that he could stir no way
without intricate trouble. At last, he thought it his best course to close with
the Serpent, and try if by mere strength he could overcome him, but soon did
he repent so fond an opinion: for the Serpent suddenly spread out his wings,
and wroong him so painfully between their gripe, that he never felt the like
agony before.

Nevertheless, Arguto well remembering with himself, that his life and honor
stood now on the very last cast, caught once more the Serpents neck between his
hands, and griping it with like strength as he had done before, he quickly got
loose forth of his wings, which proved no great advantage to him, for the
Knight with ye Lance as cruelly vexed him, and made him endure a miserable
torment, whereof to be rid one way or another, and either end his life or the
adventure, he got fast hold of the Lance, which he pulled unto him with so maine
violence, as (being wholly possessed of it) the Knight was gone again, and not
to be seen. When he saw ye Lance thus in his own custody, by which he had
suffered so much pain and travail, his mind half persuaded him, that in it
remained some secret virtue* whereby ye enchauntment might be brought to
conclusion, and beginning to smite the Serpents with the Lance which now came
about him more furiously then before, so many of them as the Lance lighted
upon, presently turned about and fell down dead. But the great crowned
Serpent, making no account at all of his strokes, put him to more perilous
trouble then all the rest did, therefore he was glad to wait opportunities,
and by many leapes and turns to keep still aloof, defending him self so
well as he could with the Lance, the length whereof was diverse times
discommodious to him. At last, watching advantage that might prove to some
purpose, even when him self least expected such good luck, the Serpent (waxing
weary of the blows he received by the enchaunted Lance) giving back a pretty
distance from the Knight, made proffer of a sudden leap upon him, to catch
his head once more in his mouth, and shooting forth his neck, lay gaping to
express what he intended.

Arguto (loath to loose time so apparently offered) thrust his Lance into the
Serpents throat, and driving it onward to his heart, tumbled him over and over
stark dead, which good occasion (had it not thus happened,) he might sooner
there have lost his own life, then gained the victory against the Serpent.

Being now sore labored and very weary, he sat down and rested him self upon
the dead Serpents, and not dreaming of any further danger to ensue, suddenly a
Serpent gript him by the belly, and dragging him along down a pair of
stairs, his head hung still upward, receiving many knockes and thumps all the
way he was thus carried. When he was come to the hethermost step of all, he
would have risen up, but he could not devise how, when presently there came a
savage man, with a strange fashioned sword, ready drawn in his hand, and
smiting a mighty blow a thwart the Serpent, seuerd it in sunder just in the
midst: but Arguto was almost dead with his dragging down the stairs, and
doubtless had perished, but that his good Armor did very much sted him, but
being delivered from so painful a griping, he started up on his feet,
preparing his sword to encounter with the savage man, who using no words at
all, but making signs to have him stand on his best guard, they buckled close
together, Arguto wounding the savage man in many parts of his body, because he
had no skill in defending him self, nor diverse times could hardly keep up on
his feet, which made Arguto the more hopeful of victory, and stepping upon
him at an advantage, offered to have slain him: but that the first Knight came
again crying to him, that he should hold his hand and not kill him, because of
his blood would arise up more Serpents, then all those he had slain before in
the vault.

Arguto presently drew back his sword, and devising how he might otherwise
overcome him, saw fixed in the marble wall of the Cave, a great Ring of iron,
with a long chain hanging down and fastened thereto, which he immediately
imagined, was purposely kept there to bind this fury. With much a-doe he
haled him to it, where at length he bound him very strongly, and finding no
other encombrance to hinder him, he came forth of the Cave, on the other side
of the Sepulcher, which he perceived to be fairer and richer then that he had
first seen.

Here began he now to glut his greedy eye, with sight of the several statues
in order, which declared the admirable deeds of Alexander: first, how he
fought with Darius King of Persia, and overcame him: next, his battle with
King Porus of India: as also his artificial passage of the River Indus. And as
he stood noting a very dangerous hazard, which happened to him at a Castle
where he fought: he heard him self called by his name, and turning to see who
was so familiar with him, he espied close by him two strange Monsters, having
the heads and breasts of a Viper, and all their other parts like to a Lion,
except the claws, which rather seemed like the tallants of a Griffen. These
two catching fast hold with their teeth on his arm, gript him so strictly, as
for a good while he could hardly stir himself: but when they saw that he
shrunk no more, neither fell down (as they expected) they let go their hold,
and he recovering quickly the Lance, accounting it his best weapon to fight
with against them, laid at each of them with such skill and readiness, as if he
had not that day been wearied at all. In short time he had so wounded both the
Monsters, that they (as their latest refuge and help) got on each side so
near him, that rising together on their hinder feet, they fastened their
former fangs about him, and their tallants so pierced through the closing of
his Armor, as thereby he received six little hurts, and lost the benefit of
his Lance, wherefore a while he must make use of his hands, catching either of
them so strongly by the legs, and bending them violently (as if he meant to
break them) made them at last to give him liberty, when perceauing he could
not regaine his Lance, he drew forth his sword, wherewith defending him
self, more then offending the Monsters, he trauersed about a while, as aiming
at the likeliest means for victory. Suddenly he apprehended this resolution,
either to make a speedy dispatch of his life, or by one way or another conclude
his enterprise, whereupon, he fell down flat on his back, with his sword in
the one hand, and his dagger in the other, that the Monsters might imagine him
to be fully vanquished. Which sorting to his expectation, and they stepping
over him to tear him with their tallants, he found his hope almost quite
frustrated, for stabbing at their bellies, which he supposed to be tender, he
found that their skins were of exceeding sound proof, till chauncing at last
upon the navel, he made such a large incision with his sword, as the bowels of
one of them dropped out on the ground, and the other sled away he could not tell
whether.

So soon as the Monster was thus fied and gone, all the several Statues began
to move and stir, especially that of Alexander the great, framing such actions
and comely iestures, cach after his Country quality and fashion, as if they
expressed signs of thankfulness to him, which (despite the Magitians utmost
malice) they still continued, to his no (...) wonder and admiration.

Hereby Arguto understood, that the adventure was now fully concluded, whereof
his thoughts growing greatly proud, he thus resolved, that this his conquest
was of as much fame and glory, as Primaleons was at the I Will of Carderia: then
turning him about, the Knight that was the Magitian, and could not die while
the enchauntment endured, appeared before him very sadly, and in regard of the
immediate death he now expected, he spoke unto him in this manner. Sir Knight,
well may thou vaunt of the worthiest enterprise, that any Knight errant durst
ever undertake, yet now by thee right nobly accomplished: for I am the man
that made this Sepulcher, hoping to have had ye whole world wonder at it, but
error beguild me, and baffuld the height of my chiefest hopes, for Alexander
dying so far hence, and his absolute rule divided into four fair
Monarchies, I forthwith framed this enchauntment, to the end no mortal eye
might ever behold it. But thou art come, and have disappointed my
determination, which, as it cuts the thread of my life, so shall it inflict
this punishment upon thee, that thou shall never have her whom thy heart longs
most after. And this (beside) I tell thee that all my dessignment is not
frustrated by thee, for in this Tomb shall be buried the only virtuous and
renowned Emperor, that ever the future ages shall afford: having thus spoken,
he died, and immediately the noise of Hammers ceased.

Arguto was displeased at this sad prognostication concerning his Love, but
such was his present joy for his victory, as he suffered other thoughts the
easier to pass his remembrance: and searching further about the Sepulcher, at
last he espied two huge Giants of iron, with each a mighty Hammer in his hand,
whereby he gathered, that their knocking had maintained the enchauntment. So
finding nothing else there to do for him, he prepared to part thence, when
presently he beheld his Squire to enter bringing him such provision as he could
get, because he thought his Lord had need of refreshing: when the Squire had
bound up his wounds received in the fight, they sat down to eat, and
afterward betook them selves to rest, where a while we must leave them,
returning now to Palmerin and Primaleon.

CHAP. LXII. How Palmerin (so soon as his hurts were healed) went strait to
Constantinople: And how Primaleon went to the Perilous I Will, and what happed
afterward, for delivery of the wizzard Aliarte.
PAlmerin, having recovered his health in such manner, that he was well able
to wear his Armor, took a kind farewell of his Nephew Primaleon, and
parted alone from him, very much discontented in his mind, to see the only
palm of valor (which he supposed to be borne by none but himself)
trans-ferred now unto another, which made him desirous once more to approve
his Nephew, for a more absolute and clear distinguishment, which of them was
most to be esteemed in chivalry: for the Knights (in those times) were so
addicted to fame and reputation, that (for purchase thereof,) they respected
neither parentage, friendship, nor ought else whatsoever.

In these distempred thoughts, he iournied toward Constantinople, where being
arrived, he was by the Emperor, and all the other great Lords and Princesses
so lovingly welcomed, as his noble virtues right worthily merrited: but more
especially, and indeed (as it ought to be) his wife entertained him with all
gracious kindness, acquainting him now with an important matter, which (at his
late secret being there) was thought meet to be concealed, I mean the
treachery of Tamerco, and how far he prevailed in her carriage thence, which
raised such a wrathful spleen in Palmerin, as presently he determined
Tamercoes death. And seeing him by chance pass through the Hall, he ran upon
him with his weapon drawn, where (but that his Cousin Oltrando stepped suddenly
between them, of whose well-deseruing Palmerin made great regard,) Tamercoes
life had there perrished: and this happened to be the occasion, that moved
these two Indians to practice their flight thence, as hereafter more at large
shall be declared.

Leave we Palmerin awhile here to ease and rest himself, and let us speak
now of Primaleon, who iournying toward the Perilous I Will, and riding the way
which to himself seemed most convenient, at the entrance of a Wood he espied
Dorina, as attending there for him, whereof he was not a little joyful,
because by her he might compass the better means, in understanding what
appertained to the enchauntment, wherein the wise Aliarte was detained, which
indeed was of such powerful strength, as (without her help) he could never
have compassed the end thereof.

Dorina riding along with him, fell into this discoursing, that it best became
him now, to omit all other needless occasions, and ride directly to the I Will
whereas Aliarte was imprisoned, to join there with happy opportunity, while
Drusa Velonna, (being now elsewhere very seriously busied,) could not
interpose herself to cross his purpose. So riding on along the Seacoast,
they came at last to a Castle there builded on the shore, where they made a
new devised kind of boat, with a broad bottom, two large paces in widenes,
the sides very low, for such employment as shall be reported: then providing
himself of hammers, and grapling yrons to open the strong made Cage, as also
certain great sharp hooks, made after no common or ordinary manner, with
great strong ropes fast knit (...) them, having put all his provision aboard,
and leau^ (...) ^rina at the Castle, away he went in his boa^ (...) his no
little wonder) did cut through the (...) ^ding swiftnes, Primaleon being so
(...) hardly could he contain himself (...) even as if he had already set (...)

The learned Wizzard, knowing by virtue of his skill, how near the hour of
his deliverance drew, had (in this time of his aboade there) called unto ye
people of the Island, and given them advise to build a little Tower, near to
the rockie cliffe where the iron Cage hung, in expectation of some success
that was to ensue, whereto they yielded, and accordingly performd it.

Primaleon, who thought he should never come soon enough to this labor, when
(a far off) he had a sight of the Cage, went on the merrier, and being come
within a bowshoote of it, he suddenly felt underneath his boat, somewhat
resembling a huge great Fish, that earnestly labored to ouer-turne it: and
some-time he saw it lifted so high on the one side, that he verily thought it
would have suncke to the bottom, nevertheless, his mind still continued
inuinsible, and onward went the boat, until it attained so near to the Cage,
that he casting forth one of his corded hooks, by good hap it fastened and
caught hold on the Cage, whereat Aliarte became a little discomforted, fearing
least the violent current of the water, would drive the boat away so mainely
in the stream, yt the Cage thereby might be drawn into the Sea, and so they
both be drowned together.

Primaleon, whose brain was somewhat giddied, and his stomach likewise
sickishly altered, with the fogge and damp of this troubled water, sitting
down to rest himself awhile, suddenly beheld in the stearne of his boat, an
old aged man, so weak and feeble in outward appearance, as if each minute he
should give up the ghost: he sat and laughed a pretty while at Primaleon, who
(though with kind co^^ of his years) did the like at him, saying within him
(...) ^t if there came no greater resistance, right soon (...) ^he set at
liberty. Scorning to offer injury to (...) ^we the stearne of the boat (as if
the old (...) extremity of weight) to sinck vn^ (...) ^ereof provoking his
patience, (...)

What will thou do, thou foolish old man? Forbear to sinck my boat, least I
take thee by the beard, and cast thee headlong into the Island. This beard of
mine, (answered the old man) shall put thee to more pain then thou art aware
of, and rising up against him, he spredde his beard abroad in such a large
compass, that twice the length of a man's arm it equalled every way, and look
wheresoever it touched Primaleon, it set his Armor on fire in the same place,
which fire having continued some little space, would then again extinguish of
it self.

The Knight heereat grew greatly displeased, yet reputed it no less then
basest villainy, to draw his sword on an aged man, and flight (on the contrary)
was as shameful: wherefore taking up a little club that lay by him, and
therewith bearing back his beard when he offered it toward him, the old man at
length was so mad angry, that leaping upon Primaleons back, he wound his long
beard about his neck, and set such a flame about his head, that the old man
starting from him for safety of himself, left the Knight in such a wonderful
perrill, as Aliarte himself was fearful of his death. But the flame being
extinct, and Primaleon well perceiving that all the old man's power consisted in
his beard, he drew his sword, and therewith cut it close by his chinne,
where-upon the old man fell down bereft of his senses, and ye fire (which in
this bickering had caught hold on his Armor) immediately vanished.

Being thus at liberty from any impeachment, he cast out another corded
hook, which likewise linckt fast about abarre of the Cage, so that now by
help of both the ropes, he could draw himself the nearer to it: but as he
busily thus bestowed his time, the great Fish, which at first made proffer of
ouer-turning the boat, leapt now into it, lading it with such an incredible
poyse, that every minute it stood upon the sincking. The Fish opening a wide
huge mouth, swallowed up the old man alive and lusty, which somewhat
terrifying the thoughts of Primaleon, (seeing himself in so helpless a place,
where he knew not how to employ his pains, but either he must overcome that
monstrous Fish, or serve for food to his insatiable mawe, or else be drowned
by his boats sinking) made him step forward with his prepared weapon,
delivering many sharp strokes at the Fishes mouth, which still kept wide open
as ready to devour him, and albeit he used his uttermost force, yet such was
the Fishes strong pressure upon him, that (in despite of what soever he could
do) he swallowed him up, as before he did the old man, and he felt such
pinching gripes in his throats passage, as now he could build on no assurance
of life. Nevertheless, by the Knights mighty stirring and striking about him,
at last he grapled hold on the old man's chinne again, which lay against the
very tendrest part of the Fishes belly, and there the Knight so labourd with
his dagger, that at last he made a large wide passage, out at which he slipped
very easily, and after him came forth a Beast somewhat bigger then a dog,
but of such a strange deformed shape, as he could not imagine of what kind he
was: this beast caught the great Fish by one of his finnes, and cast him out of
the Boat into the water, but such was the danger of the Boat in the Fishes
turning over, that the Boat was ready to sink flat down.

This fear being ouer-blowne, and the Boat in better estate of stayednesse,
the beast began proudly to walk up and down, and Primaleon still expecting
when he should be assailed, was not unready in the like to the beast, and
blows he felt to light upon him self, but ever when he returned requital,
he saw the beast to leap every where about him, but no stroke of his to
fasten upon him: so that Primaleon (very much wearied with laboring thus in
vain) the more willingly desired to sit down and rest him, but then the
beast leapt very swiftly about him, and the beast having the paws of a Lion,
as also the tushes of a wild Boar, had rent off some part of his Armor
beneath, and with his teeth hurt him upon the right thigh. The strife thus
continued between them for two hours space, with no mean vexation and
trouble to Primaleon, who perceauing the beast to offend him so harmfully with
his teeth and paws: concluded upon a quick speedy dispatch of life, or else to
break through the Ice of the dangerous enterprise. Which he could not
accomplish while he kept upon his feet, wherefore he fell flat on his back all
a-long, expecting when the beast should offer to make his seazure to kill him.
As he thus lay awayting his advantage, with no silly care to avoid the beasts
dangerous proffers, he gave a foorth-right thrust with his sword, which
happening full into the beasts mouth, cut quite in sunder his longest teeth,
and many of the other beside, so that they falling out of his mouth on the
ground, and the beast thus despoyled of his chiefest Armor, with his feet kept
a treading on the throat of Primaleon, wounding him in diverse places very
daungerously. But because he scorned to be slain in so servile a manner (his
hopes thereby aiming at much better success) he recovered footing again,
making many gallant assaults for dispatch of ye beast, who being defeated of
his teeth, could not annoy him so much as he did before: for now his best
fight consisted in his foremost feet, which the beast lifting up both together,
to seize on the Knight withal, with a glenting stroke he smote them off both
together, which making the body to reele about confusedly, at last it tumbled
into the water. Now began the Sea to swell in such sort, that the boat was
driven near to the Rock, and was just under the Cage of Aliarte.

Here give me leave to tell you, that the wizzard himself stood now doubtful
of two apparent perils, one of them, least the rough winds agitation should
break the Cage against the Rock, moved by the continual force upon the
water: the other, least the boat should strike so strongly against it, as
(driving it from the fixed hold) might presently drown it: whereupon, Aliarte
cried out to Primaleon, with his hooks and ropes to hold off a while, because
the last proof remained yet unattempted, and that (perhaps) would fall out to be
ye worst of al. Primaleon, who could not but be wondrously weary with so long
labor, being now scarce able to fetch his breath, sat down to rest himself
a little: but fearing least his wounds would grow stark and chillie, he iudgd
it better for him to walk up and down the boat, his mind still seriously
labourd and busied, how he should get the Cage from the cliffe. So long his
thoughts were thus employed, till (had not Aliarte cried out the sooner to him,
to beware of a Monster of the Sea, which softly had stolen up into the boat)
he had been plucked backward into the water: but turning himself upon this
warning, he beheld the strangest form and shape, that ever any man had seen
before: nor was this any feigned Monster, but a mere abortiue of ye Sea, which
Drusa Velonna (by her art) had brought out of the widest Seas, to prohibit
the freedom of Aliarte by any man.

This strange Sea Monster, being indeed called a Tritone, to wit, a man
(after the Sea-kinde) composed of flesh and fish in his several substances,
came sternely upon him, grasping him so strongly between his arms, with
flings and wrestlings every way, that Primaleon hardly knew how to help him
self, the Monster still dragging him to the boats side, struggling very hardly
to throw him ouerboorde, and the boat kept such a dancing on every side, as
Primaleon could hardly stand upon his feet.

He not knowing in this extremity what was best to be done, perceived the
long beard which he cut from the old man, to grow upon the chinne of the
Monster, whereon he took fast hold, and dragd him about the boat after him in
such manner, that seeing he used no further contention, he cast off the Monster
to his own liberty: whereupon, because he would come no more in so strict
handling, he lay still a while very seruilely, but started up afterward very
quick and sprightly, and leaping about him, to catch him within the compass
of his beard, the Knight as nimbly kept aloof off from him, so that all the
Monsters slights proved but in vain.

Now because this conflict showed not as yet, on which side the victory was
likeliest to fall, a crimo^ blush of shame dyed Primaleons cheeks, yt his
labor proved fruitless, when his heart assured him of happy success: for he
had wounded the Triton in diverse parts of his body, which made his fury to
raise it self with the greater violence, being nothing else indeed, but the
mere induction to his death ensuing. And let me tell ye withal, that our
Champions lavish expense of his blood, abated his courage and very much
weakened him, so that while the Monster drew back to breathe, he (as gladly)
leaned on his sword to enjoy a little rest.

As thus he stood, a sudden flawe of the Sea smote the boat against the
rock, and made the stern end to split a little, which rush of the boat
casting Primaleon backward, the Monster caught him by the feet, dragging him
along so rudely and speedily, that having gotten him half out of the boat,
the Monster leapt into the water, still holding him fast by the feet, but the
weight of his body so counterpo^zd the Monsters tugging, that he could not hale
him out into the Sea. Primaleon, beholding the extremity of his perrill,
strugled toward the ropes that held the hooks fast in the Cage, and catching
hold of them, one of them (to which he most of all trusted) loosed in the
knot, and so cast him quite out of the boat into the Sea, where being heavily
laden with his Armor, he would not forgo the cord, but kept it still in his
hand: for a man when he is in the greatest perrill, will never fail in some
part of hope, having any thing that may but appear to sted him.

When the Monster saw him thus in the water, he came violently upon him, and
casting his arms about him, strove (all he might) to diue and drown him: but
men (nearest death) being most covetous of life, make what means they may to
avoid the detriment, so did Primaleon in this desperate agony, for suddenly
he took the Monster by the beard, and getting aloft upon him, kept him
strongly underneath him, then fastening the cord about his girdle, and
afterward to the side of the boat, he drew forth hi^ ^ger, and wounded the
Monster in so many several p^, that there he quite killed him.

But now came the greatest danger of all, for the Monster dying, gript him the
more strongly between his arms, and as he suncke, he drew him down likewise,
where it had been impossible for him to have escapt, but by the cord at hs
girdle fastened to the boat, whereby (with much ado) he got up again, and
then the Boat proved his greatest enemy, for his own weight had almost
ouer-turnd it upon him, beside, his wounds wexed stiff and festering, when,
even as (by mere weakness) his hold was like to deceive him, there came a
mighty billow of the Sea, which skansing the heavier side of the boat, threw
him the easier just into the midst of it, where finding himself free from any
perrill, he praised God on his knees, for delivering him out of so manifest a
danger.

No sooner was the Monster suncke into the Sea, and he upon his feet within
the boat, but the storm and tempest immediately ceased, and the enchauntment
being ended, the wise Aliarte (by his skill) caused a great fire to flame in
the boat, which serving as a warning to Dorina that now the adventure was
accomplished, she came presently in a little Skiffe, and in short while was
with Primaleon, where binding up the wounds he had received, and pouring in
oils of precious sovereignty, they sat down and rested after this long
labor.

CHAP. LXIII. Here follows the deliverance of the wise Aliarte, and what
Drusa Velonna did in hinderaunce thereof.
THE people of the Island, having noated the angry rough winds, and mighty
tempest on the Sea, remained in hourly expectation, what would ensue
concerning Aliarte: and albeit he had caused them to build the tower, assured
them of his speedy deliverance, yet not one of them durst enter into such
hardines, as to come and behold the prosecution of the act. But when they saw
the air more mildly calmed, and no rough storms were stirring abroad, then
they ran forth upon the Rock, and others of them came thither with a fair
goodly Ship, to try if now they could attain to the Cage. The Ship arose in
such a height, that her sides came close to the Cage, whereby Primaleon the
easier compassed, to loose the hold that fastened it to the Rock, laboring
with his hooks and hammers, till at last it was at perfect liberty: to the no
little joy of the people, which they expressed by loud shoutes and cheerful
acclamations, then went they all upon the shore, carrying (by Aliarts
direction) the Cage along with them.

Drusa Velonna, was all this while very busily employed, in recovering Tirrena
by enchauntment from Constantinople, for she being now grown great with child,
the Sorceresse intended, to bestow the Kingdom of Paraz upon the infant, as
in right descent from his Father Dirdan, and thereby to bring a fresh affliction
upon the Christians. This made her ye less respective of Aliarts imprisonment,
which questionless she had else further prolonged, if not hindered Dorina in
the deed doing. But when by her Art she was informed, that her enemy enjoyed
his full freedom and liberty, in less then four hours she conuayed
herself to the Perilous I Will, where she beheld him to be newly arrived with
Primaleon, who having put off his Armor, because his hurts were greatly
offensive to him, by Aliarte he was laid in a sumptuous Litter, and so carried
along toward the City.

Velonna, to cross them in their course, and to keep Aliarte from coming
where his books were, wrought a very strange stratageme: for she slung a
certain powder among the people, which drove them into an immediate error of
oppinion, that Aliarte and Primaleon were two huge fierce Giants, and came
trechorously to take seazure on the Island, which made them fall to furious
resistance, and there they had been murdered among them, but that Serasto the
Son of Argentao, who (with diverse other that had felt none of this hellish
powder, and therefore were free from so gross a conceit) came and appeased
their violence, shutting up many of them in a new erected Tower, and safely
conuaying the other from them.

When Drusa Velonna saw her last hope thus frustrated, fearing least Aliarte
should seize upon her, she speedily fled thence to Paraz, where she
attended for the Childs creation in the Kingdom: and she being thus gone
thence, the enchauntment of the powder ceased, and the people plainly
perceiving their error, humbly desired pardon of their Lord, who well
understanding what had been done, could not but hold them justly excused.

Primaleon being brought to the City, such sovereign medicines were applied
to his wounds, as within ten days he was perfectly cured, in all which
time, Aliarte entreated him right nobly and kindly, knowing how helpful his
valor would prove to all Christendom.

During these days of their repose, Aliarte perusing his Books of art, used
a little more circumspection then before he had done, and perceiving that
Primaleon desired nothing more, then his help in the freedom of his fair love
Victoria, he resolved to assist him: but he did not remember, that the time
yet was contrary to such an attempt, which should with greater care have been
respected. But leave we them awhile, and come now to Floraman, who intending
to work wonders for the love of Clariana, became on a sudden quite changed and
altered.

CHAP. LXIIII. How Floraman seeing himself but slenderly regarded by
Clariana, became enamoured of the fair Princess Victoria, concluding to go
and deliver her out of the enchaunted Palace.
FLoraman, having recovered at one instant, both his hurts received in the
fore-remembred battles, and also forgetfulness of his fruitless love to
Altea, perceiving himself to be despised by Clariana, who was already
married to Guarino: became as a man merely desperate, and suddenly departed
with Dragonalte from Constantinople, but used not one word all the way as he
rode, whereat Dragonalte meruailing not a little, and weary of so unsociable a
companion, letting him alone (for the first day) in this sullen humor, the
next morning he began with him in this manner.

Lord Floraman, what the reason may be of your minds molestation, I can
neither guess, nor do covet to know, only this I am certain of, that if any
amourous passion have surprizde ye, another man's company will scarce be
pleasing to ye, therefore, when it shall seem good to you to travail alone,
I will shape my course some other way, as loathe to impeach your amourous
priuacies.

Floraman, because he would not be offensive to his friend, having
(unwillingly) endured the King of Nauaraes company so long, returned him this
answer. Royal Lord, my hard fortune is such, as I cannot keep even quarter
of kindness with my friends, only through an inward secret vexation:
therefore, not to be burdenous to you or my self, you may (at your pleasure)
dispose of your own travail, and let me and melancholy wander alone
together. Dragonalte being of good apprehension, quickly conceived the intent
of Floraman, whereupon, turning his Horse, and bidding him very kindly adiewe,
he rode away from him, crossing many Countries and Provinces, without any
accident worthy rehearsal, till at length he came home to his own Kingdom of
Nauara.

Floraman seeing him self left thus alone, alighted from his Horse, and
sitting down under a fair spreading Oak, commanding his Squire to walk
aloof off: he began to meditate with him self, by what means he might
soonest compass his own death, but with some high and apparent example, that
his fatal hap grew only by love. Among infinite various discoursings with
him self, at last his capricious humor thus resolved, to become enamoured of
the fair young Lady Victoria: not with any hope of ever compassing his
affection, but to hasten the speedier occasion of his death. For right well he
knew, how dearly the second Primaleon loved her, and Arguto likewise as
vehement in his choice: both of which being so famous for Arms, he might the
sooner be slain by one of them. Upon this determination, he returned secretly
to Constantinople, where (in the Garden belonging to the Princess Flerida)
hung the lively counterfeite of Victoria: which he earnestly gazing upon, grew
so deeply enamoured of, as his former intent of death was quite abandoned, and
his love to her so addicted, that now (in hope of enjoying her) he more
especially desired to live. Thus turmoyld in loves labourinth, he closely
departed the City again, and riding along through unfrequented Plains and
Forests: at last he came to the Sea side, where he espied a small Barque
dancing on the billows, as if it purposely stayed there in expectation of
him. His melancholy thoughts still guiding him on, he saw a Lady standing on
the Ships beak head, whose looks much resembled his Altea: but he having
now let pass her remembrance, seeing her wafting him toward her with her
hand, made what have he could thither, which she beholding, immediately
vanished. Floraman somewhat abashed at this strange augurie, began to imagine,
that he was called thither to die: but his amorous passions, transporting him
with desire to find out Victoria, quickly rid his brain of this suspicion.
Where upon, aduauncing him self nearer to the Barque, he stepped into it, when
presently it launched off from the shore, with an easy gentle gale of wind,
and so struck up into the maine Sea.

Then suddenly happened a violent tempest, which made him every minute in
danger of perishing: but his mind despising all peril whatsoever, cheared
his hope in the very sharpest agony, and the Barque joined at length close to a
vast mountain. Where stepping forth armed as he was, he went on foot up such
an high ascending hill, that slipping oftentimes upon the smooth stones, he
slid down often backward, and made very slender riddance of his way. This kind
of labor lasted him all that day, with much vexation, and but to little
purpose, as seeming that he should never attain the height of the hill: so,
night ouer-taking him, he made a better supper of sad conceits, then any other
viands which could content him: his mind still aiming at nothing else, but how
he might soonest find the fair Lady, and then (if she likewise disdained to
love him) to practice some present dispatch of his life, but with a memorable
testimony, that he died for love. The morning shaking off his dumpish
cogitations, he coasted along the side of the mountain, and came at last to a
pretty large Plain, which round was engirt with big rising hills, and in the
midst thereof stood a wonderful goodly Palace. Now albeit he had never seen
this place before, yet he called to remembrance, some former report of ye
Princess Leonarda, and that (in all respects like this) such another was the
Palace belonging to Queen Melia: hereupon, his heart began to leap with
conceit of joy, and he held it as a matter most certain, that here the Lady
Victoria was enchaunted.

As he directed his course on toward ye Palace, he beheld a Knight, with two
goodly bloodhounds walking by him, come (as it were) with intent to meet him,
and suddenly the Hounds began to run toward him, where doubtless (being
hunger-starued and greedy) they had torn him in pieces: but that the Knight,
(who indeed was Drusa Velonna thus trans-formed, to guide Floraman into ye
Palace without any combat,) reclaimed them back, and then stepping to him, he
used these or the very like speeches. Sir Knight, I see that you are a
stranger in these parts, wherefore, if love have been your conducter hither,
especially to the Lady enclosed in this Palace: you may account it as no mean
fortune, yt it is your good hap to meet with me, who bids you boldly to rest
assured, that here is ye choicest beauty enchaunted, which ever mortal eye as
yet has looked upon, therefore, if it please you to go along with me, your own
eyes shall be apparent witnesses, that the world contains not a comparable
beauty.

Floraman being fully confirmed in opinion, that it was the fair Lady
Victoria, without any further protracting of time, followed the guidance of the
Knight, and he was no sooner entered the Palace, but having a sight of
Victoriaes person, he became (by power of the enchauntment) so jealous of her,
as he would needs undertake ye Ioust, against any that durst presume to come
thither. But quickly was she rapt again from his sight, which enflamed his
desire with ye greater vehemency, and bound him most officiously to her
service. But leave we him, and come again unto Arguto, who having understood
in his travail, of diverse matters concerning Drusa Velonna, and that the
beautiful Lady Victoria remained enchaunted, where the Princess Leonardo had
been before imprisoned, hearing also, that Primaleon had delivered Aliarte out
of the iron Cage, and fearing least by the help a counsel of him, he would
likewise enfranchise the Lady Victoria: he purposed to journey thither before
him, hoping that Fortune would be as furtherous to him in his love, as she was
renowned by most part of his enterprises. Being thus resolved, he travailed
(according to such informations as were given him) for his speedier attaining
to the Palace of Queen Melia.

CHAP. LXV. How Arguto arrived by strange occasion, at the Palace belonging to
the fair Queen Melia, and how he remained there enchaunted.
DRusa Velonna, awayting all possible means still to disturb the Christians,
wrought (by her Art) this travail of Arguto into those parts, to the end that
when Primaleon should happen thither, they might be the death of one another:
for Arguto was of such dauntlesse valor, that if he might compass the death
of Primaleon, he cared not on what desperate terms his own life stood. Being
then thus summoned to the search of Victoria, and he loath to loose any time in
vain, directed his course as before you have heard, and riding through a
queachie thick Wood, an angry wild Bear came mainely against him, as meaning
to staunch his hunger upon him: but he having his Lance still ready charged,
defended him self with such skill and manhood, as the Bear (not daring to
endure his blows) began to run from him a softly pace, even as if (through
mere weariness) he could speed no faster. Arguto pursued the track of the
Bear, till it brought him directly to the Sea side, where the beast still
holding his course a-long, met by chance with a Damsel upon the way, whom
he catching up between his paws, ran with her into a little Pynace, which
lay at Ankor there hard by the riuage.

No sooner had the Bear carried his pray a board, but the Pynace launched (of
it self) into the water, Arguto riding his Horse still after, where suddenly
he espied the Bear on the hindeck of the Pynace, and the Damsel sitting
down close by him, without any touch or offer of violence. This gave the
Knight a present apprehension, that herein consisted some strange adventure,
wherefore, riding nearer to the Pynace side, he gave his Horse the spur, and
mounted into it: the vessel putting off immediately from the shore, before the
Squire could gain his entrance, and so it rode out into the maine deep,
having neither the help of Oars or sails.

Having (by his own estimation) gone above a thousand miles, at length the
Pinace drew near to a steepy mountain, whose descent fell down into the Sea,
affording no easy place for landing: which he not regarding, at all adventure
mounted forth on shore, and the Pinace struck back again into the Sea. Being
thus alone there by him self, he happened upon a narrow path, which guided him
along the side of the mountain, where riding on with what have he best could,
he came at last to the quadrant plain, where he soon had a sight of the
forementioned Palace: there met he also the Knight, and his two ravenous
bloodhounds, one of them flying so fiercely upon him, that he caught his Horse
by the nosthrill, and made him fling about very distemperatly, which Arguto
perceauing, and loath to be overthrown by his Horse, leapt out of the saddle,
opposing him self against the Hounds and the Knight, who having a keen edged
Axe in his hand, delivered three or four such rude strokes therewith, as
Arguto reeld about twice or thrice, and (at last) was glad to lean himself
against a tree. The bloodhounds still made violently at him, and fastening
hold upon one of his legs, dragd him along as purposing to kill him: but his
courage contemning all dangers whatsoever, and scorning to die in so vile a
manner, being got upon his feet, he drew forth his sword, and aiming a maine
stroke at the Hounds, they flew off from him, and then the Knight set to him
with his Axe, which in short while after slipped out of his hand, and Arguto
doubling stroke upon stroke, had brought ye Knight into weak estate, but that
the bloodhounds leapt upon his back, and (by ill hap) rent in sunder the
laces of his helmet, which falling off his head to the ground, and he (still
fiercely set upon by them) began to imagine his case somewhat desperate.

Now, albeit he would more gladly have parted with his life, then use any base
means for safety thereof: yet seeing his head in this sort disarmed, it
could not but make him the more wary of himself: wherefore, avoiding the
blood-houndes so well as he could, and the Knights assaults which grew
troublesome to him, he found that he had no loytering work in hand. For such
was the agilitie both of the hounds and the Knight, as they got advantage
still on him, but he could not fasten a blow upon them: yet grew they (at
length) to retire from his strokes, and he (shunning a dangerous proffer of
the Axe) followed the hounds as they took toward the Palace, intending to
accomplish some noble act, or else to die in the height of his presumption.

And as the Knight came upon him with the Axe, with a full intent to have
cleft his head, the hounds caught hold on the lappets of his Armor, and hald
him forward so confusedly, as at last he was drawn within ye Palace, whereof
the Knight being very joyful, that he had him within compass of the
enchauntment, he came to Arguto with these speeches. Be not offended Sir
Knight, that thou art thus brought into this Palace: for here thou shall see
the richest beauty of the world, and it may be thy good hap to be possessor
thereof.

Arguto persuading himself, that he meant the beautiful Victoria, took this
as a happy welcome to him, and answered. To me (Sir) can come no greater good
fortune, then so rare a beauty as you have spoken of: which I am the more
desirous to behold, to know whether it be she or no, that is the only cause
of my travail. Even she it is, (replied the Knight) and for your better
assurance herein, go along with me, and you shall see her. So walking onward
into a Chamber, he there beheld the fair Victoria, and as he offered amourous
parlance and service to her, she vanished from him, leaving him so full of
passionate tormentings, that now he wished himself hand to hand with
Primaleon, to try which of them could best deserve her.

In that very instant came Floraman to him, who (by means of the enchauntment)
had no knowledge of him, neither Arguto had any of him: and thus wrought
Velonna, because they should not combat together, by reason the nature of the
enchauntment was such, that so soon as any man's blood was spilt in the
Palace, immediately the enchauntment ceased. So fell they into kind
communication, each of them so deeply affected to the Lady, that they thought
each hour a year till some errant Knight came, to contend with them for so
rich a Jewel: either of them accounting her absolutely his own, and in this
oppinion there let us leave them.

CHAP. LXVI. How Florian still pursuing in quest of his daughter, was
(unwittingly) brought to the palace of Queen Melia.
AFter Florian was departed (among the rest) from the I Will of Carderia, in
search of his Daughter, he came one morning early to the Seacoast, where he
espied a great Fish half way upon the gravel: and drawing nearer to behold
it more perfectly, he was suddenly caught up between a griping pair of
tallants, which (in the water) served the Fish as finnes to swim withal, and
(on Land) for legs and feet to go upon.

This strange Fish, (casting Florian upon his broad back) ran swiftly
with him into the Sea, to his no little amazement at the first: but when he
saw the Fish to bear him above the water, he grew the less doubtful, but
expected what might be the end of this adventure. The Fish floating on, with
the swiftest speed that ever was seen, he beheld a Griffon come flying from a
Mountain, that houered above him a little while, and snatching him up at last
in her tallants, carried and set him upon the firm land.

Walking on musing alone by himself, at last he came in fight of the Marble
Palace, which yet was perfect in his remembrance, and shaping his course
toward it, Arguto was the first that espied him, who being wondrous joyful to
see his Ladies Father, went forth to meet him, hoping (by his means) to
compass his earnest desire. Being come together, Florian demanded of him,
what he did there, whereto Arguto returning no answer, conducted him onward
to the Palace, telling him that the Lady Victoria was there: which revived
Florians spirits so cheerfully, that he mended his pace to come where she was,
and entering into a Chamber, did there behold her, but when (as a Father) he
would have embraced her, the enchauntment altered his mind in such manner,
that he would permit no man to come thither, to carry his Daughter from that
place. Passing the time in this determination, with much intercourse of kindness
betwixt him, Arguto and Florian: at last Oliuanto happened thither, who albeit he
was not enamoured of Victoria, yet (to finish an adventure of so high esteem,)
his forward desires had drawn him into those parts.

But here you must remember the aged King, where he undertook his painful
enterprise, by him (indeed) he was guided to this Island: for (if you remember)
he then foretold him, that he should suffer diverse disastrous chances by
him, before he could compass his fair Auriana. He being entered into the
Palace, m^t first with Floraman, who knowing Oliuanto to be no rival of his,
right courteously welcomd him, and brought him where he beheld Victoria: but by
reason his affection was elsewhere settled, he made no ceremonious regard of her,
only the enchauntment restrained him from parting thence, with this persuasion,
that there he should accomplish some weighty enterprise.

Not many hours had past through Times sandy glass, but Tarnaes of
Lacedemonia chanced thither, he being likewise free from any affection to
Victoria. And because Drusa Velonna verily intended, the utter ruin of the
Grecian Monarchy, in short while she drew thither all the gallant young
Knights, and would have prevailed in like manner upon Florendos, the Emperor
Primaleon, Don Edward and the rest, but that the wizzard Aliarte (finding the
heavens now more auspicious to him, and his art to apprehend directer course
then before) thwarted her disseignes, by interposing the young and hardy
Primaleon, whom (in despite of all that ever she could do) he directed to
that course.

Which the Witch perceiving, and that he only would finish the adventure, she
strove to send him into the remotest parts of the world, till she had gotten
into her custody, the chief warriors and defenders of Christendom, which
then might fall the easier into the Pagans possession. And she grounded this
purpose of her on the son of Albayzar, who (as you have heard before) was
closely carried away from the Princess Targiana, and being now grown a good
hardy Knight, was created and enstalled Soldane of Babylon: and youthful
courage daily provoked him, to compass revenge for his Fathers death, with
mighty hatred to his Mother, for marrying him that slew her husband, and
confidently he builded on Velonnaes promises, by whose direction he was
altogether guided.

But (as we said before) Aliarte having an eye upon all her proceedings, sent
first advertisement thereof to the Emperor, and afterward ordained, that the
Knight of Fortune should have new Arms made him, wrought all of Diamonds,
with sharp Ponyards sticking forth quite over it, the better to break the
Knights blows when they came to combat, and that the Griffon (which we spoke
of before) being natural and not magical, might not so easily seize upon
him. And because by subtle means they must enter the Island, where all the
worlds strength would nothing avail them, they made a little Barque, seeming
to be one whole piece of wood, and closed over in such sort, that Primaleon
being in it, could no way be offended by the water, and when it was lanched
into the Sea, it appeared not like to the form of a Barque, but rather like a
huge unwieldy piece of Timber, being driven by the waves violently upon the
Island, where suddenly it opened, and Primaleon stepped forth upon the shore,
armed as has been already declared, and with a keen edgd Axe in his hand.

Drusa Velonna having espied him, imagined herself now quite undone, but to
let nothing lack of what she could do, she ran to her spells, and raised
such a hellish mist or fogge, as the Palace by no means could be discerned:
in which time, she caused the Knights to arm themselves, and sent them forth
against him, persuading them that he was no man, but a huge monstrous
enchaunted Hedg-hog. When Primaleon saw so many armed Knight come against him,
and all of them well known to him by their impreses, he grew doubtful what
his success would sort unto, yet prepared nevertheless to assail them.

CHAP. LXVII. How, and what the wizzard Aliarte wrought, against the
enchauntment of Drusa Velonna, and what ensued to Primaleon.
THe learned Aliarte, standing invisible on the shore of the Island, and
perceiving that these valiant Knights knew not Primaleon, whereby might ensue
the death of one another, threw likewise a Magical fume upon the I Will, which
being carried by the wind upon the Knights faces, wrought this effect, that
they discerned him to be a man, and not a Hedg-hogge, as before he seemed,
where-upon they went toward him with their swords drawn.

But Arguto, Floraman, and Florian, suspecting that he came for the rape of
Victoria, as (by the enchauntments force) they were verily persuaded, began
furiously to assail him: and he well avoiding their blows with his Axe,
returned them such sharp repayments, that they finding their swords ouer-weake
for resistance, used what skill they could for their own defense.

Now it happened, that Arguto (shunning a blow of the Axe) ran upon
Primaleon, and giving him a thrust full in the sight of his Helmet, made it fly
open that his face was seen: whereupon, Florian knowing the Prince, and how
dearly he affected his Daughter, desiring to make her his wife in marriage,
gave back, and offered no more resistance. But Arguto and Floraman, respecting
him as their rival in love, ran both very violently upon him, and had
handled him hardly, but that Primaleon passing his sword quite through
Floramans Beuer, wounded him in the forehead, and the blood running down into
his eyes, so hindered his sight, as he was constrained to retire, and leave
Arguto alone with him, hand to hand.

The battle between them lasted aboue-two hours, with very great
disadvantage to Arguto, because Primaleon shrewdly mangled his Armor with his
Axe, and in the end had stain him, but that Oliuanto, Florian and the rest,
stepped between them, causing them to give over the combat, when presently they
felt themselves freed from the enchantment, which before had restrained them to
ye place. Whereupon the wise Aliarte (being still invisible) wrought so by his
learned skill, that diverse Ships closed immediately on the Island, and Arguto
suddenly would have stepped into one of them, in rage and spleen to have parted
thence, as he did before at the I Will of Carderia: but Aliarte perceiving his
envious intent, showed himself to him, and suddenly st^yed him, when taking
him aside from the rest, he thus spoke to him. My Lord, you are too froward and
malicious, and hither am I come only for your good, for by mine Art I
foresaw that Primaleon would give end to this adventure, as in right and
reason it belongs best to him, and that Victoria should love him beyond all
other, by whom she enjoys the benefit of liberty: wherefore never pursue that
obstinately, whereto the heavens are no way agreeable. B^t because your love
shall receive some answerable requital, and to continue kindness between men of
so high deserving, Primaleon has a sister named Concordia, of no less beauty
then her Mother Miragarda, whom (leaguing your self in love and friendship
with Primaleon,) you may the easier obtain in marriage.

Arguto being both wise and valiant, and no fault in him, but only emulation in
matter of honor, took no little pleasure in Aliartes friendly advise: and
albeit his love to Victoria presently ceased, as reason and respect thought it
most convenient, quickening his desires to see fair Concordia, yet prizing his
Knightly repute before the weight of affection, he returned him this answer.
Discreet and learned father, it can be no disparagement to me, to accept
Primaleons fair sister as my wife, but rather thereby my state shall be advanced,
in being thought worthy of so rich a beauty. Neuerthethelesse, because Frysoll
my grandfather, would never give superiority to Palmerin d' Oliua, until he
had made proof by chiualry, which of them deserved to be accounted worthiest:
I see no reason, why I may not hold the same opinion, concerning him whom I
hold as my honorable enemy. Therefore grave father, until I have tried by
evident proof, whether he or I am the ablest man at arms, I will not grant
to love his fair Sister, or any other Lady whatsoever: in which humor I am
determined to part hence, to expect apt occasion for the combat between us,
since Fortune has favored him with the end of this adventure. Aliarte
perceiving the scope of his purpose, accompanied him to the Barque, where
commending him to God, Arguto departed much troubled in his mind: For albeit
he would not as yet resolve to affect the fair Concordia, yet her beauty and
honor carried so general commendation, as he iudgd it no mean grace for him
to enjoy her in marriage, and these thoughts wrought more and more with his
stronger purposes, in which humor let us leave him to his travail, till more
needful time require to remember him again.

The other Knights ( Florian only excepted) being devoted in their loves to
diverse Ladies, finding themselves freed from the force of the enchauntment,
(after kind thanks to Primaleon and Aliarte,) departed whether themselves best
pleased, Primaleon staying (as reason required) behind the^, to perform a
further service depending on the adventure. Drusa Velonna, to supply the cast
so much as in her lay, not knowing certainly whether Aliarte was departed
thence or no, made a great fire to appear before the Palace gate: but as
great a storm of rain (raised by the skill of Aliarte) as suddenly did
extinguish it, so that Primaleon going nearer the gate, and offering to enter,
it closed and opened again so suddenly, that if he had rashly stepped into the
passage, he might have been caught between the gates, and so his life very
greatly endangered, it opened and closed so many several times together.

At last, when it stood open and not closed again so fast as before, he
beheld a Griffon and a Lion, which seemed as if they would issue forth upon
him: when musing a little with himself, what was best to be done, the wise
Aliarte came to him, and spoke in his ear as shall hereafter more at large be
declared.

CHAP. LXVIII. How Primaleon entered into the Palace, and accomplished a great
part of the adventure.
PRimaleon, or our famous knight of Fortune, perceiving his entrance into the
Palace almost impossible, began to be much troubled in his mind, when
Aliarte stepping inuisibly to him, whispered him thus in the ear: that if he
smote with his Axe at a certain part of the gates, his strength would be
such, as he should easily keep them both open, and hinder them from closing
again. Primaleon, not a little longing to see his Victoria, struck
foorth-right at one of the gates, which did shut with the other so strongly
and violently, as it made him stagger backward above six paces, and tumbled
him into a pit of such clammie mudde, as very hardly did he get out again: but
having recovered footing, and striking against the other gate, he had fallen
backward as before, but that his Axe head stayed him up against a great stone,
which stood upright on one side of the gate, and he being glad of so good
success, went forward to enter: but the Lion and Griffon came so furiously
upon him, and assailed him with such eager violence, that he scarce knew how to
defend him self against them. But he scorning to serve for food to two such
ravenous Beasts, laid at them chesrefully with his sword, albeit the nimblenes
of the beasts was such, as doubtless they had slain him, but that the sharp
ponyar^s in his Armor did highly sted him: for the Lion grasping with one of
his paws at the Beuer of his Helmet, one of the ponyards past quite through it,
his other pawe (soon after) sustaining the like hurt, which made the beast
hold off the further from him, and be less troublesome to him then before. The
Griffon likewise houering above him, made many proffers at him with her sharp
tallents, and striving to gripe him through the Armor, wounded her self in
many parts upon the ponyards, so that she was constrained to let him fall,
having him aloft, as intending to fly thence away with him, and in the fall,
Primaleon hit his head against the great stone, so that he lay there still in a
trance, and might right easily have been deprived of his life, but that the
Lion and the Griffon were both sore wounded. So soon as he was upon his feet
again, (somewhat ashamed of his fall) he laid about him so courageously with
his weapon, that both the beasts whose hurts grew number and stiff with cold,
lagd about very lazilie, and still received wound after wound.

The Griffon, to make her uttermost advantage, mounted once more aloft, and
soaring about as waiting opportunity, though she durst fasten no more hold
upon him, yet she compeld him to waste time in seeking to shun her: and often
did she beat her wings about his head, till at last she overthrew him, when
suddenly the Lion catching him by the leg, where none of the poynted ponyards
were placed, dragd him along upon the ground, making him to feel extreme
affliction, but freeing himself at last by his thick doubled strokes, and
preparing to avoid a dangerous proffer of the Griffon, his blow happened just
between the closing of her wings, cutting one of them quite from the body,
whereby she being disabled from mounting aloft any more, made what have she
could to get away from the Knight, the like did the Lion, (having labored
so long in vain, and received many hurts) kept back, as willing to come no
more near him.

So Primaleon, going on to the Palace gate, and finding no other contradiction
to his passage, he holdly went in, and because he knew not how he might be
encountered, or what dangers might assail him within the Palace, he took his
Axe with him, when presently the gates clapped together behind him, and he was in
such a hellish darkness, that he knew not how to direct his footing, and there
did he hear such cries and mournings, as if many souls were in that place
most cruelly tormented. Yet (for all this) he still went onward, knocking his
head oftentimes against the walls, as if he descended down into some vaulte
or Cauerne, till at last he saw a light a far off from him, and it seemed as
if a torch were coming toward him, which somewhat cheering his spirits, he
made the more have to come nearer to the light. Being come to it, he saw that
it stood over the door of a Chamber, wherein he beheld a beautiful young
Lady, every way resembling his fair Victoria.

This Lady was dragd along despightfully by a rude uncivil villain, and she
(with loud exclaimes) cried out in this manner: Help me (for Gods sake) any
man that can, and let me not be violenced by this discourteous Knight.
Primaleon persuading himself, that this was his Lady, would have stepped into
the Chamber: but as he touched the torch, he saw a great fire suddenly flaming
before ye chamber door, by the light whereof he beheld the Lady cruelly
beaten, because she would not yield to the Knights persuasions.

This yrkesome spectacle, so offended him to see it, that (dreadlesse of the
fire) he leapt quite through it into the Chamber, where he could discern
neither the Knight nor the Lady: but looking round about him, he espied an
Adder of huge greatness craule along upon the floor, containing some six
foot in length, and having two heads, casting forth a red poison at the
eyes and mouth, which still was kindled by the Adders breath, so that fire flew
every where round about the Chamber. This sight was so hideous and dreadful to
behold, that it would have daunted any gallant spirit whatsoever, Primaleon
only excepted, who (being Fortunes darling) made no regard at all of the
fire, but went on along through it, and never was hurt or offended by it: so,
coming to the Adder, and lifting up his sword to smite off one of the heads,
it spoke aloude to him in this manner. Ah gentle Knight, do not kill me that
never offended thee, but go^ a long with me, and I will show thee the fair
young Lady Victoria, who^ thou (and none other) must free from this
enchauntment.

Primaleon preparing himself to follow the Adder, stood awhile pondering to
himself, that this might be but some cunning deceit, as indeed it was: for
Drusa Velonna had assumed this shape, with intent to guide him to a steepie
downe-fall, where she (acquainted well enough with the means for her own
safety) would no way be endangered, but he (suddenly falling down) should be
squandred into numberless pieces, according to the nature of the place. Being
thus doubtful of treacherous dealing, he profferd once more to kill the Adder,
but she (perceiving that he verily purposed her death) glided so swiftly from
him, as he could not fasten a stroke upon her: and now his thoughts became
somewhat distracted, because the fire being quite extinguished, he remained
in the like darkness as he did before.

Nevertheless, to see what this adventure would sort unto, he went on so well
as he could, coming at last to a place, where (by diverse little windows) he
discerned some light, which guiding his stepps with better security, he heard
a Lady call behind him, saying: Suffer me not to die, kind courteous Knight.
As he turned to see who called thus to him, he beheld a great door to open,
which guided his way into a goodly Hall, where he found ye great Serpent,
wherein the Princess Leonarda was sometime enchau^ted. This Serpents statue had
an opening in his side, where he might behold a Knight that held a living
Serpent by the tail, and spoke unto him in this manner. Knight, if thou repent
not thy coming into a place of such danger, lend me thy hand, for by no
means else can I get forth of this huge Serpent, then will thou and I try
our valor together.

Primaleon dreadlesse of any danger whatsoever, without any further pausing,
gave him his armed hand, and pulling with all the strength he could use, at
last the Knight issued forth upon him, and then the opening in the great
Serpents side closed again.

CHAP. LXIX. Of the dangerous fight, which Primaleon had with the Knight of the
Serpent, and how he accomplished the whole adventure afterward.
THe Knight which came forth of the Serpent, and therefore was called the
Knight of ye Serpent, walking on his feet along the great Hall, managed the
living Serpent which he held in his hand, with such extraordinary facility
and nimblenesse, as nothing can be imagined more quick and agill. Now albeit
he gave our Champion many cruel strokes therewith, yet this was nothing, in
regard of the Serpents sharp teeth and claws, which oftentimes fastened on
the bucklings of his Armor, and made it hang very loosely upon him, so that he
seeking to shun these assaults of the Serpent, the Knight flung it fast about
his Helmet, whence writing it self down along his breast, he found his body to
be quite disarmed, and his Helmet to fall beside his head.

This perrill did put new life into all his spirits, and lifting his Axe up
with both his hands, he gave a mighty stroke overthwart the Serpent, whereby
it fell down dead out of the Knights hands: and he (having no other weapon
for his own defense) the door opening again in the brazen Serpents side, he
ran presently in thereat with no mean have, and there stood upright, as quite
bereft of all his senses.

Primaleon taking up his Armor and Helmet, went forth of the Palace, where
Florian help to arm him again, earnestly entreating to return in with him:
but the youthful gallant, to have the honor alone of so great an enterprise,
desired that he would not be so much his hinderance, the rather, in regard the
adventure was destenied for him only, and by no man else could be concluded.
So Primaleon departing from the Prince, came again to the Hall where he had
left the Serpent, and finding there no further resistance, he went through a
door into another goodly room, where stood the armed statues of many Pagane
Princes, and huge great chestes, wherein the inestimable treasure was
contained, whereof we have briefly spoken in the second part of this History,
but more at large to be discoursed on, both whose they were, and for whom
reserved, either in the end of this book, or some tractate thereon depending.

Finding there likewise no denial of his passage, as he profferd to enter a
little door directly before him, looking in thereat, he beheld two angry
Lions, each standing reared up on his hinder feet, and placing their foremost
on the young Lady Victorias shoulders: whereupon, such was his fear least the
Lady should be endangered, that (never remembering his Axe) he stepped boldly in
at the door, and drawing forth his sword, went to one of the Lions, which
stood still and stird not, as if it had been an Image of stone, but only
stood as admiring the Ladies beauty, and expressing a kind of fear, least
she should by the Knight be taken from him, the other Lion doing the like in
all respects.

But that which made him most of all to marvel, was the fair Victoria,
standing as if she were immooueable, using no word at all, or any sign of
knowledge of him: this sight afflicted him more then all the rest, and made him
even ready to sink down dead with grief, till going somewhat nearer, and
offering his hand to lead her thence, both the Lions suddenly leapt upon him,
and catching him up between their paws, carried him forth of the chamber, where
with their teeth and claws they cruelly graspt him, battering and brusing all
his Armor, yet he could not fasten one blow upon them, but fought as if it had
been with the air, till he wexed so weary, that he could very hardly fetch
his breath. Notwithstanding the very uttermost of this extreme agony, his
mind held out courageously, and labored on the likeliest courses to be taken,
for speediest gayning the glory of this enterprise, and freedom of the fair
young Lady his Mistress: in which meditation, he remembered his Axe, which he
saw leaning against the chamber door, whereas him self before had left it,
and catching it up quickly, smote one of the Lions therewith upon the
shoulder, cleaving him down to the very entrails, which the Knight rejoiced
not a little to behold, hoping now of good success in the rest of his labor.
And turning to the other Lion, desirous to speed as well with him, because he
grew the fiercer upon him, as having (by virtue of the enchauntment) his own
strength redoubled, and the force of his wounded fellows likewise infused: he
found his hope mightily disappointed, for the Lion catching hold with his
teeth on the Axe, wroong it out of his hands, so that now he was glad to make
use of his sword again, wherewith he could defend him self but very
slenderly, because all his blows were still spent in vain.

Having thus fought a long while together, yet all his labor fruitless and to
no purpose, his own life always in greatest hazard, and no likelyhoode of
prevailing in the end: he saw the beast rise up on his hinder legs, when
suddenly he ran and caught him in his arms, but thereby he endured the
extremest pain and turmoile, as in all his life time he never felt the like,
for the Lions strength was still doubled against him: nevertheless, Primaleon
held out so currantly, making use of cunning sleights and witty preuentions,
that the beast got little advantage of him. The woorst that befell Primaleon
in this dangerous fight, was the beasts continual gripes upon his arms,
which hindered him from getting his dagger forth, albeit he had made many
fair offers at it: but at length, the Lion wexing almost as weary as he, and
stark mad with rage, because he could not overthrow the Knight, letting go
his hold, drew back to watch some better advantage.

Now had Primaleon liberty to recover his dagger, wherewith (as the Lion came
fiercely again upon him) he stabd it into the beasts right shoulder, that it
past quite through on the other side, and there he left the dagger still
sticking. This wound made the beast so fell and outrageous, that grasping
Primaleon once more between his paws, he threw him violently against the
ground, and went over him twice or thrice, as seeking the readiest way to kill
him. But as Primaleon lay upon his back, turning aside his head to avoid the
beasts foot, he had a sudden sight of the young Lady Victoria, who (in his
eye) seemed dead, albeit she stood upright on her feet: whereat he was so
affrighted, that starting quickly up, he gave another thrust at the Lion, which
made the beast to tumble along, and beating him self a while against the
ground, at last he was quite deprived of life.

Then went Primaleon into the chamber where the Lady was, and going reverently
near her, took her by the hand, which he felt to be so cold, as if it had
been a hand of marble, in all which time she moved not a jot, but stood so
still as if she were dead. Such was his grief to see her in this sort, as he
grew into a great impatience, and profferd to carry her out of that chamber, to
try if any where else he could be better comforted: but as he laid hold on
her to bear her thence, there suddenly started up from under a great stone,
two wild Saluage men, with clubs of iron in their hands, and at each clubbe
hung four great chains, with big iron balls fastened to them: very furiously
smote they at Primaleon, and beat him so about the head with the balls of
iron, that he fell down on the floor, when the Saluage men taking him up
between them, intended to ^ary him under the stone, from whence themselves
appeared first to him: but although their blows had shrewdly astonned him, yet
when he felt himself thus carried along, he gave one of the Saluages such a
blow with his gauntlet upon the head, that the blood trickled down about
his shoulders, and giving the other a spurn with his foot full on the mouth,
he made four of his teeth to fall out of his head* in rage and anger whereof
they let him fall, but such was his good hap, that he stood upright upon his
feet. The Saluages to revenge this injury received, turned again to him with
their clubs so furiously, that Primaleo^, (not having forgotten the weight of
their strokes, and willing to avoid them so much as he might) by his often
sleights and slippes aside from them, made indifferent means to keep them off
him, and with his sword he had cut in sunder three chains from one of the
clubbes, and two from the other, whereby he was not so beaten with the ^alls
as before, nor they so bold as at first they were, but receiving sundry hurts
by his weapon, shrunk several ways aside as desirous of breathing: but he
maintayning so good an advantage, followed them the more closely, leaving one
club quite without chains and balls, and the other but with one only, so that
the Saluages found their strength very much impaired.

During this fierce and dangerous combat, the conclusion whereof as yet seemed
doubtful, by chance as he turned his head aside toward the door, he^ beheld
two men far spent in years, carrying the fair Victoria between them, and
laying her as dead in a goodly Tomb, closed again the couerture upon it.
This spectakle was so offensive both to his eyes and heart, that he became like
a man frantique or desperate, and at two strokes recovered the clubbes from the
Saluages, who having lost all strength of the enchauntment, which they had by
means of ye clubs only, ran again under the stone from whence they issued
forth, and Primaleon going toward the Tomb, heard a voice speak in manner
following. Lay hold on this rash and ouer-bold Knight, and enclose him in this
Tomb with his enamoured Lady, so let him enjoy her in eternal darkness,
since he is so desperate as to die for her sake.

Primaleon expressed no care at all of these threatening words, but going on
forward, ye two old men came against him, to withold him from opening of the
Tomb, and because their age made him the less heedfull of the^, they suddenly
seized on him, and held him so strongly between their hands, that albeit he
strove so much as he could, yet was he forcibly taken up by them, and brought
close unto the Tombs side, which presently opened of it self, and as they put
his feet first into it, one of the old men thus spoke. Take here thy pleasure
so long as thou think good, since thou will needs have thy Victoria.
Primaleon, perceiving he had no dallying work in hand, strugled with them so
stoutly, that he caught one of the^ by the long dangling hair, which being the
means of depriving ye old man's strength, made him forsake his hold, whereby
Primaleon the easier fastened his hand on the vpper-part of the Tomb, when the
other old man (being unable to hold him of himself) let him go likewise,
where-uppon immediately he leapt forth of the Tomb, which quickly closed
again, and then both the old men vanished out of sight.

When Primaleon saw himself thus left there alone, unlikely to be informed by
any one, how or by what means he might open the Tomb, he stood a while as
one discontented: but afterward he walked round about it, and heedfully noated
every place, if there were any way whereby to open it, and making many assaies
to lift up the couerture, all the strength he could use would never stir it,
and as thus he strove with it, but to no purpose, about ye brim edge of the
Tomb, he read these engraven lines.

The Lady thou desir'est is dead,
Here have the worms upon her fed.
And entering here, thy self must die:
Despite all Art and Chivalry.
This inscription made Primaleon somewhat suspicious of his own ability,
which stretched his patience beyond the limits of sufferance, so that tugging
at one end of the Tomb with incredible strength, it seemed to him as if it
shook, and then he heard a voice within it, speaking unto him after this
manner. Alas Sir Knight, what mean you thus to disquiet my rest? Depart hence
I beseech you, because all your labor will prove but in vain. These words
made such a wide breach in the former hopes of Primaleon, as if he had not set
down his sword for speedy stay to him, he had suncke down and fallen on the
ground: but as he stood thus right sad and pensive, he saw the wise Aliarte
enter the Chamber, who coming to him, said. Be not dismayed fair Knight, for
the young Lady Victoria is not dead, nor yet enclosed within this Tomb, yet
must this Tomb (of necessity) be opened, because you can never recover her
from this enchauntment, while her statue of Marble remains here enclosed, but
all the strength in the world auailes not to open the Tomb, without mine Art,
after some use whereof performed by me, then must your virtue conclude the
rest.

So he entering into a little study, (wherein Prince Florian never came, at
such time as he delivered the Princess Leonarda,) there he found a little
book of strange written Carracters, which some-time belonged to Queen Melia,
and only served to finish the enchauntment. Not long had he read upon the
book, but all the room began to tremble, and the air became so wondrous
dark, as they (not seeing one another) heard diverse horrid voices, which gave
a sign of very serious employment. And as it thus continued the space of half
an hour, from the roof of the chamber fell down a great stone, which
lighting upon the covering of the Tomb, brake it through the midst, when
presently the day wexing clear again, they might see in the Tomb the fair
young Lady Victorias statue, whereupon Primaleon immediately coniectured, that
the enchauntment now was fully accomplished. But suddenly arose from underneath
the Tomb, a Centaure all armed, holding in either hand a great Mace,
wherewith he flourished about him so swiftly and nimbly, as it dazzeld the
eyes of them to look on him.

My Lord (quoth Aliarte) have what care you can to this Centaures Maces, for
he must and will smite you with them, and if you mean to kill him, it must be
with your hand without any weapon: which words were no sooner spoken, but
Aliarte vanished again. Primaleon seeing himself in the very procinct of
recovering his Lady, thought now (if he were naked) yet he was able to
accomplish a far more difficult enterprise, and casting by his Gauntlets, went
toward the Centaure with his sword prepared, only to bear off the blows of
his Maces, whereof at first he failed, and was shrewdly smitten with them both
at once: but he stepping back for a more ample opportunity, smote with such
fiercenes at both the Maces, that one of them presently fell to the ground, and
so did the other in short while after.

Now began the Centaure to be more violent, and leaping upon Primaleon, had
almost pressed him to the earth with his heavy weight, but he catching him fast
by the leg, threw him mainly against the ground, and then setting his foot
upon him, quickly ^ntied his arming girdle, purposing to bind fast his hands
therewith, but the Centaure was so quick and ready with them, that he
could lay no hold upon them, til at last he gave him three or four good
buffets on the face, which tamed him in such sort, as first he bound the one
arm, and afterward ye other, though with much ado before he could compass
it: and as he strove to raise the Centaure upon his feet, he suddenly died,
and as suddenly did the whole Palace vanish, with whatsoever he had beheld in
it: except the Images of the Pagane Princes, the huge metal Serpent, and the
fair Lady Victoria, who stood as amazed at so strange an accident. Then came
Florian and the wise Aliarte to Primaleon, who was now with Victoria, to
comfort her in her wandering oppinions, and Aliarte spoke (...) him in this
manner. Brave Knight, well may thou be called the darling of Fortune, in
receiving from her such inexpressable favors: but least we be further troubled
by Velonna before our departure, let me advise you, to prepare presently for
Constantinople. So leave we them to their intended journey, and now let us
speak of a dangerous combat, which happened between Leonato and Tarnaes, as
they and the rest returned from this Island.

CHAP. LXX. How Leonato and Tarnaes came to combat together, for the love of
fair Candida, and upon what condition they were parted by Palmerin of England.
Heretofore has been told you, how Leonato and Tarnaes were both enamoured
of fair Candida, ye daughter to noble Belyfart, yet neither of them knowing
the others affection: and being both among others entered a Barque together,
Leonato, dreadlesse of any danger whatsoever, declared to Tarnaes, that he
would now sail home to Constantinople, only to compass his love to fair
Candida. Tarnaes looking sternly upon him, said: Thou can not go thither
for that occasion, so long as this weapon will hold in my hand. Leonato was as
ready with his sword, and presently they would there have fallen to the combat:
but Oliuanto and Floraman (being in company) stepped between them with these
speeches. This is no place (Gentlemen) for quarrel and contention, forbear
then (we pray you) till we come to Land, where either of you may maintain
his argument of love and valor.

These reasonable speeches pacified the Knights, but for no longer time then
they should be landed: so the Barque sailing on as wind and weather pleased, at
last it brought them into Macedonia, where Oliuanto and Floraman earnestly
labored to appease them, but all was to no end: for they had coniurd them to
grant them one request, and they (not remembering their stern resolution)
consented unto it whatsoever it were. The boon (quoth Tarnaes) which we urge
ye to grant, is, that (now we are here landed) you would follow your best
intended courses, and leave us to try the effect of our contention. Greatly it
displeased Oliuanto and Floraman, that they had so rashly passed such a
promise, but because honor tied them strictly to their word, they left them,
and parted toward Constantinople, Oliuanto to see his Auriana, and Floraman to
expect the wished arrival of Victoria.

Leonato and Tarnaes thus left by themselves, with their swords ready drawn,
and covered with their Shieldes, they fought together with such art and
skilfulnes, as above two hours were spent, and yet they had not wounded one
another: but when their Shields were sliced in pieces, that they were feign to
receive the strokes upon their arms, and wheresoever else they lighted on
their bodies, then was true manhood indeed to be plainly discerned, for after
many breathings and reenforcements of the fight, they stood still so boldly
against each other, as either of them was resolved to die or be a conqueror.

This equality in courage so long continued, that wound for wound was readily
delivered, their bodies and Armor pitifully mangled, but yet the hurts not
deeply entering, by reason their dexterity and skill much help them, which is
a matter of great consequence in a combat trial, where both parts are of
equal valor, and knowledge. Til about midday thus lasted the difference,
their blood (in many places) altering the color of their Armor, when at
last Tarnaes thus spoke to Leonato. You see (Sir) in what estate we are both
brought, yet neither of us certain who shall have the victory, therefore (so
please you) we will pause awhile, and putting off our Armor, we shall soon
make proof of the worthier person, and let him be renowned according to his
merit. Leonato, who never was capable of any fear or dismay, quickly replied
that he was well contented with this motion: so either of them stepping aside
to his Squire, in very short while they were both disarmed. Then, after they
had walked and breathed a space, they came again together, but in a contrary
manner from their first kind of fight: for each opposing the right side of his
body to his adversary, made defense of his left side, breaking many desperate
blows and thrusts, according as they were diverse times dangerously offered.

When the Squires beheld their Lords in so apparent perrill of their lives,
they intended to make out unto the road ways, in hope to find some Knight
that might come to pacify them: and pursuing their purpose, they were no
sooner entered upon the highway, but they saw a Knight come riding toward
them, seeming answerable in courage to either of their Masters, to him thus
spoke one of the Squires. Never was a Knight met in a more needful time,
vouchsafe Sir to go with us, and help to save the lives of two honorable
Knights, then whom there lives none better in the world. The Knight (who was
Palmerin of England) imagining that they belonged to the Court of
Constantinople, went hastily with them, and being come to the Combattants,
lifting up the ^euer of his Helmet, he stepped between them, saying. What fury
(fair Knights) has made you so cruel and unkind to one another, let me
entreat ye to hold awhile and answer me.

Leonato, knowing it was his Father that spoke, retired back, and so did
Tarnaes, whereupon, Palmerin thus began again. Tell me Leonato the cause of
your quarrel, which I am much afraid is grounded upon love: if so, or
howsoever else it be, so please you to refer it to my judgment, I doubt not
but to satis-fie you both right nobly. Leonato declared to his Father, that
their strife was for the love they both bare to fair Candida, and Tarnaes
likewise confirmed the same, whereto Palmerin thus presently replied. Why my
friends, you know it is a matter meerelie impossible, that the Lady should be
wife to you both: let me then so far prevail in your patience, that I may
nominate wives for you both, such as I dare warrant to either of your
contentment.

Palmerin was of such honor and esteem, among all such Knights as had
knowledge of him, as these young gallants could not well gainsay his noble
offer, but referring themselves to his discretion, he thus proceeded. My Lord
Tarnaes, if your thoughts were as agreeable as mine, there is a Lady that I
could wish to be your wife, namely my daughter called Fior-nouel^a, who
although she be ouer-young as yet for marriage, yet goes she^ beyond Miragarda
in beauty: the reason why I use these speeches, is, that I wish you a wife of
greater degree, then she i^ whom my so^ee* Leonato affects, therefore because
she is less worthy then your self, let him enjoy Candida of mean^ quality,
repayring that want only by your kind brother-hoode.

Tarnaes perceiving the honorable mind of Palmerin, though it much displeased
him to alter his affection, yet considering he impaired not, but rather
augmented his reputation, especially in regard of Fior-nouellas beauty, beside
great hopes of further advancement, accepted Palmerins gentle offer, and so
did Leonato, who loved Candida with such entire zeal, as her poverty could*
not be any hinderance thereof, her birth and fair virtues only made his
election of her. Upon this agreement, Palmerin and they mounted presently on
horseback, and he conducted them to a near adjoining village, where their
hurts ^ere well regarded, and so soon as they were thoroughly recovered, they
iournied all three to Constantinople.

CHAP. LXXI. How Primaleon and Arguto fought together near to Constantinople,
and how no man could part them but the Emperor Primaleon.
AFter that the learned Aliarte had prepared all things in readiness, he called
Primaleon aside, and spoke thus to him. Thou truly valiant, and worthily
renowned Knight of Fortune, right well I wot, that your heart now travails
with no other thoughts, but only how to espouse the fair Victoria, whom you
have with such honor and dear pains deserved: Yet favor me to tell you,
that in respect you are Nephewe to my Lord the Emperor, it is necessary that
he should bestow so great a gift on you, for neither dare her Father nor I
deal in the matrimonial contract, before his highness pleasure be first
understood. Nevertheless, assure your self, that no Knight (but you only)
shall enjoy her, albeit she will cost you dearer then as yet she has done, in
a matter which you can by no means escape: wherefore let me persuade ye, that
having taken leave of her and her father, you travail alone to Constantinople,
where it shall not be long before we will meet you, and there perform your
long desired nuptial.

Primaleon, though but young, yet being wise and discreet, allowed the
wizzards counsel to be sound and good, and therefore without dwelling upon
any other doubts, he went to the Prince Florian, (who was reasoning with his
daughter, concerning Primaleons valor and virtues, to tempt and try her
disposition toward him, because already he had determined in his own mind,
frankly to bestow her upon him in marriage,) Primaleon being come to him, spoke
in this manner. My Lord Florian, I am desirous to follow some private intent
of mine own, which (happily) may guide me I know not whether, but gladly would
I encounter some adventure of worth, before I would be seen in the Emperors
presence, for he in his youth ran through many rare fortunes, enough for me
to admire at, without any vain opinion of equalling: therefore I crave your
favor for my departure, and commend all my highest hopes, to the gracious
regard of this beautiful Princess.

When the Lady Victoria heard his kind speeches, a crimson blush leapt up into
her cheeks, and so well as she could, (her affliction of mind held excused
for his so sudden departure) she formed a pretty kind of wandering discourse,
intermedled with broken sighs and faint smiles, the rain in her eyes being
readier then her tongue: yet forgot she not to thank him for delivering her
from that hellish enchauntment, promising to be as mindful thereof, as so great
a benefit did justly deserve.

So Primaleon leaving them, went aboorde a little Pynace, which (by Aliartes
appointment) set sail for Constantinople, and in few days he came within
four miles of the City, when (because it was night) he took up his lodging
in the neighboring village. Arguto making certain account, that Primaleon
would come with Florian and Victoria, used often to stray abroad from
Constantinople, having still a care what Ships took landing, because he
longed to encounter Primaleon, for the utmost proof of his ability in Arms.
So it happened, that as Primaleon came from his Inn in the morning, Arguto met
him, and knowing him, by reason he wore not his helmet, he spoke as follows.
Sir Knight, put on your helmet, and that speedily, for I am to try the combat
with you.

Primaleon mused a little to himself, returning no answer, because he knew
not the man that challenged him, for Arguto had covered his Sheelde of the
Sun, because he would by no means be known: but at last, without speaking
any word at all, having laced on his helmet, he turned his horse for the
course, so did Arguto, with a mind full of furious desire to wound his
contrary, the other being nothing so much moved, because he knew not with whom
he should encounter, which made Arguto to receive the greater advantage in the
shock, in being not stird a jot by his adversaries Lance, but Primaleon lost
one of his stirropes. This seemed somewhat strange to him, and made him
forgetful of his former patience, his imagination presently apprehending, that
doubtless his enemy was Arguto, whose envious nature (toward him) exceeded
all manly compass, wherefore now he purposed verily his death, to be rid of
such a rival both in his love and honor, and taking another Lance, prepared
to the second encounter, whereof Arguto made no refusal, but met him with such
a furious disdain, that he was cast out of his saddle on the crooper of his
Horse, very hardly escaping the fall, and Primaleon was set upon his Horse
buttocks, but not in perrill of any fall: so, both recovering their seats
again, they charged a fresh for the third trial.

Now met they together with such maine violence, that the girtes of Argutoes
saddle breaking, he tumbled backward to the ground, being shrewdly bruised with
the fall: but Primaleons Horse (by ouer-great mishap) brake his two fore
legs, and falling to the earth, chanced to stamp one of his hind feet
upon his Masters foot, so that both were feign to lie a while and rest them
selves. But having recovered footing, they came together with their swords
drawn, Primaleon feeling his foot somewhat stonned, with the tread which his
Horse had given him upon it, yet did he carry him self with such sprightly
agilitie, that his enemy discerned not any impediment at all. Now flew their
weapons so nimbly about them, that in their careless regard of defense, they
were both wounded, Arguto in the right side, and Primaleon upon the left
leg: nevertheless the battle endured in such sort, as if they had but
instantly begun the same, and they that came to be beholders thereof, judged
Arguto to be the fiercer, because Primaleon seemed to limpe a little, only by
the pain he felt of his foot. So long lasted this combat, that their armor
being hewn in pieces from about them, and their bodies wounded in many
places, a multitude of people flocking thither to see the ouent, and admiring
the stearne resolution in either: coniectured (as well they might) that if they
were not the sooner sundered, the lives of them both perforce must miscarie,
whereupon diverse ran and galloped to Constantinople, carrying such news
hereof to the Palace, that Palmerin, Florendos, Floraman, Leonato, Tarnaes,
(who were all there the day before arrived) presently armed them selves, and
departed thence with all possible speed, to save the lives of two such hardy
Knights.

No sooner were they come thither, but they understood immediately, that one of
them was Primaleon, the son of Florendos, and to know the other, Palmerin
called unto Argutoes Squire, and prayed him (for safety of his Masters life)
to let him understand of whence he was. The Squire being honest and wise,
knowing he would have intelligence of his Lord, though not by him, told him,
that his Masters name was Arguto. Greatly did it grieve both him and the rest,
to see Lords (of one Court) in such fury thus hand to hand, so that they stepped
between and labored to appease them: but they (without any respect to the
others friendly endeavor) by no means would be pacified, but striking at them,
to get forth from amongst them, seemed ten times more violent against each
other then before, and all the others honest labor proved but in vain. When
they perceived that they might not prevail with them, and their lavish expense
of blood, delivered apparent danger of their lives: they concluded, that
Leonato should poast to the Emperor, to entreat him (for safety of Arguto and
his Nephewe Primaleons life) he would come thither with all have possible.

When the Emperor heard these tidings, immediately he descended the steps of
the Palace, and mounting upon an easy Ambler, in less then half an hour he
came to the Combattants: whose extremity of fury was indifferently qualified,
because both weariness and loss of blood had so weakened them, as their
blows now did but very little harm. The Emperor riding in between them,
spoke in this manner. I half persuaded my self, that you young Knights,
would maintain the royal reputation of my Court: but now I see, that you
rather endeavor to overthrow it, in seeking so cruelly to violence one another.
Let me understand the cause of your contention, and I will so order and
accomodate the case, as neither of your honors shall thereby be impaired.

Primaleon hearing his Grandfather speak, reverently gave back, saying. Trust
me my Lord, I know not the least particle of any cause, wherefore this Knight
should thus combat with me, for I am utterly ignorant what he is: only it
pleased him to take knowledge of me, and provoke me to the fight with
chalenging terms, never yielding me any reason of his coffeehouse, or how,
or wherein I have offended him. Then the Emperor turned to Arguto, to know
whence the cause of this presumptuous quarrel grew: when he (more in reverence
to so great a command, then otherwise) declared all at large, how in respect
of the love he bare to the fair Lady Victoria, he had borne a long envious
spleen to Primaleon: but more especially, how duly he had awaited this
opportunity, to try which of them two was the ablest man at Arms. The
Emperor, (loath to hold them there in such evident peril,) promised to carry
such an even hand in this cause of their difference, as each of them should be
well satisfied therewith, both in enjoying wives to eithers good liking, and
also in this scrupulous case of their valor, wherein, neither was reputed
inferior to the other, by their late ouer-bold and hazardous trial. But
(quoth he) I am lately informed of an intended war, leueyed by Corcuto the
son of Albayzar, and now enstalled Souldane of Babylon, prepared only against
Christians: there will be a better trial of manhood upon Gods enemy and ours,
then thus one friend to misentreate another.

Upon these speeches the Knights were pacified, and presently two sumptuous
Litters were brought from the Court, where-into (after by the Emperors
command, the Knights had embraced each other, and solemnly protested a league
of friendship) they were softly laid, and being brought to Constantinople,
were lodged in one goodly chamber, wherein two beds were purposely placed. Now
ran a certain muttering among the other Lords, which of these two Knights
might be reckoned as the hardiest warrior, in regard they were both sore
wounded, and eythers estate was censured upon, Primaleons greatest harm being
thought the bruise of his foot, but Arguto had received most hurts, and his
armor was battered far worse then Primaleons.

The Emperor and the other Princes, came daily to visit these wounded
Knights, of whose lives the Chirurgions as yet stood in doubt, especially of
Arguto, because he had a dangerous hurt in his throat: to them likewise
resorted all the Princesses in the Court, of whom, the most impatient in
grief, was the Empress Gridonia and the Princess Miragarda, in their just
compassion of Primaleons peril. Notwithstanding, they failed not in kind
affability to Arguto likewise, who lay for diverse days together, by no means
able to move him self, to the great discontent of all the Lords and Ladies,
being very doubtful of his recovery: but leave we them in hope of better
health, and return we now to the wizzard Aliarte.

CHAP. LXXII. How the wise Aliarte and Prince Florian, with the fair young
Lady Victoria, set forward in their journey to Constantinople, and of a danger
which happened to Aliarte, from which he was rescued by the valor of Prince
Florian: Also, how Floraman desperately slew him self.
YOu remember, that when Primaleon set away for Constantinople, we left
Aliarte, Florian, and Victoria still at the Island, where the wizzard discoursing
with the Prince, about giving his daughter Victoria in marriage to the Knight,
who (ending the enchauntment) had so highly deserved her: and he found him
thereto right willingly addicted, provided, that the Emperor misliked not
thereof. So taking with him the book before remembered, which sometime belonged
to Queen Melia, they entered into a vessel of larger fruit, then the other
which he had sent away before, as being jealous of some disaster, which Drusa
Velonna might work against them. Sailing with prosperous wind and weather the
first day and night, Aliarte (somewhat ouer-wearied with watching) fell into a
sound sleep, as in like manner did the Lady Victoria: but Florians thoughts
were seriously busied, what his wife Targiana might conceive of his so long
absence, as thereby no sleep could fasten on him, albeit he was as glad on the
contrary part, as this amourous affliction made him sad in mind, that he had
so happily recovered his daughter.

As thus he sat transported with variety of passions, he saw a dark cloud
suddenly to engirt the Ship, and out of it dropped a mighty Serpent, with a
long tail fashioned like a Gable rope, which wrapping it self about the
sleeping wizzard, the Serpent had presently carried him away: but that Florian
quickly snatching forth his sword, ran speedily to the Monster, and smiting
a maine stroke close to his rumpe, cut the tail quite off, so that Aliarte
falling, awaked therewith, and beholding the Serpent, knew immediately this was
done by Drusa Velonna, and looking more advisedly thereon, perceived that it
was Velonna her self: wherefore, because she should not easily escape him, he
drew forth Queen Meliaes book, and wrought so by reading thereon, that the
Serpent could neither mount up to the air, nor diue into the water, but
houering a little above it, changed into her own natural shape: for all her
skill failed in the presence of this book, so that Aliarte stepping to her,
caught her fast by the arm, and drew her perforce into the Ship, where so
soon as she was entered, he bound her very strongly, and clapped her close under
the hatches, because she should compass no more treachery against them, and
highly glad were they, that so wise, politic, and deadly an enemy to
Christendom, was in this manner become their prisoner.

Without any more encombrances they sailed on merrily, and in short while
arrived at Constantinople, even when Primaleon and Arguto were (by reason of
their hurts) in greatest danger, which made the whole Court right sad and
pensive. But when they heard that Aliarte was come, every one rejoiced, hoping
the wounded Knights would now be quickly cured, and much more increased this
joy, when they knew he had brought fair Victoria, and Drusa Ve^onna as his
prisoner: as for the Prince Don Florian, he would not as yet have him seen
there, because he was to undergo a tedious travail, for delivery of the
Princess Argentina daughter to Berolde King of Spain, who (as he understood
by Drusa Velonna) was detayned in the Castle of ^amant in Persia. Heere-vpon,
desirous also to see his wife T^rgiana, he made the more have in this journey,
leaving absolute order with the learned Aliarte, concerning the marriage of his
daughter to Primaleon, committing all to the good liking of my Lord the
Emperor.

The Wizzard Aliarte, having brought fair Victoria a shore, espied first the
Princess Polinarda, and with her was Floraman come to see the young Lady, so
mounting on horseback, they rode into the City, and being alighted at the
Palace, all the Princesses and Ladies descended the steps, to entertain the
beautiful Victoria, where past such kisses and kind embraces, as truly
reported the affection they bare her. Aliarte having kissed the Emperors hand,
was loath to slack time ouer-long for help of ye wounded Knights, wherefore,
being desirous to see them, Florendos and Palmerin taking him by each hand,
they brought him to the Chamber where they languished in pain, only through
the small hope they had of amendment, but when they beheld the wizzard Aliarte,
their former doubts were removed, and now (by his means) they were half
persuaded of immediate recovery. He going severally to the bed of either
Knight, whispered thus in their ears: I am come to help your greatest
extreamitie, and to procure your hearts long wished contentment.

This promise so cheered their former drooping minds, that he applying his
precious oils and unguents to their wounds, made them express the next
morning, manifest signs of a much better condition, and within eight days
they were so well amended, that they were able to go kiss the Emperors hand,
who welcomed them with a cheerful countenance, not unmindful of the
honorable promise he had made them. After some private conference had with
Aliarte, his Majesty sent for Florendos, Palmerin, Floraman and the rest, whom
he acquainted with his determination, and found each man thereto agreeable,
except unfortunate Floraman: who perceiving that his own tongue must confirm
her marriage to another, whom he beyond all women in ye world most dearly
affected, when his turn came to speak, he stood awhile silent, as inwardly
confounded with extremity of passion. Nevertheless, after some better suruay
of his cogitations, to witness yt he more esteemed his fidelity to the
Emperor, then any care or respect of his own life, he answered, that a more
honorable match in marriage could not be made, then that those two Knights
should enjoy Victoria and Concordia, and so it past on in general oppinion,
which his Majesty fully ratified and appointed, to be sollemnized so soon as
ye Knights were thoroughly cured.

Floraman, hearing the dismal sentence against his joys for ever, stepping
forth before them in the midst of the hall, thus began. Most mighty Emperor, I
have found by true experience, that to be a lover, has been the only
infelicity awayting on my life. First I loved Altea, and by her death my love
proved fruitless, after which, long time I lived disconsolate, till vainly
dreaming, that better hap might betide me, I became enamoured of Clariana,
who rejected me with a scornful disdain, as justly my breach of faith
deserved, vowed to the ghost of my deceased Altea. But then a worse affliction
befell me, and a third amourous humor enthralled my senses, namely, to the
fair Lady Victoria, whose marriage now being likewise agreed upon, gives me yet
this benefit, that I may live hereafter among poor despised Lovers,
performing some rare and memorable act, that may register the fame of her
beauty to all posterities.

No sooner had he thus spoken, but setting the pommell of his sword against the
ground, he fell suddenly upon the point thereof, which past quite through his
body, before any Knight could lay hand upon him, albeit they ran to stay him
as speedily as they could. This desperate mishappe of Floraman was generally
lamented, and the Emperor him self took it very grievously, because Floraman
had been a Knight of good esteem, and euer-more faithful to the Emperor:
notwithstanding, seeing sadness and sorrow could not now redress it, they
concluded to honor him with a royal burial.

CHAP. LXXIII. How as they were consulting in the Court, about the marriages of
Primaleon and Arguto, with the fair young Ladies Victoria and Concordia: the
two Knights were summoned thence to a very strange adventure.
Soon after the sad funeral of loue-forsaken Floraman, the Emperor, being
very respective of his passed promise, sending for the Empress and Miragarda,
imparted to them his private thoughts, about the marriages before concluded on,
and found them thereto very tractable: saving yt Miragarda expressed some
unwillingness, to have Concordia wedded so young, she having as yet scarce
attained to fourteen years of age, nevertheless, she yielded to the order
agreed upon, and then they determined, that the next day they should acquaint
the young Ladies therewith, to the end, that upon the feast day of Pentecost,
which was within less then a month ensuing, the marriages might be publicly
sollemnized.

So departed the Empress and Miragarda to their chambers, where the day
following, they conferred with the two young Ladies, telling them how the
Emperor had intended, and their Fathers likewise thereto consented. Victoria,
expecting daily to hear these tidings, could not dissemble the matter so
cunningly, but that the quicke-conceited Empress plainly perceived, she no
way misliked so gracious an offer: but as for Concordia, she rather desired
sportfull society, with such young Damsels as were her playmates and equals,
then as yet to be burdened with the cares of marriage, whereof her green
years were yet so incapable, as she knew not how to shape an answer.

But when her Mother at large declared, the honorable worth and valor of
Arguto, as also what a perpetual league of amity, by this means would be
lincked between him and her brother, she was the easier won to consent. Thus
were the marriages fully concluded on, and the day of Pentecost absolutely
appointed, for the public solemnization of them both: whereof the two Knights
having likewise intelligence, how joyfully they took it I refer to your
judgment.

Upon the Sunday following, as the Knights sat pleasantly disposed in the Hall
after dinner, entercoursing such devises as themselves thought meetest, they
heard a great noise in the air over the Palace, and starting up to be further
resolved thereof, they saw an armed Knight enter at one of ye windows, with a
huge crooked bill in his hand, which (clapping to the ground before the
Emperor and them all) he thus began. Inuinsible Monarche, I am the most
unfortunate Knight, which lives at this day in the world: but not to make sad
this mirthfull Court with my mishaps, I will conceal my disgraces, and acquaint
ye only with the cause of my coming hither. Briefly then (dread Lord) to
find some ease for my insupportable misery, I need the aid of some valiant
Knight here in your Court: having thus spoken, he stood silent, as expecting
an answer.

The Emperor, although he desired that his Court might be famous, yet in
regard so many gallant bloods were there present, he stood in doubt whom he
should elect for this enterprise, without giving offense to all the rest: and
(indeed) a great murmuring arose in the Hall, because every man expressed
himself ready, and it was doubtful least some discord would arise among them,
which nothing but the Emperors presence did hinder, for Florendos and his
son Primaleon fell to thwarting speeches, either scorning to give the other
place in matter of honor.

While the Court continued in this spleenefull humor, the Knight well
perceiving it, and fearing if any disorder ensued, he might depart thence
without any assistance, requesting to be heard, he thus proceeded. Great
Emperor, let me entreat this gracious favor, that I may my self make choice
of the Knight, whom I shall imagine as meetest for my purpose. With all my heart,
replied the Emperor: as judging this the likeliest way to avoid all
partiality, and qualify the discord among his Knights. First, (quoth the
Knight) I desire to know the Emperors Nephew, named Primaleon, and because
not far from the place of my torments, there lives in the like misery a noble
Lady, the only woman that ever made proof of her loyalty: I would likewise
have another Knight, called Arguto, who I am assured will as honorably end
this adventure, as he effected that of the enchaunted Sepulcher.

These two young gallants, who had almost renewed their ancient enmity, as
covetous of this honorable employment, when they saw this election made of
the^ twain, before all the other great spirits of the Court, they were highly
pleased: and because the Knight was upon his departure, they craved license of
the Emperor and all the other Princes, then kneeling before their affianced
Ladies, they desired to kiss their hands, and bare the title of their Knights.
Victoria, knowing how long time Primaleon had loved her, most kindly embraced
him, saying: Seeing it pleases my Lord the Emperor, and my noble Father, that
hereafter I must be yours in marriage, I accept you, not so much for my Knight,
as for my Lord and chief Commander. But Concordia, being slenderly skild in
loves affairs, knew not what to answer, but that she was contented, and if
her worth might make him glorious, she told him plainly he should one day have
it.

Now because these young and amourous bloods, thought time never long enough in
these kind of purposes, ye Knight with whom they were to depart, clapping each
of them upon the shoulder, said. Young Lords, so important is the business
which I must bring you to, that it will put ye past the remembrance of these
fair Ladies. The Knights thus awaked from their lovely trance, presently
arose, and taking their leave, went to put on their Armor, returning in short
while right gallantly appointed. Then did ye Knight cause a Ship of Crystal
to floate about the Hall, whereinto he conducted severally the Knights, and
presently it mounted up into the air, fleeting away with such wonderful
swiftnes, as all of them had quickly left the sight of it: to the great
admiration of the Emperor, and extreme grief of poor Victoria, who rather
could have wished with all her heart, that her Knight had stayed to effect her
marriage.

The Ship in two hours space was gone so far, that the Knights thought they
were brought to the furthest part of the world, when suddenly the Ship falling
down on a great stone, seemed as if it was shiuerd all in pieces, and they
thought themselves likewise to be broken in the same manner, whereat the
strange Knight laughed heartily, because he knew it was but a vain apparition.
So mighty was the fall of the Ship on the stone, as if it had been made of the
hardest iron, it had been sufficient to have broken it, but the enchauntment
being of greater power, made it stand whole and sound upright on the stone:
when they issuing forth, followed the Knight, and he being their guide some
small distance thence, went down into a Cave that seemed very dark, beckning
to Primaleon that he should follow him, and Arguto to stay till he returned. It
was not long before he came back again, and then went toward a huge thick
Wood, whereinto he wafted him with his hand to enter, and so Arguto very
resolutely did.

CHAP. LXXIIII. Of a strange adventure which happened to Primaleon in the Cave
under ground, whereinto the strange Knight had conducted him.
PRimaleon being thus within the Cave, went downward above a mile by
estimation, not discerning any light all the way he had gone, till at last he
came to certain high windows, whereby some small glimmering entered into the
Cave. Still past he on along, till at length he espied a Wall, which was built
with the bones of dead men and beasts, and therein was a gate made all with the
heads of men, serpents, horses and Griffons, in a cunning diversity mingled
together, whereby he gathered, that it had been the handy-worke of men.

Boldly stepped Primaleon in at this gate, but afterward he was sorry he had
adventured so far, for he saw it was a spacious square plot, being round
about enclosed with that wall, at the further side whereof he saw a higher
gate, where there stood a beast greater then any Elephant, putting his head
directly toward him, and feeding on diverse mangled bodies, which were sliced
into so many pieces, that he could not guess whether they were men or beasts.
No sooner had he stepped a little forward, but this hideous beast, as if he were
extremely hunger-starued, came mainly against him, when Primaleon (as loath to
be devoured by so ravenous a Monster) having his sword ready drawn, gave him
a mighty blow upon the head, but the sword rebounded back again unto him, as
if he had smitten upon a hard stone. Then lifted ye beast up suddenly one of
his forefeete, before Primaleon had sufficiently retired, and fastening hold
upon his pouldron, rent it quite away, and mist very little, of wresting the
sword from forth of his hand.

This graspe of the Monster, gave him plainly to understand, that he must not
receive such another gripe from him, except he meant to part with life and
all, wherefore, keeping him off with his weapon so well as he could, he gave
the Monster diverse wounds in the midst of his body, and albeit the hurts were
soundly given indeed, yet was the beast of such a wonderful grossenes, as they
pierced not into any of the vital parts. While the battle thus continued, he
noated a matter most admirable to be reported, for of the blood which issued
forth of the Monsters wounds, arose up sundry strange misshapen beasts, being
some of them which he had before devoured, and they went aside into an angle of
the room, menacing Primaleon with their looks and howlings, as if they
intended some mischief toward him.

By this time was our Champion so ouer-toyled, that being almost out of breath,
he was glad to shift from place to place, yet with a heedfull eye to the
Monster, inuoking inwardly the help of heaven, to strengthen him in so great
an extreamitie: in which meditation of mind, he beheld the Knight which had
co^ducted him thither, enter in at the gate with the hooked Bill on his back,
and opposed himself against the Monster, which presently left Primaleon, and
(as bearing deadly hatred to the Knight) turned furiously upon him. So
dexteriously did the Knight handle his bill, that he wounded the Monster in
many places therewith, and still as blood streamed from him, arose sundry kinds
of strange beasts, all which (at one loud groan given by ye Monster) ran
furiously upon the Knight, and rent him in innumerable pieces, which were al
afterward suddenly swalowed by the monster himself, the bil only left lying on
the ground. This sudden death and devouring of the Knight, drove Primaleon to
some little amazement, and perceiving the monster, now to make a fresh toward
him, bethought him of the bill, wherewith the Knight had fought so nimbly, and
given diverse shrewd hurts to the beast, that some virtue (touching the
enchauntment) might remain in it.

Quickly he caught it up in his hand, and although he had no great skill in the
use of such a weapon, because it nothing appertained to Knighthoode, yet he
made it to serve his turn in such sort, as at every blow he drew blood from
the beast: and happening at last to wound him in the belly, he perceived the
hurt to open so wide, that the Knight leapt forth upon his feet alive and
well, and he wresting again forcibly the Bill from Primaleon, gave a fresh
charge upon the Monster, whose belly immediately was become whole and sound.
The other beasts, which still rose up out of the Monsters blood, as they had
done before, tore him again in pieces, and the Monster quickly swallowed him
up, when Primaleon recovering the Bill once more, defended him self therewith
against the huge beast, who now (by reason of his many wounds and loss of
much blood) went somewhat faintly up and down.

Primaleon taking good notice thereof, conceived in his mind, that if he could
dispatch the other lesser beasts, the Knight should no more be torn in pieces:
whereupon he fiercely made against them, cutting a many of them off by the
legs, whereby they being abandoned of the enchauntment, could rise no more,
their legs in this manner being parted from their bodies. He made such a
slaughter of these beasts, that but very few of them remained alive, all which
ran speedily behind the great Monster, where in a moment they had bound up
his wounds, as he seemed now as able as ever.

When Primaleon saw the Monster so strangely recovered, he had good cause to
doubt the issue of his enterprise, notwithstanding, he gave the beast sharper
wounds then he had done before, with a settled resolution to die or conquer:
and casting his head aside, he beheld the Knight to stand hard by him, who
taking the Bill again from Primaleon, with very great courage assailed the
Monster. Right quickly did the beast catch him by the arm, and flinging him
aloft, cast him quite over beyond the wall, so that Primaleon knew not what was
become of him, and having now no other defense then his sword only, he much
mistrusted what might happen to him: but turning aside, he espied the Bill
thrown back again over the wall, which (with no little joy) he took up, and
la^d^ therewith cheerfully at the Monsters legs, so that in short time he
had cut off two of them, the far leg behind, and the nearest before, when
his unwieldy body falling on ye earth, made the ground to tremble and quake in
such manner, as the wall of dead men's bones was altogether ruined, and then the
Knight came again to him, saying. Never wast time (Sir) in killing of this
Monster, but go you onward, and you shall behold me in such merciless
torments, as are to continue many hundreds of years, except by your virtue
only I may be delivered. No sooner had he thus spoken, but Primaleon saw him
diue into a deep water, whereon he had not looked very long, but suddenly
there arose up a goodly Tower, engirt round about with the water that ran very
swiftly, and two savage Bears he saw running about the Tower, pursuing the
Knight who fled before them, and ever as they caught hold of him, they bit him
most cruelly, so ran they with him into the Tower, where (out of a window) he
heaued up his hands to Primaleon, desiring him to take pity and come to help
him, which moved his mind to such compassion, as he would gladly have past
through a thousand waters to yield him succor. After he had walked on the
bancks a while about the water, to see if he could find any place for passage,
he beheld from a window a great Basket let down, which the two Bears drove
toward him from the Rock, as desirous to have him leap into it, and they would
thereby convey him to the Tower: but the Knight cried to him out at another
window, that by no means he should accept their subtle offer, but stay, and
awaite a better means of bringing him to the Rock, whereupon, the Bears more
and more labored toward him with the Basket, making signs, as if he could
have no other passage. Primaleon still thrust away the Basket from him, and
perceauing no lively way to help him to the Tower, in the self same place
where he saw the Knight diue, there did he likewise boldly cast in him self,
and arose at the Tower again, as the Knight before did: but as he offered to
mount ye steps to enter, the Bears flew upon him with such maine violence,
that one of them griped him so strongly by the head, as he had almost fallen
down in a swoune. But his dauntlesse spirit scorning all servile fear,
quickly shook off this passion, and having the Bill in his hand, which he would
not willingly part withal, he gave one of the Bears such a blow therewith on
the head, that a great part of it fell on the ground: in this while, the other
Bear so gript him about the body with his paws, as he was no way able to
stir him self, and the wounded Bear got so strong hold of his leg, (being
furiously mad with his near approaching death) that brusing in pieces his armed
greaues or gamashes, made him to feel intolerable pain. But now did
Primaleon most manifestly declare, that his equal (for chiualry and valor)
lived not in the world, for he catching the Bear fast by the throat, to make
him loose his horrible gripes, tweakt his weazand with such strength, that he
well-neere strangled him, when seeing him self at liberty, he still held his
hold with one hand, and drawing forth his dagger with the other, gave so many
stabs upon the beasts throat, that he fell down dead, and both the Bears
bodies immediately vanished, to the no little admiration of Primaleon.

Then ascended he the steps, thinking he had already concluded the
adventure, but the Knight, for whose deliverance he had thus dangerously
adventured, snatched the Bill out of his hand, as before he had done, in the
perilous fight between him and the Monster, whereof Primaleon making no
reckoning, nor mistrusting any ill intent in him, thought he might with more
safety mount up the stairs. But the Knight opposed the Bill to his breast, as
if he meant to kill him therewith, which ungentle act in him, grieved
Primaleon more then all his pains had done, in that he rather expected
assistaunce at his hand, then thus to threaten his life, as still he did:
whereupon, his patience converting to angry choler, he made an offer to smite
at the Knight with his sword, but then was he suddenly metamorphozed to a
Leopard, and assailed Primaleon so cruelly with his teeth and nails, as he
was diverse times in very desperate hazards.

Now would he either be a conqueror, or else Deaths captive, and perceauing
the beast to stand upright on his hinder feet, he threw by his sword, and
closed with him as if they would wrestle: but Primaleons arms exceeding the
beasts legs in length, gave him such a graspe upon an advantage, that the
beast was almost thratled, and fearing least he should die in that manner, he
called thus to him in his manly voice. Alas Sir Knight, the continual torment
I have suffered so many years already, me thinks your self might account
sufficient, and not pain me more between your strong arms. But
notwithstanding these speeches, and diverse other entreates delivered like a
man, Primaleon would not let him at liberty, but held him stiffly still, (by
what means I know not) from the form of a Leopard, he changed again to the
self same shape, as when he first conducted him into the Cave, when expressing
joyful looks, he thus spoke to Primaleon. Well may thou vaunt thy self to
be the best Knight in the world, in being able to accomplish so dreadful an
adventure.

When Primaleon heard him speak so humanely, he let go his hold, and
suddenly appeared to them an ancient Knight, who was Lord of the Tower, and
an expert Nigromancer, being father to the Lady, which was to be enfranchised
from her thraldom by Arguto, with very sad looks he began in this manner. It
greeues me (Sir Knight) that it is your fortune to set at liberty, this
wretched man and disloyal Lover, from the enchauntment wherein I had confinde
him, as purposing to have his sin sufficiently punished: and much more it
offendes me, that the other Knight which came with you, shall likewise end
the enchauntment of the indiscreet Girl my daughter, the whole state whereof I
will more at large acquaint you with, when she is at liberty, if such be her
good hap. So descending the stairs together, they came to a gate of the Tower,
where was a Bridge for them to pass over on, and being come into the open
field, they saw the Wood whereto Arguto went, sudden burst forth on a
flaming fire, which greatly grieved Primaleon, as fearing least his dear
friend should so cruelly perish, of whom his Sister had given him such
especial charge, before their setting forth from Constantinople, that he
should by no means forsake his company, wherefore he would have gone to help
him. But the grave Magitian, commanded him in no wise to stir thence, because
his utmost power was not sufficient, to end the labor allotted to Arguto: so
diverse discourses passing between them, they stayed to expect the issue of the
adventure.

CHAP. LXXV. How Arguto (with great peril of his life) brought to end the
adventure of the enchaunted Lady, and received freedom of his suspicion, that
Fortune was not favorable unto him.
ARguto, after he was entered into the Wood, saw the boughs knit fast together
behind him all the way he went, in such an intricate and indissoluable manner,
as all his labor was in vain in offering to return back, therefore of
necessity he must go onward still, resolved for what so ever might happen
unto him. He had not gone above the space of half a mile, but he came to a
Knightly Tent, where-into as he would have entered, he beheld a cruel villain,
who with his knife had cut the throat of a beautiful Lady, and so left her on
the ground to bleed to death.

Arguto was so moved with this inhumaine act, especially to see how pitifully
she lay panting, that boldly he rusht into the Tent to kill the villain, if he
gave him not the better reason for what he had done: but the villain scorning
to answer him, and expressing no base fear or cowardice, coming stoutly to
the Knight, holding his long knife closely hid in his hand, stabd Arguto
through the Armor very easily, wounding him a little upon the breast, and
doubtless had slain him with the blow, but that he drew back when he felt the
hurt.

Hereby he gathered, that except he were more heedefull of this villains
hand, he might soon there be murdered, a matter more hateful to a generous
nature, to perish by the treachery of such a villain, then the cruellest death
he could receive from the weapon of a Knight, whereupon, drawing forth his
sword, which all this while he refused to do, because the villain had no
other weapon then a knife, he spoke to him thus. I will be more respective, as
becomes a Knight toward any such as thou art, for seeing thou have so
villainously wounded me, without any weapon in my hand to withstand thee,
defend thy self so well as thou can against me, for I shall right my wrong
as I can or may. I will use thee worse (said the villain) if I come but near
thee, therefore it were wisdom for thee to get thee gone, that I may execute
what this Ladies father has commanded me. Well may he be termed a cruel
father (quoth Arguto) that gives direction for so bloody usage of his own
child, therefore although it cost me my life, I will do my best to free her
from thee.

Having thus spoken, he delivered a very fierce stroke at the villain, which
cunningly he received upon his long knife, and held out against Arguto with
such dauntlesse courage, that albeit he was unarmed, he was so ready every way
with his knife, as, do what the Knight could, against every stroke it was
still his defense, and no where could they light but only on the knife. Above
an hour and more the fight thus continued, in which time, Arguto conceited
with him self, in what part of him the force of the enchauntment lay, whereby
the villain was able to stand so long against him, and yet all his pains no
more to endamage him. At last, by wary observation he perceived, that he
defended himself only with his right hand, managing his knife therewith as
him self pleased, and held his left hand directly behind him, never offering
it forward, either to break, awarde, or put by any blow: heere-vpon he
apprehended this imagination, that if he could compass to hurt him in the
left hand, he might the sooner prevail against him.

Now began he to make all his aim that way, and the villain well perceauing
it, was the more diligent to prevent him with his knife, and defended his left
hand with marvelous carefulnes, so that never a thrust or blow could once come
near it. Nevertheless, among the multitude of mighty maine strokes, one (by
good hap) mist the villains knife, and lighting between his arm and body,
did quite cut off his left hand: but the villain catching it up quickly with
the other hand, ran away from him so speedily, that he could scarce discern
which way he took, and the Lady likewise, lying all this while as quite bereft
of life, starting suddenly up on her feet, fled away from him he knew not
how. To see them both gone in this strange order, made him wonder thereat not
a little in his mind, and entering the Tent to rest him self a while, he was
scarsly set down, but a Satire all covered with long shaggie hair, holding a
young tree in his hand as his weapon, came in upon him, saying with a loud and
hollow voice. Mischaunce (and not good fortune) brought thee into this Wood,
where who soever enters, must die the death.

As he had spoken these words, he gave him such a cruel blow with his bat,
that brusing his helmet very shrewdly, made him so astonned, that as he thought
to rise, he staggerd to and fro: whereupon, the Satire seeing him in such an
amazement, caught him up in his arms, and ran away with him toward a
Fountain, meaning to make him drink more then he stood in need of. He had not
gone above half a bowe-shoote, but Arguto recovering his former spirits, pulled
the Satire so strongly by the long hair, that the Monster (growing angry to be
haled in such rude sort) threw Arguto with such violence against a huge flint,
as he made him lie still enough from stirring in have, and but that the Satire
had not his tree there with him, our Knight had never gone thence to see his
Concordia. While the Monster ran back to the Tent to fetch his tree, Arguto
(being of an high and heroyick spirit) was gotten up on his feet, purposing to
defend him self from any more such blows, and the Satire being returned to
him, laid such thick and furious strokes at him, that he could not retort one
back again at the Satire, but only had work enough to do, to defend and
bear off his angry blows: for in regard of the Monsters nakedness, one blow
or thrust of the Knights, (in his own conceit) might easily have sped him.
The battle continuing in this manner, he saw the Lady come running toward
him, with a naked Rapier in her throat, and pitifully desiring help at his
hand.

Arguto, who albeit he desired the death of this Satire, having twice offended
him in such dangerous sort, yet imminent and extraordinary peril of ye Lady,
made him forsake the Satire, and follow her, who guided him to a goodly plain,
where stood ready armed thirty valiant Knights, all which engirt him presently
in a ring, and every man had a maine stroke at him: but he (by good hap)
striking at one of them, his sword lighted on the crest of his helmet,
whereupon the Knight immediately drew back, as if he could endure the fight no
longer.

Hereby he half persuaded him self, that the enchantment consisted in the
crests of their helmets, and therefore she shaped his aim accordingly, whereby
he quickly made many of them retire, when stepping forth from amongst them, he
set his back against a broad leaued Beech, where he both stoutly defended, and
well breathed him self. As he stood thus oppressed by the multitude of their
blows, freely delivered on every side, he espied the Satire come running
thither, who laying hand on the Rapier in the Ladies throat, hurld her upon
his shoulder, and away he ran again with no mean have.

Arguto was greatly grieved, to see her thus violently hurried thence,
wherefore, in hope of recovering her, he ventured to make his way through the
Knights, and handled his weapon with such success among them, that by the
blows he gave them on the Helmets, three only of them remained to confront
him, which three, either because they durst not contend any longer, or whether
the enchauntment would not permit them, they likewise right gladly retired.
This success was no little comfort to Arguto, and added a cheerful
persuasion of finishing the adventure, so that never minding how weary he was,
he went to pursue the Satire which had carried away the Lady, and the subtle
Monster, making a mock at Argutos great labor, ran in and out leaping,
skipping, and dancing, never straying far, but keeping still near him, the
Lady continually crying to the Knight for help.

Arguto melted with mere compassion, and was extremely tired with following
the Satire, for the swiftest Harior in the world could not have out-stript him,
much less a man armed, and ouer-wearied with so long combatting. All which
notwithstanding, he would not as yet give over his pursuit, but noated still
the Satires friskes and gambaldings, often looking back with mocks and gires
at the Knight, till he was ouer-reached in his own folly, for dancing
carelessly, and looking back at the very same instant, he chanced to stumble
at the root of a tree, and falling down, the Lady escaped from him, running
with open arms unto Arguto, and embraced him in such forcible manner, as he
could not devise which way to stay himself, which the Satire perceiving, came
back again toward him.

Arguto, being held in this sort by the Lady, and her legs likewise fast
twined about his, he gathered hereby, that albeit it was to his mighty
encombrance, yet she did it as loath the Satire should seize on her again, nor
could he shun a dangerous blow which the Monster gave him with his tree, so
that now he was in two mighty extremities, one, right fearful of the Ladies
injury, the other, that he had no means how to help himself, but
doubtless his life must there needs miscarie. But see how it fortuned, the
Satires tree smiting Arguto on the Helmet, descended upon the Ladies shoulder,
and such was the vehemence of the blow, that she (loosing her hold) tumbled
down backward.

When Arguto saw himself freed from his former oppression, he stepped boldly to
the Satire, and giving a full blow at the hand wherein he held the tree, cut it
quite off, so that the Monster roaring with sense of his pain, fled away
from him so fast as he could run. The Lady lying all this while in a dead
trance, starting up on her feet, said. Sir Knight, if thy heart serve thee so
well, as that thou dare undertake an attempt which I shall show thee, my
hopes will then assuredly persuade me, that not only my self shall be freed
from this enchauntment, but diverse other beautiful Ladies beside. Guide me
whether thou will, quoth Arguto, for a Knight ought not to question after any
case of perrill, but boldly adventure on any enterprise of honor, whatsoever.

So following the Lady, she led him along a very narrow crooked causey, till
at length he beheld a Tower, which seemed as if it were made of Silver, and
being come near it, they saw an high engine of war like a Ram, made with a
devise to let up and down, such as were used in elder times, before they had
any knowledge of Ordinance, to hurl great stones, or any other annoyance
therewith into a Town or Castle. By this engine, quoth the Lady, must you
gain your entrance, and suffer your self to be thrown aloft upon the Tower,
because there is no other passage admitted. Arguto took it very strangely,
that he should oppose his life to such manifest perrill, but his great courage,
treading all fear underfoot, he boldly entered into the cradle fixed on the
maine beam, being the receptacle for whatsoever should pass into the Tower.

No sooner stood he upright in this conueyance, but he heard most delicate
Music sound within the Tower, as it seemed for joy of liberty and freedom,
which the people there imprisoned hoped for by this Knight, who durst so
aduenturously put himself into the carriage, which no man (till now) was so
hardy as to offer it. The engine suddenly mounting it self up, in a moment
he was lifted aloft upon the Tower, without any other harm or perrill at all,
whereupon the Music presently ceased, and a great noise of
Armour-clattering was heard, whereby he expected some rough encounter. Then
beheld he a wild Beast so strangely misshapen, as he could not comprehend his
true natural form: for he had the head of a Bear, the teeth and tushes of a
Boar, the neck and breast of a Lion, the tallants of a Griffon, and his tail
divided in two parts, having at each end a hook of steel, with the points
thereof so sharp and piercing, as they were able to enter the very soundest
proof.

Arguto being well skild in such matters of enchauntment, persuaded himself,
that with this Beast was the latest trouble he should find there, and
therefore resolved to show his uttermost valor. The Monster was not slow in
assayling him with such fury, as would have dismayed any heart to behold it,
having never seen so eugly a Monster, but Arguto, purposing to keep off from
his tallants and teeth, made many fair proffers to cut his legs in sunder,
which the Monster still right cunningly avoiding, smote one of his long tushes
into his Shield, and rent it from about his neck so forcibly, that he made him
fall down flat upon his face, where he might have been pressed to death with
the Monsters huge weight, but that right quickly he recovered footing again,
but he could not shun a sudden gripe with his tallants, which piercing
through the closing of his Armor, wounded him a little in the left flanck.

This hurt so much displeased Arguto, that striking courageously at the
Monster, he gave him a great wound full in the breast, for which he received an
immediate castisement, by being smitten into the sight of his Caske with the
Monsters tushe, which tearing down the whole Beuer, gript his head with such
extreme anguish, that he was constrained to cut the laces of his Helmet, and
let it in that sort be taken from him. Being thus without both Shield and
Helmet, his life stood on shrewd terms of hazard, and doubtless had
miscarried, if he had not labored to end the battle in this manner.

Feigning as if he could hold out no longer, he fell down flat again upon
his face, and the beast intending to tear him in pieces, stood stradling over
him, when stabbing his sword up into the Monsters belly, he made so large an
incition, that his bowels dropped out upon the ground, and then Arguto crept from
under him, least with his huge weight he should have queld him. Now heard he
the Music again, but with far louder and sweeter strains then before, as
seeming that the adventure was almost concluded, and now came the Lady again
unto him, with ten other fair beauties attending on her, all of them
together joyfully saying: Welcome the brauest Knight that ever bare Arms.

So taking him by the hand, they guided him thence, and brought him down into
a fair square Court, where no door could be discerned for passage out of ye
Tower, which made him awhile to stand as abashed, doubting least the Ladies
intended some treachery toward him, but one of them spoke to him in this
manner. Sir Knight, do but lift up this stone, and presently the Tower will
vanish, and the enchauntment cease.

Arguto, thinking nothing impossible for him to perform, went to the stone,
and putting his hand into a great iron ring, which was fastened directly in the
midst of the stone, he lifted up the huge stone, and threw it a pretty way from
him, albeit it was so great and weighty, that ten ordinary men could hardly
move it. Out of the place which the stone had covered, started up the least
Dwarffe that ever was seen, who skipping about very pleasantly, took up
certain glasses out of the vaulte, and breaking them in pieces one against
another, vanished out of sight suddenly, and with him the Tower and the Wood
likewise, so that Arguto and the eleven Ladies, found themselves at liberty in
a large spacious Field. There found he the aged Nigromancer, and Primaleon,
calling unto him with a loud voice, and the Lady knowing her old angry Father,
durst not approach near him, fearing least he would again enclose her in the
enchauntment, as having already tasted his cruel severity.

But Arguto securing her, went cheerfully to meet them, when being come
together, the aged Father could not forbear but very lovingly embraced his
Daughter, the like did Primaleon and Arguto. So going along with the old man
to his abiding, it drew to Supper time, where sitting down at a Table right
sumptuously prepared, all the supper while, the old man's Daughter did nothing
else, but earnestly look upon the delivered Knight, and breathed forth many
broken sighs, whereby Primaleon and Arguto coniectured, that the young Lady
was enamoured of the Knight, so past they the supper time in mirthfull talk,
and pleasant discoursings.

CHAP. LXXVI. How the aged Magitian showed the cause, wherefore he had
enchaunted the Knight and his daughter, confining them to so long a date of
punishment.
QVickly after the Tables were with-drawne, the old man commanded the Squires
to walk aside, and then turning toward the Knights, he thus began. Honorable
and virtuous Lords, I am undoubtedly persuaded, that you repute me as a cruel
and unkind Father, being blessed but with one Daughter only, I should be so
transported with fury and passion, to censure her with so severe a punishment:
but if I tell you the strangest case that ever you heard, I doubt not but your
oppinion will be so altered, as you will wonder I should be so humane and
gentle, in inflicting no heavier a judgment on her: albeit in the end, each
fault should merritoriously have been doubled on this disloyal Knight, well
worthy to endure vnconfined torments, so long as this spacious round has
continuance.

Know then (fair Lords) that this enfranchased Knight named Brunoro, redeemed
by your manly pains and travail, was Lord of a Castle some six leagues
distance hence, who being enriched with countlesse treasure, would make no
spare of large and liberal sums, to have at his pleasure, the fairest
maidens dwelling in these parts. He hearing that my Daughter was ranckt and
reckoned among those of choicest beauty, attempted not by coin or rich
promises to win her to his purpose, because he well knew, such courses were
silly and very unsavory, to prevail with a Lady of high blood and
resolution: wherefore he practiced by more facill and tractable means, and
which much more easilier prevails with lightheaded Damsels, to wit,
patheticall speeches, quick and queintly couched, sealed with sad sighs,
vows, and dissembled attestations, that he was truly and sincerely devoted to
her in affection.

The young virgin, altogether unacquainted with loves idle dalliances, casting
a rash inconsiderate eye upon him, apprehended (ouer-hastilie) that he was a
man of comlie personage, debonaire, well qualitied, rich, and so worthy in
love to be respected, that she gave him so franck a possession of her heart, as
there wanted nothing but apt means to consort herself with him. He perceiving
this too sudden inclination of the Damsel, purposed only to serve his
lustful appetite with her, and then afterward to cast her off, as he had in
like manner dealt by diverse other: and procuring to have secret conference
with her, he compast it so closely, as no eye in my house could be guilty of
it. At which instant, it was my mishap, to be far off from my Country, in
service of the young Soldane of Babylon, who gathered together his martial
forces, to revenge the death of Albayzer his Father: by means whereof he had
the apter opportunity, to obtain of my unhappy child Rosella, even what his
loose desires best pleased him to urge. But yet her discretion gouernd her thus
far, that before her maiden continence should forsake her, an honorable
promise of marriage past between them, to be performed in a Wood very near
adjoining, where he would loially combine the matrimonial knot, never to be
dissolved but by death only.

And his alleged reason, why it should be there thus closely consumated, was,
because his Parents and Friends should be no hinderance, to his quiet enjoying
her in that sacred estate: for (in nobility and wealth) he somewhat exceeded
her, and therefore, (as he said) he was the more unwilling, to be injured in
this sollemne determination.

The silly Damsel, too full of credulity, stretched her well-meaning
thoughts no further then his promises, and therefore iumpt with Brunoro, both
for place and appointment, without conceiting, that an honorable mind, which
she (till this mishap) continually carried, would ever give entertainment to
such degenerate baseness, as his hollow heart right cunningly cloaked. The next
night following, without coin, jewels, or ought else of esteem, she secretly
got forth at the Garden-gate, where Brunoro diligently awaited her coming,
and this was done with such wary heed and circumspection, that not any in my
Castle did so much as suspect it: there did she lovingly embrace her Brunoro,
and he (the better to couller his untruth) expressed as kind a welcome to her.

Away they went to the aforesaid Wood, where with kisses, coyings, and such
like flatteries, but no act at all performed of marriage, he cropped ye fairest
flower that beautified her bosom. Then causing a Tent to be brought thither,
with all necessaries fit for his noble state and condition, fifteen days they
spent there in wanton iouissaunce, and so pleasing seemed this to the poor
beguiled Damsel, that (in her mind) she was more then half an Empress,
persuading her self, that he as truly loved her, as (in her very soul) she
entirely loved him. But, as the daintiest delights in time grow yrkesome, so,
Brunoro wexing weary of my Daughters company, concluding the ni^ht ensuing to
leave her, caused Wine (mingled with sleepie drugs) to be closely brought
thither, and gave her to drink thereof, she never dreaming on any such vile
treason.

About two hours after supper, the wine began to work his effect, and she
sitting leaning against a table, slept so soundly, that the loudest thunder
could not awake her. The deceitful wretch, to leave no wicked act undone,
that might bring the greater shame and contempt to her, who (by overmuch love)
fell thus into his power, caused her to be stripped stark naked, and then laid
in a bed, where him self companying with her, like a monster and no man,
glutted his libidinous and insatiate desire, as (almost) it exceeds modesty
to report it. Which being done, he caused the bed and Tent to be carried away,
with whatsoever else he had brought thither, not leaving her own wearing
garments behind him, no, not her very nearest, to cover nakedness, but
(vnmanlike) thus left there lying on the bare ground: all which he did to this
end, that when in the morning she should find her self naked, she might die
or destroy her self there in the Wood, rather then for shame to let any one
see her, I cannot tell ye the inward conceit of grief, which (poor despised
soul) surprised her at her waking, seeing all things so altered from her last
beholding them, for they were but instances of her further woe and extremity.
The next morning after this heavy accident, it was my hap to come home again,
where I found a strange and uncouth confusion, because my Rosella was no where
to be heard of.

Heere-vpon, I betook my self presently to mine Art, thereby to be resolved
what was become of her, but my ill hap chanced to be such, that a certain
wizzard among you Christians, had gone beyond me in mine own experience, and
taken the matter out of my hand, so that this way I could learn nothing of
her. Then shaped I my course by another progression, and taking two Knights
with me, mounted forthwith on horseback, purposing by diligent search to
find her again, riding directly toward Brunoroes Castle, because that very
day I understood, how he had been often seen passing to and fro from my
dwelling, and by diverse means had saluted my daughter, declaring evident
signs of love to her: at which report, my hopes wexing more cheerful, I was
half persuaded to find her linckt with him in marriage.

As we rode along through that unhappy Wood, (the close betrayer both of my
daughters joys and mine) by what chance I know not, we mistook our way, and
happened into the very thickest of all the Wood, where gazing up and down for
a more easy passage: my daughter, shunning all places where she might
likeliest be seen, had hid her self behind a thick leafie brake, yet not with
such skill, but that her snow-white skin shot a lightsome radiaunce through
the twisted branches. Now, albeit I little thought what this bright appearance
might be, yet the mind (evermore the Augure and presager of harms) struck
this harsh divination on the vntunde strings of my soul, that this shadowed
Alablaster brightness was my daughter. And making toward the place, when she
perceived that she could no longer conceal her self, she came unto me,
veyled before with an apron of thick-wrought leaves, which the sight of her
own shame had instructed her to make, and falling submissiuely upon her knees,
spoke in this manner. Behold (dear Father) thy unfortunate daughter, and kill
me not, though (in justice) I have deserved no less.

I (inly touched with the true sense both of shame and grief) was so furiously
transported, that neither pity or patience prevailing against rage, I took
her by the long tresses of her hair, and lifting her thereby violently from
the ground, would with my dagger have stabd her to the heart: but the Knights
in my company, forcibly restrained me, and counseled me like friends, to take
her home with me to my Castle, where (upon more deliberate consideration of
the case) I might further determine of her as I found occasion. Very
thankfully I took their kind advise, because I judged it an ouer-light
punishment, to let her escape with so speedy a dispatch of life, rather (me
thought) the case might apprehend such merit, that ten thousand severe
castigations would seem insufficient: wherefore, clothing her in the garment
of my Page, because that was the nearest and readiest help, I brought her to
my Castle, where imprisoning her in a remote chamber of my house, for two
days together I gave her nothing to feed on.

The two Knights my friendly companions, knowing for certainty, that the death
of her would be mine own dispatch also, right kindly coming to me, told me
in grave and sensible sort, how highly it would redound to mine own shame, when
her death should be reported to happen, by my means, and the nature of her
offense never heard or known. They having certain precious confectious about
them, and wine of rich and sovereign power, by my consent went to her chamber,
where first cherishing her faintnes with those necessary helps, and addition
of apparent likelihoode, that my grace and favor might again be recovered:
they won from her the sum of all, both by what means she came into the Wood,
and how (in that sort) she was left there naked, which they perceauing, to
happen only through fond loves simplicity, returned again to me, and told me
the whole story of my daughters misfortune.

Then grew I incensed against this trothlesse man, calming my kindled rage
(somewhat) toward my daughter, considering, that a young Ladies first offense,
should not be so severely chastised, especially when earnestly one was the
cause of her trespass: whereupon I faithfully promised the Knights, that I
would not proceed in any further rigor against her. But sitting all alone by
my self, I began to practice, how I might be sufficiently revenged on the
Knight, by whose villainy I was so hainously iniuried, and making many
plat-formes in my brain, thus I concluded: that Rosella (by writing) should
certify Brunoro, how I lay sick at the point of death, so that if he would
then come to her, he should enjoy my money and goods, and likewise be
possessour of all my books, whereof (a long while) he had been very desirous,
and offered large sums of money to have them: as for his leaving her so
unkindly naked, in the depth of her love she had buried that blame, and by no
means took it as any fact of his, but rather of some slavish uncivil
servant, who upon a malicious inclination toward her, had (contrary to his
knowledge) so mis-entreated her, and he (no doubt) in great heaviness for lack
of her company.

My purpose herein was, that (upon his coming) I might be possessed of him,
and afterward to use him as I saw occasion: so, with a Letter or transcript
drawn to this effect, I entered into my daughters chamber, where giving her
good looks, and taking her by the hand, thus I began. Although the injury I
have received by thee, has made a large passage through my heart: yet am I
willing to forgive and forget it, so thou will pleasure me but in one only
matter, which shall yield contentment both to thee and me. I will do (quoth
she) whatsoever it shall please you to command, in recompense of the great
grace I receive from you so unworthily.

My will is, quoth I, that thou write this Letter unto Brunoro: and there-vpon
I gave it her to read. The shalow witted Girl, whose doting affection would
not let her look into the vnrepairable wrong she had received by Brunoro,
suddenly thus replied. Oh God forbid (dear father) that I should prove such
a traytresse to him, whom (more then mine own soul) I love and esteem: and
no sooner had she thus said, but suddenly would have cast her self out at
the casement of her window, because she would not be guilty of writing such a
Letter.

I, who knew too well her firm resolution, immediately became so furiously
discontented, as had not the Knights stepped in suddenly upon me, questionless
she had there perished by my hand: but being by them with-helde from my
purpose, I told them the wilful folly of the wench, and how foolish love
quite blinded her judgment, and made her still dote on him that had so vilely
abused her. The Knights spent some little while, in persuading me to more
moderation, because she had confidently answered, that she would endure all
torments whatsoever, rather then be wone to betray Brunoro: and they well
noting her settled purpose, held it necessary, that she should have her mind,
I to pardon her, cloathe her again in her own habit, and let her go at
liberty, but with a far stricter eye of care of her, then before had been
used. All which I yielded to, and she (as impiercible as the diamond) could be
drawn to no other belief, but that Brunoro right dearly affected her,
whereon she compast the means, to acquaint him with my determination, writing
unto him what I had intended: and (which was most to my prejudice,) that my Art
failed me, and could at this instant do me no service.

Brunoro, being (at that time) the very arrogantest Knight in all this
Country, grew proud and disdainful against me, and hearing that I practiced
his death, did not determine the like by me, but how to bring me into a most
wretched condition of life: and perceauing it was publicly bruted abroad,
what wrong he had done to me and my daughter, he devised with him self, to lay
a fresh affliction on me, and (by trayning her once again from my house) to
abuse her more villainously then he had done before: never remembering, that so
rare love and fidelity in a woman, deserved to be matched with the greatest
Prince in the world. Upon this vile determination both against her and me, he
wrote to Rosella, that the third night following he would come and confer with
her in the garden, and at the appointed hour, the unfortunate Damsel
perceauing him there, went simply to him, where taking her up again behind
him on his Horse, unseen of any one, he carried her away. They had not ridden
above two leagues, but (like a cunning traitor) faigning that he would make
amends for his passed discourtesie, he caused her to dismount: then giving her
counterfaited kind kisses and embraces, and glutting his lust again with her
dishonor, his brutish heat was no sooner alayed, but then he manifested his
damnable purpose, and dragging her along by the hair of the head, said, that
he purposed there to kill her.

She (silly soul) ruing too late her fond credulity, entreated him (for Gods
sake) to spare her life, whereto he yielded on this condition, that she would
procure his entrance into my Castle, and make him Lord of all that was mine.
The miserable Lady, not knowing how otherwise to ransom her life, made him
promise to perform it, and returning with him back to my Castle, with thirty
attendants all well provided: through the Garden she conducted them into my
great Hall, where making their passage forward with engines of iron, the noise
quickly awaking me, I presently conceited who they were, and stepping
immediately into my study, I found, that a Christian wizzard, called the Sage
Aliarte of the obscure valley, had all this while been the hinderer of my
Magic spelles, but having done what him pleased, I was now again at liberty.

Heere-vpon, out of my chamber window I threw a certain powder, which smote
Brunoro blind, and all that were with him, so that except I pleased to release
them, they could never have the benefit of sight any more. Then stepping down
my self among them, in a dissembled voice I told them how easily they might
come by my treasure, and opening a door fit for my purpose, I said: Follow
me Gentlemen, and I will make you all rich for ever, they entering where I bad
them, were all by me locked up in a close prison, but my daughter I conuayed to
her former place of restraint.

Early the next morning, I sent for my friends, the two fore-remembred Knights,
showing them how well I had hunted, and what a booty I had caught, yet never
issued forth of my Castle: whereat a while they stood somewhat amazed, but
most of all, at the mad and inconsiderate love, which my daughter still bare to
so false a tretcher. I urged their advise, whether thus blind they should die
there in prison, or have their heads smitten off for so manifest villainy. The
Knights studying how to save Rosellaes life, in regard of her wonderful error
in love, after some little conference had together, one of them thus spoke. In
our opinion Sir, you should not put them to death thus blind in prison, for
wanting the sight of their own misery, they shall also give no example, of so
monstrous an ingratitude toward a true loving Lady: beside, they should not
escape with loss of their heads only, because a fault of such great quality,
justly deserves an aunswerable punishment. We rather deem it more
convenient, that (discharging all the rest) you enchaunt Brunoro and your
daughter in two several places, with such variety of chastisements inflicted
upon them, as should never cease or they be free from, till two of the best
Knights in the world wrought their deliverance. This sentence pleased me
exceedingly, so that setting all the rest at liberty, I caused Brunoro to be
brought bound before me, where restoring his sight again, and reproouing his
base ingratitude to so loyal a Lady, I adjudged him to remain within the
Tower, until such a Knight should come to redeem him, and there should he
continually be hunted by two she Bears, and my self (to feed mine eyes
sufficiently with his affliction) enchaunted my own abiding in the same Tower,
where you my Lord Primaleon happened to find me.

My daughters doom was within the Wood, where she lost the bright beauty of
her virgin honor, there should a murderous villain daily cut her throat,
and afterward she was to live in the uncovered Tower, feeding only upon the
bounty of the air, aunswerable to her misery in the Wood, where she was
ravished and left so inhumanely naked.

At these words he began to look about him, and perceauing it wexed late, he
would not trouble them with any further discourse: so the Knights prepared to
take their rest, with intent to pacify this coffeehouse, and procuring the
old man to be more friendly to the Knight Brunoro.

CHAP. LXXVII. How Primaleon and Arguto, caused the marriage to be sollemnized
between Brunoro and Rosella, and afterward iourneyed toward Babylon.
NExt morning ensuing, Primaleon and Arguto having concluded, to quallifie this
heavy case of discord, came down into the Hall, where they found the
ancient Magitian holding his daughter by the hand, and chyding Brunoro for his
rigorous cruelty: So the Knights giving them all the mornings salutation,
took Brunoro aside with them, and plainly told him, that he had very highly
wronged the young Lady, knowing her love so truly addicted to him, and
therefore if he would make amends for his passed transgressions, he must
accept her in marriage, for her virtues did merit one of greater worth then
he.

Brunoro, who (by this long time of chastisement) had alayed his proud stomach,
said. That it was in vain for him to offer any such atonement, when her
discontented Father would no way be won thereto. Then the two Knights took
the old man between them, showing him, how he might (in one instant) make
firm his daughters lost honor and his own, by granting to a conuenable
marriage between her and Brunoro, who had now entertained a more mild and
obedient spirit, and by the feeling sense of his passed miseries, had humbled
his proud thoughts to a more gentle temper.

The aged Magitian, confidently crediting what they said, and that they would
not report it, except it were so indeed, was contented to give his daughter in
marriage to Brunoro: but first he desired to see some proof of him, for the
better clearing of all doubts to come, wherewith the Knights could find no
mislike, wherefore they called him before the old man, and thus Primaleon
spoke in the presence of Rosella.

Brunoro, this ancient Lord is very well pleased, that this faithful Lady his
daughter shall be your wife: provided you do undertake some glorious
enterprise, which may wipe out the scandale of your passed offenses. I will
perform (quoth Brunoro) what soever it shall please him or you to command me,
although I were assured to loose my life, which truly (in justice) I have
woorthily deserved. This answer was of such powerful efficacy, that the
aged Magitian (as one sufficiently persuaded already) would have him to
adventure on no further peril, but Brunoro, to let the Knights see his
forwardnes and valor, would needs perform what he had intended.

When he was armed and mounted on horseback, Primaleon, loath to make any
longer aboade there, caused him to be called, when, to the good liking of the
aged man, but much more of Rosella, they ascended the stairs, and Primaleon,
holding the Lady by one hand, and Brunoro by the other, craving favor of the
Magitian, began as follows. Your present behavior Sir Brunoro, with no doubt
of your after progression in all honor, has made Rosellaes father to forget
all former dislikes, and gives you his dearest daughter as your wife, with
absolute promise, that after his death, his wealth and possessions remain
wholly yours, as a dowry in marriage with his beloved child. Then causing a
religious Priest to be called, which lived secretly among some few Christians
in that Country, he prayed the old man, that Rosella and Brunoro might be
baptized as Christians, according as he promised him, when he brought him forth
of the Tower.

The Nigromancer being somewhat obstinate in his own error, would gladly
have denied it, but not daring to contradict Primaleon in any thing, expressed
an outward willingness: so being baptized, they were then espoused together, and
sollemne feasting was there performed, such as the time and place could afford.

When our Knights had remained there two whole days, they called the old
Magitian aside, and demanded of him a plain information, concerning the
proceedings of Albayzars son, that they might the better provide for any
harm to ensue. Of him they understood, how this Prince had stird up the
Soldane of Persia, son to him that dyed before Constantinople, with the Kings
of Tartaria and Armenia, the Emperor of Trebisonde, and other Princes, with
them also was a younger Brother of Ristoranoes. The reason why he gathered
such a puissant strength together, was, to be possessed of so many of the best
Christian Knights as he could come by, not to put them to death, but as hoping
to draw them to his blind sect and error, or at least so to hinder them, that
they might not bear any arms against him: for the young Soldane was of such a
generous spirit, as he would not revenge his Fathers death on any man, that by
deceit should fall into his power, but openly and honorably in a pitched field
of battle.

The Knights being thus far acquainted with the case, took their leave of
the old Wizzard, Brunoro and Rosella, as if they went for Constantinople, not
revealing their close purpose to visit Babylon, yet did the Magitian plainly
perceive it, that their determination was absolutely thither, wherefore when
they were gone, he went to his study, doubting ^me mishap that might befall
them, therefore he would ha^ daily eye to their proceedings.

CHAP. LXXVIII. How Primaleon and Arguto were taken by Corcuto the Soldane of
Babylon, and set at liberty again by the aged Magitian, Father to Rosella,
returning afterward to Constantinople.
PRimaleon and Arguto, desirous to see what preparation Corcuto had leueyed,
made such dispatch of their daily iourneyes, without any hinderance or
contradiction, that they came at last to great Babylon, and having very readily
the language of the Country, as Knights errant (in those times) were quick and
ready in the several tongues, they abode there certain days, without being
known to any one whence and what they were: for Knights had free access to
all parts of the world, and their profession allowed them to go always armed,
which made them ye more boldly presume to such public places, where tryumphs
and tourneyes were customably held.

Now because Primaleon coueted not to be known, he came to the lists very
badly horsed, seeming but as a looker on and no otherwise, which made very many
to scorn and deride him, saying: Belike this is some doubtie man at arms, and
meeter to bestride an ass then a horse: But especially one cock-braind knight
of Babylon, being a man of more outward show and appearance, then any inward
virtue or discretion, would needs play with Primaleon in jesting manner,
daring him to trial of the Ioust, and hoping very readily to unhorse him.
Primaleon not willing to be discovered, feigned himself simple and silly in
his aunswers, which provoked the Knight against him in much more derision, and
without any longer stay, catching fast hold on his arm, he drew him (as it
were) perforce into the midst of the Listes, and betaking himself to his own
quarter, gave him the sign that he must needs meet him.

Primaleon, finding his greatest insufficiency to consist in his Horse, and
the worst that could happen to him, would be but a dismounting, when he saw he
must needs Ioust whether he would or no, he settled himself in his saddle,
and went to his place with so rough a semblance, that they which had mocked and
scorned him before, began with much better regard to respect him.

The Knight encountered Primaleon in the midst of his Shield, and brake his
Lance upon it, as if it had been against a wall: but Primaleon (forgetting
his former purposed secrecy) met his adversary so strongly, as lifting him
above six handfulls from his saddle, he had such a violent fall against the
ground, that he lay a good while as if he had been dead, and coming to his
senses again, he grew exceedingly grieved, that he had so unmannerly provoked
the stranger to the Ioust, buying his folly with so dear repentance.

And as he was going to excuse his offense, another Knight, one of them that
was a challenger in this tournament, (held there at this instant on some
especial occasion) to the end the Stranger should not part thence with such
honor, he would revenge the others ill fortune, and encountering with
Primaleon, he was so lightly laid along on the ground, as if he had never been
touched at all, and so we^ ^re others after him, the last of them being carried
by the hea^ and heels forth of the Lists, as if he had been quite deprived of
his life.

The Princes there present, beholding these strange accidents, grew all to a
private murmuring among themselves, of whence and what this Stranger might be,
and Corcuto the Soldane, half suspecting that this was some Knight of
Constantinople Court, went and put on his Armor, meaning to approve his own
valor against him, returning again very sumptuously accoustred, but yet
unknown to any what he was.

Primaleon (by the muttering and privy whispering which he perceived to be
among the people,) judged verily, that this was some valiant Pagane, and seeing
his own silly Jade, by reason of his running so many courses, to be very
weak and almost utterly tired, sent this message to Corcuto: that if he would
have the honor of vnhorsing him, he should not presume on so apparent an
advantage, but command him a better horse, more apt for the encounter, to the
end (he being a Stranger there) if he had the fall, yet he might not lay the
blame on his horse. Corcuto, hearing a demand so reasonable, presently sent
him a gallant Courser, right richly caparisond, whereon Primaleon lustilie
mounting, trotted him bravely to his place, and managed him so loftilie at the
sound of the Trumpets, that the Babylonians at the sight thereof, began to
mistrust their own partaker.

The encounter between them was with terrible fury, expressing dreadlesse
spirits in both the Champions, Corcuto loosing one of his stirrops, but
recovering it very quickly again, and Primaleon glentring a little aside, but
sat upright immediately on it. At the second course, Corcuto was cast on the
crupper of his horse, but presently leapt into his seat again, Primaleon
only missing one stirrup, and both growing angry at these disgraces, began
to make choice of far stronger Lances: in which encounter, Primaleon (to
escape the fall) caught hold on his horses maine, but Corcuto fell in a swoune
on the earth, and was presently carried away by his Squires, because no man
should have knowledge of him.

Primaleon, least as a tryumpher he should be conducted to the Palace,
shruncke suddenly away among the croude, and went to his lodging, where being
unarmed, his friend and he fell to pleasant conference. Corcuto being perfectly
recovered, and feigning to have been absent about some urgent business, came
down into ye great Hall, where he found his Barons and diverse strange Kings,
who having seen the sport to end, with the fall of the Pagane Knight that was
unknown, returned back to the Palace, and sitting with Corcuto, told him the
whole success of the Ioust, seeming very desirous to know the stranger Knight,
whose fair fortune had graced him with the victory.

Corcuto, being as covetous thereof as they, caused a Proclamation to be made,
that whosoever could manifest, what and who the strange Knight was, which had
so highly deserved in the tournament, should have a very large and royal
reward. The fame of this bounteous offer, coming to the Hosts ear where
Primaleon and Arguto lay, and he being assured that this was the Iouster which
his King enquired for: to enrich himself with the promised reward, he went
and declared to the Soldane, that the Knight after whom his highness sought,
lodged as a guest within his house.

Corcuto, not a little iocond at this good hap, gave the Host what was
promised by Proclamation, and consulting of this matter among his Barons, the
conclusion was this, that certain Spies should be sent thither, and finding
him to be a Christian, immediately to surprise him, thereby to weaken the glory
of the Christian Court, but being a Saracen, then highly to honor him, and
give him the rich prizes ordained for the tournament. Election was made of such
men to be sent thither, as had been diverse time at Constantinople, and other
places of great concourse in Christendom, among whom was a wealthy Merchant,
that had often sold Jewels to the Empress Grydonia, and likewise to the
Princess Miragarda, by means whereof, he had diverse times seen both
Primaleon and Arguto: and remembering them very perfectly, he quickly returned
to the Soldane and told him: that these were two of the most esteemed Knights
among the Christians, and making seazure on them, he might the easier revenge
his injuries sustained. Corcuto calling the Kings and Barons to council,
showed them what a good beginning had happened to their proceedings, whereby
they might the more assuredly persuade themselves of victory: and among the
diversity of oppinions, it was thus determined, that they should be peaceably
taken, to return in exchange for some of them, if any should happen to be
taken as prisoners, because there were many other worthy Knights in the
Christian band, at whose hands they expected scarce kind entertainment. This
being resolved on, Corcuto gave ye Host in charge, to serve them at Supper
with a commixed Wine, purposelie prepared to cause heaviness of sleep, so to
be possessed of them without any further danger: which being accordingly put in
execution, in the night time they were taken and strongly bound, without any
further knowledge in the City.

On the next morrow, when they saw themselves thus taken prisoners, they made
undoubted account to loose their lives: but when they were brought before
Corcuto, who (with a cheerful countenance) embraced Primaleon, their hopes
were somewhat better revived, and Corcuto, being of a very honorable
respective nature, spoke to them in this manner. Albeit I have just reason to
hate you, as the enemies to my blood and faith, yet am I not any way cruelly
inclined toward ye: wherefore let me tell ye, that you must remain with me,
so long as I think it convenient, and you shall be served as in your own
Christian Kingdoms, wanting nothing else, but liberty of departing hence at
your own pleasure.

Our Knights, who looked for far worse entertainment, right humbly thanked him
for this royal kindness: whereupon they were discharged of their bands, and
permitted to walk about the City and Palace, but always with a good guarde
attending on them, whereby their hopes grew desperate of ever parting thence.

Now come we to the aged Nigromancer again, who (as has been already
declared) had a daily respect to what they did, as fearing least some disaster
might befall them, when he found by his Art that they were imprisoned: he
presently purposed to set them at liberty, in respect of the honorable
benefit, which he had received only by them, but yet he intended to do it so
secretly, that the Soldane should not at any time impute it to him, so, without
imparting his purpose to his Daughter, nor yet to his Son in Law, having
prepared two excellent Armours, and two gallant Coursers, he departed toward
Babylon. There he arrived at the instant time, when Albayzars son the
Soldane of Babylon, had secretly determined the death of our Knights, in
revenge of his Fathers death among the Christians, being thereto provoked by
the importunity of his Barons, which greatly repined at the favor he showed
them, and therefore, though they had wone him to it, yet they meant to perform
it when he least dreampt of it.

The Magitian perceiving their imminent perrill, that very night entered into
the City, and going to the Chamber where they were safely guarded, he awaked
them out of a very sound sleep, and making himself known to them, told all
the treason intended against them: then gave he them a certain root,
wherewith rubbing their faces, they should be altered in so strange a manner,
as no man possibly could have knowledge of them. Then did he appoint a place
for their meeting, where he would provide them of horse and Armor, and
afterward guide them til they were in sound assurance: they thankful for so
great a courtesy, and loath to be murdered there so inhumanely, made use of
this good hap in such an urgent necessity.

The Magitian being gone very early in the morning, Primaleon and Arguto
feigning an accustomed sleeping, much longer then before they had been wont to
do, seeing the Guard and servant with-drawne to their breakefast, put on
nothing but their shirts, and cullouring their faces with the root, they
became all black as any Negro, which changing them strangely from their former
appearance, they wondered at one another, and assured themselves that no man
could know the^: So passed they out of their chamber, and by the Guard, being
taken by them verily for Indians, whereof there used many to the house, that
attended on the strange Kings then there being.

In this sort passed they by the Palace gate, and walked unsuspected forth at
the City port, reputed still to be Indian noble men, and such as were alied to
those black Princes. Being come to the place assigned by the Nigromancer, he
was right joyful of their so safe escape, and washing them with a water which
he had brought for the purpose, their countenances received their true
complexion. When they were armed, and had thanked the Magitian for his
faithful kindness, with promise never to forget so great a benefit: they rode
on a while together, and when they were far enough from the City, he took his
farewell of them, and they rode away as best them selves pleased: leaving no
little noise and disquiet in the City, when it was known that the two
Christian Knights were escaped, and no man could imagine how or in what manner,
or whom to hold guilty of their close departure.

CHAP. LXXIX. How the marriages of Candida with Leonato, and of Tarnaes with
Fior-nouella, being further conferred on in the Court of Constantinople, there
happened a sudden and vnexpectrd alteration.
VIctoria and the young Concordia, expressed by sad looks their hearts
coffeehouse, for the sudden departure of their esteemed favorites,
nevertheless, hope gave them comfort, that promises would one day be
performed: the like was elsewhere expected, concerning Palmerins passed word,
for his son Leonato, and Tarnaes of Lacedemonia, to enjoy the several Ladies
wherewith he had agreed them. But Palmerin began to repent his promise,
because him self doated extremely in affection, and entirely loved the fair
Lady Candida, yet to keep his honor from noted touch thereof, he couerd it
very cunningly, and seeing that his son must needs enjoy her in marriage, to
cross the match, and compass his own hopes in after time, he practiced how
to hinder their proceeding.

The Emperor Primaleon in like manner, without any regard of his age and
imbecilities, he was also overcome with such amorous passions, and so enflamed
with love to Candida, that it was hell to him to hear talk of her marriage:
but Leonato and Tarnaes, relying wholly on Palmerins promise, were the bolder to
break their minds to the Emperor, finding him accompanied with Florendos and
the wizzard Aliarte, who likewise made love to the same Candida. By the
Emperors aunsweres it plainly appeared, that he was not willing she should be
so married, but said, he had purposed in his private thoughts, to bestow her on
Oliuanto young Primaleons brother, which he urged the rather, because Oliuanto
was not at that present in the Court, so the more surely to defer off the
marriage: but Leonatoes resolution continued in such sort, as the Emperor (not
knowing easily how to get him out of Constantinople) was enforced to say, that
it was not meet time to marry so worthy a Lady, without performance of some
higher attempts for her sake, then (as yet) he or any else had undertaken.
When Leonato saw his hopes frustrated with such peremptory speeches, he stepped
boldly before the Emperor, saying. Since I see your highness is my only
hinderer, in the long expected felicity of my desires, which (but for you) I
might now freely enjoy: were you as other men are, I would then tell ye, that
age will not let you perform the office of a Knight, and I will maintain,
against him whosoever dare combat in your cause, that you do me most unkingly
injury.

Palmerin hearing these proud speeches of his son, stepped forth, and checked
him with a sharp reprehension, for being so careless of his duty: but
Leonato, scorning to be baffuld by any man in his love, or that the greatest
Monarch on the earth should intercept his desseignes, drew forth his sword,
saying. Whosoever dare deny, that beauteous Candida shall not be my wife, let
him come forth of Constantinople, there (like a Knight) will I expect him, and
there let him try, whether I be worthy of her or no.

Palmerin called presently for his armor, to defend (as he said) the honor
of the Emperor, but indeed he rather sought to disappoint his son, and
compass the means of his own fond desires. The Emperor, who was not wont to
bear such an injury, caused his Arms to be brought, with intent to adventure
the combat with his Nephew: but Aliarte, as forward in affection to Candida
as any of them, albeit he gouernd it with greater modesty, falling on his knee
before the Emperor, told him, that he ought by no means, to hazard his
person in fight against Leonato, because to whatsoever issue the combat
sorted, he could not but repent it: beside, he would never presume so rashly on
such an enterprise, but that in general opinion it would pass for current,
that he was grown amorous of the fair young Lady, which would be a great
disgrace to his reverend years.

When the Emperor found his grief touched, where it pained him indeed, he
stayed his hastines, yet to show that he was mooude with the zeal of his own
honor, he intended to banish Leonato from Constantinople, holding it as great
grace, in that he proceeded with no other severity against him: yet he
determined within a while to repeal his banishment, upon some earnest
entreatie of his father Palmerin, who verily intended nothing less, or
declared himself offended a jot at his sons exile, but rather was highly
contented therewith, hoping by means of his absence, the easier to proceed
in his amourous purpose.

When Leonato heard that the Emperor had banished him, he closely went to the
lodging of the Princess Polynarda, where he thought him self safe, albeit the
Emperor should understand of his being there: and such speeches past between
him and his mother, (who already was jealous enough of her husband,) that she
having sent for Candida into her chamber, fell into questioning with her
concerning Leonato, only to hear how she stood affected toward him, he
standing close hid all the while behind the Arras.

The young Lady being in his mothers presence, whom in her soul she most
entirely loved, stood not on nice terms or coying ceremonies, but plainly
declared, that none but Leonato was Lord of her desires, him had she elected as
her hearts best choice, albeit her hopes stood now on desperate hazards,
delivering no likelyhoode that she should ever enjoy him, because the Emperor
had pronounced his banishment, even at the instant when their marriage should
have been confirmed. Polynarda seeing the Lady so firmly minded, and that in
such discreet modest manner, she had imparted her true affection toward her
son Leonato, she said. Sweet Lady, if I work the means that Leonato shall
be your husband, and him self as ready as you to accomplish it, tell me (fair
soul) what will ye say then? When Candida heard the Princess use these
speeches, a flood of ioying tears streamed down her fair cheeks, and
reverently taking the Princess by the hand, spoke in this manner. I know that
your highness, being so near allied to my Lord the Emperor, will not
determine any thing, that shall return to my blame or disparagement: therefore
(if it please you) I will assure my self in your presence to my Lord Leonato
your son, and confess my self to be his troth-plighted wife, committing all
my for^unes afterward to your gracious direction.

Polynarda making a sign to Leonato, he came forth to her, where after some
duty done to his mother, falling on his knee at Candidaes foot, he caught her
hand in his, and sweetly kissing it, was so strangely transported with an
amourous passion, as he kneeled there silently a pretty while together: but she
remembering at last his ouer-fond error, raising him in her arms, said. My
noble Lord, do not so much wrong your worth and reputation, that I being your
humble and obedient spouse, you should thus humiliate your self to me: rise
therefore I beseech you, and do as your princely mother shall advise ye.

Polynarda seeing matters in so good a forwardnes, said. Since you hold both
one solemn purpose, and that I have no doubt of my son, but his behavior
shall be as become a loyal Knight: by your hands plight your hearts in a
religious contract, and afterward we will take order for other kind of
proceeding. So joined they hand and hearts mutually together, nothing wanting
but the ceremony of the Church to confirm them. Such was Leonatoes joy for
this high good hap, that speaking somewhat louder then needed, he was
ouer-heard by one of his fathers followers, who presently advertised his Lord
thereof: which Polynarda perceauing, shifted Leonato away, into the lodging of
Lucilla her waiting Gentlewoman, and kept him there so closely, that Palmerin
supposed he was gone on his banishment.

But matters falling out beyond expectation, and that Leonato might no longer
(with safety) abide in Constantinople: he so ordered the case with his Lady
Candida, as she should go thence with him into England, whereto he found her
very tractable. And preparing all things for their departure, without
acquainting his mother Polynarda therewith, one night, when Candida should have
betaken her self to rest, commanding her waiting Damsels to bed, she attired
her self like a comely young Gentleman, and in the company of an English
Squire, who was most loyal and firm to Leonato: they closely escaped unseen
out of the Emperors Palace, going to the place where her husband attended
her, and with like safety they past forth of the City, shaping their course
directly for England, where on their journey we will leave them, till time
serve more necessarily to report, what mishappes they endured upon the way.

CHAP. LXXX. How Florian travailing to the fair Argentina, came to the City
of Tubante, where with exceeding love he was entertained by his wife Targiana,
and leaving order how she should be defended against her son Corcuto, he
iourneyed thence to the Adamant Castle.
FLorian, who (as you have heard already) came with Victoria to Constantinople,
not suffering him self to be seen by the Emperor or any other: returned
toward Turkey, resolved to travail to the Adamant Castle, and having sailed
very prosperously, within few days he arrived at Tubante, where Targiana
welcomde him with such sincere love, as he could not but make most choice
account of her.

Having aboade some few days with her, tidings came thither, that Corcuto
intended his first expedition against her, as greeuing that his mother had so
forsaken him, and married the man that slew his father: so that to make
provision for this purposed invasion, a proclamation was generally sent
abroad, that all those Turks, who were wont to give attendance on the great
Turks person, for universal maintenance of the state, should make their
repair to Tubante, where they should receive directions for their further
service. Above forty thousand horsemen with speed came thither, and an
honorable Turk was sent to Constantinople, to entreat the Emperor, that he
would send a general commander for the Army, because they expected war
from the Souldane of Babylon: and among the rest, Letters were directed to
Blandidon Souldane of Niquea, to be readily prepared, for the assistaunce of
Targiana when need required.

All things thus settled in very good sort, Florian took a kind farewell of
his wife, and travailed toward the Adamant Castle, where he had arrived in
less then ten days: but that Drusa Velonna, who (by overmuch kindness and
humanity, daily used toward her by the Emperor, in hope to reclaim her
stubborn nature) suddenly got away from Constantinople, and thwarted Florian
in his purpose. For she appearing to him in the likeness of a Light-horse-man,
and being demanded by Florian for the way, which soonest would conduct him to
the Adamant Castle: she told him, that he should follow the path upon his
left hand, which within two days would bring him thither, so bidding him
adieu, she took the right hand way, and rode away from him.

Florian giving credit to the horse-mans words, did as he was directed, and
having ridden till about mid-noone, he happened upon a Fountain of very black
water, and about it were tied in chains two Bears and four Lions, seeming to
be as guardians thereof, that no man should presume to taste of the water. In
the midst of the water stood a Collomne of red stone, and upon it a figure of
marvelous black Marble, having a brief on it, containing these words.

He that takes a taste of me,
Loses his life, what ere he be.
Florian having read this threatening inscription, smiling thereat, proceeded
onward, and his passage being through the midst of ye Lions, they all four
rose up furiously against him, and because the chains wherewith they were
tied, gave the^ ouer^large scope, they were all upon him at once: yet did
Florian wound the two first that came before him, and the rest stood so
stoutly to him, as being all up reared on their hinder feet, they gript him
terribly about the helmet, and graspt him so strongly in diverse parts of his
body, as he could by no means get loose from them. Then they which had felt
the keen edge of his weapon, assailed him again, but somewhat more fearfully,
and having got him self free from the other, he set the stoutlier against the
wounded beasts, which gladly drew back to their several places, whereupon,
opposing his valor to the other resisters, his blows flew so thick every way
about them, that the beasts (albeit they were most wild and furious) held
despairingly off, and durst not come near him, by means whereof he came the
closer to ye fountain. But the Bears, whose office (as it seemed) was the
guardance of the water, when Florian had attained so near within their reach,
that they might work their malice against him: they stood upright so fiercely
against him, as Florian began to be somewhat abashed thereat, but checking his
thoughts presently for so weak an humor, he made courageously many stout
strokes at them, and had they not been by Art enchaunted, they could not have
endured against his least blow.

He wexing weary with so much labor spent in vain, and almost driven quite
out of breath, the Bears having likewise in diverse places disarmde him, so as
he might well think he had no easy task in hand, when his mind had half
persuaded him, that there might be some other means then by this sword, to
compass the height of this dangerous enterprise: he suddenly laid hold on the
chain wherewith they were tied, and pulled at it with such strength, that the
knot of the chain (being fastened only by a ryding wier, which would slip up
and down, according to ye force applied against it) ran close to the Bears
throats, and they being well near strangled thereby, made many light bounds
and mountings aloft, only to be rid of so mighty an oppression.

But the Knight, resolving either on death or victory, maintained his pulling
with the greater violence, till they were able to breathe no longer, and then
the chain breaking, they ran away speedily into a Wood near adjoining, and
the kingly Lions, seeing the Bears skud away in such sort, began to express
apparent signs of gladness, as if they had been possessed of human
intellection. So that now he might safely go nearer the water, and taking off
his Helmet to drink therein, he perceived the water to be wondrous black,
which made him a little to deliberate thereon: but to show himself not
fearful thereof, lifting his Helmet up to drink of the water, he suddenly
heard a voice, crying aloude to him in this manner.

Drink not Sir Knight, for if thou do, thou die. At this voice, Florian
turned himself about, as seeming to have some knowledge thereof, and perceived
it was Dorina, who came running toward him very swiftly, and staying his
purpose till she was come to him, he then thus spoke. You have done well
(fair Lady Dorina) in fore-warning me of so great a perrill, although such
gentleness has been by me but unkindly requited: but blame ye enchauntment of
the Ring, which took from me the freedom of judgment, when (for my love)
you received that wound, which appears as yet not perfectly healed.

Forbear such talk at this time, quoth Dorina, and provide for your present
going to the Adamant Castle, which Drusa Velonna caused her devils to make in
the night, cutting it out of an Adamant Mountain in such strange manner, that
the side toward the East, draws all kind of iron to it, but then the West side
parts again with it: So that either you must purpose to abide there for ever,
or else go thither without your Armor, and what can any Knight perform
without his Armor, especially where Arms must be his best defense? But I have
found out a help for this hinderance, you shall cover your Armor with a boyld
Hearts skin, and so the virtue of the Adamant, shall not be able to attract or
pierce it, for the rest I refer it to your manly valor.

Florian thus advised, took his leave of Dorina, and rode away with no mean
have, fearing least some other should chance thither before him, and set free
the young Lady: then returning the way again, which Drusa Velonna had falsely
directed, he rode according to Dorinaes appointment, and having ridden a whole
day, about sunne-setting he came to a part of that Country, where he
understood, how ye Adamant Castle was within less then five leagues. There
made he his couerture of the Hearts skin, spreading it over his Armor as
Dorina had instructed him, and being furnished with whatsoever else he had
need of, the next day, he set toward the Castle, arriving there somewhat
after noone: and because it was then no fit time to begin such an enterprise,
he sat him down under a few neighboring trees, and took his rest there
for all that night.

CHAP. LXXXI. How Florian (with some difficulty) concluded the adventure of
the Adamant Castle, and set fair Argentina at liberty.
THe cheerful morning, having chaced away sad melancholy night, and ye
veyled eyes of mortals, enricht with the golden Suns vp-rising, Florian
being all Heart both without and within, went toward the Adamant Tower, and
coming within less then a stones cast of it, he met an aged Knight, and two
Squires with him, one of them carrying a sword in his hand, and the other a
great Basin, when they came nearer together, the aged man thus spoke to
Florian. Dismount as quickly as thou can, thou Knight unworthy of any
welcome hither, to the end I may present thy head, to the powerful Lady
Enchauntresse of this Castle: otherwise, in sted of thine, I must deliver her
the head of the fair young Lady Argentina, and thou shall likewise die at ye
self same instant.

Florian smiling at his foolish speeches, said. Return (good father) to thy
Lady, and tell her I have but one poor head, which I cannot part withal upon
so easy an iniunction: bid her rather have care of her own head and thine,
for I come hither to master her enchauntment, and to set the iniuried Lady at
liberty. The old Knight, without returning him any answer, went back again
to the Castle, and Florian staying to see what would ensue heereon, beheld a
large table thrust out at a window, upon ye which was brought forth the young
Lady Argentina, by the two Squires and the ancient Knight, where they causing
her to fall down upon her knees, the old man, with a loud voice, spoke as
follows.

Knight, lay violent hands upon thine own life, or presently see this Lady
perrish. Florian, seeing his coming thither should cause the death of
Argentina, whereas his intent was to set her at liberty: became so troubled in
his thoughts, as he rather chose to die himself, then to be the occasion of
her murdering, and therefore he called to the old man, saying. I pray thee
good Father, put not to death an innocent Lady, but rather come work thy will
on me, since I am come hither to procure her perrill. And doubtless it had
sorted to that issue, for Florian at the old Knights coming, would more
willingly have sent his head to the Sorceresse, then there to have beheld ye
death of Argentina.

But Dorina, who had followed him thither invisible, as being greatly afraid
of Drusa Velonna, caused a Knight to steal upon him, and smiting him
trecherously with a Lance, fled back again to the wood: and Florian
offended at such a discourtesie, pursued him very angerly, till being far
enough from the Castle, the Knight showed himself to be Dorina, and spoke
unto him in this manner. Understand (thou worthy-bearer of Arms,) that
whatsoever thou beholdest at the Castle, are nothing else but mere illusions,
purposely done to fear and dismay thee. She whom thou saw ready to loose
her head, is not Argentina, but a counterfeit Image in her shape, therefore
return again before the Castle, and show thy self so inly touched with
grief, at beholding a spectacle so sad and moving, as if very conceit thereof
were ready to kill thee. Then when the old man comes to have thy head,
dissemble cunningly, as if thou could not readily vndooe the laces of thy
Helmet, that he may draw near to lend thee his help: then quickly catch him
fast by the long beard, because therein remains the strength of the
enchauntment. Now know withal, that the old Knight is Drusa Velonna so
metamorphosed, of whom be sure to have an especial care, for fear she get
again at liberty: because I (having told the way to surprise her) shall be
most cruelly handled by her, if ever she get loose and escape from thee.

Florian right joyful of this good advise, returned speedily to the Castle,
where the old Knight seeing him come again, continued his former menacing of
the Lady, whereat Florian expressed such extraordinary passions, as he seemed
ready to sinck into the ground with grief, offering if he had ten thousand
lives, to loose them all ere Argentina should miscarie. The old Knight, not a
little proud hereof, came forth of the Castle, (as before he had done) with
the two Squires, and coming to Florian, found his looks so sad and pensiuely
dejected, with a willing preparation to his death, that the inward joy of the
Knight for this good fortune, made him the less heedfull to that which
followed.

Florian kept a fumbling about his Helmet, as not able to untie the laces
thereof, where-vppon the old Knight iocondly offered his assistaunce, when he
presently fastening hold on his heard, saw him immediately altered to Drusa
Velonna, whom (by reason he had seen before elsewhere) he very well knew,
and spoke to her thus.

Thou wicked woman, I have thee now at some advantage, quickly conduct me into
the Castle, that I may set the young Lady Argentina at liberty. Velonna
fearefullie trembling, by tears and intreates labored to have him kiss her,
promising then to perform whatsoever he commanded: but Dorina coming at the
instant, cried out unto him. Kiss her not Knight, for then she kills thee,
neither trust any of the damned Witches promises, beware (beside) thou go not
into the Castle, for then thou can never return back again: but command
her that Argentina, and some other Ladies enclosed with her, may be brought
forth hither, then take the chayne-girdle from about her, and bind her hands
strongly therewith, that she be not able to get away from thee.

Florian commanded her, to have Argentina and the other Ladies brought forth,
which Velonna in very humble manner performed: then issued fair Argentina out
of the Castle, and diverse other Ladies in company with her, on whom she had
wrought her damnable treachery, and they being come before the Prince, Dorina
put her hand into Velonnas bosom, and took out a book, which was the very
dearest jewel for maintenance of her Art, whereat she was even ready to die
with sorrow. And because this dangerous Castle might be guilty of no more
harm, Florian entreated Dorina, by help of the Book she had taken from
Velonna, to confound it in such sort, as no other Nigromancer ever after should
be possessed thereof. Which being done accordingly, he desired Dorina, that
she would go and advertise Targiana of his fortunate success, in gayning the
liberty of fair Argentina, and to certify her withal, that he was gone in
company of the young Lady to Constantinople: so taking his leave of her, he
went to a near adjoining port of the Sea, where finding a Ship ready for his
purpose, both he, Argentina, and Velonna went presently aboard.

CHAP. LXXXII. What the Emperor, Palmerin, and the other Knights did, when
they found that Candida was gone away with Leonato.
ON the next morrow, when Candida was not seen in the Court, on whom the
Emperor and Palmerin hitherto had held a strict eye, now doubting some deceit,
and she being last seen in Leonatoes company, as also now generally noised
abroad, how dearly she affected Leonato, they must needs gather, that she
was gone away with him. Hereat ye Emperor showed himself to be highly
offended, and culloured this coffeehouse, to be in regard of the true zeal
he ever bare her Father and Mother, and his passions grew to such extremity,
as (in all have) he called for his Armor, and he would follow to recover her
again.

But Palmerin, no less fired with rage, though more cunning in keeping it from
public note, being come into the Emperors presence, said. It is not meet
(dread Lord) that you in person should pursue such an enterprise, least
giddie-headed censurers thereby conjecture, that rather wanton folly induced
you thereto, then the awful respect which ought to be in an Emperor. This he
spoke, because himself intended to follow them, and recover the young Lady
from Leonato: never remembering, that a Father (in such a case) should be more
mindful both of his own honor and his sons, but it is no rare novelty,
when the very wisest men are thus transported with amourous passions.

Tarnaes, perceiving Palmerin made no have in giving him his daughter
Fior-nouella, thought with himself that his best means for soonest obtaining
her, was to hinder Leonato from passing into England: whether likewise if
Palmerin and his daughter should post after, then his loves hope might be
utterly frustrate, wherefore very secretly he armed himself, and took the
way that directed to England. Palmerin also purposing to ride after his son,
went and put on his Armor: but being prettily quipt and taunted by his wife,
for so manifest appearance of unmanly behavior, not knowing with what modesty
well to excuse it, he was not ouer-hastie in arming himself.

Aliarte, who likewise was enamoured of fair Candida, but made no outward
publication thereof, being alone in the Emperors presence, privately told
him: that the Empress Grydonia full well perceived, his fond love to Candida
in these decrepite years, when a sheet for the grave were more needful to be
thought on, then such ill-seeming young desires in so old a body, yet had she
borne it with more patience, then a woman's heated blood is commonly capable
of, so that except she were the sooner visited and comforted, ye danger of her
life stood desperately upon it. These speeches made the Emperor in a very
strange taking, when he heard the weak estate of his Empress, and
contrariwise, his love did mightily torment him: but because Aliarte should
not repute him as a man quite reasonlesse, he went presently to her chamber,
and finding her in a very contagious agony, he spoke to her marvelous
kindly, when she (opening her eyes, and looking right sadly upon him) said.
Go, go, (my Lord) to the young beauty that has bewitched your age, and
leave me poor old Woman here drownde in mine own tears: yet you might
remember some of your knightly deeds done for my sake, when you made me (fond
credulous fool) to believe, that never could any other Lady have power of your
thoughts.

These words made such a deep impression in his mind, as he presently resolved
to shake off this unbeseeming humor, and embraced the Empress with such
signs of true affection, that her former dispayring thoughts were confidently
reuocated, with absolute persuasion, that henceforth all such folly in him
would be quite abandoned. Nor did he hold any longer spleen against Leonato,
but the very next day repealed his banishment, under this promise, that he had
done no act of villainy to Candida. When Aliart saw the Emperors doting
love so well reclaimed, he immediately provided, that Palmerin should no further
pursue Leonato, and caused a Post to bring a Letter, as if it had been written
by Leonato himself, the sum whereof in brief thus follows.

The Letter brought by the supposed Poast to Constantinople, as written from
Leonato, to his Father Palmerin.
The superscription. To his most noble Lord and Father, Palmerin, the right
royal Prince of England, at Constantinople, or wheresoever.
GRacious Lord and Father, your wonted kind and honorable favor, standing
between me and my loue-fault committed, in the true duty of a son, I humbly
salute you. Giving you to understand, that (in a mutual simpathy of our souls
desires) I have espoused the beautiful Lady Candida, whose love before I leave,
or can endure any rival in, I have rated it at the dearest drop of my blood.
I humbly crave pardon of my Lord the Emperor, in my so bold neglect of his
sacred worth: and please his Highness but to remember, that it was loves rash
presumption, and no uncivil rudenes in Leonato, his wrong will the easier be
repaired, and my trespass pardoned. I am now bound for England, to visit my
royal Grandfather King Edward, and in his Court to celebrate my marriage: So
with my love and duty generally to all, I end.

Your loving Son, Leonato.


Aliarte managed this business so cunningly, that the Letter was delivered, the
Princess Polynarda being by, who hearing this Letter to come from her son,
was the more desirous to read it, and having thoroughly perused it, she said. My
Lord and husband, I pray ye, much rather for fair Candidaes sake, then for
our noble sons, that you would forbear to follow him, to the end no greater
disaster may betide the silly Lady: but if you will needs be so forward, then
I pray ye take me along with ye, that I may be respective of the Ladies
honor, whatsoever happen to our son Leonato. When Palmerin saw he could by
no means recover Candida, without manifest note of being enamoured of her, he
would give his Lady no answer, but a messenger coming for him, he went
presently to the Emperor: and Polynarda, not knowing her fathers change from
his former affection, went after her husband, only to be the hinderance of his
journey. Being come into his presence, the grave old Emperor with a smiling
countenance spoke as follows,

Lord Palmerin, if both you and I had not committed some error in our love, I
would have appointed, a very severe prosecution against Leonato: but when I
call to mind, how many several dangers I opposed my self against, to gain
the love of my Empress Grydonia, I can but count it justice, having (my self)
wronged the peerless virtue of her love, to pardon the light transgression of
an amourous young man. Therefore I will that our sentence of banishment stand
no longer upon Leonato, or any of our Court to follow in pursuit of him: only
let it be thus, if he demean not him self like an honorable Knight to the
Lady, a punishment accordingly shall be inflicted on him, forbear then to
undertake such needelesse travail, and let us send for Tarnaes, to bestow on
him (according to our passed promise) the beautiful Fior-nouella in marriage.
These words did wound Palmerin to the very heart, especially being spoken in the
presence of his wife, who marked well his alteration of countenance, and
therewith gave Leonatoes Letter to the Emperor, which when he had read, and
perceived that Leonato had espoused the Lady, he wexed very joyful, seeing his
idle desseigne in love so well disappointed, and his thoughts quite discharged
of their former torments, for should his vain opinion still have continued,
he saw no means left of ever attaining it.

When Aliarte beheld all things in so good an order for Leonato, he purposed
to let his own fond love never be discovered, and brake off all fruitless
expectation that way, since two so great Princes had brideled their affections.
And for the more certainty, that no mishap might befall fair Candida, he
wrought in such manner by his Art, that a Squire ouer-tooke Tarnaes in his
travail, and riding a while with him, told him, that Leonato was returned to
Constantinople, where by the honorable means of Polynarda his mother, he had
espoused Candida: beside (quoth he) I heard the Emperor make earnest inquiry,
for a Nephewe of his, who was son to king Platir of Lacedemonia, on whom he
meant to bestow in marriage, the daughter of noble Palmerin of England, but the
Knights name I do not well remember.

Tarnaes highly ioyed with these so pleasing and happy news, began to
conceive, that if he returned not the sooner to Constantinople, some suspect
might be gathered, that he was not willing to accept the Lady as his wife:
wherefore parting from the Squire, pretending to him a very far journey, he
repaired speedily to Constantinople, and no sooner was he entered the Palace,
but he met with the Princess Polynarda, who taking him very kindly by the
hand, said. My Lord Tarnaes, your presence has greatly been desired in this
Court, that a royal promise made you might be accomplished. Madame, quoth
Tarnaes, I am here ready at your highness service: and some other speeches of
courtesy passing between them, Tarnaes privately went to his chamber, right
glad of the news he heard by the Princess Polynarda.

CHAP. LXXXIII. How Prince Florian arrived at Constantinople, with the fair
Lady Argentina, and the subtle Enchauntresse Drusa Velonna: Here likewise is
declared, how Leonato lost his beloved Candida, and afterward by what means he
recovered her again.
PAlmerin having intelligence that Tarnaes was returned to Court again, he
obtained a solemn conference with the Emperor Primaleon and his wife
Polynarda, about the bestowing of Fior-nouella on him in marriage, and the
espousall being fully agreed upon, the learned Aliarte came into the Emperors
presence, saying. Great Majesty, and you the rest here graciously assembled,
in performing your passed promises, concerning Tarnaes and the fair
Fior-nouella, it is a case both just and honorable: yet let me tell ye, there
ought to be no such ceremonious rites performed, till first those weightier
espousalls be finished, of Primaleon with Victoria, and Arguto with the sweet
young Lady Concordia, which once accomplished, there are other inamoratoes of
this Court, that look to have like grace extended them.

These speeches were very pleasing to the Emperor, and all the rest in
presence, and as they further discoursed thereon, tidings entered the Hall, that
Florian was arrived in the Port, with fair Argentina, and Drusa Velonna as his
prisoner, which news were gracde with a general welcome, for all the Lords and
Ladies gave a present testimony thereof, by being at an instant mounted on their
Palfrayes, and riding in comely equipage down to the Port, where they found
Argentina newly come forth of the Ship, whom after they had severally kissed and
embraced, she was seated likewise on a gallant proud Iennet, and Drusa Velonna
(bound to her good behavior) upon an other. Thus with Prince Florian rode they
along in great state to the Court, where being alighted and ascended the great
Hall, the Emperor gave them most royal entertainment: but when he understood,
how Velonna had behaved her self toward Prince Florian, with a frowning
countenance he said unto her. Thou ill naturde woman, could not thy secret
escape suffice thee, in contempt of all our gracious favors toward thee, but
still thou must aim thy malice at us and our Court? a more wary respect
hereafter shall attend thee: and because his words should be sealed with
deeds, he presently commanded, that she should be enclosed in ye same iron
Cage, which Palmerin d'Oliua kept his witching enemy in. Which being done,
they sat pleasantly conferring in other matters, the Emperor holding Florian
by one hand, and Argentina by an other, highly extolling the Prince for his
magnanimous spirit, and the worthy adventures by him performed.

But leave we them in Court thus gladly disposed, and come again to Leonato,
who having travailed ten days together, came at last into an even champaigne
soil, very much heated and scorched by the Suns power: there met he neither
with man or woman, nor could happen on any water to cool his thirst. Thus rode
he on till half the day was spent, till at length he came among certain
strange shapen trees, with such little leaves as he had never seen the like,
under them he purposed to rest a while, feeding on such things as his Squire
had brought with him, which hardly answered his present extremity. And much
more were his thoughts afflicted, in regard of his dear esteemed Candida,
never used to taste of such disasters, and therefore the more unapt for her
tender nature: but to rid themselves from so vast and a desert place, they
took horse again, and rode till evening, yet could not outstrip this
desolate Country. Looking (with a grieved mind) round about him, to see if
comfort might any where be expected, upon his left hand he discerned a little
light, and thither he went, hoping to gain there (by force or fair means)
some such necessaries as they stood in need of.

Being come to the place where he espied the light, he found it to be a
narrow house of thatch, but built somewhat high, where a man and woman of a
Giant-like stature, came to understand the cause of his coming thither: but
being unacquainted with such salutations as Leonato gave them, they had him in
their language, and witnessed the same by outward signs, that he should enter
into their cottage. Which when he had done, he saw a son of theirs, turning
on a spit a whole Boar at the fire, and being by becks and nods bidden to sit
down, the woman Giant kindled certain sticks of wood, which burnt as light as
any candles: then couerd she a great table, and set the whole Boar upon it,
as we do usually any dish for service. By this time had Leonato stepped forth,
and (upon this courteous entertainment) brought thither his fair Lady Candida,
and although he nor she understood these Giants language, yet by such signs
as they made to them, they sat down with them at the table, and fed very
hungerly upon the meat, by reason their appetite very well serude them, and
their drink was clear fountain water, whereof they had plenty near to that
cottage. The Giant well noting the beauty of Candida, became surprised
therewith in such vehement manner, as diverse times he would gladly have
embraced her: but that he beheld, how Leonato fed with his armor on, and his
sword hanging still by his side, wherefore he determined, to dispossess him of
the Lady while he should sleep.

So, without any evident appearance of love to her, supper being ended, he
showed them a pallet of leaves, whereon they should rest so well as they could:
now by reason the night before, and all the whole day had been very molestuous
to them, they slept so soundly, that the Giant might the more easily carry
thence Candida, as indeed he did, without any knowledge of the Lady her self.
Into a near adjoining thicket he carried her, which him self had planted with
his own hands, where he found the Ladies beauty so piercing to him, as he
durst not awake her: by which happy means, Candida was preserved from
dishonor, for otherwise this shameless man, making no account of humane
behavior, if he could not by fair means have compassed his desire, in
brutish manner he would have ravished her.

Leonato sleeping still profoundly, dreamed that a great Serpent would have
deuourde him alive, having gotten his foot already in his mouth, at which very
instant, the Giantesse (full of jealous fury) having noated the vnmanlie act
of her husband, came and wakened Leonato, saying. Arise Sir Knight, or else thy
Lady will be dishonored.

Leonato started up like one half frantic, and missing his Candida,
perceived by signs which the Giantesse made, that her husband had carried her
into a Cops hard by: and lacing his helmet suddenly on, he went according as
the Giantesse directed him, and having gone about half a mile in the thicket,
he heard the voice of his Candida, saying: Help me O heaven, that I be not
dishonored by this beastly man.

These words added such wings to his have, that he came quickly to them, and
found the Giant on his knees before Candida, using infinite persuasions to
obtain his purpose. Leonato stepped upon him in such fury, without giving any
warning for the defense of him self, (as the duty of Knighthoode partly
commands) he lifted up his sword to smite off his head: and doubtless had
done it, but that the Giantesse (repenting she had guided thither the Knight)
cried out. Oh hold your hand Sir, and do not deprive my husband of his life,
albeit in justice his merit is no less.

Now although he understood not what she said, yet he perceived, that she
was loath to have her husband slain, wherefore he held his hand, and spared
the Giant: who rising up in an extreme rage, and purposing to be revenged on
the Knight, ran presently to his Cottage, where he buckled on a great
Sheelde, and a mighty long sword, and lacing on his helmet, which after the
ancient fashion was without any beauer, he returned to Leonato, who held fair
Candida by the hand, right kindly appeasing her former grief and fear.

Fond Knight (quoth the Giant) I Will teach thee the price of hindering my
pleasure, and drawing his sword, smote first at the Lady, who fearfully fell
backward, which fall so outragiously madded Leonato, that delivering a maine
full stroke at the Giant, he cleft his Sheelde quite through the midst, the
one half falling down on the ground, and the blow sliding down with no mean
force, pierced quite through the armor under his side, and gave the Giant two
little hurts. But he returned a shrewde requital with his heavy long sword,
which lighting rudely on his helmet, smote him down in a trance, and the
Giant making use of that advantage, caught him up on his neck, intending to
drown him in the near adjoining Fountain: yet as he went along, he looked
on bright Candida, who (fearing now to be ravished indeed) seeing her Knight
in such a desperate case, fled a pace from the Giant, hoping in short while to
get out of his sight.

He purposing at one instant to rid him self of the Knight, and have the
Lady in his own possession, threw Leonato against the ground so cruelly, as
the very fall had been sufficient to have slain him: but by great good
fortune, the Giantesse having laid together, boughs, leaves, and little
shrubbes in diverse parts of the Wood, to serve them for fuel in the Winter
season: it was his chance to light on one of those heaps, so that he had no
great harm by the fall, albeit the Giant hoped the contrary, who pursuing
Candida, had soon ouer-taken her, but that the hurts in his side were some
hinderance to him.

The Lady posting on the wings of her strong fear, gained a good distaunce of
ground, in which space, Leonato being of a very great spirit, recovered again,
yet overcome with extremity of grief, least Candida (whom he could no where
behold) was become a pray to the Giants base lust. As he gazed round about him
only to epsy her, he saw her come running mainly toward him, and the Giant
following, but somewhat further off: with exceeding joy he ran to meet her,
and taking her by the hand, opposed him self to defend her against the Giant,
who came with an absolute intent to have slain him: but he having felt the
Giants stearne force, avoided his strokes cunningly, and scaping one blow made
so mainly at him, as the point of the Giants sword stabd far into the earth,
he followed this opportunity, and smote the helmet quite off from his head,
though it cost him a wound in the flank for his labor, so soon as the Giant
had freed his sword again, and afterward another upon his left shoulder, from
both which hurts the blood issued forth very liberally.

Leonato took this somewhat straungely, and began to consider with him self,
that all this was too little for his Ladies safety: yet if in this conflict he
should loose his life, and she afterward be by him brutishly abused, his soul
could endure no greater a torment. Whereupon, traversing light about from
place to place, and temporizing his own travail, to keep him self still in
some state of ability, that the Giant (by the liberal expense of his blood,
which drild down his armor a pace from his wounds) might have the less
means to hold out against him, he found this his likeliest course of
prevailing: but the Giant feeling his strength to weaken more and more, leapt
upon Leonatoes back, and catching him fast about the neck, strugled very hard
to ouer-throw him, but then he grasping the Giant about the body, wroong him
strongly by very mere force, that they both fell together upon the ground, yet
Leonatoes good hap was to be uppermost. Now was he in greater peril then
before, for the Giantesse, seeing her husband ready to be slain, caught up a
great branch of a tree lying by her, and running to Leonato triumphing over
the Giant, thought to beat out his brains therewith, that he might not stab
her husband with his dagger, which he held ready for the purpose in his hand.
When Candida saw the desperate hazard of her Lover, she cried out aloude, that
he should take heed of that bloody minded Woman, and Leonato perceiving his
imminent perrill, spurning her backward with his foot, ordered the matter in
such sort with the Giant, that he stabd his weapon quite through his heart: and
turning afterward to the Giantesse, had given her such correction as her
treachery deserved, but that she ran behind Candida, and falling on her knees
to her, entreated her to beg pardon for her of her Knight.

The pittifull-minded Lady, perceiving how Leonato intended to kill her,
desired him to remit her trespass, committed but in the defense of her
husbands life: which proved to be the safety of the Giantesse, for Leonato
hearing himself entreated by her, who might command him to venture through
any danger whatsoever, said, he would willingly save her life, but she should
go along with him to England. So, binding her hands, they went with her to the
Cottage, where finding her young son, he bound him by the feet also, least
he should escape from him, then made he signs to the Giantesse, that she
should prepare somewhat for them to eat: she stepping presently to a safe,
wherein she used to keep her provision, brought forth a young Fawn and two
little Boares, which the young Giant and his Mother dressed in such manner, as
they were quickly provided of a dinner. Having fed thereon so long as they
pleased, they rested themselves there for all that day, and at the entreaty of
the Giantesse and her son, they gave burial to her husbands dead body,
finding them likewise ready and willing to depart thence with them and go for
England.

At night they supt again with such provision as they had, and early in the
morning set onward on their way, the Giantesse and her son still going before
them, laden with fresh water and other necessaries for travail: so coming at
last by easy iourneyes to Cales, they there took shipping, and sailed toward
England.

CHAP. LXXXIIII. How Leonato (with his fair Candida) arrived in England,
where their marriage was sollemnized with very great royalty. Also how the
young trauayling Knights, with them of greater years and experience, returned
(the most part of them) to the Emperors Court at Constantinople.
LEonato had such prosperous wind and weather, that in few days he landed on
the Coast of England, where being known for grandchild to the King their
Sovereign: through all places as he past, he was entertained with exceeding
great honor, and (for his sake) his beauteous Candida, to who^ he showed the
bravery of his Country. When these news were brought to the King Don Edward,
he acquainted fair Flerida his Queen therewith, and appointed that most
part of the English Nobility, should ride to meet them ten miles from the
City of London: himself accompanied with his greatest Lords and Barons, rode
out of the City above two miles, where meeting with his graund-sonne, and
bright Candida riding hand in hand, he wondered to behold two such goodly
creatures, but especially, fair Candidaes beauty amazed him, so that he began
(almost) to be sick of the Emperor Primaleons doting disease. But his mind
being enriched with extraordinary virtues, he checked such lawless lascivious
desires, and having done royal salutations to either, would by no means
suffer the^ to dismount, but turning his horse, with Leonato on his right hand,
and Candida on the left, so rode he back to the City of London: where, at
their entrance into ye gate, they met Queen Flerida and her train of Ladies,
she having long desired to see Leonato, because it was often told her, that he
much resembled her Father, Palmerin d' Oliua, his perfect Image appearing so
lively in this young Prince, as if himself had at that instant been living.

So rode they through the City (with much joy and delight) toward the Palace,
the people expressing all subiect-like love and rejoicing: for since the
return of King Edward into England, after his recovery by ye precous ointment,
there was no other talk but of mirth and iouissaunce. Many gallant shows and
devises were performed in the streets, so that it was long before they came to
ye Palace, where King Edward (taking Candida by the hand) conducted her up
into the Presence, spending the rest of this day in courtly reuelling and
pleasure.

The King perceiving Leonatoes earnest desire, to have the marriage sollemnized
between him and Candida, called his Lords to council, to understand their
oppinions in the case: where it was concluded, that the next Sunday ensuing, it
should be performed, with the greatest sollemnitie that could be devised. As it
was appointed, so was it accomplished, for I purpose not to tell ye
perticulerly the whole royalty of the marriage: because the other young
Knights errant, being likewise enamoured of beautiful Ladies, for whose sakes
they have past through many perrillous adventures, calls me to discourse of
them awhile.

Oliuanto who left Constantinople, when his Father Florendos and he severally
intended, to travail in the recovery of the fair Argentina, travailed
through diverse strange Countries, without stay or contradiction in any part,
til at length he happened to the place where the Adamant Castle some-time
stood, and because that Field was unfurnished of trees, the Sun at midday
shone so hotely on him, as it scalded him through his Armor. Hereupon he
alighted from his horse, and shadowing himself among the stones of the ruined
Castle, he found himself drawn and knit thereto with such violence, as he
could by no means get from thence: whereat he meruailing not a little, strove
to creep from the stones by his utmost strength, but he found himself bound
thereto the faster.

Being vexed in mind at this strange accident, and studying how he should
accomplish the rest of his intended travail, a Swain of the country passing
that way, when he saw the Knight fastened to the stones in such sort, with his
Mattocke on his neck he came to him, saying: Sir Knight, you can never part
hence, except ye put off your Armor, for this is the Adamant stone, which
draws all kind of iron to it.

Now was his grief far greater then before, when he heard that he must needs
leave his Armor behind him, which was to sted him in all perrils, whatsoever:
and looking better on the place, he perceived that the same tower or Castle
had stood there, wherein desiring the Peazant further to resolve him, he told
him: How Drusa Velonna by magical art, had built a Castle there on a Rock
of Adamant, and kept therein a Lady of the Grecian Court, whom a Knight of the
same Court had delivered and borne thence.

Hereby Oliuanto conceived, that doubtless the Lady was Argentina, for he
knew of the freedom of the other two before, but he could not imagine who the
Knight should be: and seeing he must needs part with the loss of his armor,
he asked the Countryman, if there were no way to get loose without loss of
his Arms. At that very instant, one of the Ladies, who had been prisoner in
the Castle with Argentina, riding by the place, and seeing the Knight so
fastened by his Armor, trotted her Palfrey thither, saying. The courtesy of
Prince Florian, in freeing me and other Ladies out of this ruined Tower, where
we were enchaunted with fair Argentina, binds me to lend ye such
assistance, as you shall follow your knightly affairs, and yet not leave your
Armor here. So, alighting from her horse, she took a Crimosine Mantle which
was wrapped about her, and spreading it over Oliuanto and his Squire, the Adamant
immediately yielded and lost his virtue, whereby they were at their former
liberty.

As they rode thence in company of the Lady, she told Oliuanto at large, in
what manner Florian had ended the adventure, and because his thoughts were
altogether addicted to see his dear affected Auriana, (who gladly would have
stayed him from pursuing this adventure, but that he presently told her, how a
Knight should shun no occasion whatsoever, whereby to rank himself among
those of greatest merit) seeing the Lady ready to ride from him at a
crosse-parting way, right courteously he took his farewell of her, with hearty
thanks for stedding him in so urgent an necessity.

And being come to the Seaside, he was soon provided of shipping, sailing in
short while to Constantinople, where he was honorably welcomed: especially by
his Lady Auriana, as one right joyful of his high good fortunes, and hoping
of speedy attainement of their long desired joys.

In this time of general contentation, the Emperor had sent tidings through
most parts of the world, to advertise his Knights, that the three Ladies
(stolen from the Court by Drusa Velonna,) were again recovered: and therefore
they should repair to his Court, because he would have none absent at such a
meet time of ioying, whereby it happened, that many were come in again in very
short while. The first was Berolde, King of Spain, who hearing of his
Daughters deliverance, poasted with speed toward Constantinople, meeting by
the way with Caro and Armindo, who had lost much labor in search of the
Princess, and hearing now such gladsome tidings, returned with Berolde,
without staying any where till they came at Constantinople, Berolde rejoicing
not a little at the sight of his Daughter. Soon after came news, how in one
Ship were come together, Don Rosuell, Francian, Fortenbracio, and Orino: but
because Don Rosuell was of especial esteem in the Court, many Lords and
Knights rode to welcome him, bringing him to the Palace very honorably.

As they were entering the gate, they beheld a Knight who had come by Land, and
staying to be further resolved who he was, when he came nearer them, his Caske
being open, they knew him to be Forcino, the son of Dragonalte, who by his
own guilty destenie, was the amourous servant to fair Spina of France: but
she being proud and curious, would never acknowledge any of his knightly
services, wherefore he lived in very desperate estate for her love. These
youthful gallants being thus come to ye Court, the Emperors joys exceedingly
increased, to see them in this noble manner about him, whom they loved as if
he had been their Father.

While the Court was in this ouer-flow of pleasure, one day as they sat in the
Hall together, there entered a Damsel, attended on by two comely Squires, who
having done dutious reverence to the Emperor, delivered him a Letter, which
being read by Palmerin, appeared to come from Don Edward the King of England,
and importing a further message to be delivered by the Damsel, the Emperor
commanded her to speak her mind, where-vppon she began in this manner.

High and mighty Lord, King Edward of England in love salutes ye, with all
this gallant and knightly assembly: entreating your Majesty, to pardon the
offense of his graund-sonne Leonato, in presuming to bear hence the beautiful
Candida, toward whom he has demeaned himself like a virtuous Knight, and
married her in the presence of King Edward and his Queen. The Emperor, who
since the coming of Aliarts Letter, had heard no other tidings of this matter,
but doubted least some mishap might betide Candida, though not by Leonato, (of
whose honor and good carriage he never doubted) yet by some other sinister
means: when he heard of their happy being in England, and that King Edward
spoke in their behalf, whom he could not (with honor) any way contradict, he
thus replied. Say to our loving Lord and friend, that Leonato may return to
Constantinople safely at his good pleasure, since his behavior has been so
noble and knightly, assuring him we are no way displeased with him: wherefore
we commit you Lady to your good rest, allowing your return to England when it
shall please your self.

I desire no rest at all (quoth the Damsel) till I have delivered in your
presence Lord Leonato, and his virtuous wife the Princess Candida: so
descending the steps, and passing forth of the City, in less then two
hours she returned again, accompanied with Leonato and his Lady, who
entering hand in hand into the Hall, each one with cheerful countenance
entertained them: only his Father Palmerin excepted, who had not yet forgot
the injurious speeches, which his son had so rashly given the Emperor. But
Leonato, feigning as if he discerned it not, stepped before the Emperor, who
taking both him and Candida up from off their knees, kissed both their
foreheads: marie he bestowed two kisses on Candida, in remembrance of the love
he some-time bare her, whereat there grew a general smiling, in regard that
his mind still served him to be enamoured, though all the powers else of his
body denied it.

The elder Knights betook themselves to rest, but the younger delicate bloods,
whose souls did live in the fair eyes of their Mistresses, they strove by all
possible means to purchase their favors, hoping one day, (with the Emperors
gracious consent) to enjoy them in marriage. But leave we this iocond Court in
the height of felicity, and let us speak now of Franardo and ye other Giants,
that went to conquer the I Will of the bottomless Lake, termed in the former
parts of this History, the Profound I Will.

CHAP. LXXXV. How Dramusiande, Franardo, Almaroll, and Forzato, travailed to
conquer the Island of the bottomless Lake, and what happened to them in the
attempt.
DRamusiande, being first accompanied with his son, and afterward happening
on Almaroll and Forzato, according as has been already declared, when they
had acquainted him with their intention, of going to conquer the forenamed
Island, he said: That their hap was very good to meet with him, because if
they would go to the I Will of the bottomless Lake, he could inform them of a
place there, which was only manifested to him by his Aunt Eutropa. For there
was a water, which might not be passed with any boat or vessel made of wood,
but it must be hewn out of a stone which is lighter then wood, and was made
only by his Aunt herself, and kept with great circumspection in his Castle:
and (the reason hereof was) because they were to pass a certain water, which
(contrary to the nature of all other waters) sent forth continual flames of
fire, and presently consumed any boat of wood.

He told them beside, that this Island was possessed by a progeny of stern
bloody Giants, who had forcibly taken it from his father Frenaque: but that
which most of all imported their pains, was the horrid and strange
enchauntments in the I Will, which his Aunte Eutropa had not the power to finish,
but had left certain aduertisements with him in writing, which being coupled
with their valor, would give them the greater hope of victory, and the book
of these aduertisements he kept in his own Castle.

These outward appearances of so great difficulty, kindled such forward desires
in the Giants, that they could not be quiet till they came thither: wherefore
they earnestly entreated Dramusiande, not to slow time in hastening to the
I Will, least some other might rob them of the honor of this adventure. Franardo
would gladly have stolen thither alone, to dispossess the rest of so much
honor, as in such an high enterprise might well be expected: but hearing that
the glory divided among four, in conquering so many Giants and dangerous
perrills, was as great as if one man should end an enchauntment, he yielded the
more willingly to travail altogether. So in less then four days they came
to Dramusiandes Castle, where resting them selves one day, the boat was made
ready for their passage on the fiery water, and conuayed to such a place, as
without any contradiction they might set thence: and having put up the book in
his bosom, they furnished them selves with the best armor which was to be
had, because they should stand in great need thereof. The boat being brought to
the mouth of the Lake, they as yet rode all along by the waters side, because
them selves being weighty, would not endanger it against the craggie rocks,
which rising somewhat high in the River, might the sooner break it.

Having ridden so far as they thought convenient, they left their Horses with
their Squires, and went aboard without any Mariners: for the boat only moved
by the words (which Dramusiande read in the book) and flew with such
swiftnes, as if it had been an arrowe through the air. When it came to the
flaming Lake, the very stoutest among them began to be astonned, for the flames
did fold about them in such strange manner, as if they felt their armor on
fire about them, and the boat it self was so extremely hot, that they could
abide by no means to touch it. So that they had been in most miserable estate,
if the boat had not made such extraordinary expedition, and floating along
still through the fiery flames, at last it came to a very cool water, which
was no mean comfort in quallifying their long heat: there did they discern
the Island not far off, and Dramusiande reading in other places of the book,
caused the boat to stay a while, as meaning not to pass to the Island till the
next morning, because being ignorant of the creekes and reaches, the Giants
might work some treachery to them in the night time.

Abiding there upon this determination, they spent the time in conferring with
Dramusiande, how they should sort them selves together for the combats,
because they knew not how many Giants they were to fight withal: wherein
Dramusiande resolude them so far as he could, saying (as he had learned by
his Aunt) that they used not to wear any strong Armor, so rested they for
this night, without any treachery or inconvenience. In the morning they awaked
very early, and went toward the Island, Dramusiande reading such words of Art,
as made the boat go merrily thither, and there they intended to be the sooner,
because the Giants might not lay their traynes abroad, to endanger their lives
before their landing, but rather that they might steal upon them unseen. At
Sun rising, the b^ate shot into a little bay of the I Will, and our four
Giants, armed at all points for their purpose, with their Sheeldes strongly
fastened on, and very ponderous Axes in their hands, went forth upon the
shore, and espying a great Tower in the midst of the Island, thither they
shaped their course directly. Not far had they gone, but they were espied by
two young Giants, who were thus early going on hunting, and imagining they
would offer them no resistaunce, they perceived presently they came to assail
them.

Franardo desirous to cope with them first, stepped foremost to meet them, and
received two arrows upon his Armor, which being of sound proof, withstoode
their entrance, albeit they made an inward denting, as if they had been the
pushes of two Lances: hereby he perceived the strength of those people, and
how industrious they were in the feate of shooting. Boldly he stepped to them,
and lifting his Axe against the foremost, who had nockt another arrowe ready in
his bow, by reason he was unarmed, he cleft him from the left shoulder down
to the flancke, so that immediately he tumbled down dead: and the other
(having never seen such a stroke before) was abashed when he beheld his
companion dead, and because he desired not the like salutation, he began to
speed away, but Franardo, (least he should give warning to the rest in the
Island) followed, and gave him such a cut in the head, as he was not able to
run any further.

By this time, Dramusiande and the rest were come to him, all now going
together toward the Tower, and there had they arrived without any hinderance:
but that a Giantesse (mother to the two young Giants slain, standing in the
door of an old ruinous house, made of twigges and rafters knit together,)
espied this their mishap, and therefore cried out aloude: Oh help, help,
help, for our enemies are entered into the Island. At this lamentable cry, the
Giants awaked, and making certain openings in their houses, which served them
as windows, they no sooner beheld these four armed Giants, but they presently
coniectured (as indeed it was) that these were some friends of Dramusiandes,
of whom they lived in hourly fear, because they took this Island from his
Father, whereupon they took up their swords and sheeldes, and eight of them
went forth to make resistaunce, while the rest had leisure to arm them selves.

When our Giants saw these come against them, that so wondrously exceeded the^
in stature, they dismayed not a jot, but albeit they were somewhat weary, with
running after the young Giant, that would have saved his own life by flight, yet
did they courageously set upon them, and with their keen Axes sliced the
others sheelds in pieces: receiving from them again such puissant stroks, as
they were hardly able to stand under the^, for such was their strength, as
easily they might have dashed them in pieces, if they had been possessed of skill
and agility in Arms, or could have borne them selves with providence against
their enemies. But being almost spent with rage and fury, three of them was
slain, and the rest so sore wounded, as they were not able to resist any
longer, and then came forth the fiercer Giants, armed only with a Gant-plate
and their helmets, but no defense at all upon their backs, because they had
never seen any such armor. When these beheld the large expense of blood, of
their near alliance and respected friends, they were so outragiously incensed,
that they could not expect their enemies as they should have done, which they
likewise well noting, left the other five, and preparing to entertain these
fiery fellows, the greatest Giant set upon Franardo, another smote Almaroll
so stoutly on the helmet, that he fell down backward in a swound.

Dramusiande seeing the stearne power of the Giants, could hardly guess what
their attempt would sort unto, and stepping before Almaroll, to sheelde him
from being thus slain on the ground, he gave such a siding stroke with his
Axe, as cut off one of the Giants legs, in which while Almaroll recovered,
and being somewhat ashamed of his fall, began to lay about him in such sort with
his Axe, that he wounded one of them very shrewdly on the arm, albeit he was
so mighty of stature, that Almaroll seemed but like a Dwarffe to him. Forzato
labored earnestly against one of them, and Franardo was twice in very great
danger, but that his skill and dexterity very much help him, whereby he
escaped many a pezant stroke, which falling on ye ground, seemed as they had
lighted on a mountain.

Dramusiande seeing Franardo in great peril of his life, smote mainly at his
adversaries head, who to shun the blow of the Axe, receaude it on his Sheelde,
but then Franardo giving a thrust at his enemies belly, made so large a passage
through the Cuirasse, as his bowels were ready to fall out, and he glad to stay
him self on his sword from falling. Now would Dramusiande needs rid him
altogether, in succor of his son, who was extremely wearied, wherefore
stepping to him, he said: Get thee away on thy journey, since thou art so
forward, for thou art but an hinderance to my son, who is a coward if he send
not another soon after thee.

These words so stird up the spirit of Franardo, that laying on load with
dauntlesse resolution, he quickly dispatched an other after his fellow, and
Dramusiande added a third to the number: so that the fight being now grown
equal, four to four, our Giants being the better armed, and of more cunning
in mannaging their weapons, had the greater advantage against the other, and
brought it to such effect, as quickly had this battle been concluded: but
that ten other Giants of lesser stature, came freshly upon them, being little
inferior to the other in valor, and they with their Boare-speares and hunting
Iauelings, so sharply beset them on every side, as now they judged them selves
to be in great danger.

Franardo having slain his Giant of the four, was round beset by four more
of these other, so that now if he not bestird him self nimbly indeed, there
was no remedy but he must needs perish. Almaroll being likewise rid of his
Giant, though he was wounded in the arm, yet two of these fresh comers in
assaulted him, who questionless had slain him, if they had been armed.
Forzato having left his Giant but with one leg, buckled the readier with
another of these ten, who had grown too strong for him, but that Almaroll
cleaving one of his customers down the head, and making the other almost in as
able a case, succourd him a while, and then ran to Dramusiande, who had but
three at once upon him, broaching and goaring him with their Lances: but he
which most molested him, was soon made quiet enough, and the hastines of the
other indifferently calmed, by means whereof he went to assist Forzato at a
very narrow strait, for his helmet was so batterd and bruised, that it pincht
his head in so many several places, as he was constrained to take it quite
off. One of those that fought with Franardo, seeing a fellow of his somewhat
oppressed by two of our Giants, ran speedily to help him, and then flew upon
Forzato, whom he saw without a helmet. The fight continuing a long while in
this manner, those three that opposed themselves against Franardo, seeing him
(through overmuch labor) to be very weary, not shifting from place to place
as before he had done: they ringd them selves about him, and lifting him from
the ground by their strength, meant to carry him away with them.

But Dramusiande, who all the fight time had an eye to his son, when he saw
him in such a desperate estate: gave one of his enemies such a furious stroke,
as cutting quite through his Sheelde, entered into his belly, and his entrayles
falling forth, him self tumbled dead after. To another, whose left arm he
had pitifully mangled, he gave such a sudden fierce blow, as cutting his
Iaueling in the midst, wounded him likewise above the eye, whence the blood
streaming forth abundantly, he could not discern which way he went.

Being thus freed of them, he ran to stay those Giants that carried his Son
away, who seeing him coming, threw Franardo against the ground, and turning
upon Dramusiande, he gave them such a gentle welcome, that he cut off the
foremost man's left arm, and afterward ran his sword quite through his breast.
The other two affrighted at this accident, setting both their Boare-speares
rudely against his breast, cast him along on his back, and assuredly had there
slain him, but that Almaroll and Forzato (having each slain one of their
opposed enemies, and left the rest in so weak disposition, as they were able
to endure no longer against them,) came speedily to his help, endangering
greatly their own lives thereby, in regard of their former wounds, fainting
and wearines, whereof the other Giants not a little triumphed.

But Dramusiande and Franardo recovering at one instant, though both were sore
bruised by their falls, yet did they assail them with such courage, as (after
some few blows) they fell dead at their feet: and having there now no more
to withstand them, they entered a house near adjoining, appearing to be more
honorable then the other, there to bind up their wounds, and rest them selves.

CHAP. LXXXVI. How two young Ladies being Giantesses, declared to our wounded
Knights, by what means they should enter into the Profound Tower, and finish
the enchauntment.
IN the house which our wounded Giants had entered, were many young Giantesses,
two whereof seemed to be of far greater respect then the rest, who perceauing
our Knights to be gentle, discreetly gouernd and ciuilly attired, though the
large effusion of their blood much altered their countenances, yet had they
great compassion of them. Almaroll well noting this, and looking advisedly on
them, because their looks likewise were modest and womanly: went unto them,
and with gentle language entreated them that they would help to bind up their
wounds, which appeared to be very dangerous. The young Ladies, desirous to do
them any honorable pleasure, secretly said: that they were very ready to cure
their hurtes, provided (for safety of their own innocent lives,) they would
but say, that they had enforced them to this favor.

Almaroll turning back to Dramusiande, who as yet stayed without, and entered
not the house, told him what the Ladies had said unto him, and he entering
the room where the Ladies were, with a stearne countenance said unto them:
Come quickly and help to dress our wounds, for no injury shall be offered to
your honors.

The Ladies dissembling before the rest, as if they stood greatly in fear of
them, came presently to them, and they (being disarmed) had very sovereign
oils and emplaisters applied to their hurts, being handled very tenderly and
with choice regard, with promise of speedy recovery, because their wounds
were not mortal.

Dramusiande afterward sitting down by them, demanded if there were any other
Giants in the Island, and why so many women lived together in that one house.
The eldest of the two Ladies, showring down tears from her eyes in great
abundance, began in this manner. Fair Sir, we two are Nieces to the Lord of
this Island, who is gone to a Castle called the Profound Tower, intending to
bring hither two sons of his, to whom (against our wills) he will give us in
marriage, they being the most brutish and uncivil men, living at this day in
any part of the world: and his reason herein is, to deprive us this way of
our inheritance, and make his sons absolute possessours thereof. This unjust
act in him, is the cause why we would otherwise else dispose of our selves,
rather then to live with such as are loathsome to us: wherefore if there be
any Knights among you, that are single and unmarried, as we are, we will yield
our persons and honors into their power, and kindly accept them as our
husbands.

When Dramusiande had heard the Ladies just cause of grief, and the liberal
offer they tendered withal, he turned to Franardo, saying: You son shall
take one of these Ladies to wife, and on Almaroll I mean to bestow the other.
Forzato being the youngest, was in hope some remembrance would have been had
of him: but Franardo, who loved Grando^ya, Farzatoes Sister, as has already
been before declared, stood very silent, to the no little marvel of his
Father, and inward grief of the young Lady, whom Franardo being loath to hold
in any further suspense, said. My Lord and Father, I humbly entreat your
pardon and the Ladies, that I have been so slack in returning mine answer:
for my thoughts being long since obliged to an other Lady, whose love I can no
way justly refuse, has been the reason of my so long silence: but because
this Lady shall not be wronged in her desires, I will exchange one kindness
with Forzato, for receipt of another. I love his fair and virtuous Sister, and
that he may with the better will bestow her on me in marriage, I am content to
resign my right here to him, in enjoying one of these worthy Ladies.

Forzato being greatly enamoured of the eldest Lady, falling suddenly on his
knee before Dramusiande, said. My Lord, I may with just reason account my self
fortunate, that your son Franardo so long has accepted me as his kind
companion, on whom I freely bestow my Sister for marriage, without expectation
of so gracious a requital, which makes me to glory the more, that it was my
good hap to promise him my Sister. Having thus spoken, he rose up, and very
lovingly embraced his Brother: which Dramusiande perceiving, and noating
withal what speeches had been past, appointed that Amaroll and Forzato should
espouse the two Ladies, who being likewise pleased to their own hearts
contentment, returned back to their Chamber, to certefie unto the rest of the
Giantesses, that they had no other conference, but of curing the Knights wounds.

Soon after, our Knights sent for them again, to gather some enstructions
from them, how they should bear themselves against the Lord of the Island, and
compass the ending of the enchauntment: but still the case was cunningly
covered, and Dramusiande sent twice imperiously for them, whereby the rest
coniectured, that they were forcibly constrained to come to them, which the
Ladies as queintly fitting by their behavior, gave them to understand. That a
Giant, sometime a servant to their Father, but now attending on the Lord of the
Island, as being his Nephew, was newly there arrived, and told them, that his
uncle would not return back till ten days were expired: But because the
slaughter of the Giants was revealed to him, that night he would carry news
thereof to his uncle. Wherefore the Ladies advised them to lay hold on him,
that he might not be the messenger of such tidings to his Lord, so should they
have the more time for curing their hurts: and he returning without
intelligence of his loss, could make the less provision for his mishap,
because any advantage against him was held for good, in regard he was of such
incomparable valor, that ten other of his greatest Giants could not stand
against him, and his sons likewise were very valiant, beside diverse other in
his company of singular prowess.

Concerning the enchauntment, they must preserve the Uncles life, who only
knew the means how to confound it, albeit his taking would be somewhat
troublesome to them, and hardly should they make him confess, how the
enchauntment was to be concluded. Then calling Franardo, forth at the window
they showed him the house, where the late-come Giant had hidden himself, and
kissing their espoused Lords, took their leave again to avoid suspicion.
Our Knights, after they had dined, with their swords and Shieldes they went
forth of the room, demanding of all the women they met, if there were any
more Giants in the Island, and they made answer still that there were none.

Dramusiande, feigning as if he believed them not, went strait to the house
which ye Ladies had showed him, where suddenly entering, he found the Giant,
who (being weary with his journey) slept very soundly: without making any
noise they bound him hands and feet, that when he awaked, they might menace
him with death if he kept not silence. So laid they him aside in another
Chamber, where none of the women should come to him, and at night brought him
into their own lodging, where they attended the healing of their hurts, being
daily visited by the Ladies diverse times, giving them further instructions from
time to time, how with honor they might reach ye height of their desires.

CHAP. LXXXVII. How the Lord of the Island came thither, and of the victory
which our Knights obtained against him and his.
Our high resolved Knights, had their hurts no sooner healed, but a Barque put
into the port, having in it the sons of the Lordly Giant, who came to delight
themselves with the Ladies, that the more contentedly they might accept them in
marriage. But Forzato, who always stood as Centinell for the speedier arming
of themselves upon the Giants arrival, having espied the Barque a far off,
gave the rest of his friends warning to prepare themselves: then going all
closely down ye Port, they stood behind a ruined Cottage, only to have them
come on land, least by sight of them they should turn back again, and thereby
have fallen into such manifest danger, as (with life) they could never have
departed thence.

The two young Giants being landed, with ten other in their company, having
no other defense then their Shieldes, and huge long swords, they took toward
the house where the Ladies were, which our Knights perceiving, boldly stepped
forth before them, saying. Friends, whether go ye? We go (quoth one of them)
to our own abiding: but bold thieves, what make you here in our country?
That ye shall soon know, replied Dramusiande, and all (with their weapons
drawn) went presently against them.

When the Giants saw themselves so fiercely assailed, they stood upon their
own guarde, and delivered such strokes, that our Knights having had good
experience of them before, right cunningly avoided them, and wounded them at
their own pleasure, they having no skill in the use of their weapons. But yet
our Knights were sorry, for not bringing their Axes with them, which they had
left above at their lodging, and might cause the Ladies thereby to be
suspected, if any one should escape and get thither: but the reason why they
brought them not along with them, was, that the other women in the house,
imagining they went abroad but to walk, should not look forth to espy ye
Barque, and by their outcries have hindered these other Giants from landing.
Nevertheless, so well they handled the matter with their swords, that they
wounded six of these new come Giants, and they would have fled, but that the
two young Lords cheerely encouraged them, with undoubted hope of vanquishing
their enemies.

The battle thus continuing, one of the brethren, being run by Franardo
quite through the face, fell down dead, and brake Franardos sword hard at the
handle, as he fell mainly upon his weapon: whereat the other Brother growing
mad and desperate, caught Franardo in his arms, and by reason he exceeded him
in strength, he got him down under him, and striving to open his Helmet,
purposed to kill him. Franardo beholding his own extreme peril, gript his
enemy so strongly by the bottom of his belly, as he (feeling his breath to
fail him) let go his hold, whereby Franardo tumbled him on his back, and
getting aloft upon him, meant presently to dispatch him: but now he was in
greater hazard then before, for two other Giants, who had dealt with
Dramusiande very shrewdly, came running in res^ew of their Lord, and Franardo
perceiving they purposed to help him, slew him out right with his dagger, being
scarcely upon his feet when the two Giants set mainly on him, the one before,
the other behind him, forcing him to fall along on the ground, where they had
forthwith slain him, but ye Dramusiande came quickly to assist him, who
stepping between them and his son, received their furious blows upon
himself, till he was got up again, and being more offended with shame of
his disgrace, then any pain he felt by their strokes, began to buckle the
closer to his enemies. And now the fight bewraied an other kind of course, for
Franardo smiting down one of them dead at a blow, left his Father hand to
hand with the other, running to aid Forzato, who contended with two, and was
almost driven quite out of breath: but he entering among them, gave one of them
such a salutation on the Helmet, as cleaving it through, the weapon entered a
pretty way into his head, albeit himself was soon chastised for it, for the
Giant (being of greatest courage among them all) feeling that he must needs
fall down to ye earth, in his sincking, caught Franardo by one leg, and
lyfted him up so powerfully, that he had dashed out his brains against a great
Beech-tree: but more by great good hap then otherwise, Franardo caught hold
with his hands on the boughs of the tree, and smote the Giant with his foot
so mainely on the breast, as made him to stagger back above six paces, in
which while, he leapt down light on his feet, nothing frighted or amazed, with
this terible swindge. His adversary meruailing hereat not a little, and
reckoning himself past hope of life, beckned with his hand to Franardo, as
desirous to speak with him: so ceased the battle, for three other of the
Giants remaining alive, having likewise noated this admirable act, stepped back
and held their hands, they being kinsmen to the Lord of the I Will.

Dramusiande going to the Giant that requested parley, spoke thus unto him.
Know that I am Dramusiande, son to the deceassed great Lord Frenaque, from
whom you took this Island traitorously, and now I am come to claim it as my
right, being constrained to recover it by force of arms, when gentle
persuasions would not serve to obtain it. Fosco, for so was the Giant named,
considering that of ten there now remained but four alive, and they also
could expect nothing else but death, replied: that he was ready in assisting
him to recover his own, but Tirso (being Lord of the I Will) was so proud and
valiant, as by no means he would yield to another possession. It shall suffice
me (quoth Dramusiande) yt you bind your selves to me by faith and knighthood,
to stand no further on his part against me. We will not meddle any more against
you, replied the Giant, and made him sollemne promise to keep their word. Why
then (quoth Dramusiande) will I in such sort commend you to the great Emperor
of Constantinople, as he shall enrich you with larger possessions, then ever
Tirso could bestow on ye. The Giant protested, that as they would not
partake against Tirso, so they would not impeache any course he could take,
where by to compass his own determination.

Dramusiande and his friends were well pleased with this contract, to declare
that they stood in need of no other help, so leaving their weapons with
them, the Giants went to a place of their own abiding, so far remote from
the lodging of our Knights, as they could not discern when the young Ladies
came to visit their Lords. After this accord, they likewise returned to rest
themselves, having understood by these Giants, that it would be ten days
before the arrival of Tirso, whereof they were very highly contented: not in
regard of any dangerous hurts received, but because they were much travailed
and weary, for which quiet rest was the only remedy.

The Ladies still provided them of all necessaries, often accompanying them to
their contentment, whereby the other Giantesses suspitiously gathered, that
they bore some favoring inclination to these strangers, expressing no sorrow
or grief at all, for the slaughter of their friends and kindred, but rather
seemed enamoured of our Knights, which closely they concealed to themselves,
expecting daily the coming of their Lord.

Our Knights having recovered their former alacrity of spirit, kept hourly
watch on the Port, that when Tirso came, he might not get to the Tower: because
the Ladies had informed them, how there was no possibility of ever
surprising, or finishing the enchauntment, if he in person came to the defense
of it.

Almaroll being the first that shook off his distemper, the night ensuing was
watchman of the Port, and on the morrow by three a clock, he espied a spread
sail making toward the Island, whereof giving his associates immediate warning,
they comforted themselves with precious confections and other good meats, that
they might with better ablenes hold out the fight, arming themselves now for
all advantages, not forgetting their keen Axes, and other iron engines which
they found in the Giants Armorie, wherewith they went down to the Port,
standing closely ambushed as they did before, that the Giant might not descry
them before his landing.

No sooner was Tirso (and seven Giants more with him) come on shore, but our
resolved Knights stepped forth against him, and without using any words at all,
opposed their weapons boldly to withstand him. Tirso, who never was bard of his
passage till this instant, angerly drew his weapon upon our Knights, and
lighting first upon Forzato, made him tumble backward over and over.
Dramusiande would next have dealt with Triso, but his son Franardo, doubting
least his Father (being weakened with the imbecilitie of age) could not stand
against this lusty, strong, and stern Giant, undertook his place, being
roughly welcomed for his presumption with so rude a stroke, as almost had
smitten him quite out of breath, whereby he soon perceived, that if he
became the buckler but to few such blows, his life must be the conclusion of
the bargain.

Heere-vppon, he smote at him stoutly with his Axe, and his Armor being but a
weak defense against the blow, he gave him a deep wound, and made him stand
off from approaching so near him, albeit whenever Tirso answered any stroke
again, he found it laid on with no mean proof. Dramusiande had three of the
other Giants confronting him, and resisted them but with slender sufficiency:
Almaroll and Forzato undertook the other four, and well found that they had
no loytering labor in hand.

The Ladies looking forth, and seeing our Knights so hardly matched, began to
grow jealous of their own safety, if Tirso in the end should gain the
victory, wherefore they ran to the three other Giants, which had yielded
before to our Champions, who beholding the manifest peril they were in, knew
not how to conceive of their own security, but held it for most certain, that
Tirso would be most rigorous to them, because they had not yet stepped forth in
his assistance. This terror in the Ladies much more augmented, by alleging the
passed cruelties of Tirso, and how tyrannously he maintained his government
over the^: which the sooner incited them to aid our Knights, to whom they came
at a very narrow strait, for Dramusiande was in such extreamitie, that hardly
he could support himself from falling, which Fosco perceiving, cried out
aloude to him: Fear not my Lord Dramusiande, for I will be better then my
promise which I made to ye.

Thus came the battle to an equality again, no doubt to the great vexation
of Tirso, seeing his own subjects to partake against him: but now was no time
for threats or stearne speeches, which made him therefore to fight ye more
furiously, bringing Franardo to so many hazzards, as he was very often in
danger of miscarrying, yet this impacience of his proved his own hurt, for
spending his vigor in fury and madness, without any intermission or respite
for breathing, his blows began to fall the more faintly, which Franardo making
very good use of, and cherrishing his own strength by the others weakening,
pursued him still upon so many advantages, as the Giant began to despair of
victory.

By this time had Dramusiande so wounded his enemy in the breast, that it was
too late to call for a Surgeon, and Fosco likewise having slain his
encou^trer, they came both to Tirso sighting with Franardo, to whom Dramusiande
spoke in the Greek tongue, that he should not at any hand kill the Giant, but
practice how to surprise him alive, otherwise, they should never gain the
rule of the Island.

So, they three cirkling him round about, severally laid hand on him, and
binding him fast with two long chains, which the Ladies had sent them, made
him past ability of any further resistance. When the two Giants that fought
with Forzato and Almaroll, saw the surprising of their Lord, they fell to a
very desperate course of fight, because they stood hopeless of any mercy, but
Fosco spoke in this manner to them. Forbear my brethren this angry violence,
and entertain the kindness of these Knights, which you shall find every way
to your own contentment.

The Giants being sore wounded and weary, upon condition of pardon, threw by
their weapons and yielded them selves: being received by our knights as
reconciled friends, after which they led Tirso to the Ladies lodging, where
their wounds were respected with all helpful means possible, and Dramusiande
had the charge of looking to Tirso.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. How our Knights went to the adventure of the Tower, and of
the several occasions that befell them, until they found the Serpent of the
Sun.
BEfore ten days were fully expired, since the dangerous combat of our
Knights with the Giants, they were very well and soundly recovered, when
Dramusiande, causing Tirso to be brought before him, thus spoke unto him. If
thou be dreadlesse of death, which I am determined thou shall endure, mittigate
the sharpnes thereof by thine own means, and tell me truly, how the
enchauntment of the Tower may soonest be concluded. Tirso, who well knew, that
while the enchauntment lasted, he could not be deprived of the dominion of the
Island, answered: that he was utterly ignorant thereof, and maintained his
speeches very constantly.

Dramusiande presently called for a fire, and commanding certain Tanackles or
Pincers for torment to be put therein, threatened him with death in that manner,
except he revealed the enchauntment to him. The Giant, albeit he was of
wondrous courage, yet when he saw such sharp torments prepared, he began to
grow fearful, and said. Now do I well perceive, that I must justly restore
what I have wrongfully withheld: know then, there are two several
enchauntments belonging to the Tower, and they must be undertaken by two of
you, wherein you will find so hard a labor, as will cost ye much sweat
before ye end it: yet when ye have gone through all manifest perils, they are
to no purpose, except ye can pass through the mouth of a Serpent, and issuing
forth at his vent again, go into a Garden of frightfull terror, where
obtaining the conquest of that place, both the enchauntments are fully
concluded.

When Dramusiande perceived, that Tirso knew no further of the incantation, he
took the book out of his bosom, which his Aunt Eutropa the Enchauntresse had
left him, and calling Franardo along with him, they went together toward the
Tower. Being come thither, they beheld diverse Monsters looking through the
battlements, and out at the gate issued a ^east of so many strange forms,
where into still he changed with such swiftnes, as they could not perceive him
to hold any certain shape. After this beast came forth a Knight with two
heads, turning readily to one another every way, so that without any use or
winding of his body, they guided him whether so ever he pleased: four arms
had he beside, and in each hand a very long sword. 2 Franardo advanced him
self against the Monster, which one while smote him with his horn, and then
again so readily with his paws, as he could not devise how to avoid the
blows: and his sword served him but to small purpose, for he smote as if it
had been on a flint wall, without any appearance of the beasts feeling the
strokes. Dramusiande buckled with the Knight, being still smitten with two
swords at once, and as he sought to shun the other two, the Monster gave him
such a blow on the back with his foot, as made him reele staggeringly
between the Knights arms, and he being but of common stature, caught him up
from the ground, running so lightly with him into the Tower, as if his carriage
had been of an Infant. Franardo seeing his Father thus carried away, pursued
him presently, and notwithstanding the Monsters resistaunces, followed the
Knight into the Tower, which closed again in such strange manner, as there
appeared no gate at all for passage.

When Franardo saw him self thus enclosed, he smote at one of the Knights
swords, wherewith he labored to wound his Father, and immediately it fell out
of his hand, whereby he perceived, that the power of the Knight consisted in
his swords, because by being dispossessed of this one, he was not so furious
as before, and beside, Dramusiande was again at liberty, fighting
courageously with the beast, yet seeing no likely means how to overcome him.

Wherefore he turned upon the Knight, and in little while deprived him of two
more of his swords, whereby his vigor was much enfeebled, and being soon
after robbed of his last weapon, the Monster wexed in like sort disabled, because
they held a simpathie of courage, and as the one weakened, so the other in
like manner followed, both running away into an obscure place, where our
Knights would not pursue them, least therein consisted some secret treachery.
Standing still to see what would ensue heereon, they saw a great Barrel come
tumbling down a pair of stairs, seeming by the sound to be full of armed
men, and so soon as it was on the ground, it presently opened, where-out
there issued ten Hunts-men, with as many Hounds in several leashes, and
rounding our two Giants as in a ring, they let slip their dogs all at once,
then drew forth short swords hanging by their sides, and smote so fiercely at
Dramusiande, as he was in very great hazard of his life: for beside the hard
usage of these Hunters, two of the dogs had got him fast by the arm, and
another had bit in sunder the laces of his helmet, so that his helmet totterd
loosely upon his head. But having recourse to his wonted valor, he behaved
him self in such manner, as shaking his arm, he threw off the two dogs
against the wall, and the other standing upright against his breast, he caught
him fast by the throat, and had quickly strangled him, if two of the Hunters
and the other dogs had not hindered him, for they coming fiercely again upon
him, set him very hardly, and both the men and dogs were so ready about him,
as he could not fasten one stroke upon them. Franardo having all the rest on
him, had hardly escapt them, but giving a thrust by chance at one of the dogs
mouths, he perceived him to give back and meddle no more with him,
whereupon, aiming his strokes in like manner at the other dogs, they still
fell off from him, as expressing where their cheifest power consisted.

But now the Hunters did him the greatest injury, and as yet he had not found
the means to endamage them, nor how the enchauntment served to defend them:
yet at last, smiting one of their Hattes beside his head, he saw him stagger
backward, and declared no willingness to assail him again. These so fortunate
accidents, did highly advantage both the father and the son, so that by
wounding the dogs in the mouths, and vnhatting the fierce Hunters one after
another, they were in the end deprived of any further resisting, and swallowed
up in a wide opening of the ground: out of which gulffe there presently came
forth, a beast having two Serpents bodies united together, from the very
lowest parts up to the heads.

This Monster leapt between the two Giants, and mounting up toward their
faces, breathed forth such an horrible smell, as they by no means could
endure it: and although they laid on the beast lustily with their swords, yet
all their labor was spent but in vain, and so they might have continued God
knows how long, without any better success of their pains: had not
Dramusiande suddenly pulled the book out of his bosom, where he saw the same
Monster figured with two Giants, who having the two heads in their hands,
seemed easily to wrest them every way, whereupon he stepped to his son
Franardo, and showing him the figure, they gave over further contention,
awayting opportunity to get near the Monster, which when they had compassed,
each of them caught a head in his hand, and writhed it as the picture had
directed them.

Upon this good hap, they felt an earthquake so sudden and terrible, as they
diverse times imagined the Tower would have fallen flat upon them, for all which
terror they would not let loose the Monster, but held fast to try the end of
this marvel. Then saw they the earth to open where they stood, and after
three or four mighty blasts of wind, a huge Dragon came up out of the ground,
which closing quickly again under it, the Dragon carried them into a deep
darkness, where they felt them selves in a ready beaten way, whereof the book
had before given them some enstructions, and that it would guide them to a
Palace, where they should perfectly conclude the adventure.

Going on still in this comfortless darkness, they often smote their heads and
shoulders against a stony wall, which made them to hold their hands before
them, for fear of brusing or hurting their faces, and having been above an
hour in this obscurity, at last they beheld a glimmering of light, but could
not discern from whence it proceeded, albeit still the further they went on,
the light increased and grew greater. At last they came to an open door,
wherein they beheld a very splendant light, which seemed to them as if it were
the Sun: but a wondrous great Serpent obscurde the beams thereof with his
wings, which extended forth in a marvelous breadth, and by their often moving
up and down, they caused the twinkling light which at first they beheld.

This Dragon was of such wonderful highness, as ten great Giants might easily
stand upright in his belly: his mouth he held continually gaping, and thence
issued forth likewise a shining brightness, and in fair large letters was
engraven on his head these words, THE SERPENT OF THE SVNNE.

CHAP. LXXXIX. How Dramusiande and Franardo went into the Serpent, and
afterward finished the whole adventure.
DRamusiande seeing the Serpents mouth to gape so wide, he remembered the
former speeches of of Tirso, and said to Franardo, In sooth it is a very
strange case, for us to adventure through this horrible passage, being
counsaild thereto by my deadly enemy, perhaps to remain here embowelled
for ever. Then looking behind him, he saw the way which they had come to be
quite dammed up, so that there was no turning back again, then onwarde they
must there was no remedy: wherefore without any more a-doo, he stepped into the
mouth of the great Serpent, and his Son Franardo boldly followed.

Not long had they stayed within the Serpent, but at his vent they issued
forth again, without any danger or hurt at all, more then of the darkness
through which they had past. Then found they them selves before a Garden gate,
where-into when they entered, they beheld the strangest grafts and plants that
ever were seen: for the trees were great Giants, some planted with their heads
downwarde, some upon one foot, others upon an arm, and some grafted one upon
another, the very least grafts or plants of all, being men of middle or common
stature, and the herbs were swords, daggers, and other bloody weapons. When
Dramusiande had well noted the manner of this Garden, he read these lines
written over the gate.

Into my Garden who dares to enter,
Shall here be planted for his bold venture.
These bug-beare threats did nothing at all discourage our Knights, who
without any regard hereof walked along by these strange appearances, which
moving still toward them, made an horrid noise with their hitting one against
another, and still seemed to menace them, but did no action at all against
them. Then came they to the straungest Fountain which ever was seen, for the
water was of reeking blood, running swiftly in a round compass, and the
banckes about it was the flesh of men, diverse Woolues, Bears, and other beasts
came running to this Fountain, where slaking their thirst with drinking the
blood, they went and fed on human bodies, which were round planted about the
place.

As Dramusiande and his Son stood beholding this admirable spectacle, they
saw the earth suddenly open, and out of it came the Serpent which had two
bodies, accompanied with an armed Lion, which immediately without any staying,
flewe upon Franardo, who as yet had not unsheathed his weapon, when seeing him
self in such peril, snatched out his dagger, wherewith he gave many stabbes
at the beast, but yet not one of them could wound him: and very much had he
been endangered, but that by a grype he gave the Lion, the beast was enforced
to fly off from him, by means whereof he had the liberty to draw forth his
sword, wherewith he both defended himself, and offended his enemy, but the
Lion very nimbly avoided his blows, and gave such spurns with his feet to
Franardo, as diverse times he reeled against the strange trees, which he
suddenly heard to speak, saying: Repent thy self at leisure, for here must
thou bide and keep us company.

The Serpent had so roughly dealt with Dramusiande, as he was scant able to
hold out any longer, for twice he had been smitten down to the ground, and
so trampled on, that seeing no other likely way how to bear off this
turmoyle, he drew forth his book again, and finding there the platform of
this Garden, he saw that he must strangle the Serpent with his hands, and then
bind the Lion: which was the Enchaunter himself, and if he were slain, there
was no possible means for conclusion of ye enchauntment, for the Serpent was
the Magitians son, whom he had metamorphosed into that shape, for a great
offense which he had committed.

Dramusiande gave his son advertisement hereof, and casting by their weapons,
they ran on the Lion and Serpent with such courage, as they began to be
greatly affrighted, in seeing them take the only way to end the enchauntment
by the Serpents death. Franardo held the Lion hard tacke, catching him in his
arms to overthrow him, for else he should never compass the means to bind
him, and grasping him very hard by the throat, he thratled him in such sort,
as the Lion being unable to breathe, began to shrincke backward. Franardo
pursuing this good advantage, tripping with his foot the Lions hinder feet,
he fell flat on his back, and Franardo upon him, and getting loose his arming
girdle, the Lion being much astonned with the fall, he bound one of his
legs, which ere he had fully done, the Lion getting loose his other pawe,
and madly raging to be bound in that sort, he rent the Armor off from his
side: whereupon, Franardo seeing in what perrill he was, set his knee suddenly
on the Lions breast, and getting hold on the other leg, with much ado bound
it fast too, so did he his other legs afterward, that he was not able to
stir any way.

In this while, Dramusiande had strangled one of the Serpents necks, but with
such difficulty, as he was greatly annoyed by the other, and scantly could
stir with extreme wearines: wherefore Franardo being as valiant a Giant as
any then living, caught the Serpent by the other neck, and held him so
strongly, that presently he died. Then was such a terrible thunder and
earthquake, and the air so wondrously dark on a sudden, as they were not able
to discern one another, but when the darkness was vanished away, they saw
the Lion changed to a man of fourscore years old, but bound both by the
arms and legs, humbly entreating the Giant to unbind him, promising him to
finish the enchauntment: but Dramusiande willing to be altogether directed by
his book, found, that he must not unbind the old man, until the strange
Garden were first quite ruined, wherefore stepping angerly to the old man, he
took him by the bosom, threatening to stab him with his dagger, whereat the
Wizzard wexing somewhat fearful, said. Save my life (Sir Knight) and do not
kill me, and I will willingly fulfill whatsoever you command me.

Then praying him to let loose one of his hands, he drew a little book out of
his pocket, whereon having read a while to himself, he saw the men and Giants
planted in Garden, run and cast themselves headlong into the Fountain of
blood, so that there remained not one body, but all were swallowed up in the
blood, which immediately was covered with fresh earth, with a pillar or Collomne
of red stone advanced upon it, and an Idol standing upon the pillar, which
held a little brief of letters in his hand, so shadowed over with a veil, as
easily they could not be read, then said the Nigromancer: Now you must
understand that the enchauntment is concluded, especially so much thereof as to
you appertains, now may you safely enjoy your own Island: But the Idol which
holds the scedule in his hand, the reading whereof you cannot attain to,
must stand here still, until a Knight as yet unborn, and son to the most
valiant Prince this day living, do chance to come hither, to end the highest
and most perrillous adventure that ever was heard of.

Having thus spoken, they found themselves presently to be in the Tower, out
of which they went at their own pleasure: but the old man vanished from them,
of whom ye shall hear more in the following history.

CHAP. XC. How Dramusiande made his son Franardo Lord of the Island, assigning
the Castells belonging to the Ladies, to their Husbands, Almaroll and Forzato,
Franardo purposing his departure thence, to take Grandonya Forzatoes Sister to
wife, and how afterward they arrived at Constantinople with they Ladies.
ALmaroll and Forzato, who all this while doubted some disaster, which might
happen, to Dramusiande and his Son Franardo, though they had bound Tirso and
the two other Giants that yielded themselves: when they saw them return from
the Tower in so good disposition, they ran cheerfully to meet them, and kindly
embraced each other. Then did Dramusiande unbind Tirso* and the other,
promising (on their good behavior) to use them honorably, so they would be
loyal and faithful to him.

On the next morning, he caused a banquet to be prepared, for espousing the
young Giantesse Ladies to their Lovers, that they might the sooner set for
Constantinople: whether all the chief Knights of that Court now repaired, to
determine a resistance of the purposed war, which they daily expected from
Corcuto the Soldane of Babylon. When the Giants and ye rest of the Island were
there thus assembled, Dramusiande said, that he would give the I Will to Franardo,
as his lawful inheritance, and then calling the Ladies, they were there
publicly affianced to Almaroll and Forzato, and two Castles belonging to the
Ladies as their dowries, were appointed to their troth-plighted husbands, the
eldest Lady being named Ferea, and the other Albana. Franardo likewise taking
his oath, for their quiet enjoying of these their several Castells, with all
the rights and privileged to them appertaining.

This being done, he appointed that Fosco should go with his Ring and a
Letter to the Castle of the Vale, there to command a Nephew of his named
Oralio, to bring his Soldiers with their wives and children, and possess
their dwelling in that Island, assigning them the goods and lands of the
deceassed Giants. Afterward, he wrote to King Edward of England, and acquainted
him with the whole course of this victory, entreating him withal, to hold his
Son Franardo as his obedient subject, and to afford him all honorable
assistance, for the better performance of his loyal vassailage in right of the
Island.

These orders thus established, he caused the Ladies to prepare themselves in
readiness, because they should go along with him to Constantinople, whereof
they were not a little joyful, in regard of their desire to see ye Court,
where the Ladies and Princesses were so renowned for their beauties, as the
fame thereof was noised through the world. In few days after, Ora^o came
thither, and things being confirmed in all meet order, they set away thence,
taking all the Giants along with them, because no new stirs should arise by
their means.

Thence went they first to Forzatoes Castle, without any accident in their
journey worth the rehearsal, saving it was their hap to see upon the way, the
goodly Tomb or Sepulcher, the adventure whereof was ended by Arguto, the
Knight of the Sun. Coming to the Tomb, they found it open, and in it lay
the shape of an Emperor, but covered with such an arteficiall veyle, as they
could not perfectly discern his face. But Dramusiande well noating the form
of his body, imagined it to be the Emperor Primaleon, as indeed it was: for
the skilful Magitian, when he saw the adventure was accomplished, to shun his
own shame, conuayed thence the Image of Alexander ye great, and placed this
other in stedde thereof, but covered in this manner, as loathe to have it easily
known. Dramusiande and the rest, grew very pensive, that the death of the
Emperor was so near, as by a manifest sign they perceived, namely the
uncovering of the Tomb, being hourly ready to receive him.

In this grief they parted thence, and within four days arrived at Forzatoes
Castle, whereof he having before sent his Sister warning, found her most rich
and gallantly accoustred, entertayning them with the greatest honor that could
be devised: and taking Franardo by the hand, right friendly kissed and embraced
him, but with such a reverend modest bashfulnesse, as added an admirable luster
to her beauty, whereupon Forzato said unto her. Never blush (sweet Sister)
at welcomming of your Lover, who comes now to make you his Wife in marriage.
Ascending the stairs, they found the Tables ready furnished, and having dined,
Dramusiande perceiving his sons earnest desire, as also the disposition of
the Lady herself, sent for a Priest (of most sacred life) near adjoining, who
in presence of all the Giants and the rest, performed the rites of marriage
between them, to such high liking of both the parties, as the beholders might
apparently perceive it, Forzato renouncing his right to the Castle, and giving
it as his Sisters dowry.

The next day following, Dramusiande thinking each hour a year till he were
at Constantinople, would needs set onward, Franardo taking Grandonya along in
his company, which she earnestly labored, as willing to go with him through
any perrils whatsoever, and very glad also of the other Giantesses company,
because she should have others of her stature, to associate her in the Grecian
Court. No sooner was dinner done, but they mounted on horseback, and
pleasantly rode toward Constantinople, beguiling the time with much delightful
conference, and ouertaking Fortenbracio by the way, they iournied together the
more merrily.

Now it fortuned, that the Giants of the Island, whom Franardo led as prisoners
to Constantinople, had secret talk together, and intended to murder our
Knights in their sleep, which when they should have compassed, they meant to
put on their Armor, because themselves had none, and afterward to do what
other mischief they might. And this vile intent had taken effect, but that
Dorina happened among them, she travailing likewise to Constantinople, to be
at the marriage of young Primaleon. She riding awhile along with them, and
steadfastly looking upon those Giants, found by her Art the treachery of their
thoughts, and feigning as if she would talk with Dramusiande concerning
Primaleon, bad him have an especial care of the Giants his prisoners, because
they purposed treason against him and his company. Then Dorina caused two angry
Lions to appear before them, against which beasts as those Giants strove to
defend themselves, they were presently torn in pieces, without any prejudice
or offense at all to any of the other, and thus was the damnable drift of the
Giants utterly disappointed, the Lions speedily vanishing no man wist whether.

No sooner was this storm thus past, but onward they gallopped, until they
came somewhat nearer to Constantinople, where a far off they were descried by
their huge stature, especially Franardo, who exceeded his father in height
above three foot: whereupon, diverse ran hastily to the Palace, saying, that a
squadron of Giants were coming against them, which made every man presently to
arm him self, and make out for resistance of these Giants. Arguto being
first in readiness, because he was newly returned from hunting, was the foremost
man that left the City, and meeting with Franardo, who wore an embroidered
garment over his Armor, which his wife had given him as a loue-token, and made
him the more unknown to the Knight of the Sun: But Franardo, albeit he knew
him well enough, was disposed to break a Lance with him, the rather to make
some proof of himself, with what ability he could endure the shocke of this
brave gallant, who was reckoned among the very choicest Knights of the Grecian
court. When he behold Arguto to give signal of the Ioust, he gave forth to
meet him, and the encounter was so violently performed, as both of them lost
their stirrops, Franardo catching hold by the maine of his horse, to sheeld him
from falling, and Arguto somewhat disorderly shouldred aside: but, which most
displeased him, being unable to rule his horse, he ran with him till he came
to Dramusiande, who perfectly knowing him, received him in his open arms,
saying: My Lord Arguto, you come against your lovers and friends.

Arguto knew Dramusiande and Almaroll as they embraced him, at which instant
came thither Palmerin and Florian, who turning to the other with Franardo,
after some ceremonious complement, Franardo said. I am taught (my Lord Arguto)
how to ioust with any man that I have no knowledge of. Nay, quoth Arguto, I may
much rather say so my self, as knowing the sufficiency of your high merit.
Salutations and courtesies being ended between the Knights, they then
affoorded like kindness to the young Giantesses, whose beauties were aunswerable
to their greatness in stature, and riding on to the City, the Emperor had
tidings of their arrival, who albeit he was much crazed in body, yet would he
needs be carried along in a Horse-litter, and meeting with the Giants, very
sollemne respects of affability passed between them, especially to
Dramusiande, whose faith and love to the race of Palmerin, had been truly
approved.

Afterward, he embraced his son Franardo, being at large acquainted with his
worth and valor, whereof had been so late a trial, in his hardy meeting with
the Knight of the Sun. The Emperor next gave welcome to the Ladies, and like
one that had wished well to such beauties in his days, kissed their
foreheads, causing them to ride on each side his Litter, taking them severally
by the fair hand, and using speeches of much gentleness to them: but to
Grandonya (exceeding the rest in comely features) he expressed very princely
kindness, all the Ladies highly extolling their fortunes, to be so graciously
entertained by the Emperor, of whom they stood before in great awe and
terror.

In this sollemne joy they entered Constantinople, and being come to the
Palace, they were roially welcomed by the Empress and the other Princesses,
all showing great joy for the health of Dramusiande, but Arlencea taking her
husband and Franardo by the hand, went into the midst of the Hall, where
kissing them severally very often together, all the rest laughed heartily at
them, the like did Cardigea to Almaroll and his Lady. Within few days after,
the Emperor held a sollemne festival, the espoused Ladies sitting at the
Table with their dear affected Lords, and the other young inamoratoes,
praying for the like success in their loves: all eyes being bent on the
delicate demeanor, of Primaleon toward his Victoria, Arguto to Concordia,
Tarnaes to Fior-nouella, Oliuanto to Auriana, and the rest of the sweet
consorted couples, whereof we will speak more in the ensuing story.

Dinner being ended, a dancing was commanded, only for the new married and
enamoured, wherein all the Court took very great contentment: the Giantesses
declaring as much civility, as if they had been there trained up all their
life time, and the Emperor sent for very costly Jewels he had, which he
bestowed on the Ladies of the Profound I Will, because they were not acquainted
with such courtly deckings.

Now did his Majesty think it very necessary, to make a public sollemnitie
for all these marriages together, that his Court might be the more renowned
thereby: but Aliart, to whose judgment these occasions were most of all
referred, told his Highness, that they must stay the coming of the Princess
Targiana, as also of King Edward of England, who were in good forwardness on
their journey thither: which news were not a little pleasing to ye whole
Court, but especially to Prince Florian, who stood in doubt least Corcuto had
commenced his war, and thereby endangered his beloved Lady. According as
Aliarte had before promised, so within four days after, news came from the
Haven to the Palace, that Ships of sundry Nations were put into the Port: and
a second messenger openly delivered, the landing of the Princess Targiana and
King Edward of England, both of them riding in royal manner toward the City.

The young Prince Primaleon, because the Emperor was weak and aged, caused
all the Lords and Ladies of the Court to mount themselves, that so great
states might have some entertainment aunswerable to their high merit, and so
they rode in royal equipage to meet them, where Florian encountering his fair
wife Targiana, gave her most gracious and loving welcome, as all the Lords and
Princesses in like manner did, rejoicing greatly in her noble presence. Then
went they to King Edward of England, and did him such duty as his worth
deserved, in regard of the great esteem he bare among them, and especial
favors heretofore from him received: he not a little glad at the sight of
his sons, and they as iocond to behold their kingly Father.

Being alighted at the Palace, the old Emperor, for joy of his
youths-partner in Arms, swounded twice or thrice down right, and much a-doe
had they to keep life in him: so that between these two extremes, gladness
for the view of so long absent friends, and sadness for fear of loosing the
Emperor, they could scarce contain any indifferent measure, till the heat of
either was more moderately appeased, and the violence of such passions in
better sort calmed. Within few days after, a Council was called, to
deliberate on matters concerning Targiana, who having seen into the practices
of her Son, was come thither to provide for future dangers of war, not
doubting but to find her husband in the Court of Constantinople.

The Barons and Lords of the Kingdom being assembled together, Targiana
declared before them, that all heathenesse drew to the faction of Corcuto,
because he had subborned many princes of Turkey, to believe his right claim to
that government: which since he could not with quietness compass, he meant
to overrun it with warlike troops, not doubting but his own people would
cleave unto him, and justly bear Arms against his Mother, for marrying the
murderer of her husband, and receiving baptism among the Christians, then
which (in his mind) she could not have done a deed of more indignity,
whereof he would be revenged even to the uttermost.

She told them beside, that he was backed by a mighty troop of Giants,
derived from the progeny of Darmaco, who was slain by the valiant Palmerin d'
Oliua, and they were very bloodily minded, hating all the issue and friends to
the said Palmerin. Hereupon he had prepared the greatest Fleet that ever was
seen at Sea, with resolute determination, that if any man amongst them should
but talk of turning back, till they had utterly rooted out the name of
Christians, he should suffer the extremest death that could possibly be
devised: and what Prince soever, being entered with him into this confederacy,
that offered to shrink from the course intended, all the rest were to hold
him as a hateful enemy, and immediately to turn their weapons upon him,
punishing him all one as if he were a Christian.

When Targiana had at large delivered her mind, with no little admiration of
the Emperor and all else present: every man was entreated to speak his
oppinion, and to help this dangerous case with the best advise he could.
Florendos persuaded them by many good reasons, to leuey an Army speedily, and
assail the enemy at home in his own provinces: all the young Knights iumpt
with his oppinion, but Palmerin, Florian and Aliarte held the contrary,
alleging, that an Army of such sufficiency would not be easily gathered, as
might serve to beat the Pagans within their own dominions. Then Aliarte
turning to his Father King Edward, desired him to speak what he thought most
expedient, because his long practice in war, and grave experience, could not
but yield them the pregnantest course herein to be taken.

King Edward replied, that the counsel of Florendos was so good, as it no way
deserved check or reprehension, and that of Palmerin was very expedient, from
both which grounds, there might be an absolute course determined on. But first
of all he advised, to provide for Florians best security of the state, who
with his people of Thrace, and ye aid of Blandidon, Soldane of Niquea, might
well maintain that part of Turkey. And, quoth he, this Court (God be thanked)
affoordes young gallants enowe, to undergo a far heavier burden then this,
Oliuanto and Fortenbracio, they may have the managing of these affairs. Here
are beside of our dear lovers and friends, the Giants so lately come from the
I Will of the bottomless Lake, let them four be employed in some other meet
place, with promise of honorable recompense for their pains, giving each of
them a City in the Kingdom of Paraz, fallen now to the Empire, by the revolt
and death of Dyrdan, always provided, that no injury be any way offered to
Blandidon, but upon his good success in this glorious enterprise, to have the
rest of that Kingdom under his command.

When things are thus established abroad, then may ye leuey an Army,
according as your provision by Sea shall require, and though not consisting of
multitudes, yet furnished with so many generous and dauntlesse spirits, as may
cope with an Army of far greater show: and thereof let Lord Florendos be
General, choosing to him such grave consorts, as himself shall think best
of, and may fittest be spared from my Lord the Emperor. And such an Army,
when the enemies of Greece shall ween to come hither, will force them
(despite their hearts) to be more careful of home, least loosing Cities and
Fortresses there, they be not ouer-hastily recovered again. Then may a fresh
supply be sent after, according as intelligences shall be delivered, that if a
general battle be proffered, slight skirmishes, sallyes or combats of man to
man, such good order may be taken in the election, as it shall every wa^ still
redound to our benefit. And Palmerin my son gave good direction, in aduising,
that as occasion shall need, so the City here be still stored with able men
at Arms, to be ever in a readiness, least the worst should happen. But by no
means may we spare young Primaleon from this service, being so highly favored
by Fortune as he is, and let him still be stored with the water of the
Mountain Arteferia, whose virtue strengthens Armor in such sort, as the
keenest edgd weapon can hardly enter it, the rest I refer to his own
discretion.

This counsel of King Edward was generally allowed of, so that with the
Emperors consent, and all the Princes, it was fully ratified and agreed upon.
No sooner were they risen from these weighty businesses, but Aliarte being
disposed to set all the Court on a iocond meriment, even as they issued forth
of ye Counsell-chamber, caused strange varieties of Music to be heard, and
the young Ladies taking their Lovers by the hands, as also the grauer sort
their honored Princesses, they daunced gallantly through the Hall, the old
Emperor first with the Empress Grydonia, King Edward and his fair Queen
Flerida, Miragarda with Florendos, Palmerin with Polinarda, and so the rest in
order followed, Aliarte being highly commended by the^ all, for fitting the
time with so general a contentment.

After the dance was ended, a more martial noise was heard, of Drommes,
Fifes, Clarions, and Trompets, when Aliarte commanding a way for passage, the
resemblance of Corcuto the young Soldane of Babylon, with his confederated
Kings and Princes attending on him, all being bare-headed, carried covered
banqueting dishes, and upon each man's dish stood his own Crown: thus
passed they into the Emperors Gallerie, where a fair Table being ready
covered, with great reverence they placed their dishes thereon, which being
done, they vanished again, and the Emperor with his Lords and Princesses,
sat down to the banquet, gathering hereby, that the war against Corcuto,
would prove successeful: at which banquet we must leave them, as having yet no
instructions what further befell them.

FINIS.
The Conclusion.
Here Gentlemen, fully ends the History of Palmerin of England, and Don
Florian his Brother, without expectation of any other part concerning them,
albeit this third Book break of imperfectly, and referres the war and
other matters to an after discourse. Such a following History indeed my Author
speaks of, but terms it, The Knightly deeds of Prince Pagmalion, whereof as
yet I can compass no intelligence, neither in the Spanish, Italian, or French:
but it is very likely, that if any such History were written and imprinted, it
will in time happen to my hands, and then your kindness to this will command it
the sooner.

In mean while let me entreat your favor, because some few faults have
escaped in this Book, both by reason of the crabbed Coppie, not every where
very leageable, and by words mistaken, that quite alter the sense, which such
as know me, I doubt not but will sufficiently excuse me of, as being subject
(I thank God) to no such silliness, nor willingly (I dare presume) committed
by the Printer.

As for my last part of Primaleon of Greece, and the third and last part of
Palmerin d' Oliua, both them I confess to have in mine own custody, and as I
perceive your willingness to entertain, so shall I be ready to hasten them
for you: but if my pains in this last part of Palmerin purchase your dislike,
I Will keep the rest to my self, and offend ye no further.

Yours ever, A. Mundy.

A Table, for the readier finding of every Chapter contained in this book,
guiding the Reader according to number of the Chapters and Pages.
HOw the bodies alive and dead, of the Princes, Dramusiande, and others
(supposed slain) were conuaied unto the Perilous I Will. Chap. 1. Folio. 1. What
Targiana did, after the Camp was dissolved, and the Soldane Albayzar her
husband dead. Cap. 2. fol. 3. What they did in Constantinople, after the
departure of the sage Aliarte. Cap. 3. fol. 5. How the Princes that were in the
Perilous I Will, were now recovered past any danger: And what happened to Madame
Leonarda in child travail. How the other Princesses in like manner were
delivered of children, and how Prince Florian of the Forest departed thence.
Cap. 4, fol. 6. What happened for the burial of the dead Princes bodies. Cap.
5. fol. 8. How the several Tombs were made manifest, with the Epitaphes
belonging to each of them. cap, 6. fol, 9. How Pandritia having hid herself in
the Chamber among the Tombs, was found dead by her husband Bellagris. cap. 7.
folio. 11. How the other Princes were buried the day following. cap. 8. folio.
eodem How the Knight of the Savage man following adventures, there happened to
his hand a Letter and a Ring. cap, 9. fol. 14. What Florian did after his
departure from Dorina. cap. 10. fol. 15. How Ristorano returning to Tubante,
provided good guardance for Targiana, delivering the Armenian Princess to
Sucusano, and what Florian did for Targiana. cap. 11. fol. 16. What Sucusano
did, when he heard that the Armenian Princess was forcibly rescued from them,
which had charge of conducting her to him: And further concerning the Prince
Florian. cap. 12. fol. 18. How the Princes in the Perilous I Will, being
recovered to their former health, would have returned thence to their several
estates, but they were stayed there for a while: And of a new accident that
suddenly happened. cap. 13, fol. 21 How Sucusano became enamoured of Targiana,
and knowing Florian to be Nephewe to the Emperor Primaleon, laid hold on him,
suspecting likewise evil between him and Targiana. cap. 14, fol, 24 How
Dorina, with the four Knights and Dramusiande, arrived at the City of
Tubante, and delivered Targiana, with whom they entered the Forest. cap, 15,
fol. 27. How the Emperor Primaleon returned to Constantinople with Don
Rosuell, and what happened to the rest. Likewise, how the wise Aliarte
advertised Palmerin, Florendos, and other more, of Prince Florians case, who
needs would depart to give him succor. cap. 16, fol. 30 What happened in
Turkey, when the prisoner dissembled in the sted of Florian was led to death.
cap, 17. fol. 32 How Sucusano raised his Camp to be gone, and being followed
by the Christian Knights with their power, yielded Florian. cap. 18. fol. 35
How Dorina left off her love to the Prince Florian, with intent to advance the
honor of Primaleon the second, son to Florendos: not because she bare any
immodest affection to him, but only to make him famous through the world. cap.
19. fol. 38 How the young Princes arrived at Constantinople, where they
received the order of Knighthood, and how preparation was made for a
Tournament. cap. 20. fol. 41. How they proceeded to the Tournament, wherein
Arguto would have slain an unknown Knight, because he could not endure his
company. cap. 21. fol. 45. How the Knights of Tubante combatted against the
Pagane Kings, and how the City was neere-hand loosing, by a treacherous devise
that Ristorano wrought. cap. 22. fol. 49 What followed upon the war at Tubante,
and how the Monster was overcome. cap. 23. fol. 57 How Dorina presented her
Monster in the Listes at Constantinople, and how Tamerco carried away the fair
Polynarda. cap. 24, fol. 61 How Dorina carried away with her the Knight of
Fortune, and how Polynarda was recovered again by the valor of Arguto. cap.
25. fol. 64 How Arguto was assailed by three Giants, which took the fair
Princess Polynarda from him. How she was afterward recovered by the Knight of
Fortune, and given by him to Leonato, that he might go onward to the I Will of
Fortune. cap. 26, fol. 67 Of the fight that chanced at Sea, between these
guides to the Princess, and an unknown Knight. cap. 27, fol. 71 How Franardo
found Belcar, Fortenbracio, and Forcino, hand to hand with three Giants, that
dwelt at the foot of the mountain Arteferia in Macedonia, and having slain
two of them, they went toward the Island of Carderia. cap. 28, fo. 75 How Arguto
arrived at the I Will of Carderia, and combatted with Franardo, and how they were
seized on by an enchaunted Knight. cap. 29. fol. 77 How the Knight of the Sword
vanquished a savage Monster, and afterward found Caro and Estrellant combatting
together: likewise what happened to them, and diverse other Knights. cap. 30,
fol. 79 How the Knight of the Sword undertook the adventure of the vault. cap.
31, fol. 82 How Tarnaes coming to try his fortune in the adventure of the
wheel, combatted with Leonato, and how by Orino they were friendly pacified.
cap. 32, fol. 87 How the Army of the Christians met with Tamerco and his
power, where he was taken, and his men joined with the Christian forces. cap.
33, fol. 88 How the Knight of Fortune chanced on a strange adventure, and what
ensued to him thereon. cap. 34, fol. 90 How the Ship went to the shore, and
how the Knight of Fortune, accompanied with the Lady and the Lions, departed
thence to the adventure of the Castle, and what chanced unto them by the way.
cap. 35, fol. 93 How the Christian Army, before they could take landing in
Turkey, were constrained to deliver Oliuanto to a Dwarffe, that came and
demanded him at their hands. cap. 36, fol. 96 Of whence and what this King
was, and what passed between Oliuanto and the Lady, likewise how he
accomplished the adventure. cap, 37. fol. 100 How Leonato caused the wheel to
be carried to Constantinople, and afterward went to the I Will of Carderia, where
he remained enchaunted for defense of the place. cap. 38, fol. 104 How the
Knight of Fortune entered the Castle, where by advise of the Lady, he
accomplished the adventure. cap. 39, folio, 108 How as the Christian Knights at
Tubante, were setting forward to the conquest of Niquea, Florendos despairing,
because he could have no cure for his lamenesse, departed away with a Damsel,
and what he understood by her. cap. 40, fol. 109 How Florendos met with a
strange enchauntment, and afterward overcame Saboco, with great peril of his
own life. cap. 41. fol. 114 How the Knight of Fortune went to combat
Garnides, and being taken of him, was by one of his daughters set at liberty
again. cap. 42, fol. 118 How Primaleon caused Laurea to be married to Trasino,
making him King of the Morning Islands, and gave Filenia likewise to Garnides.
cap. 43, fol. 122 Of that which Florendos did with Saboco and Isota, and how
after he had subdued a Serpent, he returned to Tubante, even as the Christian
Army was preparing to depart. cap. 44, fol. 126 How the Christian Army
departed from Tubante, and what happened to them by the way, in their going
toward the Kingdom of Niquea. cap. 45. fol. 130 How Palmerin and Florian would
needs go combat with them of the Tent, and how the enchauntment was
concluded: Also of a strange accident that suddenly happened. cap. 46. fol.
134 How Oltrando and his men of India, came and joined with the Christian
forces: and how Niquea was besieged, and Tirrena taken. cap. 47, fol. 138 How
Primaleon went the adventure of Fortune, and what happened in the first days
attempt. cap. 48, fol. 142 How Primaleons Squire arrived at Constantinople
with his Horse, and there witnessed, that a Lion had devoured his Lord in his
presence: and of an other sad news there happening also. cap. 49. fol. 146 How
the Monster released him self and Ristorano in Tubante, after that Tirrena was
sent to Constantinople. cap. 50. fol. 148 How Trineus arrived (by chance)
with his Ship on a strange Island, where he found labor enough to do: And
how his Army sailed on to Niquea. cap. 51, fol. 152 How Trineus found his
Army in the Port of Niquea: and how they gave battle to the City. cap. 52.
fol. 159 How Tarnaes combatted with Leonato, and remained there prisoner, and
how many other Knights were taken: and of a disgrace which happened to the wise
Aliarte. cap. 53. fol. 165 How Florian, Florendos, and Berolde sundered them
selves, for better recovery of the Ladies: And how (thinking he had found the
Palace of Queen Melia) Berolde arrived at the I Will of Carderia: And how
Florian finished a strange adventure. cap. 54, fol. 168 What, and who the
Monster, the dog, the wounded Knight and Lady were: And how the enchauntment
was fully concluded. cap. 55, fol. 173 How Florendos combatting with Leonato,
was carried captive into the I Will of Carderia. cap. 56, fol. 176 How Primaleon,
otherwise called the Knight of Fortune, accomplished in two days the adventure
of the Tower. cap. 57. fol. 181 How Primaleon understood, that the fair Lady
Victoria was kept in an enchauntment. And how (upon the arrival of Trineus)
Primaleon prevailed so much with him by persuasion, that he granted to turn
back to Constantinople, for the convey of his Mother, and the precious
unguent. cap. 58, fol. 187 How Primaleon slew the savage wild Bear, and
finishing the adventure, set all the famous Knights at liberty. cap. 59. fol.
191 The reason why the enchauntment was first framed. And how Primaleon (going
to set the wizzard Aliarte at liberty) entered the combat with Palmerin of
England, and how they were parted by Dramusiande. cap. 60. fol. 195 How
Florendos with Oliuanto returned to Constantinople, where he found remedy for
his lamenes. And how the other Knights betook them selves to several parts,
finishing diverse strange and memorable adventures: among which is expressed,
what happened to Arguto in his travail. cap. 61, fol. 199 How Palmerin (so
soon as his hurts were healed) went straight to Constantinople: And how
Primaleon went to the Perilous I Will, and what happened afterward, for delivery
of the wizzard Aliarte. cap. 62, fol, 204 Here follows the deliverance of
the wise Aliarte, and what Drusa Velonna did in hinderance thereof. cap. 63,
fol. 208 How Floraman seeing him self but slenderly regarded by Clariana,
became enamoured of the fair Princess Victoria, concluding to go and deliver
her out of the enchaunted Palace. cap, 64, fol, 210 How Arguto arrived by
strange occasion, at the Palace belonging to the fair Queen Melia, and how
he remained there enchaunted. cap. 65, fol. 212 How Florian still pursuing in
quest of his daughter, was (unwittingly) brought to the Palace of Queen
Melia. cap. 66, fol. 213 How, and what the wizzard Aliarte wrought, against the
enchauntment of Drusa Velonna, and what ensued to Primaleon. cap, 67, fol. 215
How Primaleon entered into the Palace, and accomplished a great part of the
adventure. cap. 68, fol. 217 Of the dangerous fight, which Primaleon had with
the Knight of the Serpent, and how he accomplished the whole adventure
afterward. cap. 69, fol. 219 How Leonato and Tarnaes came to combat together,
for the love of fair Candida, and upon what conditions they were parted by
Palmerin of England. cap, 70, fol. 223 How Primaleon and Arguto fought together
near to Constantinople, and how no man could part them but the Emperor
Primaleon. cap. 71. fol, 225 How the wise Aliarte and Prince Florian, with the
fair young Lady Victoria, set forward on their journey to Constantinople, and
of a danger which happened to Aliarte, from which he was rescued by the valor
of Prince Florian: Also, how Floraman desperately slew him self. cap. 72, fol.
228 How as they were consulting in the Court, about the marriages of Primaleon
and Arguto, with the fair young Ladies Victoria and Concordia, the two young
Knights were summoned thence to a strange adventure. cap, 73, fol, 230 Of a
strange adventure which happened to Primaleon in the Cave under ground,
where-into the strange Knight had conducted him. cap. 74, fol, 235 How Arguto
(with great peril of his life) brought to end the adventure of the enchaunted
Lady, and received freedom of his suspicion, that Fortune was not favorable
unto him. cap. 75, fol. 235 How the aged Magitian showed the cause, wherefore
he had enchaunted the Knight and his daughter, confining them to so long a
date of punishment. cap. 76, fol. 239 How Primaleon and Arguto caused the
marriage to be solemnized between Brunoro and Rosella, and afterward iourneyed
toward Babylon. cap. 77, fol. 244 How Primaleon and Arguto were taken by
Corcuto the Souldane of Babylon, and set at liberty again by the aged
Magitian, Father to Rosella, returning afterward to Constantinople. cap. 78,
fol. 246 How the marriages of Candida with Leonato, and of Tarnaes with
Fior-nouella, being further conferred on in the Court of Constantinople, there
happened a sudden and unexpected alteration, cap. 79, fol, 249 How Florian
travailing to the fair Argentina, came to the City of Tubante, where with
exceeding love he was entertained by his wife Targiana, and leaving order how
she should be defended against her son Corcuto, he iourneyed thence to the
Adamant Castle. cap, 80, fol, 251 How Florian (with some difficulty) concluded
the adventure of the Adamant Castle, and set fair Argentina at liberty. cap.
81, fol. 253 What the Emperor, Palmerin, and the other Knights did, when they
found that Candida was gone away with Leonato. cap, 82, fol, 255 How Prince
Florian arrived at Constantinople, with the fair Lady Argentina, and the
subtle Enchauntresse Drusa Velonna: Here likewise is declared, how Leonato
lost his beloved Candida, and afterward by what means he recovered her
again. cap. 83, fol. 158 How Leonato (with his fair Candida) arrived in
England, where their marriage was solemnized with great royalty. Also how the
young travailing Knights, with them of greater years and experience, returned
(the most part of them) to the Emperors Court at Constantinople. cap, 84. fol,
261 How Dramusiande, Franardo, Almaroll, and Forzato, travailed to conquer the
Island of the bottomless Lake, and what happened to them in the attempt. cap,
85. fol. 264 How two young Ladies being Giantesses, declared to our wounded
Knights, by what means they should enter into the Profound Tower, and finish
the enchauntment. cap. 86, fol. 268 How the Lord of the Island came thither, and
of the victory which our Knights obtained against him and his. cap. 87, fol.
270 How our Knights went to the adventure of the Tower, and of the several
occasions that befell them, until they found the Serpent of the Sun. cap.
88. fol. 273 How Dramusiande and Franardo went into the Serpent, and afterward
finished the whole adventure. cap. 89, fol. 275 How Dramusiande made his
son Franardo Lord of the Island, assigning the Castles belonging to the
Ladies, to their Husbands, Almaroll and Forzato, Franardo purposing his
departure thence, to take Grandonia Forzatoes Sister to wife, and how
afterward they arrived at Constantinople with their Ladies. cap. 90. fol. 277
FINIS.

