ANTHONY PAINT^^ THE Blaspheming Caryar.

Who sunk into the ground up to the neck, and there stood two day^^ two
nights, and not to be drawn out by the strength of Hor^^ or dug out by the
help of man: and there dyed the 3. of November. 1613.

Also the punishment of Nicholas Mesle a most wicked blasphemer.

Read and tremble.

Published by Authority.



At London printed for John Trundle: and are to be sold at Christ Church Gate.
1614.

THE STRANGE PUNISHMENT AND IVDGEMENT OF GOD, UPON A CVRSED blasphemer: ANTHONY
PANETER Caryer.
TRemble all ye people, stoop now and fall down under the dreadful and most
just Judgment of that great Jehovah, which holds in his hand, Heaven, Earth,
and every thing that therein is, weighing them in scales as though it were
dust: Be now amazed at the might of so mighty an arm, which in the twinkling
of an eye crusheth and beats down sinners in his wrath, scatters them as
the wind does the Grasshoppers, and makes them the subject and argument of his
glory, in the sight of all Nations. O fearful judgments of the most High,
which suffers not his glory to be trodden under foot, but when he thinks fit
brings the just and horrible plagues of his auengement upon the despiser of his
holy Name. How terrible and full of horror, quoth the Psalmist, it is to fall
into the Lords hands, when he puts on the armor and weapons of his wrath; as
the holy Apostle Paul, shows in the tenth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, he may when he pleases punish with diverse punishments and temporal
plagues, besides the eternal damnation those that rebel against him and
offend his sacred Majesty. Tremble and shake again (O Sinners) (for the
Prophet Moses, in the 14. of Exodus pronounces unto you the decree from heaven
so dire and frightfull, saying, that this great God without using the
ministry or means of any man sends his Angels (the executioners of his
vengeance) against the proud profane which sets light by his holy Name; That
high minded Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon shall be, though to his great
shame, the first we will produce for an ensample to all posterity. Pharao
King of Egypt, and the ten notable plagues, which, the same God, auenging his
honor, did send upon that swaggering spirit, are evident proofs of the same;
waters turned into blood, filthy Frogs, Lice, anoyance of Flies, the
mortality of men by pestilence, murren and death of Cattle, Boyles and
Scabbes, Hail, and frighting Thunders, Grasshoppers, obscurity and palpable
darkness, briefly the very Angel of the same God whom he blasphemed made
war against him, yea' by things that seemed very contemptible and of no
force; by the only wind of his mouth and by his destroying Angel he
overthrows and quite undoes the proud and insolent blasphemer Senacherib King
of the Assyrians, for attempting with blasphemous words to spite this
Sovereign God, but the same most mighty God made him well know and all men
after him, that it is he that punishes and shows mercy, which kills and
keeps alive, which makes wonders in heaven and earth, and he throws even
down to the ground that lofty man, by the hands of Sarazar and Adramalec his
own Children, within the temple of his own false God Nezrok in Niniuie: And
as the same our great God has diverse and sundry ways at hand, so does he
diversely inflict and lays pains upon sinners: sometimes by the Elements, as
Moses witnesses in the 26 of Leuit. and 11. of Deuteronomie. Sometimes by
sicknesses of sundry sorts. Exodus 15. Deuteronomy. 28. Sometimes by the Sword and by
War. Ezech. 5. Sometimes by Famine, by Fire, by Captivity, briefly in a
thousand manners when it pleases him to take revenge for his honor offended:
night cannot hide the sinners from him: their strength and nimblenes of their
body cannot save them: Monarkes, Emperors, Princes and Kings do tremble and
shake under his mighty hand: the strongest, and best fortresses tumble bowne
at his only look: It is that terrible and potent God, of whom spoke that
Captain of the Hebrews, Judas Macchabeus, who is like in force and greatness to
the mighty God of the Hebrews? and the same posie he used in his ensigns of
war. Do you think then you wretched and accursed blasphemers of the Name of
the most High (at whose terrible looks the earth does tremble, the elements do
(...), the heaven fades away, and the sea flies out) do you think (say I to
you) do ye think to shun the fury of his face, and escape the heaviness of
his arm that can not be avoided; O accursed blasphemers, the first and
cheifest, more wicked and more abominable than all other sinners, do you not
see, that as many times as you open your stinking mouths to blaspheme the
Name of the Almighty, as many times the Devils and frightfull fiends do enter
within your selves through every blasphemy? Do thou believe wretched
blasphemer, that God which sees and understands thee is deaf or a sleep,
or else distracted and busy about some other business, like the Idols of the
Paynims, as the holy Prophet Elias did in old time, reproach unto the Idolaters
of those days? Do thou think thou must never be called to account, for thy
foul and stinking blasphemies, be it never so late, that letting loose the
reins of thy desolate tongue, which polluteth both heaven and earth, thou
shall thus still live without God, without Faith, and Religion in this world?
Thou art, O blasphemer! far worse and more wicked than a Thief, a Niggard, a
Murderer, a Liar, a Whooremonger, a Wanton, an Adulterer, a Drunkard, a
Glutton, an Idolater, a Ruffian and Pandar, or a Conceaier of st althes: for
thou art traitorous and rebellious unto God, spitting in his face as many times
as thou blasphem'st against his holy Name, with no less indignity and
ignominy, than the Jews which did buffet and spit upon the blessed Savior of
the world. And if Saint Paul said in the sixth to the Hebrews, that sinners do
crucify once again the Son of God, that being said in general how much
more in particular may it be applied to the Swearers and Blasphemers of the
Name of God.

For, those (as says Saint Augustine) do not sin less, which blaspheme our
Savior Christ, reigning in heaven, than those which have crucified him walking
upon the earth: Yea it may be said, that it is less sin to blaspheme Jesus
Christ hanging and dying on the Cross, than now he is sitting and reigning in
heaven, living, and triumphing. The Jews, not knowing that he was the Son of
God, did blaspheme and filthily bespit him; but now blasphemers, that know him
to be the very Son of God, do yet worse than ever the Jews did, and are yet
more wicked than the damned which blaspheme God, in that by blasphemies they
make this world their very Hell, by anticipation; It is most certainly held
amongst the Divines, that God is nothing so angry for the blasphemies of all
the damned altogether, as for the blasphemy of one blasphemer alive, for
blasphemy is not forbidden to the damned: on the contrary as the glory of
the Saints in heaven is to praise and bless GOD, so is it a punishment and
torment to the damned to blaspheme him: but unto the living it is most
expressly forbidden to speak blasphemy, upon pain of eternal damnation:
whence it follows as it is abouesaid that the blasphemers, what pretense and
color soever they will cover their accursed swearing withal, are worse and
more wicked than the damned, and are like to this Monster fained by Homer,
expounded by Lucretius in this verse, Prima Leo, postrema draco, media ipsa
Chymera.

A true Hyerogliphick or poesy of the wretched blasphemers, swaggering like
Lions, venomous like Dragons, and no less abominable diverse and counterfeit
in the framing their blasphemies, than these Chymeraes hideous and invented
Monsters; But that we may not stay ouerlong in the choice and picking out of
the just judgments and plagues inflicted and used by the great GOD from time
to time upon blasphemers, we will insist upon one only example among many,
being an accident of fresh memory and above all other most exemplarie, worthy
to be considered and remembered, in all ages; Set before your eyes this notable
and dreadful example of the judgment lately executed by the Divine vengeance
upon one named Anthony Paneter, an ordinary Carrier in the territory named
La Condamina, three leagues distant from the City of, Genoa in Italy: This
man returning from the City with two horses laden with diverse wares, and his
horses for the heaviness of their burden scarcely able to go fast enough to
be at home before night, fell unto such chafing and rage, that cursing,
banning, blaspheming despitefully, and with a desperate madness the holy and
fearful Name of Almighty God, calling the Devil to come to help him, or
else that he should carry him away and his horses withal (as, alas! it is to
ordinary an use of some Car-men, and Carriers both by Sea and by Land every
foot to blaspheme and curse the holy Name of GOD) this vile wretch not ceasing
his fury on a sudden was stricken with the revenging hand of him against whom
he did so outragiously vomit his blasphemies; for being about two leagues
forward on his way, still continuing his outrageous cursing, swearing, and
blaspheming, The earth moved and shaken at the very horror of his oaths and
blasphemies would not, nor yet could any further bear and sustain so vile a
Monster, but at the will and judgment of the Creator opened it self, and
gaped under the feet of that vile wretch, and swallowed him up to the neck,
so that he could by no means deliver himself from thence. Stay now and
behold ye bloody blasphemers, and detestable swearers; worship here in fear
and trembling, the Majesty and power of him against whom your voice speaks,
and your tongue vtters such vile oaths and fearful curses; Let this wretch
be an example unto you of amendment, leaving that filthy and damnable custom,
whilst you have time, and whilst yet God stays his hand to call you unto
repentance and amendment. This wretch thus stricken with the hand of God, his
two horses still followed their way until they came home; his wife seeing the
horses thus come without their unfortunate master was instantly taken with
great fear and amazement, least that her husband should be slain or robbed
upon the way by some thieves or others, so she stayed a little still looking
for him, but hearing no news of his coming, she gets out of the house and
goes all lamenting and doleful along the highway toward the City of Genoa,
accompanied with some friends or neighbors of hers, because it was already
late and about three hours in the night. She went not far but that she found
on the way one of her neighbors named Ambrose Vidoze, of whom (all amazed and
distracted as she was) she asked whence he came, he said he came from Genoa;
she further asked him whether he had met with her husband whereat yet all
affrighted trembling and astonished at the horrible and frightull cries of this
miserable Catiffe which he had heard, he told her that lately without seeing
him or any body he did hear a voice and dreadful cry upon the way which
said in these words. I am damnd, I am damnd to all the devils of hell, because
I have so often and in so many fashions sworn and blasphemed the holy name of
God: Thus the poor Vidoze stricken with the terror of this fright could speak
no more, but went home; where casting himself on his bed he died suddenly not
able to speak a word: a thing verily at the which our hayres may stand upright
on our heads able to shake and amaze all our senses.

The woman with her company pitifully crying and tearing herself, follows on
her way and never leaves till they had found the said Anthony Panetier whose
frightfull voice they heard a far off still crying that he was damned with all
the devils in hell, because he had so often and wickedly blasphemed the holy
Name of GOD; besides that (a thing most wonderful) he was environed and
assaulted by a troop of hungry and ravenous Wolves ready to devour him, had
not some men with swords, staves, pieces and shot ran thither, and yet could
scarce master them, so raging were these beasts against the man, as though
they had been sent thither like so many Sergeants to execute the vengeance of
the Almighty. That wicked wretch made no long stay there but he was summoned
and cited before him whom he had thus blasphemed, for the next day he was
found dead, and yet could not be drawn from thence. Such was the judgment of
the Divine Majesty, against this wretch: Such was the end of the said Painter,
which shall remain for an ensample unto all cursing, swearing, banning, and
blaspheming persons, which make but a jest and mockery at every word to bring
an oath and tear and take at their pleasure that great holy and dreadful Name
of Almighty GOD without any reverence, or discretion; nay without any subject,
occasion, anger, choler, or cross in the world; but through a most vile
accursed and detestable use and custom they have inured themselves unto, So
that now a days (so depraved is this our age) a man thinks to be esteemed
more brave and more dreaded, which at every word can swear and trim his
speech with oaths, taking and tearing GOD from the head to the foot, and if
any hearer having horror be offended, or goes about to rebuke them, his
return shall be vile words, and oftentimes blows.

The holy Doctors of the Church agree all upon this point and hold for
certain that all wickedness, parricides, incests, poisonings, murders, and
other crimes are nothing so great, neither deserve such punishment as do
blasphemy, inasmuch as all wickednesses (as the Prophet Samuel said) are at
their first committed against men, but blasphemies are first and directly
against the honor of God, and even as it were to spite him.

If Dathan, Corah, and Abiran for having murmured against Moses and Aaron, in
the wilderness, have been gulped up and swallowed alive with all their
families into the deepest bowels of the earth, what must blasphemers look for
and expect but the very same and worse?

If any back-biteth or speaks ill never so little of his King and Prince, he
is by and by chastned and put to an exemplarie death; Why should not the
blasphemer be used so, since that by his blasphemy he does no less then spit
upon the very face of God, which is the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, and
the Sovereign Monark of all the world.

If the Law of worldly Kings and Princes is vnviolably observed and executed
against such men, Why shall not Gods Law be likewise put in execution, which
expressly and upon great threatenings does command Kings and Magistrates to put
the blasphemer to death, and to cut and root him out from amongst his people
to appease his anger?

The ancient Romans did so abhor and detest a Blasphemer, that finding no
torments fit enough for his punishment they did give him up to the fury of
their gods, after he had been publicly whipped, causing this to be proclaimed
before him.

Do not swear by the name of the Gods rashly.
HEsiodus in the first book of his days and works affirms, that in all
ages the Blasphemer has been bitterly punished by the Gods (for he was a
Pagan and knew not the true God) and that the first Blasphemers were laid out
and set for a prey unto Vultures, add ravenous birds to feed upon, which did
eat their eyes, tongue and Liver; Alas! if these poor Heathen have believed
that their false Gods thus would, and did avenge their honor, how can we make
any doubt being Christians, but that the true God, which we worship, will
punish the blasphemers, since that he commands it to the Judges and Magistrates
of the earth without any restriction.

The wise man in his Ecclesiasticus chap. 13. says that the man which uses to
swear shall be filled with iniquity and the plague and affliction shall not
go far from his house.

In the 12. chap. of Saint Matthew the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be
pardoned, neither in this world, nor in the other. Saint John in in his
Revelation, chap. 16. gives a reason for it, saying, that the damned shall chew
their tongues for very smart and despair, and for their plagues they shall
blaspheme the God of heaven, because they did not amend themselves.

The Thief hides himself to steal: The Letcher seeks darkness out to commit
his wickedness in, the proud counterfetteth himself to be humble, the envious,
the covetous, the glutton, and the idle, cover and draw out of men's sight their
vices; as being ashamed of them, but the blasphemer alone is a shameless,
saucy, wicked one, uttering publicly and without shame and fear his
blasphemies against the holy Name of God, nay thinks it a mean to be esteemed
a brave and valiant fellow, and so he is; but in the Devils School and in the
academie of the damned and Reprobate, O how happy was the age of that great
Doctor Saint Chrysostom, In whose time blasphemers were presently punished,
and with great rigor, as it appears in his first Homily to the people of
Antiochia, grounded upon the places of Scripture there cited in these words:
whosoever shall hear the voice of the blasphemer if he accuses him not, he
shall bear his iniquity. Leu. 5. chap.

God said unto Moses cast out the blasphemer out of the Camp, and let all the
people stone him. Leu. 14.

In the same place God says, The blasphemer shall die the death; The same
sentence was executed upon a blasphemer, whose mother was an Israelite, and his
father an Egyptian which was stoned to death in the wilderness.

Judas Machabeus for the same crime caused the tongue of Nicanor to be cut and
minced for food to the birds of the air, Mac. 2. book, last Chap.

The blasphemer of Corinth was delivered to the Devil S. Paul. 1 Cor. chap. 3.

Nabuchodonosor by a solemn Decree commanded that whosoever should blaspheme
the God of Daniel should die the death? Dan. chap. 3.

The laws of the Church Extr. de maledict. C. Statuimus, thus condemn them,
that whosoever shall be found to have blasphemed the holy name of God, the
Virgin Mary, or the Saints, must stand by seven Sundaies at the Church door
and not go in, and the last Sunday of them must be there barefoot, and a
halter about his neck; he refusing to do so, he must be thrust out and
separated from the Church and deprived of Christian burial.

The civil and Imperial law punishes them severely, decreeing that it is a
greater sin to blaspheme the eternal Majesty then the temporal or worldly
Majesty.

Phillip the fair alias le Bell, King of France decreed that blasphemers should
be thrown into a river or poole.

Robert King of France judged them to death without pardon.

S. Lewis King of France would have them marked in the forehead with a hot Iron
and their tongue peirced through

King Hnery the 3 likewise made an excellent statute against them.

The matter then being so weighty and of so high a consequence as directly
touching the honor of Almighty God: Let all good and faithful Christians be
upon their knees holding up their hands, and pouring out tears at the feet
of our gracious Sovereign Lord and King) whom God bless with long and happy
years) of his most wise counsel, and of the Lords of his justice with most
humble and devout petition that by this notable example they would be pleased
better and better to put in execution the decree of God against blasphemers
confirmed and observed from time to time through all laws, Commonwealthes, and
kingdoms, that thereby God being appeased for the sins of this World, we may
see under our King Lewis 13. and his most wise mother Regent a golden age, vice
exiled, chastened, and extinguished, virtue and Christian faith exalted, that
so our France may be a mirror of virtue, piety and justice unto other nations.
So be it.

Briefes drawn out of the Registers of the Court of Parliament.
Upon the motion and complaint made unto the Court by the Kings Attorney
general, that as well in Paris as in other places, from whence notice was
given to him by many of his Substitutes or deputies in sundry Shires, and
Jurisdictions or resorts of Seneschaldoms and other Territories, amongst the
huge wickednesses, and horrible impieties brought in through the unbridled
licentiousnes of the civil wars, the Blasphemies against the holy Name of
God, of the blessed Virgin his mother, and the execrable oaths, detestable
renouncings, abominable cursings and defyings or spightings of their names and
power, are grown so common and familiar amongst all persons, of what condition
so ever, that to appease the ire and wrath of God, it is very necessary to
renew and bring in again the severity as well of the ancient Statutes of the
Kings S. Lewis: of Philip; Charles the 8. Jews 12. Henry the second, and
Charles the ninth: as also the Decrees and ordinances of the said Court in the
years 1544 1572. and 1575. Requesting that an order may therein be taken by
the Court, and that which hereupon shall be ordered by the same, shall be
read and proclaimed with a loud voice, in the high places and markets through
the town and Suburbs, likewise in all the Iustice-seates or Courts, as well
general as particular of all the shires, Seneschaldomes, and Prouostships of
this resort and power.

The said Court according to the former Orders and Decrees, did make, and makes
inhibition, did forbid and forbids all persons in general of what state
quality or condition they be, to swear and blaspheme the holy Name of God,
of the blessed Virgin his Mother, or his Saints, upon the penalties in the said
Orders and Decrees enioined, and danger of life and death, if the case
requires it: has enioined and enioines or commands all Vshers, Sergeants and
Officers of the Justices, to take, arrest, and carry unto prison instantly, all
those whom they shall find blaspheming, that the Law may go speedily upon
them, and they be made an ensample; and commands all persons which shall hear
them swear to denounce and accuse them to the Magistrates, adiudging therefore
to the Denonciators or Promotours the third part of the fines fined upon them.

And this present decree shall be read and proclaimed, which the sound of the
Trumpet, and public cry by the markets and high places of this Town and
Suburbs, and places used and ordinary for cries and proclamations: Also
through all the Cities, Towns, Boroughs, Villages, Shires, Senescaldomes and
Prouost-ships of this resort and power; Enioined and charged to all Judges of
Provinces to keep a straight hand, and employ their power for the execution of
this Decree, and to the Substitutes of the said Attorney general to take all
the courses and orders thereunto necessary, upon penalty of forfetting their
Office. Done in Parliament the 26. January 1613. And read and proclaimed with
trumpets sounding and public cry through the high places and Markets of this
Town and Subburbs of Paris the 27. of the said Month;

Signed Voysin.

A Decree and Judgment of the said Court against Nicholas le Mesle Blasphemer.


THe Court having seen and viewed the process criminal or evidence made by
the Senescall of Main, or his A Judge to to sit upon life and death.
Lieutenant criminal in the territory of Man's, at the suit of the Substitute
of the Kings Attorney general Complainant and accuser, against Nicholas le
Mesle Prisoner in the prisons of the As the prison of the Gatehouse.
Conciergerie (or Ward) of the Palace having appealed (or complained) of the
sentence given against him by the said Senescall or his Lieutenant the 14. of
May 1598. by the which sentence for public amends and reparation of the cases
in the said process mentioned and proved, the said Mesle was condemned to
make the amends (called) honorable bare head, and bare foot, holding in his
hand a burning Torch of two pounds weight before the great Portall and chief
gate of the Collegiall Church of Saint Peter; of the said Town of Man's, and
there shall say publicly, and with a loud voice, that rashly and maliciously
he had blasphemed against the Name of GOD, of whom he craved pardon of the
King and his Justice, this being done, be banished from the Country and
County of Maine for five years, and in that while forbidden to be found
there, upon the penalty in the Kings Statutes; and besides condemned in two
crowns fine to the King, and two crowns for the poor.

The prisoner having been heard and examined upon the causes of his appeal
and upon the cases laid on his charge having heard also the Kings Attorney
general which as for case newly coming to his knowledge had himself declared
to appeal a minima of the said sentence, requesting to be admitted to his
appeal (as well provided) and thereupon and upon his conclusions (or demands)
to have right and Law; All being considered, It is said or decreed that
concerning the appeal declared by the said Mesle, that he did appeal ill and
without greeuance, and shall be fined for: The Court has received and does
receive the Attorney general to his appeal, a minima from the said sentence,
admitted, and admits it (as well provided) and doing right upon the same, has
annihilated and annihilats both appeal and sentence from the which he
appealed, without fine; And for the cases contained in the process (or
evidences) has condemned and condemns the said le Mesle, to do the amend
(called) honorable before the chief gate of our Ladies church of Paris,
barefoote, and bare head, in his Shirt, a halter about his neck, holding in his
hands a burning Torch of Wax of two pounds weight, and there on his knees to
say and declare that wickedly and maliciously he has spoken and uttered the
execrable blasphemies against the holy Name of God, and of the Virgin Mary,
whereof he repents and craved pardon of GOD, of the King and his Justice;
That being done, shall his tongue be pierced through with a hot iron, and his
two lips slit or cloven, and afterward has banished and does banish him
from the Kingdom of France for evermore; has enjoined him to keep and observe
his banishment upon penalty where he shall be found to be hanged to death
without any other process: has declared and declares all his goods done and
confiscated to the K ng, taking first upon them the sum of a hundredth
crowns to be applied for the bread of the Prisoners of the Conciergie of the
Palace. Ordains that the process and evidence (on the which followed this
decree) shall be burned.

The Court also makes inhibitions and forbids all persons of what quality or
condition soever they be to swear and blaspheme the Name of God upon the
penalty contained in the Statutes and decrees formerly made, And this present
Decree shall be read in the Judgment seat of Man's in the Sises time, and
when they are sitting, at the suit and solicitation of the substitute of the
Attorney general in that place.

Pronounced to the said le Mesle, and executed the 27. of January 1613.
Signed. Voysin.

Translated out of French: and printed at Paris.


