Fiscus Papalis. SIVE, Catalogus Indulgentiarum and Reliquiarum septem
principalium Ecclesiarum vrbis Romae. Ex vetusto Manuscripto codice vere and
fideliter descriptus. A part of the Popes Exchequer, That is A Catalogue of the
Indulgences and Relics belonging to the seven principal Churches in ROME.
Laying down the spiritual riches and infinite treasure which (as sure as the
Pope is holy and true) are to be found in the Catholic Roman Church, whereof
the poor Heretics in England have not one Mite. Taken out of an ancient
Manuscript, and translated Together with Certain notes and Comments explaning
the more difficult place, for the ease and help of good Catholics, who had
best go to Rome, to try the virtue of the glorious Indulgences. By a
Catholic Divine.

LONDON, (...) by Nicholas Oaks, for George Norton, and are to be sold at his
Shop near Temple-barre Gate. 1617.

THE PREFACE, To the devout and distressed Catholics of Great Brittan.
WRITTEN AS IT SEEMS from one of their Priests, to inuit them to leave England
as a den of Heretics, and get themselves to Rome, there to be made partakers
of the riches and blessings laid down in this Book.
COnsidering (dear Catholics) that nature teaches, and we have well learned
that lesson in other things, to leave the worse and take the better, it has
often made me muse and marvel, that you can be hired to stay amongst these
Heretics, or kept from running to Rome with all speed possible: Many things
have amazed me in this consideration but three especially.

1 To see how all your hopes here vanish and come to nothing.

2 The miseries and vexations you here endure.

3 The comforts and blessings you might enjoy at Rome. What our hopes have
been, it greeues me to call to mind. In those golden days of Onuphrius in
vita Pauli 4 Petramalerius in vita Poli Card.
Queen Mary, when Cardinal Poole reconciled us, then they rejoiced at Rome,
we triumphed at home and made bonefires of the Heretics all over England: But
by and by all the fat was in the fire: for Elizabeth soon caused us to turn
our Te deum into de profund is. We cried and complained Extat ipsa bulla
excommunicationis inter Petri Mataei Constitutiones Romans Pont. page 624.
at Rome, and found releife. Pius quintus thundered out his roaring Bull against
her, excommunicated her as an Heretic, deprived her, discharged her subjects
of their oaths to her. Gregory confirmed it. Sixtus renewed it that this
threefold cord might not be broken, and we for the execution of that thrice
blessed Bull, plotted Treasons in the South, raised rebellions in the North:
But alas what became of all? She lived to see those three Popes and three
more, all turn up their heels as though the curse had fallen upon the cursers
heads: and the rebellions Treasons and Conspiracies against her, were all
discovered and defeared.

Hereupon the penalties of the laws, being doubled and redoubled upon us, we
groaning under Vide librum inscriptum. Canenizatio. S. Didaci impressum. Roma
anno 1588.
the burden, got Sixtus quintus to hire the Spanish King against her, who came
upon her with his Invincible Armado. Now were our hopes at the height, and we
could scarce contain our selves for joy. But how soon was it dashed, for what
became of all the invincible Armado, but confusion to it self, shame and loss
to the senders, and such grief to the Pope that procured it, as cost him his
life: and we were left not like Sheep to the slaughter (for we love not the
sheep qualities) but like Foxes to be hunted by the Heretics and ferretted
out of all our warm nests.

Thus laden with shame and sorrows, we lay languishing in woe and misery,
having now no hope left but the death of that wicked woman, for which we said
many a mass, made many a prayer, and (because you know we trust not to our
prayers) devised many a treason against her life, but all in vain, she lived
to see the hanging of hundreds of us, and died at last with nothing but old
age, surmounting in glory and greatness, all the Princes in the world of her
sex and time.

And now had we been utterly forlorn, and desperate, had it not been that
some good Catholics put us in hope to find favor from him that did succeed
her. This kept us in life, and and therefore at his entrance, we went with the
foremost, and let the world see our hopes were not dead. But alas alas for us
poor cursed caitiffes, we lept out of the Frying-panne into the fire, for
presently we found our selves in worse case under him and far more hopeless
then before.

Whereupon some of our zealous brethren, Watson and Clarke.
seeing how they and we were deceived, plotted against him, and hoped to have
constrained him to that they desired, but all in vain, for this was defeated
and they were hanged, and we poor Catholics left cold and comfortless. Oh
had we then been so wise as to have gone all to Rome, how happy had we
been, but we were yet put into one hope more by our ghostly fathers and
confessors, that at the next Parliament we should be relieved: for the good
success whereof we all prayed and longed to see that happy day: and indeed a
number of our brauest spirits and most zealous Catholics had attempted one of
the worthiest exploits that ever the world heard of, and the blow was even
almost given, sentence was pronounced upon the Heretics of England, in Rome it
self confirmed by all the Iesuited Catholics in the world, and execution was
expected within a few hours: But alas alas (as some of those good men said
when they were Grant and Keys.
in the Tower) the business was too good to prosper, for all was discovered
and we defeated, and so in stead of them, we gave our selves the deadliest
blow that ever we had, and of which, whilst the world stands we shall never be
cured: for by this action many of our chief ones lost their lives, we our
peace, and our religion that little credit it had before amongst them, and all
we got was this that his Holiness least we should be all discouraged from such
brave works, made them As was the powdet treason.
Martires at Rome, and we hope ere long will Canonize them for Saints, as they
well deserved.

And thus good Catholics if we will not cozen our selves, say in earnest,
where are we now? and what is become of all our hopes? are they not all like
Tabacconists food, and the Alehimists riches blown away in smooke? And as our
hopes are past and worn away, so if we consider the present persecutions and
miseries we endure, it is more then marvelous we stay in in England, you know
how bitter the laws are against us, and the King because he sees his mercy
is abused, commands them all to be executed upon us, so that now to offer to
bribe the Pursiuants and corrupt the Justices, will do us little good, he is
so set against us and transported with zeal to his own religion (which He
good soul thinks verily to be the true Gospel of Christ Jesus) as now all
the gold we can keep from Rome will scarce purchase us a protector, or find
one that dare once open his mouth to speak a word for us.

Oh then (dear Catholics) what do we here, what stay we for? what can you
hope or look for here? but for a heavier yoke, and more grievous persecution
every day? why then do we not get us all to Rome, out of the stormy and
tempestuous England into the happy haven and sweet sunshine of his holiness
favors? where should the Children be but with their father? where the Servants
wait, but on their Lord? where the Sheep feed but with their Shepherd?
where can you drink so pure as at the Fountain? where graze so daintily as
upon the Seven hills? where suck so sweetly as at your Mothers teats? Is not
his Holiness your father, and the holy Roman Church your mother? why then can
you be kept from them, unless you be bastards and not children? But if you
fear to find him a hard father or a stepmother of her, be not deceived: how
dearly he loves all his children, ask Venice, Naples, Sauoy and Sicily: who
ever committed themselves to his care that repented but once? And for her (most
loving mother that she is) she never received more then came to her, nor
deceived any that trusted her not: her lap was ever open to receive, and her
treasure to disbuse again, but mark the difference and magnify her bounty:
for she takes from you but your silver or gold or such like temporal trash,
but opens you her treasure, and lades you again with better blessings,
spiritual riches, holy pictures blessed grains, Agnus deis, holy bones, holy
stones, holy wood, holy blood, holy relikes, holy rags: glorious pardons,
gracious Indulgences, and other inualuable Jewels: and well may I call them
so, for no living man can tell the value of them: leave then these Heretics,
who (gross heads) know not the virtue of these riches, leave them I say to
their Onions and Garlike, their word and Sacraments, their Psalms and Sermons,
their praying and preaching, like Dogs to their crusts, or Swine to their
akornes. Let us, as more refined spirits, seek for purer feeding, and
therefore hasten to the seven hills where holiness dwells, and where we shall at
easy rates, be made partakers of such riches as the poor Protestants never
tasted of: witness this book that here I send you venerable only for the
antiquity of it. For as to the truth of it, it cannot be questioned, seeing
Onuphrius, and many other great and well Onuphrius de 7 vrbis Ecclesijs.
approved Authors, confirm the same, and all travelers find it to be true,
as their purses will testify if they should deny it.

Oh then what a worthy change shall you make, Italy for England: Rome for
London, Tiber for Thames, Mass books for Bibles, seven Sacraments for two,
and many other great blessings to boot: you shall be delivered from Sermons,
and Psalms singing, and Prayers in a known tongue, and many other such
superstitious ceremonies, which here you are combred withal: and whereas here
you can scarce walk in Paul's, nor make a bargain in the Temple Church,
without being offended with Psalms singing, Bells ringing to serve heretical
devotions, nor walk scarce by any Church, but shall be scandalized and
tormented with a Sermon. There you shall be quite delivered from all such
purgatories, and contrariwise you shall not peep into a Church, nor creep
into a Cloister where you shall not find more bounties and blessings, and more
thousands years of pardon, then all the Churches of England are able to give;
as you shall well perceive by this ensuing Book: And if you have such quesie
and tender stomachs as you cannot be without a Sermon, his Holiness herein
also condiscends to your infirmity, and prouides, therefore you shall have
store of them in Lent, when like Fish they be in the best season.

And if the fear of Purgatory hap to trouble you, Rome is the only place in
the world for you, for you will perceive by this book so many fine and easy
ways to escape it, as you will hold him more then worthy to go to hell, that
ever suffers himself or any he loves to come within the sent or smoke of
purgatory.

And for your Clergy and confessors, and young men unmarried fear not, they
will be in better plight then they ever were in England, for the stews are
there in every street which his Holiness (out of his own former experience,
no doubt of the necessity thereof) in great wisdom tollerats both for Clergy
and Layetie, for eschewing of greater inconveniences but espetially that his
Clergy may avoid that foul and detestable sin of marriage: which with us is
held a greater Costerus in Euchirid. Gretsecus, Ignatius etc.
sin then to lie with other men's wives, or twenty whores. And if any thing
do afterward trouble the conscience, you have there at every hour a Confessor
at hand, and are not to seek him a far off, send for him with cost, keep
him with danger, and send him away in secret as you do in England: and he is
as ready to give you absolution, as you to pay him, and as able to discharge
you of all your sins as of his own.

And as for worldly wants, fear them not, how can so tender a father, and so
loving a mother see their children want? who knows not the rich and royal
entertainment that Westmerland had, when having lost all for his Holiness he
fled to them? and least the English should plead it as their privilege, call
to mind how the Scottish Bishop of Rosse was received and rewarded, first with
Vnde laesleum in sua congratulatione ad Albertum Archiducem de Seipso.
the title of the Bishopric of Constance in France and afterward (because
Constance by reason of the wars was little worth) with a promise of the
Archbishoprike of Macklin, and that he might not starve in the mean time, he
had a pension assigned him of fifty scutes a month, which though it was most
ill fauouredly paid him, yet was it most fairly and frankely bestowed on him:
And howsoever you be not such Archtraitors to your own states, nor such
wel-deseruing fauorits of the Roman Church as these two were, yet fear not for
you shall at your first coming be welcome, and well refreshed at the English
College, and after that know for your comforts, that every day certain
pilgrims of several nations dine in the Popes presence, of meat from his
own table, blessed with his own most holy hands: (oh who were not worthy to
want it that would not post from England to Rome for such a dinner) And it is
but a reasonable suit to some Cardinal, or the fathers of the College to be
often made guests at this table, the very crummes whereof gathered up and
carried away are of as much virtue as many of the Relics in Saint Peter's
Church.

Now then seeing there be such entertainments and rewards to be had for the
body, as these examples prove and such riches for the soul, as this Book
declares, let us leave these Heretics to wallow in their mire, let covetous
Merchants go to the Indies, and Gallants to Guiana: let silly Catholics go
dwell in Ireland, and fools into Virginia: Let us take a wiser course and post
to Rome, where we are sure to have as good entertainment as we deserved at
home, and to find as much honesty as holiness, and as much happiness as
both: And as the Heretics make themselves sport with this Book, because
(poor fools) they believe it not: so do you more wisely who know it to be
true, take it with you, read it in your journey for your recreation, and when
you come there, examine the truth of it Church by Church: And if you find the
Relics there as precious, and as full of virtue and value, as you will find
the relation here made of them to be true, I dare say you will be the
richest and happiest people in the world: And further, off this be assured for
your better content, the Heretics will not so much envy your rich and happy
State in Rome, as they do the little liberty you have in England: and to say
truth (If I may without offense) they are not such cruel bloud-suckers, as we
speak and write of them, for I have often heard many of them say, they had
rather have you all sent away to Rome, then the blood of any of you to be
shead in England. And that you may require them for this courtesy. Let me
advise you when you come at Rome, and now and then for your recreation go
forth to see an Heretic burnt after a sessions from the Holy house (where it
is pretty sport to Catholics to see how the fat Friars out, and how the
burning Torches bring away pieces of their, flesh) then if it happen to be an
Englishman, do him this favor for countries sake, to get him a little sooner
dispatched out of his pain: But I put you to too much pain, by keeping you so
long from preparing for your Journey, which I am sure you will do as soon as
you have read this Book, unless it be you doubt of the truth of it, (which
none will do that are true Catholics,) and then I suspect you are turning
Heretics and therefore will wish, that for your punishment you never see Mass
again, and for your penance may every Sunday hear a Sermon, daily read two
Chapters of the Bible, and receive the Eucharist once a month, which most
grievous penance, if you would avoid, get you first to your Book, and then to
your Journey.

And as true as the Pope is as (we call him) the Vickar of Christ, and his
breast the habitation of Holiness and truth, and (as the Cannon-law calls him
our Lord God, so certainly you will be most happy in your Journey, and most
welcome to his Holiness, espetially if you leave all you have in England, and
come to him poor and unprovided, and so give him occasion to exercise his
Charity, for you know, He and his Cardinals, and all his Court hold it a
better thing to give them to reciue.

FINIS.
Good Reader, He out of whose study this old book was printed, and by whose
means it was transcribed being absent, these errors escaped the Press, which
thou art desired to amend or pardon, besides many less and literal faults.
B 4. For thirty, read thirteen. C 2. for Clement the 5. read 8. for Sixtus
the 6. read 5. D 3. for censure, read answer. E 1. for prays, read preaches.
3. for soul, read son. 4. for vocal, read royal. F 3. for Ides, read
Kalends. G 1. for God his, read God knows his. for Epistles, read Thistles. H
1. for per, read pro. 3. for Stephani, read Sehastiani. 4. for 38000, read
366000. I 3. for altar sancti, read altar sub quo sancti. 4. for cezend, read
cozening. K 1. for three, read there. L 4. for with, read which. 4. for quarte
sunt, read quarte feriae sunt. M 1. vnibiculus, read vmbilicus. 3. for anni,
read omni.

Index Authorum.
COrpus Iuris Ciuilis. Onuphrius de 7 Vrbis Ecclesijs. Azorij Institutiones
Morales. Villamonts Travels in French. Corradi casus Conscientiae. Iacobus de
Grafijs Decisiones. Petri Mathaei constitutiones Romans Pontificum Platina De
vitis Pontificum Romans Onuphrius De vitis Pontificum Romans Cicerella. De vitis
Pontificum Romans Molani Compendium practicae Theologiae. Toleti Instructio
Sacerdotum. Iac. Ledesma de sacra Scriptura non Iegenda, etc. Serranus de
Ecclesijs Vrbis Romans Hen. Korumanni, liber inscriptus, Roma Communis Patria.
Certain Notes to explain the Text.
a The glorious mother City of Rome, which some good Catholics call, The
Mistress of the world: some, The wonder of the earth: some, The eternal City
(not because they believe it shall be eternal, but for that they wish it) is
built on seven hills, which are called by these names:

Capitolinus, Quirinalis, Caelius, Exquilinus, Auentinus, Viminalis, Palatinus.

and of late are added 4 more.

Mons Hortulorum, Vaticanus, Ianiculus, Testaceus.

Of the great glory of this City if any would be more fully satisfied, let
him read the little book called, Roma communis Patria, written lately by one
that was there, and it will give him a stomach to go thither, if it were
further of then it is, or else surely he wants Catholic devotion. And as it
is built on seven hills, so it has seven principal privileged Churches
above the rest, and Patriarcall: they be

St John Laterane, St Peter's in the Vaticane, St Paul, St Mary the great, St
Cross, St Laurence and Steven, St Sebastians.
No tongue can tell the glorious, gracious, and blessed Indulgences that belong
to these seven Churches. But this ancient Manuscript copy sets down good part
of them, and much more then these idle Caluinists will believe: but no matter
for them, if they will be ignorant, let them be: they know not the virtue of an
Indulgence, therefore they contemn it. But if any Catholic think lightly of
these gracious Indulgences, they wrong themselves, and their religion. And
therefore whereas some zealous English Catholic of late I. R. In his
confutation of the Protestant Pulpit-babels, against W. Crashaw.
called this book contemptuously an old worme-eaten Manuscript: he was much
unadvised, and has given (I fear) too much advantage to his adversary, who
cannot but tell him again, (as I here tell you my Catholic brethren) that
the truth of these Indulgences set down in the old boookes, is averred and
confirmed by the late books of many great and learned Catholics, as
Onuphrius, Onuphrius de 7. vrbis Ecclesijs.
a great man in his time, since him Serranus, Serranus.
and since him Villamont, Villamont.
therefore no good Catholic may doubt of the truth and validity hereof,
unless he will deny such grounds as may not without mortal sin be called in
question.

b Here be not all, but a great part, and yet there be in one Church 33000
years of pardon for once going up one pair of stairs, and in another Church
is to be had within the compass of one year, more then two and twenty hundred
thousand years of pardon: Oh what a glorious treasure the Pope is Lord of! his
Exchequer is never empty, and what silly fools are the Heretics to deprive
themselves they know not of what?

c We read (say the Caluinists) in the fathers, of books Canonical, and the
Papists tell us of hours Canonical: but of any book called by the name of
Canonical it self, or any thing else so called, they might do well to have
told us more plainly and particularly: for Possevine the Jesuit their good
friend, who takes upon him so exactly to describe all Authors and their books,
speaking of this Silvester, mentions no such Book, therefore take heed this
Canonical prove not some Apocriphal, hidden and forged story. Thus prate the
Heretics out of their ignorance and presumption, not knowing that the holy
and authentical Canon law of the Pope teaches in the Decree, that the Popes
Decretall Epistles are numbered amongst Canonical Scriptures: but these
Caluinists care little, it seems, what the Popes law says, they are all for
Scripture, Scripture, and that makes them such Heretics as they be.

d If this be true, that there were in Siluesters time 1505 Churches in Rome,
how comes it to pass (say the Heretics) that the greater number is now
defaced? it cannot be said to be done in time of persecution: for in
Siluesters time the persecutions of the Heathen were all ceased. What then,
has Popish devotion pulled down the Churches that the persecutions left
standing? Has Rome been Gods Church, and Gods house all these years, and yet
pulled down above 800 Churches? They accuse Protestants of pulling down
Churches, but they cannot show so many pulled down in this whole kingdom as
here they have done in one City: And for these that are down, men's
corruptions, not our religion took them away, saving some few which being
needless and superfluous, others or more in places more needful have been
erected for them. But if any good Catholic hear any Heretic babbling on
this fashion, stop his mouth presently and tell him, that their Churches
being Heretical Churches, therefore the more the worse.

e None may say Mass at these Altars but the Pope, or those that have license
from him; but he tells us not (say the Caluinists) who may preach in their
Pulpits. An idle objection, and so let all good Catholics hold it: for what
is Preaching to a Mass? even nothing at all: nay, its hard to say whether the
Roman Church has got more good by Masses, or hurt by preaching; and therefore
let all devout Catholics never stumble, at it, if in all Catholic books
they find the altar so much spoken of, and the pulpit so little: the Altar so
magnified, and the Pulpit set aside: for his Holiness well knows, it is the
Altar that sends him in his rent, he never got any thing by the Pulpits; what
he has lost by them he knows and feels so well, that if he knew how to
carry it cleanly, he would rid his Churches as clean of them as he has done
of the Bibles in the vulgar tongue. In the mean time his Holiness out of
great wisdom, is content that any disgraces be cast upon Preaching that can
be devised, insomuch as if any be great preachers in Catholic Countries, it
is enough to suspect them for heretics, and their books must be purged,
witness Stella, Ferus, and many others; and though Christ and the Scriptures
seem to magnify preaching never so much, yet good Catholics must not care
for it, but must know that Christ spoke what was fit for those times; but his
Holiness knows and must appoint what is fit for these times: and therefore
he will notwithstanding give it what place he list. And if any man offer to
compare it with the Mass, it is little better then Heresy. But Friar Lobo, a
great preacher in Rome, could not contain, but in the hearing of Pope Gregory
the 13, delivered this in the Pulpit: That it is of greater worth before God,
and more profitable to the doer to hear Gods Word preached, then to see a
Mass. But what followed? His holy stomach could digest no such doctrine, nor
endure such blasphemy against his God: and therefore forthwith he constrained
the poor Friar to go up again, and in the same place to eat his words, and
to teach the contrary. Thus he made him in the Pulpit to disgrace the Pulpit,
and in the place of preaching to disparage preaching. And not thus content, he
also susspended the Friar from preaching; yea his recantation could not keep
him from suspension: and no marvel, for he that durst magnify preaching
above the Mass, is not a man fit to preach in Rome.

Bapt. Corradus Resp. cas. con. To. 2o. quaest. 253. art. 2o. Nauar. in Manual.
cap. 13. art. 30. Fumus in verb. Festum page 378.
Neither is this practice contrary to our doctrine: for do not our Jesuits and
Casuists teach and write, that as upon the Sabbath day, the Commandment of the
Sabbath enioynes not the inward worship of God, but only the outward, Soto de
Just. and Iure lib. 2. q. 4. art. 4.

Iac. de Graf. de decis. aur. To. 1o. lib. 2o. cap. 34. art. 8.

Azor. Institut. Moral. To. 1o. lib. 7o. cap. 3. q. 6.

Posseu. Bib. sell. To. 1o. l. 11. cap. 1o.


(a piece of rare Divinity.) So also that that outward or exterior worship
(only commanded in that Commandment) consists only in hearing the Mass;
and as for praying or hearing of Sermons, they are not of the essence of that
Commandment? Nay, our Church (say they) has no law for hearing, or being
present at any part of Gods service, but only at the Mass: nor is it any
where a custom in the Catholic Church that a man is bound under pain of
mortal sin, to pray to God on the Sabbath day, or hear the word preached,
but only to hear a Mass. (Oh sweet and dainty doctrines!) And these be no
triuiall Doctors, but of our chief ringleaders, especially * Molanus Comp.
pract Theol. Tract. 2o. c. 9o.
Azorius, who was one of the principal founders of Iesuitisme. This was he,
whom as Possevine reports, Gregory the thirteenth, called to Rome, to be one
of them that should make laws and orders for the whole society. This holy
Jesuit having gotten some secret inspiration from his Holiness, and sucked out
of the Popes own breast more pure Popery then all the rest, he goes further,
and says: It is the common opinion that there is no Divine law compelling or
commanding Christians to hear Sermons on the Sabbath or festival days. And
whereas there was so much goodness in the Council of Trent, as the Heretics
call it, or rather so much curiosity as we may say, as to decree that Bishops
should diligently admonish their people, and tell them that they are bound to
come to their parish Churches to hear Gods word. Azorius the Jesuit has
answer ready, that the Bishops are bid to warn them, not to compel them: and
if that seem too slight, he has a better in store, whereas (says he) the
Council would have them come to hear Gods word, that must be understood of
the Gospel in the Mass: for is there not a Gospel read in every Mass? and
is not the Gospel Gods word? Then he that comes to the Mass hears a Gospel
read, and consequently hears Gods word: Is not here deep divinity? and shall
not an ignorant man be well edified when he hears a piece of the Gospel read
in Latin, whereof he understands not one word? Yes doubtless, says learned
Ledesma the Jesuit, if they come with devotion, and a good intent. Thus then
you see that preaching is a mean matter in respect of the Mass. And this is
the reason why here and elsewhere in our Liturgies and chief and best books
of state, as our Missall, Pontifical, Ceremonial, Sacerdotall and the like,
for one mention of a Sermon and a Pulpit, you shall hear a hundred times of an
Altar and a Mass: And if this be done by the Church, and that Church cannot
err, then all good Catholics must know, that not Pulpits and Preaching, but
Altars and Masses must they look after. The Heretics I confess do hereat
take great offense, and hereupon do cavil and rail bitterly, and say, that
it is no marvel to see the pope prefer the Altar before the Pulpit, and a
Mass before preaching: for say they, and my ears have heard them say it to my
great grief, if they gained no more by the one then the other, his Holiness
would be feign to strike sail, for the wings of his pride would soon be clipped.
He tells us (say they) of a miracle in Transubstantiation, that the Bread and
Wine are turned into Christ's Body and Blood, and there remains nothing but the
fashion, color, or likeness of Bread and wine: But as our faith finds none
such in Scripture, no more does our bodily sense find it in experience. But we
can tell them of a much more true and sensible wonder daily amongst them: for
their Pulpits are transubstantiated (if we may be so bold with their word, for
Gods it is not) into Altars: their Preachers into Priests, their Sermons into
Sacrifices, their Bibles into Missals; and these are so absolutely altered, and
really changed, that indeed there remains nothing but names and shadows. For
the other have the substance. Pulpits (say they) are for Lent, Altars for every
day. Masses are commanded, Sermons but advised: Sermons may do well, but
Masses are necessary. The Bible has bred many heresies, but the Mass book
breeds and feeds devotion: Therefore Gods Dan. 11. 36 37. 38.
book, the Bible, is to be removed from the people, as a dangerous thing, and
the Mass book of man's making, is to be their daily bread. Is not this the
same, say they, (or as bad) that Daniel prophesies of, that there shall be a
King that shall do what him list, and shall exalt himself, and magnify
himself against all that is God, and speak marvelous things against the God
of Gods, and shall prosper till the wrath be accomplished, etc. Neither shall
he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desires of women, nor care for any
God: for he shall magnify himself above all. And in stead of God, shall
worship his God Mauzzim, even the God that his fathers knew not. Whether their
Mass be this Mauzzim here meant, or no, say they, we affirm not: once this is
clear, that he has turned his Mass into a Mauzzim, and made an Idol of it,
and worships in it a God of his own making, a God that his fathers knew not:
for his transubstantiation and his propitiatory sacrifice (which two be the
life and soul of the Mass) were not known in the ancient and purest Church
for 500 years after Christ. And this Mauzzim is set up in the very room of
God. For since the Mass was erected unto this height it is at, Christ never
had his due, but was despoiled of his Offices and Honor, Gods book cast
aside, and a Mass book laid in his place: Sermons accounted but things
indifferent, or convenient, but Masses the only necessary duty of the Sabbath
day. And as he here says, No man may say Mass at the high Altars of the seven
Churches in Rome but the Pope, or his Deputy; but you shall find no such
prerogative for preaching here, or elsewhere. Arise O Lord, maintain thine
own cause, against that Idol the Mass, and Mauzzim of the Romish Synagogue.
Thus madly and extrauagantly do these idle heretics prate: but let not this,
nor ought that can be brought out of Scripture, trouble any good Catholic
conscience, these be but the temptations of the Devil, let him hearken what
the Pope teaches, who is Gods Vicar, and Peter's successor: and if they be good
Catholics, they know that he cannot err; and that whatsoever he does or
teaches as he is Pope, it is all one as if God did it or taught it: let
heretics then if they will, extol preaching, let this satisfy devout
Catholics, that here the Pope takes order for saying Mass, reserving certain
Churches to himself, at whose high Altars none may say Mass but himself, or
some by commission from him: but find me any whose pulpits he reserues to
himself: nay find me any in whose pulpits he will come at all. No, it is too
base a place, and preaching too painful a duty for his holiness, he harh
something else to do, as namely, to create Cardinals, to translate Empires,
and dispose of Kingdoms, to read and answer letters from the Princes of the
earth, and to give audience to their Ambassadors, to control Kings when they
displease his holiness, and to excommunicate them if they submit not to his
pleasure, and if they persist, to depose them, and discharge their subjects of
their oath and allegiance, to give their kingdoms to whom he list; and to
raise their own subjects against them; to augment Saint Petars patrimony, by
procuring Princes and Dukes to give him the reuersions after them, to go and
take possessions of the Provinces that fall to him by such excheates as Clemens
the 5 did lately of Ferrara; to make leagues betwixt Princes, and to break
them when he sees good, yea though they be confirmed by Oath and Sacrament
Vide Peter Math inter constitutiones Pont. Romans in Bulla Pauli. 3. contra
Henricum 8. Angliae Regem.
(as Paul the 3. did against Henry the 8 of England) Pius 5 against Elizabeth,
and Sixtus 5. against Henry of France) to canonize and make Saints at his
pleasure, to set up shrines for them, and appoint them their holy days: as
Sixtus the sixth lately made a new Spanish Saint, (namely S. Diego) whom he
canonized at the request of the last Phillip, to encourage him in the invasion
of England, Anno 88. Vide canonizationem S. Didaci.
To make new holidayes (and alter the Calendar as Gregory the 13. did) putting
out many of his old Saints, by whom he has got well, and are now past date,
and out of memory, and to put in new ones in their room, which as new broomes
shall cleanly sweep up the gold of the world into his Coffers. These are
employments fit for Popes, and not to busy their brains, and spend their
spirits about preaching. And are these all? Nay, who is able to recount all the
honorable affairs his Holiness has to manage. Therefore fie upon these
Decretum.
foolish heretics, who hold that the Pope ought to preach. For is not he the
universal Bishop of the world, and Pastor of Pastors? and is not all the world
his province? and is not the care of the whole world, and government of the
whole Church laid on his shoulders? how then can he find time to preach? For
besides all the aforenamed weighty employments, he has much more to do, and
which none can do, but himself, as namely, to receive appeals from all parts
of the world made unto him, to review matters judged, and reuerse, disanull,
and alter them at his pleasure, to nominate and fill the Abbacies and
Bishoprics of the world as they fall void, to elect into all places, or at
least to confirm the elections made by others, to send his provisions into all
Lands for what livings he list, against they be void, that he may have them to
gratify his Minions: to appoint general Councels, when and where, and as often
as he pleases, to call them, continue them, proroge them, remove them,
dissolve them: to nullify or confirm them as he list; or to take that that is
for him, and reject that that is against him, as he did, and yet does in the
Councels of Constantinople, Chalcedon, Constance, and Basil: To devise and
create new relics when the old ones are lost, perished, or worn, and to
hallow them, that devout Catholics may have what to worship, and so may be
encouraged to pay their rents well: and when need is, to execute his admirable
skill in Arithmetical Multiplication, or rather his transcendent power and
Omnipotency for the multiplying of holy relics, as he did to the great
comfort and edification of his Church, when he multiplied S. John Baptists
head, of one making three, and of the three Kings of Collen, making three more:
and found out a third arm of Saint Peter, and that little and cursed Cross
which Simon of Cyrene once bare upon his shoulders, he by his mighty power has
multiplied in such sort as now never a ship in the world, can carry it. And as
he multiplied the substance, so has he changed the nature and quality, for
being cursed before, he has made it now so blessed, that (as he Gretserus de
Cruce, Tom. 1. Cap.
teaches) it ought to be worshipped with the same worship as Christ himself.
Oh silly heretics, that will tie him to study and preach that has these
things to do: what, think they that these can be done in a day? No, no, it
has cost the holy Mother Church many a years labor, and it has sore beaten
her brain to bring these matters to this pass. As for the multiplying of the
nails that fastened Christ's body to the cross, which of 3, are brought to more
then 23: that we will not speak of, as being but a small matter: for every
Goldsmith can make of one great plate of gold 100 little ones, and every one as
good gold as the great one, but let us leave that, and proceed to see what
further employments his holiness has. Has he no more to do? Yes, to weed
out the heresies that spring so fast with the hooks of his holy Inquisitions,
to confute the heretics with those excellent arguments of Fire and Faggot,
Daggs and Daggers, Pistols and Poniards, Murders, and Massacres: to look to
the books and writings of the world, that nothing be left that may make
against him: to allow what and how many he will have read, and to bar or
prohibit all the rest: and for those that are to be read, to alter them as he
sees cause: taking out what makes against him, and putting in what nay make
for him: surely he has little time to spare, that has all this to do. And
yet he has more to do. namely, to create new religions, and set up new
orders. For Christ when he ascended, left but one religion in the world: but
to multiply that one into many, and to derive 100 several from it, and yet all
these to be religions: this labor, because it beseemed not the Author of unity
to leave many, but one religion, he left to his Vicar, who has performed it
most diligently: for since his Ascension into heaven, he has reared up at
least an hundred more then Christ ever thought of: and yet still every day he
deuiseth more, all tied together by the tails, like Sampsons Foxes, but every
one looking and drawing several ways, one pulling against another, one
envying and supplanting another, so that another business that much troubles
him, is to reconcile them one to another, and yet all he can do, is not
sufficient to keep them in love and amity. And when he sees any of them grow
too high, and too full of wealth, then another part of his care is to squeaze
the sponge, being too full, as he did the Templars for their lands and riches,
whose order he pulled down, and burnt their great Master at Paris. Thus to
create new religions, and erect new orders, to keep them from one
overthrowing another, and to dissolve them again when he sees cause, are not
these sufficient employments to keep him from preaching, if he had no other?
yet there is one more, and that no small one, which he has to do, namely, to
look to the succession of Princes, and to take care how kingdoms may be
provided when their Princes either dye, or be by him deposed. As Innocentius
the fourth having deposed Frederick the Emperor, Alexander the fourth took
pains to make a Decree touching the succession of the Empire, publishing a
Bull, prohibiting and forbidding the Electors to choose Conradus his son to be
Emperor. A fact without example, and beyond belief, that a foreign Prince
should publicly dare to interpose himself in a foreign election, and publish
his letter to the world written against that Prince, whom the Princes Flectors,
and all the Christian world had their eyes upon, as the most probable successor
of the Empire. But by this, that idle Heretics, Huguenots, Caluinists, and
Lutherans may see that the Pope is tied to no presidents of other Princes; nay,
he is to give example to all, but to take of none; and they may see, that the
fact that would have been foul in another Prince, is in him not only
justifiable, but commendable. And though they babble and say, that if the wise
and judicious reader make himself the reader of that Bull, (for it is enrolled
in the public Register, and inserted for a perpetual president in the
continuation of the corpse of his Canon law) he will see in that one alone the
complete and lively picture of the great Antichrist: yet all good Catholics
know, that therein they do but show themselves open Heretics, that dare call
in question the facts of their holy Father: who though he should draw millions
of souls into hell, yet no mortal creature ought to say; Sir, why do you so?
And also it did little hurt, for that Conrade even maugre the Popes malice, as
the heretics say, was chosen Emperor; yet showed it the Popes good will and
godly care over kingdoms, that they may be provided of such successors as may
be to his liking: and it shows in what holy and mortified cogitations and
actions he spends his time, namely in disposing the Crowns and Kingdoms of
the earth.

Now then put all these together, and are not these fit and proper employments
for the Popes Majesty? A Fig therefore, or rather a Faggot for these foolish
Heretics, that will tie his Holiness to preach? What? is it fit his
sovereignty should forbear and forsake these supreme prerogatives, and stoop
down to so base a business as preaching is? No, no, Aquila non capit muscas.
Indeed the case was otherwise heretofore in former ages, but they are gone.
Preaching might beseem Gregory, or Leo the great, or their Predecessors, and
no marvel, for seeing then there were Emperors that would govern the world,
and Italy it self, and set peace between kingdoms, call general Councels,
keep the Pope within compass, and command him to his duty; What therefore had
the Popes to do but to Preach? But Haec aetas alios mores postulat: then the
Popes called and acknowledged the Emperors their Sovereign Lords, now they be
their servants, and if they please them well, their beloved white sons, and
shall have the honor to hold his stirrup, lead his horse, hold the basen, when
he washes, and bring up the first dish when his Holiness eats. Then
therefore they had time and leisure to preach; but now as we have showed, they
have so far better businesses to attend, and so far higher employments to
manage, that they have no leisure.

Non vacat exieuis rebus adesse Ioui. Again, these idle and adle-headed
Heretics that would tie the Pope to the Pulpit, never consider that every man
is to be disposed to that which he is fittest for, and which thriueth best in
his hands. Now do we not know, that Pope John the 22. who would needs be so
busy with preaching (which indeed he used more then many before him, and all
after him) has given a president to all his successors: for did not he fall
upon the rocks of strange opinions, little less then heresies in the judgment
of his own friends? And has not Occham the famous Franciscan Friar, written
an accusation against him, that not in one, but in many Sermons, he taught not
one or two, but many several (and some condemned) heresies? Such was the
success of his preaching, and so ill has preaching succeeded in the hands and
mouths of Popes. Whereas contrariwise when they go about the consecration of
Biships, coronation of Emperors, deposing of Heretic Kings, disposing of
their Kingdoms, granting dispensations, sending out Indulgences, receiving
appeals, answering Ambassadors, taking of homages, releasing of oaths,
dissoluing of leagues, intermedling in the affairs, and interposing in the
elections of Princes. In these, and such as these, which so well beseem the
Majesty of the Pope, he proceds and prospers, and hereby he has advanced and
magnified his seat, in the eyes of all his friends and favorers; whereas when
Pope John the 22. forgetting himself, and the honor and Majesty of his place,
would fall a preaching, he incurd at the least so strong a suspicion of
Heresy, as neither his Penitentiary Pelagius with all his tears, could wash
away: nor his successor Benedict with his interpretatiue Bull to that purpose
set out, could remove: nor Bellarmine and all his beloved friends with their
best wits and learning, can wipe off to this day; nor ever will whilst the
works of learned Ocham do live in the world. Is it not therefore an idle
conceit of these bawling heretics, that will have the Pope to preach, which
in these latter times of the world does so ill beseem them, and prospers so
badly in their hands?

And if they object, that Preaching is a principal part of divine service, and
of Gods worship: and therefore best of all beseems the Pope that is Gods vicar,
and nearest to him: Let them know busy fools as they be, that it is not
determined among the Schoolmen and Casuists, whether hearing a Sermon be at
all commanded, or rather but counseled and advised: so that herein they do
but show their own Ignorance. But the great learned Jesuit Azorius can teach
them, and beside him Molanus, that it may well be a counsel to hear a Sermon
on the holy day, but they are assured there is no commandment for it: so that
the doing of it may be a work of supererogation, but cannot be a duty of
necessity. But if it were allowed to these heretics, that it were a necessary
duty to make and hear Sermons, and a part of Gods worship; yet sure they
cannot be so ignorant as not to know, nor so profane as once to doubt, but
that the saying and seeing of a Mass is far before it. For thus do all the
best approved Schoolmen and Casuists teach with one voice, and do reprove the
elder Doctors, or doaters rather for their presumption in holding the contrary.
For Summa Angelica, and Summa Rosella do both teach, that where it falls out
(which these Heretics ought to know falls not often out in Popish Churches)
that on one day a Sermon and a Mass so come together, as both cannot be heard,
but the one must necessarily be omitted: in this case the Mass is to be left
and the Sermon preferred. And these sottish fellows seem to prove their
assertion out of the Canon Law, and out of Bernard, and out of Austine, (and
it is marvel they brought not Scripture for them also, as all these heretics,
and maintainers of new opinions use to do.) But let all these stoop, for a
Jesuit comes in place, let the Canon Law vanish like smoke, let the Doctors
go to the School again and learn, and let the Scripture, that dumb Judge,
stand aside in a corner, and let us hearken to the irrefragable, unanswerable,
sovereign, and superexcellent determination of the Jesuits, The men that were
borne to bless the world, to save it from sinking, to purge it of Heretical
books, and rid it of heretical Kings, to restore learning, and preserve the
truth, which without them had perished, to make plain and perfect the
Scriptures, which till their time lay neglected, to compose all controversies,
read all riddles, know all secrets, hear all confessions, and (to discover no
more then makes for their purpose) censure all questions, satisfy all
consciences, resolve all doubts; and in a word, to be the very Oracles of the
Christian world, as holy, as true, and as infallible as ever was that of
Delphos, or Jupiter Hamon. I say, let us hearken how those reverend Jesuits,
and for them all, how renoumed Azor, one of their most glorious Fathers, and
founders of that blessed company, handles this question.

It Is moved (says he) and made a question, if on one day a Mass and a Sermon
do so concur, as both cannot be heard, whether is to be omitted with less
loss and sin. The forenamed Doctors, and many other more (Dunses as they
be) do teach that the Mass must yield to the Sermon. And the good Jesuit
ingenuously confesses, which he does: not for that he holds Jesuits tied to
speak truth (who can speak nothing but truth, and whatsoever they speak, is
therefore truth because they speak it) but because the more and greater his
Adversaries be, the more glorious is the victory: Therefore he freely
confesses, that many of the Popish Doctors be of the same opinion; and that
they ground this their opinion upon the Decrees, and upon S. Bernard, and S.
Augustine. But what are all these to such sincere, learned, and iuditious men
as the Jesuits, even nothing at all when once the truth comes in question: for
then down go Doctors, Fathers, Councels, Scriptures, and all to make room
for the holy Catholic Romish Truth, out of the Jesuits holy mouths. In
which Catholic zeal, the noble Jesuit thus resolves the question.

But whatsoever (says he) these, or any of these, or all these, or any other
do think, It is to be said, (Mark ye dull Heretics, with what majesty a
Jesuit concludes against Canon Law, Schoolmen, and Fathers, and tremble when
you see what potent adversaries you have of them.) It is (says he) to be held
without control, That the Mass, which is to be heard by the Churches
commandment, is to be preferred before the hearing of the holy word of God.
And mark his reason whereby he proves it: for though it be no reason to
expect a reason from so great, so grave, so godly men as the Fathers of the
Society, who by their nature and constitution will not think, speak, nor do
any thing without a reason; yet is his Father-hood here pleased to give us a
reason: but mark it I say again, for it is as good, as honest and as religious
a reason, and as well-beseeming a Jesuit, as the opinion it self.

The Mass (says he) is to be preferred before the Sermon, and the Sermon is
to be omitted for the Mass, for that (says he) there is great difference
betwixt that that is due by Commandment, and that that is due by Counsel: for
that that is due by Commandment may not be omitted, nor can be, under pain of
mortal sin. But it is no sin to omit that that is due only by Counsel:
Now the Mass is commanded, Preaching is but counseled: to hear a Mass a man
is tied by virtue of the commandment, to hear a Sermon he is but counseled,
or advised: therefore it is apparent, that a man is bound to prefer the Mass
before a Sermon, and to omit or loose a Sermon for a Mass. And thus so
learnedly, so holily, so irrefragably is this question resolved, that none but
professed foes to the holy Romish Church, and open enemies to the Mass, and
aduancers of that dangerous book called the Scriptures, (and who therefore are
justly condemned for Heretics) can, or will, or dare gainesay it. And as for
those that durst hold the contrary, though they were none of them of these
vp-start Heretics, yet it is not fit that they pass without reproof, and
just censure for this their so gross ignorance, or so foul impiety, as to
perfer a Sermon before a Mass; and therefore says the Jesuit religiously and
learnedly, like himself:

If this be so, It will be here demanded, whether Angelus, and the rest that
hold this Detestable Error, that a Sermon is to be heard rather then a Mass,
be to be condemned as holders of a Timerariouse opinion. Some says he,
absolutely condemn it and them so to be: Others hold it to be a false
Opinion, but not Temerariouse: And thus they excuse them, and they gloss it
over with some shows and shadows of argument; as if it were a hard case for
the Church to tie a man, for the gazing of a mass, to loose so great a matter
as a Sermon. But this is idle (says the Jesuit) and therefore (for you shall
always see Jesuits take the better part) seeing they have no good reason for
their opinion, in my judgment the opinion is to be holden Temerariouse, and
they to be condemned to have spoken Temerariously, that is, rashly,
unadvisedly, and without judgment. So then these Heretics might see, if they
were not blind, that in the holy Roman Church, it is so firmly holden that a
Sermon is not so good, so holy, so necessary, as a Mass: That whoeuer holds
the contrary, be it Caluinist, or Schooleman, Father or Council, they are
subject to censure and punishment for it. And even Bernard and Augustine, may
be glad they had so good hap to be made Saints by that Roman Church; for
otherwise, for this their impious conceit, to prefer a Sermon before a Mass,
they had been sure, and that very worthily, to be condemned for Heretics:
But seeing the Church that cannot err, has vouchsafed to Canonize them for
Saints, she will therefore deal more mercifully with them then their impiety
deserves, and at the humble mediation of the charitable Jesuits, will only
pronounce them temerariouse, but not condemn them for Heretics.

If this then be clear, that by the resolved Doctrine and Definition of the
Roman Church, A Mass is the principal part, if not the whole worship of God;
and that only the Mass is strictly commanded, and hearing of Gods word
preached, is but conditionally advised; And that therefore a Mass is far
more excellent in it self more available with God, more profitable and
comfortable to the soul, then is the hearing of sermons: then who sees not but
if the Popes holiness prays but seldom or not at all; Yet do often and
continually say Mass, that then he has stopped the mouths of all heretics,
that like curres do bawle and bark against him, and call him and his great
Bishops Dumb Dogs that cannot bark: O silly fools, these Heretics, that
bring these words of the Prophet against his Holiness. For do they not know,
that when the Prophet complained of those dumb dogs, that could not bark,
there were then no Masses in the world: for if there had, he would have blamed
their negligence in them, rather then of preaching; and this I say by the
warrant and president of the Mariale, which says, that whereas Solomon writes
thus, The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous fly unto it, and
are helped; Solomon (says he) knew little of the Virgin Mary: for if he had,
he would have said, The name of our Lady is a strong Tower, the righteous fly
unto it, and are helped. And surely with as good right may I say, the Prophet
knew little of the dignity, virtue, and efficacy of the holy Mass, for if he
had, he would not have blamed them for not preaching, but for negligence in
saying Mass. But Solomon and Esaias are both to be pardoned, because of the
times they lived in; but as for these Heretics that live in these times, and
cannot but see the great virtue and high price that Masses are at, and how
beneficial they be to the Catholic Roman Church, and consequently how good
cause the Church has to magnify Masses above Preaching, they are without all
excuse, and their fault unpardonable. But though they be so mad to move it,
and so malicious to press it, that the Pope and all his Clergy ought rather
to preach then say Masses, yet he is too wise to hearken to it: nay though
sometime some of his own Catholic children are bewitched with this poison,
and are harping on this string, that preaching is the greater, and worthier of
the two, yet he has wit enough to discover, and power to suppress them in
time: therefore if any of them write so, he commands it to be razed out of
their books, that hereafter it may not testify against them: and if any be so
bold, to preach it, his holiness takes such order with them, as few dare
follow their example. Witness Friar Lobo, of whom we spoke before, whose
judgment was so just, and sentence so sharp by Pope Gregory's own holy
mouth, for that his impious presumption, in preferring a Sermon before a Mass,
and that also in Rome, where (like a fool that he was) he might have
remembered, that preaching has been out of season these 500 years: that from
that day we have not heard of any that durst attempt the like in Rome, and if
the like course had been taken in Germany, France, and England, these new
heresies had never spread as they do. For it is nothing but hearing Sermons, and
reading the Bible, that has bred and fed, and still feeds and disperseth those
heresies of the Lutherans and Caluinists, as daily and lamentable experience
lets us see and feel. For his Holiness knows full well, that if he could but
rid the world of the Bibles in the vulgar tongues, and pull down this talking
trade of Preaching, we should soon see these Heresies, and this new Gospel of
Luther and Calvin melt away, and come to nothing: for take away the means and
cause, and the effect will follow. And full well spoke a wise Cardinal to the
Pope, when in a private consultation there was complaint of the growing and
spreading of Lutheranisme, We may thank our selves (says he) and our own
sloth and carelessness for this, who let the Scriptures fly abroad, and become
so common: for we ought to have kept them (under color of Majesty, and to
procure them greater Generation) in the learned tongues, and laid them up in
safe and secret Libraries, so should neither they have been corrupted by
heretics and Jews, as they have been: nor they have corrupted and made so
many Heretics as they have done. A wise and worthy speech doubtless, and well
beseeming a Cardinal, and a full devout soul I warrant him was he of the
Romish Mother Church. And from that day forward has the Pope been more
careful in this point, and has set on work his darlings the Jesuits, who
have done him faithful service in this kind, as may appear to their great
honor, to al them that will loose a little time to read their books: for by
their books, their Sermons and their persuasions, they have so prevailed, that
where ever any of them do remain, or but lurk, you shall not find a Romish
Catholic, but he can learnedly prate against the Scriptures, (whereof he
heartily thanks his God he never read one book) and can tell you what a
dangerous book it is, and how many have been made Heretics by it; and by
this means their Disciples bogle at it, and avoid it, as snare, or a pit in
the way, or a rock in the sea.

Now if this be true, that the Scripture is so dangerous a book, and that
preaching must be out of that book, who sees not, that therefore in good
Popish reason, and Pope-holy religion, it follows, that it beseemes all men
to be wary, tender and dainty, even how they make or hear too many Sermons.
For if the Scripture be a dangerous book, surely preaching cannot but be a
dangerous exercise: in which regard appears the wisdom of the holy Romish
Church, who has ordained, there shall be Sermons daily in the Lent, in most
great Cities, and so by making them proper to Lent, she makes them seem to be
out of season all the year besides, and in most places never expected, never
thought of, till Lent come again, whereas contrariwise the holy and blessed
Mass is always in season, and by the strict order of the holy Roman Church,
is daily to be said without omission: nay, some days two or three, and every
day the more the better. So then sermons are but the Lent provision, but Masses
are the daily bread of the holy Roman Catholics.

And howsoever the holy fathers the Popes and his Cardinals do not trouble
their heads nor disturb the peoples minds with much preaching, yet they make
them a bountiful amends with the multitude of Masses wherein all good
Catholics know they do but as if a householder kept away course bread, and
gave his people store of fine Manchets for it: for what be sermons but as
course bread, but the Masses these be the fine Manchers, they be the dainty
feeding for the refined stomachs of all Romish Catholics: Therefore let these
bawling heretics know, that because the Popes Holiness saw the old Church
in former times surfetted of Sermons, and that every heretic brought
Scripture presently for his heresy, therefore in these latter and more prudent
times they have made a blessed exchange, and for poor homely vestments wodden
Chalices, and a golden Clergy, have given the people goodly rich Copes and
golden Chalices good store to make amends for their leaden Bishops and wodden
Priests, which we cannot deny but are plentiful in many Catholic countries.
For the Scripture in the vulgar tongues which thereby was made too common and
exposed to contempt, have given them the Latin Gospel in the Mass, which is
read so solemnly, so stately, and with such glorious ceremonies, that all the
people stand stricken with admiration and amazement, and are oftentimes edified
as much by it as he that reads it, because he that reads it oftentimes
understands it as well as they that hear it. And for that unreasonable much
preaching with which S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, S. Augustine, Origin, Ambrose,
Leo, Gregory, and other fathers, did consume their time, good simple plain
meaning men they were for those times, but full silly God wot if they be
compared with the holy Roman Father of these days) and with which they did
fill the peoples heads; they have given them the celestial food of the
blessed Mass, and having appointed preaching to the hard time of Lent (that so
both the body and soul may fast, feed hardly, and do penance together) and
having commended it to Princes Courts, and great Cities and Cathedral
Churches, and that so it might be used and respected as a state ceremony, they
made Masses common and vulgar commanding (for the holy Mother Roman Church, is
ever so gracious and merciful and such are the bowels of her bounty, as she
never takes any thing from her children, but she gives them a better) that the
people should have every day a Mass or two one for their breakfast, and
another or two or three for their dinner, and such dainty feeding being so
continual, will make them not find the want of such homely fare as preaching
is.

And to that end for the peoples better content and satisfaction, she has
holily and bountifully ordained, that not only in Kings Courts and great
places, but in every Church, every Chapel; nay at every altar in every
Church, shall be every day, a Sermon. A Sermon said I, oh forgive me holy
father, forgive me so foul an error, I should have said a Mass and not every
day only but sometimes more: In so much as in diverse great Churches there are
by the Popes bounty so many altars, that there be oftimes twenty, thirty,
forty, fifty, Masses of a day in one Church, as the people there do find to
their great edification; and travelers to their great admiration, who when
they see twenty or thirty, or more maiesticall Masses, like so many glorious
Maskes, all in one great Church, in one forenoone, in every i will, and every
corner one; No marvel if it astonish them, and make them say fie upon these
foolish, silly, poor, plain, heretics the Protestants. Who in steed of all
these (besides the ordinary divine service, which is also made so common with
them that every one can say it at home when they list) are feign to be content
with one silly Sermon, or one plain Communion: and hereupon it comes to pass
that many one, who trauells out of Protestant into Popish countries, though
they went away no great good Protestants, yet return again fine zealous
Popish Catholics, for the holy pictures, and goodly gilded Images, whereof
many are made so artificially, as they can smile and laugh and speak, by the
mighty power of the Pope and his Priests, and the gorgeous ceremonies, and the
pompous Vestments, and the stately processions, and the many maiesticall
Masses, and the glorious light of the tapers burning day and night in their
dark Churches are all strong and excellent well made cobwebs to catch such
flies in.

And that all this may have the more credit, his holiness has wisely
ordained, that howsoever great men as Bishops and Cardinals have little or no
time to preach and therefore, and for the good reasons aforesaid shall not be
tied to it, but at their pleasures, or at visitation or certain great days
(that so the sermon may come in as a third course it a feast, neither
certainly expected before it come, nor much regarded when its come) yet none
are so great, but that being Priests they are tied to the continual saying of
Mass whereeuer they be, and to that end he has appointed it (because the
Mass in a sacrifice, and no sacrifice can be without an altar) if there want
an altar consecrated, they shall have altars made of a little square stone
which they may carry about with them, This is called Altar portatile.
and shall serve at all occasions, and these little moveable altars by virtue
of the Popes blessings have as much virtue as the great standing altars, and
the cake consecrated, at these shall be as truly transubstantiated and made as
really the body and flesh of Christ as at the other.

And least that this God of the holy father, and his Priests making, should,
like the Heathen Gods in continuance of time come into contempt, or least that
his Maozim the Mass should become of less account by the common, continual
and vulgar use; Or because the generality of the Mass makers namely of the
Monks, Friars and secular Priests are held contemptible men: His Holiness
therefore (in whose breast all wisdom that is not from above, does reside and
dwell) has politikely and worthily ordained, that in all great feast days,
Coronations of Princes, Consecration of Bishops, Dedication of Churches,
translation of relikes, confirmation of leagues, Canonization of Saints: and in
all public meetings, royal assemblies, and even in General Counsels, the
chief of all, or one of the chief shall say the Mass; Nay often times
himself will vouchsafe to do it, kindly and thankefully giving some honor
to it that yields him so much profit, and fills his coffers with so many
millions of Crowns. And such is the devotion of his holiness, and so great
his neglect of all the matters of this world (which he with all his heart as
willingly treds under his feet, as his predecessor Alexander trod upon the
neck of great Frederick the Emperor) that in the morning, when other great
men and Princes of the world are making them ready for their recreations, then
is his holiness full devoutly fitting himself to say Mass. And this he does
not sometime and seldom; But continually every morning, as not only his
books tell us, but as trauellors also testify. Some whereof have had the
happiness and honor to be present at the Popes morning Mass: Oh happy men
to receive so high and invaluable a reward for their travel and cost. For what
though they went two thousand miles, and spent twice two thousand pounds, what
is that in comparison of this honor, these miles may be counted, and these
pounds numbered. But the benefits they shall receive by hearing the Pope say
Mass are without number, I can name but one that is this. He that hears the
Pope say Mass, escapes hell as he can, but I dare warrant him he shall never
come in Purgatory. Are not they therefore to be commended for their devotion,
and held for wise men in their countries, when they return, that willingly be
at the cost and labor to travel to Rome to be partaker of so blessed a
Breakfast? Or rather were it not good that they might stay in Rome, and never
be suffered to return that so they might never be deprived of that
blessedness, and in steed of the homely fare in their countries be fed with
the excellent Manna of the Popes Masses: As for the Hugenets and Heretics they
are well worthy to want it seeing they hold it not worth their labor, and
therefore for their penance, let them be enjoined to read every day two
Chapters of that hard, harsh and homely book called the Bible, and to have
three Sermons a week: and with those Garlike and Onions, let these base
stomakes be contented, seeing they know not, nor care not for the dainty and
costly Manna of the Masses of the Romish Catholic Church.

But what then (will these babbling Heretics say) and does the Pope never
preach at all? What matter if he do not, seeing he every day says Mass,
which every sage Catholic knows is far better, for what tho Christ being
upon earth and in his glorified body after his resurrection calling together
his Apostle, gave them not only commission but commandment also to go and
teach all Nations, and preach to every Creature: Yet the holy Mother Church of
Rome knows that he spoke it, as fir for those times, but he left his spirit
to his Vikar, who should supply and put down what he did not. And therefore
whereas he forgot to bid his Apostles say Masses, the Pope like a good Vikar
adds what he forgets, and commands all his Priests that howsoever they preach
now and then, when they please; Yet that they miss not to say Masses daily,
whilst they live: and for the better satisfaction of their Consciences he has
by his power concluded; (which Christ never did, nor it seems could do) that
preaching is but a Counsel, and Masse-saying a commandment, and therefore
Masses be necessary, and preaching but voluntary. If therefore the Popes
Holiness never busy himself with the pulpit and preaching, that's no great
matter as long as he every day devoutly sings his Mass and offers up the
unbloody sacrifice, which is a sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of quick
and dead, as sure as he is the Vikar of Christ.

But let them stop their mouths and hold their babbling for howsoever
Preaching is a mere voluntary action, and a work of superogation, and the
least and last matter of twenty that belongs to a Mass, and the least and
basest of a thousand that his Holiness has to do: Yet let these Heretics
know his holiness does not forswear all preaching, for howsoever upon those
common occasions of calling, converting or saving souls, he cannot find time
to preach, but leaves that to such of his Friars or Priests, as have such
tender and precise consciences as to think that preaching only, ordinarily
begets faith: yet upon other great and solemn occasions, as when some Saint is
to be canonized, at the mediation of some great Prince (who paies roially for
it, and like a Prince) Or when some great King comes home from heresy, and
honors himself and makes himself so happy, as to kiss his holy foot and be
reconciled, and pay a round ransom for his, former rebellion as Henry the
fourth did. Or when some such blessed work is attempted and archiued as was
that Massacre at Paris, and in the most great Cities of France (where the
Heretics were killed up like Rats or mad Dogs, where ever they could be
caught, and so were sent to hell by heaps) Or when some young nouice, and brave
spirit, bred and brought up in the Jesuits school, and that has past and
practiced all their spiritual exercises, has attained to that high perfection
as to refuse nothing that is enjoined him, and in that holy obedience, has
stabbed some Heretic, or killed some great King, that would not stoop to the
Vikar of Christ (as the Iacobine killed Henry the third, and the young Jesuit
had killed Henry the fourth, but for a tooth, oh cursed tooth that hindered the
Jesuits from that honor, and made them leave it for that base Friar and
rascal Rauilliacke) When such blessed occasions, such high and holy occasions
as these fall out (For these are occasions beseeming his Holiness) then he
will vouchsafe to grace the pulpit, and in his own person take pains to make
a Sermon, sometime blessing his gods of silver and gold, and thanking his great
god Dagon, sometime praising the Inuenters, Plotters and Prosecutors, but
especially the actors of such noble facts, and stirring up others to the
admiration and imitation of them. And if the Heretics be so mad to deny
this, that holy and zealous Sermon made by Sixtus V. upon the death of Henry
the third, and in praise of that happy Friar that stabbed him with that holy and
See the Sermon it self set out in lattin and English by F. Warmington the
Priest.
hallowed knife, shall prove and testify it for ever to their shame, and his
everlasting honor: And its not to be doubted, but if the Powder Plot in
England had been so happy to have taken effect. His holiness would have been
as willing to have preached himself for joy, and made a Sermon of
thankfulness for the good success of so great and glorious a work, as his
successors must be serious and busy and prudent in conceiling it from the
ages to come, seeing it succeeded ceeded not, or in diuerting it from the
Catholics to Puritans or other enemies. Or at least in denying it, and telling
the world that it was but an invention, and a trick of the State put upon the
poor Papists to make them odious. And herein appears the malice of these
Heretics that care not how they sclander the Popes holiness, saying, he never
has care, nor Conscience to preach, when its most certain, never Huguenot in
France more desired to go to a Sermon, nor a Puritan in England to a Faft then
his Holiness did to have preached upon that occasion, if he could but once
have heard the joyful news from England that the blow had been given: But no
matter what these blind and malicious Heretics say or think, let it suffice
God his heart, how earnestly he desired it, and will doubtless reward him
accordingly, and all others that looked and longed for that joyful day.

And thus I hope we have given a sufficient Apology for his Holiness against
these curious and carping Heretics. will you have Masses? His Holiness
misseth not a morning, but has a Mass to his breakefast, will the Heretics
have preaching? his Holiness preaches also, when there falls out an occasion
that is worthy of his pains.

Quae est Caput totius Orbis: And is the Church of Saint John Lateran the
principal and head of all Churches vrbis and Orbis, not of Rome alone but of
the whole world: But why is not Saint Peter's the head Church, seeing he was
the head of the Apostles, and the Pope is his successor and by being his
successor is head of the Church: If Peter be head of the Apostles, and his
successor head of all men, why then is not his Church head of all Churches?
Thus do idle Heretics carpe and cavil. But all good Catholics know that
seeing Pope Gregory the eleventh almost 300 years ago established it, and
long after him Pius the fourth, and after him Pius the fifth, by several and
solemn Bulls confirmed it; therefore, no devout Catholics will once call it
into question. Indeed some in old time were so curious as to make doubt of it,
but Gregory therefore sends out his Bull and stops their mouths: And about the
time of the Counsel of Trent the Benedictiue Monks were so proud and pompous,
as to stand upon points with the Prebendaries or Chanons Regular of this Church
of the Lateraene, and challenge place and precedence before them in the Counsel,
(for many such high points and mighty Church matters were debated in that
Counsel) But what got they? Pius the fourth then Pope called the matter to his
own hearing, (shaming much that the world, and Heretics especially should see
two of his best sons together by the ears which of them should be the
greatest,) and after long and deliberate hearing, judges the matter for this
Church, and imposes perpetual silence to the Friars in this point: Yet
afterward the Prebendaries or Priests of Saint Peter's in the Vaticane, hoping
that these constitutions concluded not them, out of their holy humility they
also strove with the Laterane Clergy for precedence. So that Pius Quintus was
feign to take the matter upon hirs, and by a solemn and irreuocable decree,
pronounced for the Laterane Church.

Yet let not the devout Catholic think that his holiness neglects his
Church of Saint Peter. For he honors it with his presence living and dead,
more then any other, he keeps the blessed Iubile in it, and therefore he
adornes it most gloriously, and he is so careful of it, that for the very
repair and fabric of that one Church, he has scraped up out of
Christendom more then five hundredth thousand pounds sterling; and yet most
wisely he keeps it unfinished, that so it may yet bring in more, for as Saint
Peter being a fisherman, yet catched but few fishes, but by the help of Christ
caught many; So even Saint Peter's Church by the help of his holiness, brings
good store of fish to his Net, and those as well great as small: So true a
fisherman is Saint Peter's successor and so far more skillful then Peter was,
that he has made the very name of Sant Peter's Church bring him ten thousand
times more gold and silver then Peter himself got either by his fishing, or
his preaching all his life long. Indeed Peter at one Sermon caught three
thousand souls, and if any Lutheran ask when the Pope will do so, answer
them (like Heretics as they be) that Peter was made a fisher of men, and
therefore had nothing else to do, but to labor to win souls: But Peter's
successors have other kind of employment, they have another kind of fishing,
and other kind of fishes to fish for, they have other, and higher, and better
matters then winning of souls to look to. For if they for these last thousand
years had found themselves nothing else to do, but to preach and win
souls, they had never brought it to this pass, to give and take away
Kingdoms and Empires, to wear a triple Crown, to be carried on men's
shoulders to have Emperors hold his stirrup, power his water, and bring up his
first dish, and King to serve him at dinner, and many glorious matters more,
whereof seely Saint Peter never once dreamed, and little thought he (good man)
when he trudged up and down and preached, that his successors could ever have
brought it to so fair a pass. But such was the simplicity of those, and such
is the wisdom of these days, that where Saint Peter did take nothing but
souls, now the very name of his Church shall bring in as much gold and silver
as will build good Churches: and as Peter at one Sermon took three thousand
souls, the Pope in holy imitation of him sends out his Legates into several
nations, whereof one, in one City, by reading and casting abroad one Bull of
Indulgence from his holiness shall catch up three thousand, and three thousand
Crowns at a clappe, and all for the repayring of Saint Peter's Church. And what
though some, even Catholics are so curious as to cavil and say that not the
tenth penny is bestowed on the Church, nay what if not the hundredth part? must
that offend a good Catholic? As though the Pope has not many other as good
occasions as that to bestow it upon: Has not he occasion to send Royal
Embassages, and to reward Ambassadors that come to him. Has he not his
offices, his Guarde, his Garrisons to pay: to build his Galleys, to uphold his
armies, to maintain his Minions, to advance his Kindred, can these and many
more as holy and good as these be done with nothing? And therefore very
requisite that his Holiness have goodly Lands, Dominions, Rents and revenues,
and the rather because he takes it not as his own, but as Saint Peter's
patrimony and borrowes it from him, as the money that his officers sweep up
out of Christendom, he most honestly says, is not for himself, but for the
building and repairing of Saint Peter's Church.

The Indulgences and Relics of the seven Churches in Rome.
Textus Latinus ex manuscripto ad verbum descriptum.
HAE sunt Reliquiae and Indulgentiae septem a Ecclesiarum principalium vrbis
Romanae pro maiori part, b necnon aliquarum aliarum Ecclesiarum Parochialium
and Capellarum.

Sanctus Siluester scribit in sua Canonica, c quod Romae fuerunt mill
quingentaequinque Ecclesiae quarum mayor pars nunc destructa est. d Et fuerunt
ibidem quadringenta sexaginta septem Ecclesiae Parochiales priuilegiatae
gratiae and sanctitate, and dicuntur Regales, quia a summis Pontificibus and
Imperatoribus sunt constructae. In quarum summis altaribus solus Papa vel cui
ipse licentiam dederit vel concesserit licite potest celelebrare. c Inter istas
Ecclesias sunt septem priuilegiatae maiori graria sanctitate and dignitate and
magis omnium regales: Inquas prima and principalis dicitur Ecclesia sancti
Iohannis in Laterano quae est caput totius orbis. f Item Ecclesia sancti
Iohannis est dedicata in honor sancti Saluatoris, and sanctoru^ Iohannis
Baptiste and Euangelistae. Et sunt ibidem quotidie xlviii. anni indulgentiarum
and tot carenae and tertie partis omnium peccatorum remissio. Item Papa
Siluester and Papa Gregorius qui eandem Ecclesiam consecrauerunt dederunt tot
indulgentias quot nemo numerare potest nisi solus Deus testante Papa Bonifacio
qui dicit quod si homines scirent indulgencias Ecclesie sancti Iohannis quot
essent, non transirent ad sanctum Sepulchrum in Jerusalem vltra mare vbi
absolvuntur a poena and culpa: nam sic etiam absoluuntur in Ecclesia sancti
Iohannis predicta. Item dicit sanctus Bonifacius, qui deuote venit ad orandum
in die consecrationis Saluatoris qui visibiliter apparuit omni populo Romano,
cuius dies est nona die mensis Nouembris, and est ibi remissio omnium
peccatorum Constantino Imperatore supplicante, postquam Constantinus Imperator
a lepra mundatus fuit per sacri baptismatis susceptionem dixit beato Siluestro
Papae pater sancte domum meam in Ecclesiam ordinaui, infunde in Ecclesiam tuam
largam benedictionem omnibus venientibus ad eam. Respondens sanctus Siluester
dixit; Dominus Jesus Christus, qui te per suam misericordiam sanauit, and
mundauit; and purificet omnes venientes sine peccato mortali ad locum istum
quocunque tempore Anni ab eorum peccatis. Et nos authoritate beatorum Petri and
Pauli, atque nostra, remittimus and concedimus eis remissinem omnium peccatorum.

Item sanctus Gregorius qui hanc Ecclesia^ consecrauit reparata^ post
demolitione^ per hereticos, confirmauit indulge^tias predictas positas per
beatum Siluestrum.

Item, Bonifacius Papa dixit; indulgentias Ecclesiae Lateranensis nullus
numerare potest ego tamen omnes confirmo.

The same in English.
THese be These be they that then were: namely some 300 years ago; since then
little has been altered but the better way: for if some have been taken away,
or spent, or lost, many more have been conuaied into their rooms, to the
comfortable upholding of the Roman faith, as he may see who will read
Onuphrius and Villamont of this matter.
for the most part the Relics and Indulgences of the seven principal
Churches of the City of Rome: as also of diverse other principal parish
Churches and Chapels of the same City.

Saint Siluester in his Canonical, writes that in Rome there were a thousand
five hundred and five Churches, which for the more part are now defaced. And
there were in the same City fourehundred sixty and seven parish Churches,
privileged with grace Lo, is not Rome a holy City, and is not she to be
called The Holy Mother Church, where the very Churches have grace and
holiness? The religion of the Protestants can give grace but to men, but the
Catholic Religion even to Churches, nay she has holy bones, holy stones,
and holy rags, and holy hair, and holy swords, and holy water, and holy
earth, and holy milk, and all things in a word as holy as herself. Therefore
may not the Caluinists be ashamed to say, that she is not the holy Church?
and holiness: and these are called Churches Royal, because they were built
by the Popes or by Emperors. In the high Altars of these Churches no man can
Lawfully: By what law say the Caluinists? Not Gods certainly: for if God
command to say a Mass, the Mass is not only lawful, but a good action: they
therefore mean their own law, and they do well to confess that their Mass
stands by virtue of their own Law. Thus they prate: but alas for these idle
heretics! as though Gods law and the Popes law were not all one: yes
assuredly, as sure as the Pope is Gods vicar: only there is one difference,
that where Gods law is defective, the Popes law supplies it, and where it is
imperfect the Popes law adds perfection to it: therefore though the Mass stand
by the Popes law, yet stands it surely and safely enough.
lawfully celebrate or say Mass, but only the Pope himself, or he to whom
the Pope gives or grants license in that behalf. Amongst all these Churches
there be seven Now there be 7. but in the old Prouincial, which I have seen
manuscript in a far more ancient copy, there were but five: but the Pope
adds and alters at his pleasure, and as he sees it for his profit: and good
reason, for he is Christ's vicar, and may do that Christ left undone.
that be privileged with more holiness and greater grace and dignity, and be
more royal then all the rest: of which seven the first and principal is
called the Church of Saint John the Laterane which is the head of all the
world. The first principal Church in ROME is the Church of Saint John in the
Laterane.
Also this Church of St John is dedicated in the honor of St Savior, and of
St John the Baptist, and St John the Evangelist. In this Church of St John
Laterane, there be daily and every day eight and forty years Every day 48
years. It is in a year more the^ thirty thousand years. Oh how bountiful
the Pope is to all his good children.
of pardon, and as many Quarrantens, together with the remission of the third
part of all a man's sins. Remission of the third part: but what will that help
a man seeing one will condemn him? Again, see what a Vicar Christ has, who
can remit a third part, and keep two thirds vnremitted for another occasion,
Christ did never so, but for gave all or none. Thus prate the Heretics: but
let all good Catholics only regard what the Church says, no matter what
Christ said or did.
And further Pope Siluester, and Pope Gregory, who consecrated the same Church,
gave and granted thereunto so many Indulgences, as none can number but God
alone, as witnesses Pope Boniface, who says, that if men knew the Indulgences
belonging the Church of S. John, and how many they were, they would never go
so far beyond the sea, as to the holy sepulcher in Jerusalem, All men may
believe there be as many Indulgences in the one place as in the other, as it
is very true that a blind man sees as well at midnight as, at noonday.
but would spare so great a labor: for say that they be there absolved a poena
and culpa (both from the punishment, yea and from the guilt and sin also) even
so are they likewise in the Church of S. John aforesaid. Likewise the same S.
Boniface says, that he coming devoutly to the said Church to pray, upon the
day of the consecration of S. Savior, our Savior appeared Hueguenots and
heretics think it a great matter that a Saint or an Angel should appear to
a a man or a woman, but here they may see that is no great matter in the
Catholic Roman Church, when at one time, not an Angel nor a Saint, but
Christ himself appears, and that not audibly, but visibly; and that not to
the Pope, or a few, but to all the people of Rome. No marvel surely, though
that be a holy City, where Revelations are so common. And let no devout
Catholic doubt of this: for it is as certain and true as that the host
bleedes when it is pricked, or that a woman carried home an Host to charm
withal; and when she could not work her feat by it, threw it into the fire,
but the Host spoke to her, and said, Why will thou burn me? and leapt again
out of the fire into her lap. Unbelieving Heretics will laugh at these, but
good Catholics may as safely believe the one as the other.
visibly to all the people of Rome. And this day was the 9 day of the month of
November: and there is there upon that day remission of all sins, which was
obtained at the supplication of Constantine the Emperor. For (says he) after
that Constantine the Emperor was healed of his leprosy, by receiving holy
Baptism, he said to S. Siluester the Pope, holy Father, I have ordained or
consecrated my own house to be a Church, thou therefore infuse and power upon
this Church thy plentiful blessings, for all that shall repair and come unto
it. Hereunto S. Siluester answering, said, our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his
own mercy has healed thee, and cleansed thee from thy leprosy; cleanse and
purify from all their sins all that come to this place without mortal sin
This is most undoubtedly true, that whosoever comes to that Church, without
mortal sin, shall obtain all these Indulgences: and the very Caluinists and
Lutherans will not for shame deny this. But if they be so curious as to reply
and say, that none can come without mortal sin, and therefore by this grant
none at all shall get any good, let them go like busy heretics as they are:
for being Heretics they are not worthy to be censured but by fire and faggot.
at what time of the year so ever they come to it. And we by the authority of
S. Peter and S. Paul, and our own, do remit and pardon them, and do grant unto
them remission of all their sins.

Likewise S. Gregory, who also consecrated this said Church after it was
repaired, having been defaced by Heretics, confirmed all the aforesaid
Indulgences formerly founded by S. Siluester.

Moreover, Boniface the Pope once said, The Indulgences that are to be had in
the Church of Laterane no man can number, Here again the heretics will laugh
and say, that it is most true, they that are not at all cannot be numbered, as
no man can number or count the gold in a beggars purse, because there is none.
But these show themselves bold heretics indeed, that dare suppose holy Pope
Boniface, especially the 8. would aequiuocate.
yet I confirm them every one.

CHAP. 2.
Reliquiae eiusdem Ecclesiae.
IN illa Ecclesia est quaedam Capella, quae vocatur Sacristia, ibi est Altar
sancti Ioha^nis quod habuit in Deserto and ibi tabula super quam cenauit
Christus cum suis discipulis in cena Domini.

Ibidem est testamentum vetus, scilieet, virga Moysi et archa foederis. Ista
omnia apportauerunt Titus and Vespasianus de Jerusalem cum quatuor columnis
aeris, quae stant circa summum Altar, vbi sunt capita beatorum Apostolorum
Petri and Pauli. Et quando ista capita monstrantur tunc sunt ibi tot
indulgentiae quot sunt ad sanctum Petrum in ostentione Veronicae.

Item imago Domini quae depicta est in pariete non per manus hominum, sed
Diuino opere, coram omni populo Romano apparuit quinto Idus Nouembris. Item
Candelae aureae quae fuerunt in priori tabernaculo.

Item, mensa in quae lex est scripta digito Dei.

Item, de quinque panibus ordeaceis and duobus piscibus ex quibus saturati
fuerunt quinque millia hominum.

Item, tunica inconsutilis, quam fecit Maria virgo matter Domini nostri Jesus
Christi.

Item est ibi vestimentum purpureum quod Maria sibi fecit.

Item est ibi de sanguine and aqua fluente de latere Chricit.

Item de loco ascenfionis domini in coelum.

Item de crinibus and sanguine beati Iohannis Baptistae.

Item de puluere and cinere corporis eius combusti.

Item cilicium eius quod fuit de pellibus Camelorum.

Item tunica sancti Iohannis cum qua duos mortuos resuseitauit.

Item de Manna sepulturae Iohannis Baptistae, quod fuit inuentum in sepultura
sua magna pulla plena.

Item Imago Domini nostri Jesus Christi quam fecit Nichodemus sicut Iudei
Christum percusserunt.

Item ibi est linteum cum quo Christus pedes suorum Discipulorum tersit in
coena Domini.

Item praeputium Domini Jesus Christi quod sibi abscissum fuerat in
Circumcisione Domini.

Item caput Zaechariae Prophetae, and caput sancti Pancracij de quo sanguis
emanauit ad tres dies quum Ecclesia Lateranensis combusta fuit.

Item stapula sancti Laurentij.

Item vna Capsa plena reliquijs Mariae Magdalenae.

Item, sudarum Christi.

Item Cyphus ex quo sanctus Iohanne bibit venenum.

Item Camisia quam beata Maria virgo fecerat mhristo.

Item pannus ille quem beata Maria dedit filio suo pendente in cruce circa
femur.

Item magna pars de cruce Domint.

Item duo dentes de sancto Petro.

Item in eadem Ecclesia est vna Capella quae vocatur ad sancta sanctorum: in
quam mulieres non intrant, and vbi est vna facies saluatoris quando fuit
quatuor december annorum.

Et ibi est omnibus diebus remissio omnium peccatorum a poena and a culpa and
circa eandem Capellam est vnus assensus triginta trium graduum quoties homo
aliquis illos devote ascenderit de quolibet gradu habet mill annos
Indulgentiaru^, qui gradus apportati sunt de Jerusalem, quos etiam gradus Jesus
ascendit ad Pilatum presidem.

Item Cathena cum qua venit sanctus Johannes de Epheso Romam and forpices cum
quibus fuit tonsus de mandato Domitiani.

Item velum quod portauit beata Maria in capite.

Item de arundine cum quo percusserunt Christum in domo Pilati.

Item tabula plena de reliquijs Martirum, Confessorum, atque virginum, and
magna pars verae crucis.

Item, de vestimentis, lacte, capillis beatae Mariae virginis.

Item, de capillis sancti Iohannis baptistae.

Item, iuxta lauaecrum omni die est remissio omnium peccatorum in quem locum
non intrant mulieres.

Item, in Aula domini Papae sunt tria ostia and cuilibet intro eunti per vnum,
and exeunti per aliud, concedu^tur xliiij anni indulgentiae, and tot carenae.
Et in part orientali Ecclesiae capitalis sunt tria ostia quae portata fuerunt
de Jerusalem.

CHAP. 2. Of the Relics in the said Church of Laterane.
IN this Church of the Laterane there is a certain Chapel which is called
the Sacrist, or the Vestry: in it there is S. John's Altar Here the Heretics
may see how ancient Altars be, for as sure as this is true, Altars be as old
as since S. John Baptist. Now whether this be that very Altar or no, and
whether those vnder-named, be not the very Table that Christ supped at, and
Moses his rod, and the right Arc of the covenant, Heretics will make
question, but good Catholics will as firmly believe it and more, then they
will that the book of the Revelation is Canonical Scripture.
even that very Altar which he had in the Wilderness. And there is also that
very Table upon which Christ supped with his Disciples at his last supper.

In the same place is the old Testament, to wit, Moses his rod, and the Arc of
the Covenant. All these did Titus and Vespatian bring thither from Jerusalem,
together with those 4 great brazen pillars which now stand about the high
Altar, within which Altar are the heads of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.
And when these heads be showed unto the people, then there are as many
Indulgences at that Church as there be at S. Peter's Church True, as many in
the one place, as in the other.
at the showing of Veronica. He means a picture of Christ, which they say he
gave to a woman called Veronica, in that handkercher which she gave Christ to
wipe his face withal.


Also there is the Image or picture of our Lord, which was painted upon the
wall, not with man's hands, but by the Divine work of God, before all the
people of Rome. Here is a picture that is worth speaking of, which God himself
painted. If the heretic Caluenists did believe that God made this Picture,
they would not be so earnest against Images. But they (poor souls) think
that some of the cunning Clergy of Rome made it secretly in the night, or some
way else conueighed it thither. And thus they wilfully cast away themselves, as
though the holy Mother Church of Rome would say this if it were not true.
And this Image thus appeared upon the 5. day of the Ides of November. Also
there are the golden Candlestickes that were in the first Tabernacle of the old
Testament.

Also the Table wherein the Law was written with the finger of God. The
Heretics also will not believe that these be the true Tables wherein the Law
was written, because the Jews that are in Rome in great abundance would by one
means or other have got them away, though it had cost them their lives: but no
matter what Jews or Heretics say, as long as the Holy Mother Church tells us
these be they.


Also some of the 5 barley Loaves and two Fishes, with which five thousand men
were fed by Christ.

Also the coat without seame which Mary the virgin and mother of our Lord made
for Jesus her son.

And there is also the purple garment that Mary made for her self.

Also there is some of the blood and water that flowed out of CHRIST'S side.

Also some of the ground where Christ stood when he ascended into Heaven.

Also some of the hair and of the blood of S. John Baptist.

And some of the dust and ashes of his body when it was burnt.

And the haire-cloath which he ware, being of Camels skins.

There is also the Coat of S. John the Evangelist, with which he raised up
two dead men to life.

And there is some of the Manna of S. John Baptist his Sepulcher, which was
found in his grave even a great pot full.

Also, there is an Image of our Lord Jesus Christ, which Nichodemus made as the
Jews were a beating him. A very fit time to take a man's picture when one is
beating him. But it seems Nichodemus was a very cunning painter.


Likewise, there is that very linen cloth or towell with which Christ wiped
his Disciples feet (1) This fore-kin was missing many years, but it was found
again (says Onuphrius) such good hap has the holy Church of Rome, that if
any relics be stolen or lost, they are found again in a short time, some are
so bold to say, that others are put in their rooms, but they prate like
Heretics.
at his last supper.

There is also the foreskinne of Jesus which was cut from him in his
circumcision. (17)

Furthermore there is the head of Zacharias the Prophet, and of S. Pancrase,
out of which blood did stream forth for 3 days space when the Church of
Laterane was burnt.

Also there are the breeches of S. Laurence. Was it not a strange thing, that
when S. Laurence was broyled to death on the grid-iron, the fire that burnt his
flesh and bones; would not touch his breeches. The Catholic Roman Church is
full of these miracles, let the Caluinists match them if they can.


Also, there is a Casket full of the Relics of Mary Magdalen.

Also Christ's hand-kercher.

Also the Cup out of which S. John drunk the poison.

Also the shirt which the blessed virgin Mary made for Jesus.

Also that linen cloth which the blessed virgin gave unto Jesus, about his
thigh, as he hung on the cross.

There is also a great deal of the cross it self our Lord died on.

Also two of Saint Peter's teeth.

Moreover in the same Church there is another Chapel, which is called the
sancta sanctorum, or holy of holiest, whereinto women may not enter. Not on the
day time by any means least they should pollute it, but is not so on the night.
In it is a picture of our Savior, that was taken when he was fourteen
years old.

And in that Chapel there is daily and every day remission of all sins. If
there be remission of all sins there, why are women excluded? because they
have no sin? or because they need no remission, or they must not have remission
so lightly as men? Let every good Catholic ask his Confessor this question.
both a poena and culpae, from the punishment and the sin also. Not far
from the same Chapel there is an ascent of three and thirty steps, and how
often soever any man shall devoutly ascend up that ladder, for every step he has
a thousand years of pardon: so then the going up of these steps procures to a
man three and thirty thousand years of pardon: oh what a bountiful Lady the
holy Mother Church of Rome is!
these steps were brought from Jerusalem, and be those very steps which
Christ ascended when he went up before Pilate the President, to his judgment.

Also there is the chain with which S. John was bound when he came from
Ephesus to Rome, and the sheares with which he was polled at the commandment
of Domitian. There be the sheares that polled him, but where is his hair?
surely they were too blame to leave the hair, that were so careful to
preserve the sheares, especially seeing they have the hair of other Saints.


Also the virgin Mary's veil with which she used to cover her head.

And some of the Reed with which they smot Jesus in Pilats house.

And a Table full of the relics of Martyrs, Confessors and virgins: and a
great quantity of the true Cross. The Cross on which Christ died, which
Simon once bore, is multiplied by miracle. For an hundred years ago, Erasmus
wrote, the greatest ship in the world could not carry the pieces of it, that are
kept, showed, and worshipped in the holy Churches Roman, let the Heretics
show such a miracle if they can.


And of the apparel, milk and hair of blessed Mary the virgin.

And of the hair of Saint John Baptist.

Moreover, in the place where the Font is, there is every day remission of all
sins to be had. But as for women, they may not enter into that place. Poor
women of Rome, what have you done, that you still may not come where remission
of all sins is to be had?


Also in the Hall of our Lord the Pope, there be three doors, and to every
one that enters in at one door, and goes out at another Here is an easy piece
of penance indeed: he that will not go in at onedoor, and out at another for
44 years of pardon, surely he is unworthy of them: so what an easy, sweet,
and comfortable religion the Catholic Romish? what can be less required of a
man then this: he will not do this will do nothing.
are granted four and forty years of pardon, and as many quarantanes. And in
the East side of the principal Church of Laterane, there be 3 doors which
were brought thither from Jerusalem.

CHAP. 3.
De Reliquijs Ecclesiae Sancti Petri.
SCiendum quod in vrbe Romana iacent octo copora sanctorum Apostolorum ab
invicem separata.

Primo in Ecclesia Sancti Petri est medietas sancti Pauli, and medietas sancti
Petri, quorum corpora fuerunt inuenta in vno tumulo, and dubitatio erat quae
erant ossa sancti Petri, and quae erant ossa sancti Pauli, ideo ponderauerunt
dicta ossa in duas parts aequales mittentes medietatem vnam in Ecclesiam
sancti Petri, alteram in Ecclesiam sancti Pauli, sub maioribus altaribus
dictarum Ecclesiaru^.

In Ecclesia sancti Petri iacent corpora sanctorum Apostolorum Simonis, Iudae,
sa^cti Gregorij Papae, Chrysostomi Doctoris sanctorum Martyrum Processi and
Martiniani Sanctae Petronillae virginis, and aliorum sanctorum Martirum, quae
numerari non possunt: and ibi est caput sancti Lucae Euangelistae.

CHAP. 3. Of the Church of S. Peter, The second principal Church, S. Peter's in
the Vaticane.
and first of the Relics in that Church.
IT is to be known, that in the City of Rome there lie the bodies of eight of
the Apostles Is not therefore the Church of Rome worthiliy called, The
Apostolical Seat, who has still 8 of the Apostles lying as before she had 2
of them living there. Heretics doubt of both, but certainly one is as true as
the other.
severed one from another.

And first of all, in the Church of Saint Peter, there is the half of Saint
Paul, and the half of S. Peter, whose bodies were found together in one grave:
and for that it was doubted, whether was S. Peter's, and whether S. Paul's bones,
therefore they weighed the said bones, and by weight divided them into two
equal parts See how equally and justly the holy mother Church of Rome deals
in all her actions: heretics babble and say, that she loves to divide
kingdoms and principalities of another fashion. They may say what they will,
but here it is plain, that when it comes to a question about dead bones, there
was never a more equal division then here she made.
and sent the one half of the whole to the Church of Saint oeeter, and the
other to S. Paul's, and laid them under the high Altars of the said Churches.

In the same Church of S. Peter lie the bodies of the holy Apostles Simon and
Jude, and of S. Gregory the Pope, and of Chrysostom the Doctor, and of the
Martyrs, S. Processus and Martinian, and of S. Petronell the virgin, and of
other holy Martyrs, so many as cannot be numbered: and there is also the head
of Saint Luke the Evangelist.

CHAP. 4
Istae sunt Indulgentiae Ecclesiae suncti Petri.
ITem, anno Domini millesimo tricentesimo septuagesimo primo, Papa Siluester
assignauit in Canonica sua quod in omni Ecclesia parochiali Cathedrali vrbis
Romanae, scilicet, ad Ecclesiam beati Petri Apostoli, and ad Ecclesiam beati
Pauli, ad Ecclesiam beati Iohannis in Laterano, and ad Ecclesiam beatae Mariae
mayor is, vnicuique introeunti in quamcunque praedicatarum sanctarum
Ecclestarum quandocunque, quotiescunque, and quocunque tempore anni de iunctis
penitentijs xlvij annos, and tot carenas Indulgentias, and terciae partis
omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item, ibi est quidam ascensus viginti nonem graduum quotiens deuote ascenderit
vel descenderit sine peccato mortali, totiens sibi relaxantur de quolibet gradu
septem anni indulgentiarum a Papae Alexandro depenitentijs Iniunctis.

Item in dicta Ecsia sunt septem (parce precor Prisciane) centum and quinque
altaria; quotiens aliquis homo illa visitauerit deuote tociens sibi conceduntur
de quolibet altari septem anni Indulgen: Et in quolibet altari quando
celebratur eius festum sunt ibi xviii anni Indulgent. Et tot carenae. Et
tertiae partis omniu^ peccatoru^ remissio.

Et ex istis altaribus sunt septem altaria pra alijs priuilegiata maiori
gratia, sanctitate, and dignitate.

In prime altari est sudarium, Domini nostri super quo monstratur facies
Christi. Et qua^do cade^ facies Christi monstratur. Tunc Romani habent septem
millia annorum de Indulgent. and tot carenas and alij circum quaque habitantes
habent nouem millia annorum, and tot carenas, venientes autem vltra mare, sieve
vltramontes habent duodecim millia annorum Indulgent, and tot carenas and
remissionem tertiae partis omnium peccatorum.

Et secundum altar est beatae Mariae Virginis.

Tertium altar beati Andreae Apostoli.

Quartum altar beati Gregorij Papae iuxta sepulchrum eius.

Quintum altar beati leonis Papae vbi in missa recepit visum.

Sextum altar Apostolorum Simonis and Iudae.

Septimum altar Sanctae Crucis ad quod non (als, approximant) appropinquant
Mulieres.

In quolibet altari sunt omni die septem anni Indulgent.

Item Gregorius in summo altari concessit Indulgent. de peccalis oblitis, votis
factis, and de offensis patrum and matrum, (preter quam manuum iniectionem)
viginti octo annos Indulgent. and tot carenas.

Item ab ascensione Domini vsque ad kalendas Augusti sunt omni die xiiii. anni
Indulgent. durant istae Indulgentiae per octauas Sancti Martini Episcopi.

Et multae aliae Indulgentiae sunt in eadem Ecclesia secundum Chronicas quae
numerari non possunt, quae in quadragesima, omnes duplilantur.

Item in festo Sancti Martini fuit ista Ecclesia dedicata Beato Siluestro, and
tunc est ibi remissio omnium peccatorum Et omnibus festiuitatibus Beati Petri
and Pauli. Et in omnibus festiuitatibus Beatae Mariae Virginis sunt ibi Mill
anni Indulgent. and tot carenae.

Item in die ascensionis Domini sunt ibi mill anni Indulgent. and tot carenae.
and tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissio.

CHAP. 4 Of the Indulgences belonging to Saint Peter's Church.
IN the year of our Lord one thousand three hundred seventy one (3) Pope
Siluester in his Canonical Bull, assigned and granted, that in every
parochial or Cathedral Church in the City of Rome; as namely, to the Church
of Saint Peter the Apostle, and to the Church of blessed Paul, to the Church of
Saint John in the Laterane, and to the Church of blessed Mary the greater, to
every man that should enter into any one of the foresaid holy Churches,
whenever, how often soever, and what time of the year soever they come, seven
and forty years of pardon 47 years of pardon for each time a man enters into
any one of these Churches: O wicked Lutherans to charge the Church of Rome with
covetousness. See what a bountiful and liberal Lady she is to her
followers, who would not trudge from France or England to Rome, for such vocal
rewards? If the Lutherans believed this, surely they would come to Rome also.
But as for the next indulgence.
or releasement of their enjoined penances, and as many quarantens, and
remission of the third part of all their sins.

Also in the same Church there is an ascent consisting of nine and twenty
steps, which whosoever shall ascend, or descend devoutly, without mortal
sin that whosoever goes up or down these steps without mortal sin, shall
have seven years pardon, they believe that to be very true; but they say that
clause, Without mortal sin, was wisely put in, and to good purpose.
so often as he does it, he shall receive for every step 7 years of pardon, or
shall be released of so much of his penances enjoined and this is granted by
Pope Alexander.

Moreover in the same Church there be seven hundred and five altars Oh base
and beggarly Balaam that had but his 7 altars. But here the glorious Church of
Rome has 700 in one Church: Balaam may certainly be abasht and hide his face:
But who would not pity the poor Caluinists and Lutherans, come in to one of
their Churches and you shall find a poor Pulpit and a plain Communion table,
whereas here you find 20. 30. 50. 100. altars in a Church, besides many
precious relics, and many rich Copes and Vestments, and goodly gilded Images,
whereof some can weep and laugh and speak, and move, and some are appareled
most costly. Who would not leave that beggarly religion and embrace this rich,
royal, and stately Religion of Rome.
which how oftsoeuer any man shall devoutly visit so often there be granted
unto him for every altar seven years of pardon, also at every one of these
altars when the feast of Saint Peter is kept, there be eighteen years of
pardon, and as many Quarantens. And remission of the third part of all sins.

Amongst all these altars there be seven which are privileged with greater
grace, holiness and dignity then all the rest.

In the first Altar is the handkercher This handkercher the good Lady Veronica
as Christ came by her door carrying his Cross, gave him to wipe his face, who
laying it on his face fourthwith gave it her again with the picture of his
face in it, which is now every year showed and scene with great devotion. The
Caluinists prate that there is no good history to warrant this, and say
further, that if Christ had left any such monument behind him, some of the
Evangelists would have put it down, who have not omitted lesser matters: and
they say that twenty to one this is made by art, and has been often trimmed,
but not a pin matter what they say, for they be heretics.
of our Lord, wherein is to be seen the picture or face of Christ, which
whenever it is showed to the people, then all the people of Rome, have seven
thousand years of pardon, and as many quarantens. And all people dwelling
abroad out of Rome have nine thousand years of pardon, and as many quarantens.
But as for them which to see this sight, do come from beyond the seas, or from
beyond the hills, they have twelve thousand years of pardon, and as many
quarantens. And remission of the third part of all their sins.

The second altar is the altar of the blessed Virgin Marie.

The third is Saint Andrews altar.

The fourth is the altar of Saint Gregory the Pope over against his Sepulcher.

The fifth is the altar of Saint Leo the Pope standing in the place where
himself once said Mass at which Mass he being blind received his sight.

The sixth is the altar of the two Apostles Simon and Jude.

The seventh and last of these principal and priuileged altars is, the altar
of the holy Cross whereunto women It is delivered and held for a truth that a
woman (namely Helen, Constantines mother) first found the Cross, yet now women
may not approach to the altar of the Cross: See what holy and deep and secret
mysteries are in the Roman religion.
may not approach.

At every one of these altars there are every day seven years of pardon.

Also Gregory the Pope gave and granted to the high altar of this Church,
that there should be at it Indulgence and pardon of sins forgotten and vows
broken, and of all offenses to father and mother, saving the laying of violent
hands upon them, to these he granted eight and twenty years of pardon, and as
many quarantens. And why do the Heretics carpe at this, that the Popes
holiness pardons them that abuse their father and mother: for did nor the
Pharisees the like. Math. 15. 5. 6. and has not his holiness the like or more
power then the Pharisezes had?


Moreover from the Assention of our Lord to the Ides of August, there be every
day in that Church fourteen years of pardon, and this pardon of Indulgence
Why this time is more blessed then the rest, Heretics curiously do cavil,
and say that by the Law we are forbidden to regard times. But do not they
know that his Holiness is free from all Laws?
does also last and is of force in and through the Octaues of Saint Martine the
Bishop.

There be also many more indulgences as the Chronickles do record belonging
to this Church even so many as are past numbering, but in the time of lent how
many soever they be, they be all doubled. Oh glorious Roman Church that has
so many Indulge^ces in one Church for her children as are past numbering. But
behold a greater wonder. In Lent these be all dubled? So then out of Lent they
be innumerable, and in Lent innumerable are dubled. How many then be these
Indulgences in Lent, let all these idle Heretics and curious Caluinists tell
if they can.


Now this Church was dedicated by Saint Siluester, upon the feast day of Saint
Martine, upon which day there is to be had in the Church full remission of all
sins. And in all and every of the feasts of Saint Peter and Saint Paul and of
the blessed Virgin Marie there be in this Church a thousand years of pardon,
and as many quarentens.

Also upon the feast day of the Ascension of our Lord, there be in this Church
a thousand years of pardon as many quarantens, and remission of the third part
of all sins. Upon Saint Martins day there is remission of all sins in this
Church, then what needs the third part be left to an other day: Again why
should Saint Martins day yield remission of all, and the day of Christ's
ascension but a third: these be questions fit for Heretics to make, not
Catholics.


CHAP. 5
Indulgentiae in Ecclesia Sancti Pauli.
IN Ecclesia Sancti Pauli extra muros sunt omni die xviii anni Indulgentir aum,
and tot carenae, and tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item in omnibus festiuitatibus Sancti Pauli, mill anni Indulgent. and in
conuersione eius centum anni.

Item in octauo Sancti Martini fuit is it Ecclesia dedicata a Beato Siluestro
papa. Et tunc est ibi omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item in festo Innocentium sunt ibi xlviii. anni Indulgent. Ite^ in dedicatione
viii mill anni Indulgent. and durat per octo dies post festum Sancti Martini.

Item qui continuauerit visit are omnibus diebus dominicis praedictam Ecclesiam
per integrum annum haberet tot Indulgentias ac si iret ad Sanctum Iacobum.

Reliquiae Ecclesia Sancti Pauli.
IN Ecclesia Sancti Pauli est mediatas sieve pars corporum Beatorum Apostolorum
Petri and Pauli quae vt supradictum est aequaliter ponderata sunt a Beato
Siluestro supra altar quoddam quod habet in Ecclesia Sancti Petri, anno a
natiuitate Domini Tricentesimo Decimonono. and alia medietas ad Sanctum Petrum.

Ibi etiam est caput Sancti Stephani Prothomartyris. Et ibi est brachium Annae
matris Maria Virginis.

Item ibi est claustrum monachorum situatum extra muros, cuius Ecclesia
consecrata est in honor Sancti Eustachij, quod claustrum vulgariter nuncupatur
ad tres fontes.

Item ibi est vnae columpna suprae quam Sanctus Paulus fuit decollatus.

Indulgentia praedicti claustri.
DE praedictae Ecclesia scribitur quod Papa Vrbanus concessit omnibus
paenitentibus confessis and vere contritis qui ad dictam Ecclesiam in vigilia
Beatae Mariae Virginis, Apostolorum Beatorum Petri and Pauli and omnium
Apostolorum and Euangelistarum, Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae, Catharinae, Agathae,
Agnetis, Luciae, Margaretae atque Sanctornm Martrum I aurentij, Vincentij,
Anastasij.

Nec non per Octauas little, and omnibus dominicis diebusper annu^ and in
dedicatione deuote accesserint qualibet die dictarum solemnitatum tria miltia
annorum a Papa Siluestro, and totidem a Papa Nicholae. Et totidem a Papa
Gregorio vniuersis and singulis peregrinis, quocunque tempore anni venientibus
ad dictam Ecclesiam, Nec non pro reuerentia Sancti Pauli Apostoli ad aquas
saliuas, alio nomine ad tres fontes, causa orationis, peregrinationis, seu
causae deuotionis, peccata oblita, vota fracta, offensa patrum and Matrum sieve
Iniectione mnauum relaxantur.

Nec non in eadem Ecclesia de antiquis sunt mill anni and xl. anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae ad aquas saliuas predictas scribitur, quoth in
consecratione eiusdem est vera remissio omnium peccatorum. Videlicet vicesima
nona die mensis Ianuarij.

Item in capella ibidem qua vocatur scala Caeli, sicut scribitur in Chronicis
vrbis Romanae, quod illa capella Sancta adificate est in honor Beatae Mariae
Virginis, sub cuius maiori altari requiescunt corpora sanctorum december millium,
Martirum, militum tempore Tiberij Imperatoris.

Et quicunque sacerdos in dicto altari missam proviuis and defunctis pura
conscientia, cord contrito deuote celebrauerit, a paena and culpa remissionem
omnium peccatorum suorum habebit, and vnam de purgatorio liberat animam.

Ista Indulgentia concessa, consu^mata est per quadraginta sex pontifices,
quorum corpora in Caemiterio Sancti Stephani habentur and requiescunt: primo
per Papa^ Geruasium, Pelagium, Vrbanum, Siluestrum, Benedictum, Honorium,
Leone^, Clementem, Innocentem qui omnes and singuli dictam Indulgentiam
confirmauerunt ad augendam deuotionem.

Item in codem monasterio sanctissimo habetur, quod quicunqne ex tribus istis
fontibus vbi Beatus Paulus fuerat decollatus biberit aquam, a qua cunque
infirmitate de caetero liberabitur. Et quicunque de illis tribus fontibus
biberit, vt dictum est, a quolibet habebit mill annos Indulgentiarum. Quia dum
arat decollatus tunc caput eius fecit tres saltus and a quolibet saltu
generabatur fons vnus.

Item in eadem capella habetur lapis saphyricus, qui cum sit positus ad latus
vbi quis Apostema habuerit, solo tactu illius libera bitur.

Et ibi multa corpora Sanctorum Martyrum atque confessorum requiescunt. Et ibi
est etiam gladius, per quem decollatus fuerat. Et stat ibi in vno pariete.

CHAP. 5 Of the Indulgences of the Church of Saint Paul.
IN the Church of Saint 3 The three principal Church, the Church of Saint Paul.
Paul without the wales of Rome, there are every day eighteen years of
pardon, and as many quarantens, and remission of the third part of all sins.

Also in every feastday of Saint Paul, there be a thousand years of pardon,
and upon the day of his conversion one hundred years. Why upon other feast
days of Saint Paul should be a thousand years, and on the day of his
Conversion, being the chief of all, but a hundred is certainly a very Mystery
of Roman faith, the Protestants doubt less cannot attain to it.


This Church was dedicated by Saint Siluester the Pope in the Octaues of the
feast day of Saint Martine upon which day there is to be had in that Church
full remission of all sins.

Moreover upon the feast day of the Innocents there be eight and forty years
of pardon. This is also a deep mystery, why 48 years and not full 50.
And upon the day of the dedication of this Church there be eight thousand
years of pardon. Every day there be 18 years, that is in a year, 6000. and
here be 8000 on one day: (summa tot 14000 years) let the Caluinists in
England show as much of their Saint Paul's Church if they can.
And this Dedication lasts eight days after the feast of Saint Martine.

Moreover whosoever shall continue to visit the said Church every Sunday for
one whole year Who would not be at cost to go to Rome, and there take up his
lodging for a whole year to enjoy so great a reward?
shall have as maindulgences, as if he went unto Saint James in Spain. The
Heretics cannot deny but this is most true: but they have a malicious and
heretical meaning, namely that there is none in neither place.


The Relics in the Church of Saint Paul.
IN the Church of Saint Paul the half part of the bodies of the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul which Saint Siluester equally divided by weight as we
heard before, upon a certain altar, which is in the Church of Saint Peter in
the year from the nativity of our Lord three hundred and nineteen, and the
other half was left at the second Church of Saint Peter.

There is also in this Church of Saint Paul the head of the first Martyr, Saint
Steeuen. What if any other place say that they have Saint Steuens his head? No
great matter for that, the Church of Rome has power to multiply at her
pleasure, and to do many fine tricks besides to the great edification of
devout Catholics.
And there is also one of the arms of Saint Anne, the mother of Marie the
Virgin.

There is also a Cloister of Munkes, situated without the wales, which has a
Church consecrated to the honor of Saint Eustachius, this Cloister is commonly
called the Cloister by the three fountains.

And there is also in the same Church the pillar upon which Saint Paul was
beheaded. A very precious relicke doubtless for they that loved Saint Paul
cannot but make much of the block wh^reon he was beheaded. The Lutherans and
Caluinists (seely fools) do make much of Saint Paul's Epistles, as being a
better Relicke of him: let the poor asses alone with their Epistles, and them
with his Epistles. The holy Roman Church, where wisdom dwells, knows that it
had been better for her if some of them had never been written, and therefore
lets them lie in Libraries, and commends to her children this holy relicke of
the block on which his head was stricken off, for this she is sure will teach
nor breed no heresy, as Saint Paul's Epistles have done too many.


Indulgences belonging to the foresaid Cloister of the Church of Saint Paul.
IT is written of the foresaid Church, that Pope Vrbane gave, and granted to
all men penitent and truly contrite, and confessed that shall repair to the
said Church in the vigills of blessed Marie the Virgin, the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul, and of the Apostles and Evangelists, and of Saint Marie
Magdalen and of Saint Katherine, and of Saint Agatha, and Saint Agnes, and
Saint Lucie, and Saint Margaret, and of the holy Martyr Saint Laurence, Saint
Vincent and Saint Anastasius.

And also in the Octaues of the said feasts or upon any Sunday through the
whole year, or in the dedication for every day of the foresaid solemnities
three thousand years of pardon. And as many were given by Pope Siluester, and
as many by Pope Nicholas. Also Gregory the Pope granted as many to all and
singular Pilgrims that shall come to the said Church at any time of the year,
or that for the (8) Here a penitent has 9000 years of pardon, for once
visiting the Church: is not here a royal recompense for so litlit labor. Oh
thrice blessed Romans that live so near.
reverence of Paul the Apostle shall come to the Cloister of the salt waters
otherwise called the three fountains, either to pray there, or as a pilgrim to
visit it, or for any other devotion. All men so doing shall have released or
forgiven, their sins forgotten, the vows broken; their offenses against father
or mother, unless they did lay violent hands upon them.

Furthermore unto the same Church there do belong of old See how anticent the
giving of Indulgences is: for these be given of old says this blessed book.
a thousand and forty years of pardon.

Moreover it is written and recorded in that Church of Saint Marie at the salt
waters aforesaid, That upon the day of the consecration of the said Church,
there is true Yea certainly as true remission is there of all sins as the
bread in the Priests hands is the true transubstantiat body of Christ, or as
the maffe is a true expiatory sacrifice, or as the Pope is the true Vikar of
Christ. But whereas the Caluinists loudly laugh and say, that if in other
places, where it is said there is remission, there be not true remission, then
the people are deluded, and if there be, then this word here, is an idle
boast. No matter what they prace, they be heretics.
remission of all sins, and that is upon the nine and twenty of the month of
January.

Likewise there is a certain Chapel of the said Church which is called the
Ladder of Heaven, as it is written in the Chronickles of the City of Rome
where we also find that the said holy Chapel was builded in the honor of
blessed Marie the Virgin, under the High Altar of this Chapel there rest the
bodies of ten thousand holy Martires that were soldiers in the time of
Tyberius the Emperor. Behold another wonder 10000. soldiers that were
Christians in one army in the time of Tiberius immediately after Christ. The
Scripture tells us of no such wonders for there the believers are reckoned in
fewer quantities: but the Catholic traditions of the Roman Church, supply the
defects and wants, that be in the Scriptures and the Catholic cause were in a
fair case indeed, if nothing might be believed but that is in the scripture,
or gathered from it, as these foolish Heretics would have it.


And what Priest soever, shall devoutly celebrate one mass at the said altar
for the living and the dead with a pure conscience, and a contrite heart, shall
have remission of all his sins, both from the punishment and the fault, and
shall deliver one soul out of purgatory. See what a happy thing it is for a
man to live in Rome, for its impossible he should ever come in purgatory, if
he list to avoid it, for how easy is it to get a Priest say Mass at this
altar for him. But all the difficulty will be (say the Caluinists) in getting
a Priest with a pure Conscience, for such it is said are not common in Rome: Oh
idle Heretics, as who say in the holy City, and so near his Holiness can be
suffered any but holy Priests: for though they go, at noone day to the Stews,
can they not go before night to confess it, and so be made as pure as they
were the day they were baptized: Certainly if Cardinal Poole and his fellow
committees had remembered, and regarded this they would not in their report they
made to Paul the third, of the abuses in the Church have held it so foul a
matter that Priests of Rome, and Cardinals Chaplains, do at noone day go to
Whores, (for as for Cardinals themselves they go modestly in the night time,
unless it be in the Carniuall.) Seeing that a wife being forbidden them as a
most unholy and unlawful thing, therefore they use this but as a convenient
remedy to keep them from that foul sin of marriage, which by the Catholic
teachers, Jesuits and others is concluded to be in them a far greater sin
then whoring, or Adultery: Alas then who can blame them, or rather does not
commend the holy Clergy of Rome, if of the two evils they choose the less, to
avoid the great: and if any little fault remain after that fact, how easily
may they go to confession, or as soon as they have done all being Priests,
may one absolve another, and so come out of the Stews, as holy and pure as
they went in: where as all good Catholics know that these heretic Priests
that have their own wives, though they never touched other woman, are never
pure, but ever defiled with that pollution that follows them in that damned
estate of marriage as (whatsoever the heretics prate out of the Scriptures) the
holy Roman Church has truly and holily determined. Seeing therefore the
Clergy in Rome are not wrapped in the sacrilegious bonds of marriage, and so not
tied to one; And for all other scapes have the holy and happy, and present
help of confession, ever at hand and always in season, let no good Catholic
doubt, but as all that have traveled thither do well know, holy Clergy men
and Priests with pure Consciences are as common in Rome, as posthorses in
Venice.


And this Indulgence thus granted was confirmed by six and forty Popes, whose
bodies do all rest in the Churchyard If 46. Popes lie buried in one
Churchyard. It seems those days were not so devout as these of ours, nor the
Popes so pompous, nor so rich, for now it is not agreeable to Catholic
devotion, Nor to the Majesty of his holiness to be buried in a Churchyard, but
in as stately and pompous manner as any of the greatest kings of the earth.
of Saint Sebastian, and namely by Pope Ieruatius, Pelagius, Vrbanus,
Siluester, Benedict, Honorius, Leo, Clement, Innocent, etc. Who all and every
one of them have confirmed the foresaid Indulgence for the increase of devotion.

Furthermore it is found registered in the same most holy Monastery, that
whosoever shall drink the water of these three fountains, where Saint Paul
was beheaded, shall from thenceforth be deliver from whatsoever disease he
has. The Heretics will here object, and ask how it then comes to pass that
any in Rome or near it, be sick or die of such filthy diseases as they do,
for either they may here drink and be healed, or else this here praemised is
but a cosenage and delusion. But heretics are not worthy to be answered, let
the^ go.
And whosoever shall drink of these three fountains as before, shall have from
every fountain a thousand years Here is a sweet and a gracious indulge^ce
when for drinking 3 draughts of 3 sweet fountains in a hot Summers day, in a
hot country, a man may gain 3000 years of pardon: Is it not pity, but so good
a mother as the holy Roman Church should have devout children.
of pardon and all this because that when Saint Paul was there beheaded, his
head being smitten off, leaped three times, and at every leap when it fell to
the ground, forthwith there sprung up a fountain of water. The Heretics
cavil and say that this is a fable of the three fountains and that there is
no good history for it, and say further that he made and dug fourteen
better fountains, and left them not for Rome alone, but for all Christians,
and say that whosoever drink of these fountains, shall receive true Indulgence
indeed, and have the diseases of his soul healed: but they babble and show
themselves true heretics, who always come with Scripture, Scripture: But
contrariwise al good Catholics know that the holy Roman Church in these later
and wiser days found these fountains so dangerous to drink of, that
prudently she stopped and wald them up within the wall of the Latin tongue. And
the wiser sort of Catholics do know, and some of them are bold and zealous
to affirm, it had been better for the Catholic faith, if they had been
better and safer stopped up, then they have been. But as for these three blessed
fountains that sprange when Saint Paul's head leapt three times after it was
smitten off, (which is as certain as that Saint Denise took up his head, when
is was stricken off, and carried it in his hands three miles, as the Breuiary
says in his service) these the Pope is sure will not infect the drinkers with
heresy as those Epistles of Paul have often done, And therefore these
fountains his holiness stops not up, but lets them be always open, that good
Catholics may resort unto them, at all times of the year, and from all parts
of the world, to the great honor of Saint Paul, at least to the great gain of
his holiness, and of the Roman Citizens, who could not well maintain their
City without these good helps, and consequently to the great advancement of the
holy Catholic Roman faith.


Moreover in the Chapel there is sapphire stone, which when it is laid to the
side of a sick-man, that has an Apostem, presently the sick party shall be
healed with only touching.

Also in the same Chapel there do rest the bodies of many holy Martires and
Confessors. And there is also the sword with which Saint Paul was beheaded, and
it stands there in a wall. Behold a most precious relicke, the sword that cut
off Saint Paul's head: And has not the Popes holiness good cause to preserve
and honor the sword that cut off his head, who durst rebuke Saint Peter, whose
successor he is? The Caluinists brag of a better sword which they say Saint
Paul left them, Ephesians. 6. 1. The sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
but let them like foolish Cocks take the barley come, and leave us the Jewel,
for all good Catholics know that the sword of the Scripture, howeuer Paul
commended it in those times, is found in these days to be a dangerous sword
to be used: and the holy Roman Church, had never seen so many of her children
fall to be Cauinists and Lutherans had it not been that the use of this sword
was too easily and freely premitted unto them: As for this sword that cut off
Saint Paul's head, that never did hurt to the Catholic Roman Church, but has
gained it many a fair million of crowns, even the very showing of it, to
people and pilgrims: seeing then the Popes holiness gains so well by this
sword, and has lost so much by the sword of the Spirit, full wisely therefore
he prohibits the use of that sword: but allows the other to be seen of all
men: and if Saint Paul be angry that we make more account of the sword that
cut of his head, then that sword of the spirit, which upon his knowledge, he
commended so earnestly to the Church, let him know his holiness cares not a
pin, for though he was so bold to reprehend Peter when they were on earth; Yet
now his holiness being Peter's successor has made and enacted it for a law,
and has so put it in the body of his law, Did. 40. c. 6. That though he
should be so faulty and so enormously wicked, as that he draws millions of
souls with him into hell; Yet no man must presume so much as to reprove him
for it. Therefore let Saint Paul do what he can, his holiness will keep and
make much of the sword that cut of his head, and show it to be honored, and
will gain fairly by it, and will also restrain and prohibits the use of the
other sword, though he pleased to call it the sword of the Spirit, seeing he
finds by so long experience, that he loses by it every day.


CHAP. 6
In Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae annunciatae.
ITem ibi scribitur sic quod Beatissima virgo Maria apparuit Cuidam fratri
dictae Ecclesiae cum multitudine Angelorum dicens omnis homo vere confessus and
contritus qui hanc Ecclesiam intrauerit, and me puro cord visitauerit, ab
infernali incendio liberabitur.

Scribitur etiam in cronicis, quod cuilibet visitanti quotidie dicta^ Ecclesia^
pro quolibet die qua eandem visitauerit mill anni Indulgent. and quadraginanni
Indulgent. and remissio tertiae partis omnium peccatorum, and tot carenae. Et
omnes predictae Indulgentiae duplicantur in aduentu domini and in quadragesima.
Et in die Annuntiationis Beatae Mariae, est ibi plena remissio omnium
peccatorum, data a Sanctissimo domino Bonifacio.

Quicunque etiam in dicta Ecclesia ob honorem and reuerentiam gloriosissimae
Virginis Mariae Genetricis dei missam celebrauerit, vnam animam meritis and in
tercessionibus eiusdem Virginis Mariae de paenis purgatorij liberabit.

CHAP. 6 4 The fouth principal Church, the Church of our Lady.
Of the Church of Saint Marie of the Annunciation.
FVrthermore it is thus written in the place aforesaid, that the most blessed
Virgin Marie appeered to a certain Friar of the said Church attended with a
great multitude of Angels, and said unto him every man truly confessed and
contrite, which shall euter into this Church, and visit me with a pure heart
shall be delivered from the fire of hell. The Heretics say that certainly this
is but a tale, for the Virgin Mary (say they) would not take upon her to
deliver any out of hell, nor purgatory by her own merits as it is here said,
and if she could, she would not tie it to such a condition as the visiting of
that Church, because then the poor souls that dwell in far countries could
never receive good by it, thus these shameless heretics dare argue against it
that the holy Church teaches, are not they worthiy condemned?


It is also written in the Chronickles, that whosoever shall daily visit this
said Church, shall have for every day wherein he shall so visit it a thousand
and forty years of pardon So that then to visit that Church every day for one
year, a man shall obtain 38000 years of pardon: come, come all good
Catholics, let us go leave this cursed country of England, and go dwell at
Rome, where we shall be received, entertained and enriched with such bountiful
blessings.
together with remission of third part of all his sins and as many quarentens
etc. And all the said Indulgences are doubled in the time of the Aduent of our
Lord, and in lent. And in the day of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin
Marie, there is full remission of all sins to be had in that Church,
granted by our most holy Lord Pope Boniface.

Whosoever also shall celebrate Mass in the said Church in the honor and
reverence of the most glorious Virgin Marie, mother of God, shall through the
merits and intercessions of the said Virgin Marie deliver one soul out the
pains of Purgatory. See what a blessed thing it is to be a Priest in Rome,
when a man may every day at his pleasure deliver a soul our of Purgatory: is
it therefore any marvel if so many of our fine wits and hopeful young men do
run to Rome, and become Priests? No surely, but the wonder is that if they
believe this, they will come again into England, where they may sooner send
themselves to hell, then deliver a soul out of Purgatory.


CHAP. 7
Indulgentiae Ecclesiae Sancti Sebastiani.
ITem scribitur in Ecclesia Sancti Sebastiani, quod ibi Angelus domini apparuit
Beato Gregorio in celebratione Missae in altari Sancti Sebastiani Martiris
dicens. In isto loco est vera remissio omnium peccatorum splendour and lux
perpetua and sine fine laetitia. Quam Indulgentiam a Papa glorioso concessam
Beatus Sebastianus meruit.

Item dominica die prima mensis Maij est ibi omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item ab ascensione domini vsque ad Kalendas Augusti sunt omni die mill anni
Indulgent. and tot carenae, and tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item in alijs diebus per totum annum sunt omni die quadraginta septem
Indulgentiarum and tot carenae.

Item ibi est quidam introitus subterraneus, and ille Introitus vocatur
Caemiterius Sancti Calixti Papae, vbi solebant se ab scondere Sancti dei
Martires quando persequebantur a Romany. Et ibi sunt tot Indulge^tiae quot
nemo numerare potest nisi solus Deus.

Item ibi est puteus in quo corpora Sanctorum Petri and Pauli per centum annos
iacuerunt antequam fuerunt inuenta and sunt ibi CCC anni Indulgent.

Item in eadem Ecclesia est adhuc vnus puteus situatus modicum extra Ecclesiam:
ibi requiescunt quadraginta septem pontifices, dantes vnusquisque suam
Indulgentiam, tantam quantam potuerunt.

Item in dicta Ecclesia est tanta Indulgentia, quanta in Ecclesia Sancti Petri
Apostoli.

Reliquiae Ecclesiae Sancti Sebastiani.
ITem in summo altari requiescit corpus Sancti Sebastiani. Et in altari
inferius, corpus Sancti Fabiani. Et in altari in fine Ecclesiae subtus
requiescit corpus Stephani Papae.

Item retro Ecclesiam est alius transitus rotundus circa altar Sancti Apostoli
Petrus and Paulus ad centum annos iacuerunt in quo transitu multae corpora
Sanctorum, iacuerunt confessorum, atque Virginum requiescunt.

Item in eadem Ecclesia est columpua illa ad quam Sanctus Sebastianus fuit
sagittatus.

Item ibi est caput Sancti Calixti and plura corpora aliorum Sanctorum.

Item in Caemiterio sancti Calixti quod habetur in eadem Ecclesia stat quoddam
altar ad quod sanctus Petrus, tempore quo Romani persequebantur illos sanctos
Martyrs ibidem sepultos, celebrare so lebat.

Item in eodem Caemiterio habetur longitudo per quendam lapidem, vnius claeui,
cum quo Christus fuit affixus crucis patibulo.

Item in eadem Ecclesia habentur vistigia vndecim pedum in vna capella a
latere, super altar quoddam. Quae vestigia sunt illa viz. quando sanctus
Petrus voluit fugere de Roma and tunc obuiabat domino Jesus Christo and dixit
domine quo vadis, iuxta paruam capellam modicum extra ciuitatem scituatam, and
respondeus Jesus vado Romam iterum crucifigi, and illa capella vocatur capella
Beatae Mariae de Palmae.

Item in Ecclesia sancti Iohannis ante portam latinam, vbi coctus fuit sanctus
Johannes in oleo, est liberatio vnius animae in die sancti Iohannis a
purgatorio.

CHAP. 7 5 The fifth principal and Patriarchall Church; namely of Saint
Sebastian.
Of the Indulgences belonging to the Church of Saint Sebastian.
IT is registered in the (1) The presumptuous Caluinists say this is a foul
stinking lie. For an Angel, say they would never tell a lie, but to say that in
any Church in Rome, or any place on earth is or can be everlasting light, and
without end, is not only false but plain Atheism and intimates that the
world shall never have end: Oh shameless heretics that dare call in question
the sayings or doings of the Pope, as though his holiness can either speak
ought but truth, or do ought but good: So there have been some heretofore
like to these Caluinists that durst be so bold with the Popes, as to bring them
under censure, accusing Liberius for an Arrian condemning Honorius for a
Monothelite, and them, and John the 22 for heretics, as did the sixth general
Council, and Occham, and many more, but what got they? some of them are
condemned and all of them reproved for their labor by the Popes holiness, as
be also the Caluinists, who were pronounced heretics in the Council of Trent,
and excommunicate every passion week in Bulla Caenae, and therefore no matter
what they object.
Church of Saint Sebastian, that an Angel of the Lord appeared in that Church
to Saint Gregory as he was a saying Mass at the Altar of Saint Sebastian the
Martyr, and said to him these words. In this place there is true remission of
all sins, brightness and light ever lasting, joy and gladness without end.
This Indulgence did Saint Sebastian merit to the Church, and thereupon that
glorious Pope did grant and ratify it.

Also upon every first Sunday or Lords day of the Month of May, there is in the
same Church remission of all sins.

Likewise from the ascension of our Lord, until the Kalends of August, there
be for every day, in that Church a thousand years of pardon, and as many
quarantens, and remission of the third part of all a man's sins.

And moreover, all the year long, there is daily and for every day seven and
forty years of pardon, and as many quarantens.

Furthermore in the Church, there is a certain Vault, or hollow passage under
the earth, and it is called the Churchyard of Saint Calixtus the Pope: In this
the holy Martires of God in times past used to hide themselves, when they were
persecuted by the Romans: and to this Vault there do belong so many
Indulgences and pardons as none can number but only God. Seeing there belongs
to that vault, so many Indulgences, it seems that our holy fathers, the Abbots
of England held vaults to be very holy places, and therefore it was
(doubtless) that they made at so many Abbaies, vaults under the ground,
leading from the Abbay to the Nunnery, which was never very far off, that so
the Nuns might meet the Friars and get their part of these blessed
Indulgences: Many of these holy vaults are yet to be seen in England to the
shame and confutation of the Caluinists: And though those vaults have been
dearly loved of the Romish Clergy, and so are still where they yet be, and are
therefore partakers of the Popes Indulgences, which made the Nuns frequent
them so willingly: yet was there one vault in England which was of greater
value and expectation then all these, and which (if the powder there laid by
those devout and zealous Catholics had blown up the heretics according to
the mind and desire of them that laid it, and the hope of his holiness, and
the Jesuits) should certainly have had as many blessings and Indulgences
bestowed on it, as the bottomless treasure of the holy Roman Church could have
affoorded. But that work was too good to prosper as some of themselves said,
the day before they died.


Also in the same Church there is the pit or hole, wherein the bodies of Saint
Peter and Paul lay hid for an hundredth years before they were found, and at
this hole there are three hundredth years of pardon.

Likewise in the same Church there is yet a pit or hole, situate a little
without the Church, and therein do rest the bodies of seven and forty Popes,
every one whereof granted to this Church Indulgences, as great and ample as
they could or might.

To conclude, there is in this Church as great and large Indulgence, as there
is in the Church of Peter the Apostle.

Relikes in the Church of Saint Sebastian.
IN the high altar of this Church, there is the body of Saint Sebastian
himself: and in another lower altar, the body of Saint Fabian, and under the
altar that is at the end of the Church rests the body of Pope Stephen.

Also in the backside of the same Church there is another passage, which is
round, hard by the altar, under which Saint Peter and Saint Paul lay for a
hundredth years, and in the same place to this day there lie the bodies of many
holy Confessors and Virgins.

Also in the same Church there is the post or pillar, at which Saint Sebastian
was thrust through with darts.

There is also the head of Calixtus, and many bodies of other Saints.

Moreover in the Churchyard of Saint Calixtus (so called as before) which is in
the same Church, there stands a certain altar, and that is the very altar
whereat Saint Peter used to say Mass, The Caluinists say this is an idle tale
for say they if Peter had had an altar or said Mass the Scriptures would not
have concealed it: But a fig or rather a faggot for these heretics and their
Scripture also, for what care Catholics though it be not it the Scripture, as
long as the holy Roman Church says it here and elsewhere.
at such times as the Romans persecuted those holy Martires that used to fly
thither, and are now there buried.

Likewise in same Churchyard of Calixtus, there is a certain great stone,
upon which is drawn out the length of one of the nails, with which Jesus was
nailed to the tree of the cross. This was doubtless a great nail, for out of
one of them have been fince made at least a thousand more nails, and which is
more strange, the first is still as great as it was.


Further, in the same Church there be yet to be seen the steepes of eleven
foot, and they be upon an altar, that is in a Chapel, situate on one side
of the Church: what these steps are, and how they came there, we are to know
that when Saint Peter would have fled out of Rome, Jesus met him at a little
Chapel, Here again the Caluinists cavil and say, that this is surely a
cozn'd tale. For Saint Peter say they spoke it Acts 3. 21. that the heavens
must hold Christ till the end of the world, and therefore say they though it
might well be that Saint Peter might see Christ in a vision sitting in heaven
as Saint Stephen did. Act. 7. 55. yet its not credible that he saw Christ so
really standing by him that the steps of his feet should remain in the
earth, but we have a short answer for them, and that is this, let them, and
such fools as they, rely upon that uncertain rule the Scripture (which
therefore our Catholic Doctors, Eccius, Pighius, Hosius etc. have justly
called a nose of wax, and a shipmans hose, a dumb Judge and a leaden rule) we
Catholics will hold the sure certain and infallible rule that can never
deceive us, namely the determination of the holy Roman Church, that is the
rock that Catholics rest upon: and therefore though the Scripture say never
a word of it, yet by virtue of that determination we believe that Christ is
really and corporally in the Sacrament, and that the bread is turned into his
body, and we believe that this story is true, and what ever else the Roman
Church shall teach us.
somewhat out of the City, then Peter meeting Christ asked him, Lord whether
go thou? And Jesus answered, I go to Rome to be crucified again, and these
steps of Jesus and Peter as they stood talking there, are here to be seen to
this day: and that Chapel where they thus met, is called the Chapel of our
blessed Lady Mary of the palm.

Likewise in the Church of Saint John before the Port Latin, where Saint John
was boiled in hot scalding oil, is every Saint John's day, deliverance for one
soul out of purgatory.

CHAP. 8
Indulgentiae Eccleclesiae sancti Thomae Apostoli.
IN Ecclesia eius scribitur quotienscunque homo visitauerit, illam Ecclesiam
videlicet manus ponendo adiutrices ad sustentationem Pauperum and liberationem
Captiuorum in sancta terra incarceratorum; in Ecclesia quae dedicata est in
honor sancti Michaelis Archangeli and sancti Thomae Apostoli, conceduntur per
multos pontifices tria millia annorum Indulgent. and xl. dies, vota fracta,
offensa patrum and Matrum sine mannuum violentarum iniectione relaxantur illi
vt permittitur predictam Ecclesiam visitanti.

Item summi tres pontifices viz. Alexander, Inocentius and Vrbanus quilibet
eorum concessit septimam partem anni and omnium peccatorum remissionem and vnum
annum and quadraginta dies plenamque participationem omnium stationum and
dedicationum Romunae Ecclesiae quae facit xlix. annorum Indulgent. and tot
Carenas. Ac etiam participatione^ terrae Sanctae vbi Indulgentiae mirabiles
conceduntur.

CHAP. 8 Indulgences belonging to the Church of Saint Thomas the Apostle. This
Church though it bear the name of one of the Apostles, yet is it none of the
seven principal and Patriarchall, because as Onuphrius freely tells us, those
Churches are most dignified by the Pope, which he gains most by: and he
gains most by them that are in the way betwixt the great Churches of Saint
John Laterane, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, therefore Saint Sebastians is one
which stands in the way betwixt Saint Paul's, and the Lateran, and not this of
Saint Thomas which stands out of the way.

IN the Church of Saint Thomas, it is written and recorded, that how often soever
any man shall visit that Church, putting to his helping hand for the
sustentation of the poor, or for the redeeming and deliverance of captives
imprisoned in the holy land, so often there be in that Church, which is
consecrated to the honor of Saint Michael the Archangell and Saint Thomas the
Apostle, three thousand years of pardon, granted thereunto by diverse Popes.
And for xl. days long, vows that be broken, and offenses against father and
mother, excepting laying violent hands upon them, Still the heretics prate and
say that the Pope forgiues the offenses committed against father and mother:
poor fools why should he not, is not he the father of fathers and supreme
father of us all, good reason then that he ouerrule our fathers and mothers,
and those that please his holiness, let them not care though they displease
father mother, master, mistress, nay Prince or Sovereign, for he can and
will release the punishment as well as he can forgive the fault.
are three released to him that shall visit the Church as is aforesaid.

Moreover three chief Bishops or Popes, as namely Alexander, Innocentius and
Vrbanus, every of them gave and granted thereunto, the seventh part of the
year, and remission of all sins and one year Its very hard to know the
meaning of these bountiful Indulgences, they are so many that we may say
Copia ipsa nocet: therefore devout Cathikes that desire to know them
distinctly, had best go to Rome, and there they may both know them and have
them.
and forty days, and full participation of all stations and dedications of the
Roman Church which make up nine and forty years of pardon, and as many
quarentens, and also they granted hereunto participation with the Holy Land,
where strange and wonderful Indulgences be granted.

CAP. 9
Indulgentiae Ecclesiae Sanctae Crucis.
IN Ecclesia Sanctae Crucis sunt omni die xlviij anni Indulgent. and tot
carenae and tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item ibi modicum inferius a latare est vna capella que vocatur Jerusalem, in
quam mulieres non possunt intrare nisi in die sancti Benedicti. Et tunc est ibi
omnium peccatorum remissio a paena and a culpa.

Item hanc Ecclesiam Constantina Imperatrix edificauit in honorem santae Crucis
and ad preces sanctae Helenae Papa Siluester consecrauit.

Item omnibus diebus dominicis and mercurij sunt ibi CCliiij anni Indulgent.
and omnibus alijs diebus Cxxx viij anni and tot carenae.

Et multae aliae plures Indulgentiae sunt quas explicare non audemus nam omni
die dominica and die mercurij Sanctus Siluester omnes indulge^t. duplicauit.

Reliquiae predictae Ecclesiae.
IN praedicta Ecclesia sanctae Crucis est funis cum quo Christus Jesus fuit
ductus, portans sieve baiulans crucem.

Item clauis vnus cum quo cruci fuit affixus.

Item magna pars vestis sancti Iohannis Baptistae. Item duo dentes de sancto
Blasio Episcopo. Item duo lacerti Apostolorum Petri and Pauli sub maiore altari
requiesunt corpora sanctorum Anastasij Caesaris and Prothasij.

Item ibi est de ligno verae Crucis.

Item vna lampa plena Balsomo, in quo iacet caput Vincentij Martiris.

Item spongia cum qua Iudaei dederunt Christo Jesus acetum bibere cum fell
mixtum.

Item ibi sunt duo sophiri, quorum vnus est plenus sanguine Christi, and alter
plenus lacte Mariae Virginis.

Item caput Innocentij Martiris.

Item in dextro latere altaris est liguum crucis latronis conuersi.

Item ibi est vnus digitus Beati Thomae Apostoli.

Item ibi est titulus Jesus Christi appositus cruci, scilicet Jesus Nazarenus
Rex Iudaeorum.

Item in eadem Ecclesia iacent corpora xlij. summorum pontificum quorum
vnusquisque suam dedit Indulgentiam.

CHAP. 9 6 The sixth principal and patriarchall Church is the Church of Saint
Cross.
Indulgences of the Church of Saint Cross.
IN the Church of Saint Cross, there are every day eight and forty years of
pardon, and as many quarentens, and remission of the third part of all a man's
sins.

Also a little lower on the side of the Church there is a Chapel called
Jerusalem, into which women may not enter, but only upon Saint Benets day.
Blessed Saint Benet was the good woman's friend, who got them leave on his day
to come into the holy Chapel, which is one reason doubtless, why women are
so devout to the Benedictins.
And then there is in that Chapel, full remission of all sins, both a paena
and a culpa.

Further, Constaniina the Empress builded this Church to the honor of the
holy Cross, Bawling heretics do here make a stir and wonder, that we dare
build Churches in honor of the dead Cross. But they be fools, and know
nothing. But all devout and learned Catholics do know that the holy Roman
Church teaches to pray to the Cross, and has a prayer to it in the holy
Mass book or Breuiary, O cruxaue spes vnica, hoc passionis tempore, auge pijs
Iusticiam Reisque dona veniam: and least some should think, (who have too nice
and spiced consciences as some Catholics have) that this prayer is to him
that died on the Cross, and not to the Cross, our approved Doctors have
handled the case, and resolved it that ipsam Crucem alloquimur, ipsam Crucem
deprecamur, quasi ipsum Crucifixum: If we may speak to the Cross, and pray
to the Cross it self, as to Christ; Then surely no man will deny but we may
build Churches to it.
and Pope Siluester did Consecrate it at the instance, and prayers of Saint
Hellen.

Likewise upon every Sunday, and every Wednesday there be in this Church two
hundred fifty and four years of pardon, and upon every other day an hundred
thirty eight years, and as many quarentens.

And there be many other pardons and indulgences here which we dare not set
down, Let the heretics here see to their shame; First the great modesty of
the Roman Church, who forbeares to put down the Indulgences, when they are so
exceeding many as they cannot be counted, and behold also the bounty of our
spiritual mother, who grants Indulgences so plentifully as modesty forbids to
express them: what good Catholic can stay from going to Rome, that there he
may diue into the midst of this sea, and partake of this bottomless Treasure.
for upon every Lords day and every Wednesday Saint Siluester doubled all the
Indulgences.

The relics of the same Church.
IN the foresaid Church of Saint Cross there is the rope Behold a precious
relicke, the Rope that Christ was led in, for though the Gospells speak of
none, yet here is as good warrant for it as the Gospel, to all good
Catholics.
where in Christ Jesus was led to his death when he bare his Cross.

There is also one of the nails with which he was nailed to the Cross.

Also a great deal of Saint John Baptists coat, and two of the teeth of Saint
Blase the Bishop. And two arms of the Apostles Here be two arms of Peter and
Paul in this Church, and yet we are to believe that the whole half of them
both is in Saint Peter's and the other whole half in Saint Paul's Church for
these two arraes the Pope created by his power.
Peter and Paul. And under the high altar of that Church do lie the bodies of
Saint Anastatius Caesar and Saint Prothatius.

Also there is in that Church some of the wood of the true Cross. Here is some
of the wood of the true Cross: to put a difference betwixt too many, that are
counterfeits, by which good devout Catholics are darly cozened to their great
discomfort.


Also a lamp full of baulme, wherein lies the head of Saint Vincentius Martire.

Also there is the Spung with which the Jews gave Jesus Christ vinegar mingled
with gaul to drink.

Likewise there be two glasses whereof the one is full of the blood of Christ,
and the other full of the milk of Marie God Catholics do greatly wonder,
seeing the holy virgin had no child after Christ, how this milk of hers was
preserved, for sure she would not keep it her self, and in those days few
regarded either her, or her son for thirty years: we hope therefore his
Holiness will let us know this great secret, for sure there is some great
miracle and mystery in it. But seeing in that Church there is both of the
milk and the blood, we now see the reason why father Scribanius the Jesuit,
writers that he so longs for the milk of the mother, and blood of the Son,
that he knows not whether to desire more, and says that therefore he will
mingle them both together, and of that mixture, make a precious soueraign
medicine for his soul: Indeed we do easily believe Jesuits to be such
extardinary men, that they have some extraordinary spiritual physic for
their souls which others have not: yet as great and as good as he is, he may
now be beholding to us that publish this blessed book, for now he knows
where he may have both his simples to make his confection, both the milk and
blood, and let him not fear that they at Rome can spare none of it: for if he
pay well for it, he shall have it, and yet by the supreme power of the Pope,
though never so much be taken continually, yet they multiply again, and the
last is as good as the first, and all of like virtue.
the Virgin.

Also there is the head of Innocentius the Martire.

And upon the right side of the altar there is the wood of the Cross whereupon
the good thief died.

And there is also one of the fingers of Saint Thomas the Apostle.

There is also the title of Jesus Christ, which was set upon his Cross,
namely, Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.

Moreover in the same Church there lies the bodies of two and forty Popes or
chief Bishops, whereof every one bestowed their indulgence upon this Church.

CAP. 10
Indulgentiae Ecclesiae Sancti Laeurencij.
ITem Papa Pallagius qui hanc Ecclesiam consecrauit concessit ibi in quatuor
temporibus anni and in omnibus festiuitatibus Stephani and Laurencij vel
stationum seu dedicationum illius Ecclesiae septem annos indudgentiarum, and
tot carenas and tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissionem.

Quas Indulgentias Beatus Siluester confirmauit, and in quadra gessima
duplicantur, and sunt omni die xlviij. anni Indulgent. and tot carenae and
tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item quicunque continuauerit omninibus diebus dominicis vel quartis ferijs per
integrum annum, liberat vnam animam depaenis purgatorij quoth promeruit Sanctus
Laurencius Martyr Christi, vnde Continet hoc templum sanctorum corpora pura. A
quibus auxilium, suppleri poscere cura. See here, we are taught to call upon
the Saints for help. Some Catholics are so nice, and tender conscienced that
they rhinke we must not pray to Saints for any thing, but only that they would
pray to God and to Christ for us, but here we see that a man ought to pray to
them for supply of all good things he wants, this is true Catholic religion,
let some mince and distinguish it as nicely as they will.


Cum Sixto iacet Laurencius igne crematus,

Et prothomartir Stephanus Leuita beatus, Post hypolitus equorum Collo ligatus,

Cum nutrice sua cum cuncta plebe suorum,

Romanus miles trisona virgo quirella,

Et quadraginta quas passio continet illa.

Reliquiae Ecclesiae predicta.
ITem in altari inferius requiescunt corpora Sanctorum Martirum Stephani and
Laurencij, quicunque visitauerit sepulchrum little and lapide^ super quem
Sanctus Laurencius positus fuerat qui etiam habetur a latere summi altaris
habet vij mill Indulgent. and tot carenas, ac etiam terciae partis omnium
peccatorum remissionem.

Ite^ ibi est lapis cu^ quo Sanctus Stephanus lapidatus erat.

CHAP. 10 Indulgences belonging to 7 The seventh prinpall Church: the Church
of Saint Laurence and Saint Stephen.
the Church of Saint Laurence.
POpe Pellagius who Consecrated this Church, granted unto it that in the four
times otherwise called the four Ember weeks of the year, and upon every of
the feast days of Saint Steeuen and Saint Laurence, and upon the days of the
stations or dedications of this Church at all and every of these times, there
should be seven years of pardon, and as many quarentens, and remission of
the third part of all a man's sins.

All these Indulgences Pope Siluester confirmed, Here is a great miracle and a
mystery that may stop the mouths of all Heretics that say we have no true
miracles, for here Pope Pelagius consecrated this Church and gave the
Indulgences to it, and Siluester the Pope confirmed and dubled them, and yet
Pelagius was not Pope till two hundred years after Siluester died. Let
Lutherans or Caluinists show such miracles if they can.
and doubled them them in the time of lent: and granted further to the same
Church, every day eight and forty years of pardon, and as many quarentens, and
remission of the third part of all a man's sins.

And further whosoever continued his devotion to this Church every Sunday, or
every Wednesday through the year, he shall deliver one soul out of the pains
of purgatory, and this is merited and procured by the holy Martire of Christ
St. Laurence. Whereupon this is witten in old latin verses, of this Church. This
Church contains the full and perfect bodies of many Saints, from whom see
that thou have care to call for supply of help.

Here lies Sixtus and with him Laurence that was broiled in the fire,

And Stephen the first Martire, that blessed leuite,

Besides these Hypolitus that was pulled in pieces with horses,

Together with his Nurce and all his people.

Here lies also a Roman soldier, and Crisona the Virgin.

And Quirella and forty Martires more, who suffered the same time.

Relikes in the foresaid Church of Saint Laurence.
IN the lower altar of that Church, do lie the bodies of the holy Martires,
Saint Stephen and Saint Laurence. And whosoever shall visit their Sepulcher,
and that stone whereupon Saint Laurence was laid, which lies at the side of
the high altar, has seven thousand years of pardon and as many quarentens
and remission of the third part of all his sins.

There is also the stone with which Saint Stephen was stoned. Caluinists think
that Stephen was stoned with many stones, because the Scripture says. They
stoned Stephen: But they may see here how they are deceived, for he was stoned
with one, and that is to be seen in Rome, he that will go thither to see it
is worthy to see it, and kiss it also: And see here the wisdom of the holy
Roman Church who can find gain for her self, and make profit of the rope
that tied Christ, the stone that stoned Stephen, and the sword that cut off
Paul's head, they were not so hurtful to the parties, as they be beneficial
to the present Church and City of Rome: So wise are these times, beyond the
times of the Primitive Church, for we find not that they made any profit of
these.


CAP. 11.
In Ecclesia Sancti Praxedis.
ITem ibi est vna Ecclesia quae vocatur Ecclesia Sancti Praxedis and est luxta
Ecclesiam Beatae Mariae maioris situata, necnon Sangrome multora^ sanctorum
consecrata.

Item in eadem Ecclesia habetur vna Capella in qua est corpus Sancti Paschalis
Papae primi illo nomine vocati.

Item in eadem Ecclesia est vna Capella quae vocatur hortus paradisi and sunt
ibi duo millia and tricenta sanctorum Martirum corpora and quatuor december
corpora Sanctorum pontificum.

Item in eadem capella est tercia pars illius collumpriae Jesus Christi circa
quam in domo pilati fuit flagellatus.

Et in eadem capella omni die omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item in eadem capella non possunt intrare mulieres.

CHAP. 11. In the Church of Saint Praxed. Thus we have heard the riches, and
blessings, belonging to the seven great Churches in Rome. Now follow some
other.

FVrthermore there is a Church which is called the Church of Saint Praxede,
seituated near unto the Church of Saint Marie the greater, and Saint Sangrome
filled with the bodies of many Saints.

Also in the same Church there is a Chapel, wherein is the body of Saint
Paschall the Pope first of that name.

There is also in the same Church another Chapel called the garden of
Paradise, in it there be the bodies of two thousand and three hundredth holy
Martires, and of fourteen holy Popes that were Saints. It is a matter that
troubles many good devout Catholics to see that of the first forty Popes in
the first four hundred years all almost were holy, and made Saints, but of a
hundred Popes in this last five hundred years, there is not one Saint, nor
scarce one that ever was held worthy: Caluinists they make a foul matter of
this, and laugh loud at it, but good Catholics seeing they know not what to
say to it, they are silent, and hope all is well, and for the matter do
believe as the Church believes.


Also in the same Chapel, there is the third part of that pillar at which our
Lord Jesus was whipped in Pilats house.

And in this Chapel there is every day to be had remission of all a man's
sins.

But into this Chapel women may not enter. It seems strange that still women
may not come in the the holy places where remission of all sins is seeing the
good natured courtizans of Rome, are so kind to the Clergy of Rome, that they
bid them welcome, whether they come by day or by night: Or else belike women
there, need not to go to these holy places for remission, for that the
Priests, when they go from them, do give them absolution as part of their
wages: I say as part for seeing the poor women do pay a rent to his holiness
weekly, good reason they have some thing else, by which to raise their rents,
and to live by their trade: But let these go: good Catholics do more wonder
why honest and godly Matrons may not enter into those places, seeing Paul tells
us that in Christ there is no difference betwixt Male and Female: But no matter
what Saint Paul says, that must not trouble the conscience of a good
Catholic. He must consider what the Church delivers, and what the Pope
teaches, that must he harken and trust unto, and not trouble his head further
with Scripture matters, for that is very dangerous: But howsoever the dames of
Rome maynot go in, yet it is credibly hoped, that if our English Catholic
Ladies would leave this heretical dunghill of England, and come themselves to
the holy City of Rome, his holiness would be so favorable, and gracious to
them, as to give them leave to enter into those most holy places: for great is
the love that his holiness bears to our nation, for he loves our men, our
women, nay for baser things, he loves our silver and gold, and any thing that
comes from thence: Oh that our Catholic Ladies would go thither.


CAP. 12.
Indulgentiae Beatae Mariae maioris.
IN Ecclesia Beatae Mariae maioris ibi sunt omni die xlviij. anni Indulgent.
and tot carenae and terciae partis omnium peccatorum remissio.

Item in omnibus festiuitatibus virginis Mariae and in Natiuitate domini and in
Resurrectione domini and in festo Laurencij sunt ibi mill anni Indulgent.
Etiam in festo omnium Sanctorum est ibi omnium peccatorum remissio.

Ite^ in festo assu^ptionis Beatae Mariae Virginis vsque ad eius natiuitate^
sunt omni die xiiij anni Indulgentiarum and tot carenae, and tertiae partis
omnium peccatorum remissio. Omnes istae Indulgentiae in quadragesima
duplicantur.

Reliquiae predicta Ecclesiae.
ITem in summo altari requiescit corpus Sancti Mathai Apostoli and in alio
altari a dextro latere corpus Sancti Hieronimi, and ibi sunt aliae multae
reliquiae quiae in die paschae ostenduntur.

Item ibi est cunabulum Christi.

Item de ligno sanctae Crueis.

Item de lacte capillis ac vestimentis Beatae Mariae Virginis, and alia vestis
in qua Sanctus Hieronimus celebrauit missam.

Item brachium sancti Lucae Euangelistae.

Itam de reliquijs Sanctorum Cosmae and Damiani.

Itaem brachium sancti Thomae Cantuarien. Martiris and de vestibus eiusdem.

Item ibi est vna Image Beatae Mariae Virginis facta per manus Beati Lucae.

Item panniculus sanctissimi corporis Virginis Mariae quem filius eius Dominus
noster Jesus Christus nascendo secum adduxit and in illo velut in quodam pallio
inuolutus qui in Tabernaculo argenteo lapidibus preciosis ornatus retinetur
inclusus.

Item de feno in quo iacuit Jesus in presepio siti ortus.

CHAP. 12. Indulgences belonging to the Church of Saint Marie the greater.
IN the Church of Saint Marie the greater there be every day, eight and forty
years of pardon, and as many quarentens, and remission of the third part of
all a man's sins.

Also upon all and every the feast days of Saint Marie and of the birth and
resurrection of our Lord, and upon the feast day of Saint Laurence in all and
every of these days there are to be had in this Church a thousand years of
pardon, and upon the feast of all Saints there is full remission of all sins.

Also in the feast of the assumption of our Lady and so from thence until the
feast of her Nativity there are every day fourteen years of pardon, and as
many quarentens, and remission of the third part of all a man's sins. And all
these Indulgences, how many, or how great soever are doubled in Lent.

Relikes in the said Church.
IN the high altar of that Church lies the body of Saint Matthew the Apostle:
and in another altar on the right side thereof, the body of Saint Hierome: and
there be also many other relikes, which are always showed openly to the people
on Easter day.

Also there is the Cradle that Christ lay in.

Also some of the wood of the holy Cross.

Also some of the milk, and of the hair, and of the apparel of the blessed
Virgin Mary: there is also the vestment in which Saint Hieorme used to say
Mass.

Also there is an arm of Saint Luke the Evangelist.

Also some of the relikes of the holy Saints Cosmus and Damian.

Furthermore there is in the same Church an arm of Saint Thomas the Martire of
Canterbury, and some of his raiment. See how his holiness loves the English
nation, even so much as he makes great account of an arm of Thomas a Becket,
who you know in England, is held a traitor.


Moreover there is an Image of the blessed Virgin Marie, with Saint Luke took
and made with his own hands.

Also there is the very skin or pannikle that came out of the most holy body
of the Virgin Mary, which her son Jesus Christ our Lord, in his birth brought
with him, from her, in which he was wrapped, as in a coat, Here is a strange
relike, for where as all women use to burn that skin as soon as the child
is borne its maruailous that the Virgin Mary preserved hers: and if she would,
it is strange how she could do it. But it is to be thought by all good
Catholics, that some Angel took it, and laid it up safe till the time came
that the holy father of Rome knew how to make profitable use of it which
Christ himself that brought it into the world with him, nor his Apostles never
knew.
and this pannickle is laid up and kept close in a silver Tabernacle or
Cabinet set with many precious stones.

Also there is some of that very hay it self, in which Jesus lay in the Cratch
or Manger when he was borne. Good Catholics must not doubt, but some of that
hay was preserved, howsoever the Evangelists forgot to put it down.


CAP. 13
Indulgent. Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae to rocundae.
ITem in Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae Rotundae tercia Me^sis Maij and in festo
omnium sanctorum and in octauis assumptionis Beatae Mariae Virginis est ibi
remissio omnium peccatorum and omnibus diebus quarte, sunt ibi CCC anni
Indulgent. and tot earenae and tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissio.

CHAP. 13 Indulgences belonging to the Church of Saint Mary the Round.
IN the Church of Saint Mary the Round This is that Church which was once of
old building to heathen Jupiter: afterward Agrippa beautifying it, would have
dedicated it to the honor of Augustus, but he refusing it, he consecrated it
to Mars and Venus first, afterward it was held to be the Temple of the great
Mother of the gods, and consequently of all the gods, and was therefore called
Pantheon, and so continued for more then six hundred years after Christ, and
then Boniface obtained it of Phoca (the same holy man that killed his Master
Mauritius, and was Emperor in his steed, and the same that gave the Romish
Church to be the head and Mistress of all other in the world) and consecrated
it to the holy Virgin, and to all Saints, see Marlianus his Topographia Romae,
and Massonus de vitis pontificum.
upon the third day of the Month of May, and on the feast of all Saints, and
in the octaues of the assumption of blessed Mary the Virgin, there is remission
of all sins: and every Wednesday in the year, there are three hundred years
of pardon, and as many quarentens, and remission of the third part of all a
man's sins. Every Wednesday 300 years, that is in the total every year,
15600 years of pardon: a fair Indulgence, and no marvel, for if any one
Saints Church can give many years, then good reason that this should yield
good store, which is now the Church of all Saints: But mark here the wisdom
of the holy Roman Church, that makes these Indulgences grow due, not on the
Tewsday, nor Friday least it should be thought that they had been given to the
honor or proceeded from the virtue of Mars or Venus, to whom that Temple was
first consecrated, but on the Wednesday the day betwixt both.


CAP. 14.
Indulgent. Ecclesiae Mariae de Populo.
IN Ecclesiae Sanctae Mariae de populo est etiam Imago quaedam Beatae Mariae
Virginis per manus Sancti Lucae facta: Ibiest remissio omnium peccatorum in
assumptione Beatae Mariae Virginis.

In eadem Ecclesia sunt omni die duo millia octingenta anni Indulgent. and
mill CCCC xiiij carenae quas confirmauit Papa Paschalis primus, and Bonifacius
octanus and Gregorius nonus.

Reliquiae illius Ecclesiae.
PRimo est ibi vmbiculus domini nostri and de lacte Beatae Mariae Virginis.

Item de ossibus Sancti Petri and Pauli.

Item de ossibus Sancti Andreae Apostoli.

Item de ossibus Beatae Mariae Magdalenae.

Et de ossibus Beatorum Laurentij and Sixti.

CHAP. 14. Indulgences belonging to the Church of Saint Marie of the People.
IN the Church of Saint Marie of the People, so called, there is another
picture of the blessed Marie the Virgin, made by the hands of Saint Luke the
Evangelist. Catholics may see by his Gospel that Luke was an Evangelist, and
they may learn in his Gospel, and elsewhere in the Scriptures, if they might
so read them that he was a Physician, But that he was a picture drawer they
should not have known, but out of this blessed book. Therefore a fire and
faggot for the Caluinists, that would make us believe that all things needful
for salvation are contained in the Scripture, for how should good devout
Catholics have ever come to know this great point, had they been tied to the
Scripture alone.
In this Church there is remission of all sins in the feast of the assumption
of blessed Marie the Virgin.

In the same Church there are every day two thousand and eight hundred years
of pardon, Every day 2800 years of Indulgence, is more in the year then a
million of years: oh Indulgence of all Indulgences: See what a bountiful
Master our Lord God the Pope is.
and a thousand, four hundred and fourteen quarentens, all which, Pope
Paschall the first confirmed, and after him Boniface the eight, and Gregory the
ninth.

The Relikes of that Church.
FIrst there is the Navel of our Lord that was cut in his birth. And there is
some of the blessed Virgin Mary's milk.

And some of the bones of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Though it was said before
that just half of all Peter's and Paul's bones are in Peter's Church, and the
other in Paul's, and yet must it not trouble the devout Catholic, to hear
that some of their bones are in this Church also, let it suffice thee to
believe, what the Church teaches.


And some of the bones of Saint Andrew the Apostle.

And some of the bones of Saint Mary Magdalene.

And some of the bones of Saint Laurence, and Saint Sixtus.

CHAP. 15.
ITem in Ecclesia Sancti Iacobi est lapis super quem dominus noster Jesus
Christus fuit presentatus in templo and sunt ibi mill anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia Sancti Martini in montibus requiescit Sanctus Siluester, ibi
sunt cottidie CCC anni Indulgent.

Item Iuxta Sanctu^ Petru^ est ager dei and sunt ibi omni die mill anni
Indulgentiarum and tertiae partis omnium peccatorum remissio. In quo agro
Peregrini sepeliuntur quorum corpora post triduum non reperiuntur.

Item ibi est vnus lapis altus in cuius pinaculo est corpus Iulij Caesaris.

Item in Ecclesia Sancti Petri in carcere est remissio tertiae partis omnium
peccatorum and omni die CC anni Indulgent. quae omnibus vere penitentibus and
confessis a summis pontificibus sunt concessae totiens quotiens quis causa
deuotionis sieve peregrinationis visitauerit vel etiam suas eleemosinas
erogauerit, relaxatur ab omnibus peccatis.

Et ibi inferius est puteus sieve fons qui miraculose apparuit dum Sanctus
Petrus captus fuit Nerone Imperatore.

Item in Ecclesia Sancta Agnetis sunt xlvi anni Indulgent.

Et in festo illius CC anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia Sanctae Susannae vxoris Sancti Alexij CC anni Indugent.

Item in Ecclesia Sanctae Katharinae CC anni Inaulgent.

Et infesto eiusdem mill anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia Sanctae Felicitatis xl anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia Sanctae Lucie C anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia Sanctae Petronille mill anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia Sanctae Elizabe the C anni Indulgent. anni die.

Item in Ecclesia Sainctae Clare C anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia sanctae Mineruae mill anni Indulgent.

Item in Ecclesia sancti Iuliani scribitur sic.

Noscant vniuersi hanc paginam ininspectnri gratiam pietate dei and meritis
sancti Iuliani omnibus fidelibus datam, precipue si quis presumens iter
arripere peregrinationis pro animabus patris and matris ad dictam Ecclesiam and
cum deuotione vnum Pater noster and Aue maria dixerit prosperum fine
aduersitate obtinebit hospicium.

Reliquiae praedict. Ecclesiae.
ITem primo est ibi de lacte Mariae Virginis.

Item ibi est mentum Beati Iuliani.

Item de Crinibus Beati Iohannis Baptistae.

Item de spina de Corona qua coronatus crat Jesus. Item dentes Beatae
Apolloniae.

Of certain Indulgences and Relikes, of diverse other Churches.
IN the Church of Saint James there is the stone upon which our Lord Jesus
Christ was presented in the Temple, and at it there be a thousand years of
pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Martine on the hill lies Saint Siluester, and
there be daily there three hundred years of pardon.

Also not far from Saint Peter's Church there is a field called Gods field,
where there are every day a thousand years of pardon and remission of the
third part of all a man's sins. In this field Pilgrims are buried, and their
bodies after three days are found no more. Of this strange field read in the
larger notes or comment.


Also there is one stone of a great height, upon whose pinnacle or top, there
is the body Here is a holy relicke indeed, namely the body of Julius Caesar
it is pity so great a Saint has not a day in the Calendar, which many have
that were never so well known as Julius Caesar.
of Julius Caesar.

Also in the Church of Saint Peter at the prison, there is remission of the
third part of all a man's sins: and every day two hundred years of pardon,
all which are granted by diverse Popes to such as shall be truly penitent, and
be confessed so often as any man shall either for cause of devotion or of
pilgrimage visit the said Church or else if he give his alms unto it: thus
doing, he is released of all his sins.

Also there a little below is a well which appeared and spange up miraculously
when Saint Peter was laid hold of by Neroe the Emperonr.

Also in the Church of Saint Agnes there are six and forty years of pardon.

And upon her feast day two hundred years.

Also in the Church of Saint Susan, who was wife to Saint Alexius two hundred
years of pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Katrine there are two hundred years of pardon.

And upon her feast day a thousand years.

Also in the Church of Saint Felicity are forty years of pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Lucie a hundred years of pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Petronilla a thousand years of pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Elizabeth a hundred years of pardon every day.

Also in the Church of Saint Clare a hundred years of pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Mynerua a thousand years of pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Julian it is thus written.

Know all men whosoever shall look upon this chapter that by the goodness of
God, and merits of Saint Julian, grace and pardon is granted from God, to all
faithful men. Especially if any man do undertake a journey of pilgrimage to
this Church for the souls of his father and mother, and shall there say with
devotion one Pater noster and one Aue, he shall also be sure to obtain a
prosperous journey, good lodging without danger of theenes or any other
adversity. See what a sweet and comfortable thing it is to travel to Rome,
when a man is sure by virtue of the Popes Indulgence to escape thieves and all
his journey long to be sure of good lodging: who that believes this would not
travel to Rome?


The Relics of the same Church.
FIrst of all there is in this Church some of the milk of our Lady.

Also there is Saint Iulians beard.

Also there is some of Saint John Baptists hair.

Also some of the crown of thorns with which Jesus Christ was crowned.

Also some of the teeth of Saint Appollonie. And all these are so miraculously
market, as they cannot be counterfeited, no, nor changed neither, but when it
pleases his holiness, for the greater edification of his good Catholics.


CAP. 16.
ITem in Ecclesia sancti Euzebij and Vincentij CCC anni Indulgent. and ibi est
brachium Beati Christopheri.

Item in Ecclesia sancti Viti and Modesti and aliorum millium Martirum sunt
omni die septem melle anni Indulgent. and tot carenae and tertiae partis omnium
peccatorum remissio.

Item in Ecclesia sanctae Potentianae ibi est scampnum super quo Christus
sedebat cum discipulis suis in cena ibi est mill Indulgent omni die.

Item in Ecclesia sancti Anthonij ibi conceditur sextae partis omnium
peccatorum remissio.

Item in Ecclesia Sancti Petri ad Vincula, ibi sunt Cathenae cum quibus Sanctus
Petrus fuit Cathenatus quas portauit filius Theodotij de Jerusalem. Quam
Ecclesiam pellagius Papa primo die Augusti consecrauit and remissionem omnium
peccatorum ibidem concessit.

Reliquiae quae sunt in Ecclesia quae vocatur ara Celi.
ITem in Ecclesia fratru^ minorum quae vocatur ara Caeli, ibi sunt vestigia
Angeli in lapide stantis and Regina Caeli laetare cantantis in castello Sancti
Angeli.

Item in eadem Ecclesia est primum altar totius mundi confectum.

Item dicitur quod Octauianus Imperator vidit circulum in Celo and ibi
pulcherimam and gloriosissimam virginem Mariam super altar stantem and suis
brachijs puerum tenentem qui ammiratus valde audiuit vocem de caelo dicsentem
and haec est ara caeli, filij dei qui statim procidens in terram adorauit
Christum venturum.

Haec visio facta fuit in camera Octauiani Imperatoris vbi ipsum primum Altar
construxit.

Et est ibi dominica dic and assumpsionis Beatae Mariae Virginis, omnium
peccatorum remissio.

Item est ibi vna venerabilis Imago Mariae Virginis manibus Beati Lucae
depicta. Quam venerabilem Imaginem Beatus Gregorius in processione portans
tempore quo illa horribilis pestilentia fuerat Romae cum magna solemnitate:
veniente processione prope Castellu^ Sancti Angeli, Angelus Marmoreus qui se
inclinauerat sepe ad hanc venerabilem Imaginem Beatae Mariae Virginis, pluribus
videntibus and audientibus, Regina caeli laetare, all luia cantauit: Et
composuit Beatus Gregorius. Ora pro nobis Deum Alleluia etc.

CHAP. 16. Of Indulgences and Relics in diverse other Churches.
IN the Church of Saint Euzebius and Vincentius, there are three hundred years
of pardon, and in that Church there is the arm of Saint Christopher.

Also in the Church of Saint Vitus and Modestus, and of a thousand other
Martires, there are every day seven thousand years of pardon, Here is yet one
Indulgence greater then any of the former, 7000. years every day, which is in
one year more then two millions of years: Oh how endless and infinite is the
love of our holy father the Pope to his devout children.
and as many quarentens, and remission of the third part of a man's sins.

Also in the Church of Saint Potentiana, there is the stool, or bench, or
form whereupon Christ sat at his last supper with his Disciples. For good
reason seeing the table came the stool should come also.
In this Church there are every day a thousand years of pardon.

Also in the Church of Saint Anthony there is granted remission of the sixth
part of all a man's sins.

Also in the Church of Saint Peter ad Vincula there be the Chains, with which
Saint Peter was bound in prison which the son of Theodosius the Emperor did
bring with him from Jerusalem. But who kept these holy chains in Jerusalem,
all those four hundred years long, from Saint Peter's time to the days of
Theodosius, the book tells us not: therefore let not good Catholics be too
curious to inquire, this is not fit to be written, but let them go to Rome,
and there they may learn it in private, for this is the wisdom of his
holiness, and the holy fathers of the society, not to make all things plain
by writing, that so they may inuit devout Catholics to come to Rome, to ask
what is not elsewhere revealed, that so in Rome they may be partakers of all
the invaluable riches of the Popes treasure, and of the holiness of the pure
Clergy, and of the virtue of the many precious relickes that be there.
This Church did Pope Pellagius consecrate the first day of August and granted
unto it full remission of all sins.

Relickes in the Church that is called Ara Caeli, or the altar of heaven.
IN the Church of the Friars Minors, which is called the Altar of Heaven, there
be the foote-steppes of the Angel that stood upon the stone and sung (Regina
Caeli laetare, or, rejoice the Queen of Heaven) in the Castle of Saint Angel.
This is very likely, that Angels have so gross and heavy bodies, that they
leave their foote-steppes in stones where they tread. But is not this a great
miracle, that when the Angels sung Gloria in excelsis to God, they left no
print behind them: But when they sung to the praise of a creature, then they
made and left the impression of their footesteppes.


Also in the same Church there is the first altar that ever was made in the
whole world.

Concerning which altar, thus it is said that on a time Octauian the Emperor
saw a Circle in the Heavens, and in the Circle the most beautiful and glorious
Virgin Mary standing upon an Altar, and in her arms holding a child: The
Emperor amassed at this sight, heard a voice, that said to him from Heaven,
This is the Altar of Heaven, of Gods Son. Octanian hearing this, instantly
fell down upon the earth, and worshipped Christ to come.

This vision was seen in the chamber of Octauian the Emperor, and in that
chamber he built the first Altar. Must not this be an holy Altar that was made
by so great a Saint as the Heathen Emperor Augustus? But if any ask how this
can be the first Altar, when as we herd before there is in Saint John's Church
the Altar that Saint John Baptist said Mass on in the wilderness. Let not
this trouble the good Catholic for is it not likely that Saint Octauian would
send this his new made Altar to John Baptist from Rome? Yes verily as likely as
that he made any.


And at this Altar there is every Sunday and upon the assumption of our Lady
the blessed Virgin, pardon and remission of all sins.

Also there is a worshipful Image of Mary the Virgin painted by the hands of
blessed Luke: See what good hap the holy Roman Church has, that all the
pictures she has of the Virgin Mary were drawn by the hands of Saint Luke
himself, but he forgot to tell us this when he wrote his Gospel, or rather
he left it for the Pope to teach in aftertimes, when greater points are to be
reueiled then the Scripture teaches, or then were fit for those times.
which worshipful Image, whilst blessed Gregory carried in procession with
great solemnity, at that time when there was a horrible pestilence in Rome
(that it was called the great plague) as the procession came near the Castle
of Saint Angello, the Angel of Marble, as often times before it had bowed it
self to this venerable Image Caluinists and Lutherans will not worship Images.
But we see here that the Image of marble did worship the Image of our Lady.
Is it not strange that a graven Image should bow to a painted Image? But such
and so wonderful are the miracles in the holy Roman Church, and so deep are
the mysteries of her piety.

Away therefore to the fire with these cursed Heretics that will worship no
images: More hard hearted are they then the Marble Angel which full devoutly
bowed it self to the Venerable image. But no marvel though they be worse then
marble, when it is apparent (as the Jesuits have learnedly of late proved
from France) that they be worse then the devil? For they deny purgatory, but
the devils confess it; they say the Roman Church is not the true Church, but
the devils dare swear it by all the faith and truth that is in them: Nay they
have renounced God and their part in heaven, if the Roman Church be not the
true Church: So far better are they then these Heretics; And therefore it
is great marvel that some nice Catholics hold that we may not equivocate
with these Heretics, nor delude them, nor deceive, nor oppress them, but
that it must be called cruelty. For what can be hard or sharp enough,
toward such beasts as are worse then devils, and harder hearted then marble
stones: or what good Catholics care what they do to such base and vile
Heretics: who it is certain are greater enemies to the Roman faith and
Church, that now be, then the devil him: Let them therefore go as they be.

But whereas some tender hearted Catholics, do here make a question how the
marble Image was made straight again, when it had bowed it self, alas that
they should be so scrupulous, for could not the holy Image as easily rear up
it self again as it bowed it self down? Yes assuredly and I think the very
Heretic will not deny it: Therefore that needs not to move you: But the
other doubt I confess is of more difficulty, namely that a goodly graven Image
should bow to an Image that was but painted, and the Image of an Angel to the
Image of a woman, or to any but the Image of GOD.

This is certainly some great mystery, I have asked of the holy fathers and
priests that come thither of it, but they answer me diuersely, and no marvel
though the best wits differ in so dark and difficult, and deep a question:
Therefore the best advise is that till his Holiness call another Council, if
any man list to be resolved, Let him go to Rome, and repair to the Chair
that cannot err: and besides an infallible resolution, he may happily find
such excellent instructors, and such good examples there, as may make him, as
devout, as holy, as tender hearted, as is the marble Image that stands at the
gate of the Castle of Saint Angel.


of the blessed Virgin Mary, so now in the presence of many that saw and heard
it, it sung out aloud, Alleluia and Regina caeli laetare, and thereupon Saint
Gregory made the prayer. Ora pro nobis Deum Alleluia.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for George Norton, and are to be sold at his
Shop near Templebarre Gate. 1617.


