The Broken Heart: OR, DAVID'S PENANCE, Fully expressed in holy Meditations upon
the 51 PSALM, BY That late Reverend Pastor SAM. PAGE, Doctor in Divinity, and
Vicar of Deptford Strond, in the County of Kent.

Published since his death, BY NATHANAEL SNAPE of Grayes Inn, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, 1637.

TO THE HONORABLE, Sir ROBERT AYTON, Principal Secretary to the Queens most
excellent Majesty, and Master of Saint Katherines, near the Tower of LONDON.
Sir,
MY intentions had fastened the patronage of this Book upon that pious and
Right Honorable Gentleman, Sir Julius Caesar (your predecessor in the
Mastership of St Katherines) whose dedication of himself to that great Master
and maker of the world, renders you the Successor of his place and my service.
Therefore, and because all that know you rightly, speak you to be a friend to
Learning, and Philagathus in abstracto, a true Religion Lover, I thought fit to
present these devou^ Meditations to your judicious acceptance. These royal
Penitentials deduced and exemplified unto us from the sacred person of a King,
conclude all persons and degrees from an exemption in the practice: And the
command of that excellent duty is more especially incumbent on us in these
particular times of humiliation, when that formidable pestilentiall sword has
so smitten us, and hangs still so perpendicularly over our heads. The profit of
Repentance, it removes our sin in reatu and poena, it blunts that weapons
point, whose thirst is sooner quenched with ^ear and then blood, and it
prefers the miserable delinquent from the shameful Bar to the most
glorious Bench. Let the Reverend Authors pen declare his worth, and let the
work commend it self to the world. Only Sir, be you pleased to give it
countenance and protection, which I am confident will improve it to a more
general and public approbation, and make it the more redundant in the
Churches benefit. Health, honor, and Heaven at last I wish you from the heart
of

Your humble Servant, N. S.

MEDITATIONS upon the 51. PSALM.
VERSE I. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness:
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.
IN this Psalm David is,

1. For himself, ad fin. v. 17. 2. Then for the Church, 18. 19. In the first
part.
1. He is all crying God mercy and supplication, v 1, 2. 2. Confession of
sins, 3, 4, 5, 6. 3. Supplication against, 7. ad fin. 17.
1. In the first consider,

1. What ailes him? where is his grief? his transgressions, his iniquity, his
sin. 2. What remedy, loving kindness: multitude of tender mercies. 3. What
effect of these: to blot out, to wash thoroughly, and cleanse away all this
uncleanness.
3. What he ailes.

He varieth the phrase, and calls his disease, transgressions. 1.
Arias Mont. renders it, praevaricationes, to our sense. For the Law sets
us bounds; thus far we may go, and no further: every sin is a
transgression, an overreaching of our bounds.

Peshang signifies the same, to forsake the commandment, and it answers Gods
challenge of him by Nathan: Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the
2. Sam. 12 9.
Lord?

Verse. 2. He calls his grief his iniquities: these also are 2.
against the Law, which S. Pa^l calls holy, and just.

He calls it sin, which is (...), which is, privatio 3.
legis. This shewethus the danger of all our sins.

They put us out of the way: for our way is the way of Gods commandments: all
other are called false ways.

It is Uia legis, the way of the Law, which guides our thoughts, words, and
actions.

It is Via veritatis, the way of truth, which guides our understandings, and
judgments.

It is via pacis, the way of peace, which guides our heart, and the affections
thereof. Sin puts us out of all these ways. Into those false ways which
David does utterly abhor. Yet he is fallen into them by a strong temptation.

It is our wisdom to know and consider the nature of sin, that every sin
is transgression of Gods Law.

So Joseph answered his wanton Mistress: How shall I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? And now David has bethought him, he says
to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord.

We must not think, that any of our sins do hurt God, or take from him any
thing to empaire him. For when we live in his obedience, we give him occasion
to exercise his holiness in our sanctification: his goodness in our
conservation: his bounty in donation of all good to us. But if we transgress,
he exercises his wisdom in his detection of us: his holiness in abhorring
of us: his justice in punishing of us.

So that the going out of our way which he has set us in, his Law, is the
hinderance of our own journey, and the danger of our own souls and bodies.

It is our great blindness of judgment, and hardness of heart, that we
should delight in sin against the Law of God.

The Law of God is an undefiled law. The Law is holy, Romans 7. 1^.
and the commandment holy, just, and good.

This was ordained of God to be a bridle to restrain sin: yet our corruption
has made it a spur to provoke and put on sin. So the Apostle found it. For
sin, that Ver. 13.
it might appear sin, working death in us by that which is good, that sin
by the commandment might be exceeding sinful.

For corrupt nature is impatient of restraint: and no fruit seems so fair to
the eye, or taste so sweet to the palate, as the forbidden fruit does. Every
man above all things in the world affects his own will, and desires liberty
to do what seems good in his own eyes.

The Law does restrain us of this: and it is,

1. Holy, in directing us a way wherein we may w^lk in all pleasing to God. 2.
Just, in declaring the danger of going astray from it. 3. Good, in rewarding
our obedience: for godliness has the promises of this life, etc.
David has professed great love to this Law; great delight in it, all his
Psalms over. He has confessed great benefits received from it: yet here he
confesses transgression, and iniquity, and sin: he has not kept this Law
and has sinned against God.

Now we see in this example, how heavy sin is, when the conscience grows
sensible of it. Nothing so pleasant as our sin, for the time: but Cito
praeterit, quod delectat: It soon passes away, which delights: now David
gronesunder the burden of it: he has the whole weight of the law upon him for
it; and he has found that he has walked contrary to God*

We have great use of this recollection of ourselves.

1. We have need of God every moment for his help, and comfort, and counsel.
So long as our sins are upon our conscience unrepented, unpardoned, we cannot
pray to God for any favor.

2. We cannot give thanks: as our prayers are turned into sin, if we regard
wickedness in our hearts: for God hears not sinners.

1. Impenitents. 2. So our thanks-givings are but the sacrifices of fools. 3.
We cannot hear with profit: for good seed must be sown in good ground. 4. We
cannot receive the holy Sacrament: for pearls must not be given to swine. So we
are unfit for all acts and exercises of Religion. And especially upon our
deathbeds, when we should part with this life. Our iniquities show us quite
out of heavens way, and we have no warrant to commend our spirits into the
hands of God: for he receives no such souls as turn aside to crooked ways; he
leads them forth with workers of iniquity.
There is none so unhappie, as the impenitent sinner. For the world cannot be
friend him, and God will not. Who shall then have pity upon thee, O Jesus?

David feels the burden of sin importable.

There is no rest in my bones, because of my sin. For Psalm. 38. 3. etc.
mine iniquities are gone over my head: as an heavy burden, they are too heavy
for me. My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness. I am
troubled: I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the day long.

S. Augustine very judiciously looks beyond David in this Psalm, and makes
the whole Psalm the complaint of Christ. Who though he were free from the
infection of sin, yet was he over-laden with the burden thereof, for God
laid on him the iniquities of us all.

So the point is more pressed to the conscience of a sinner: for if my sins
could make the soul of Christ heavy to death: if my sins could make him sweat
water and blood, and pray with strong cries and supplications: how blind must
my reason be if I see them not? How insensible and dull must I be, if I feel
not the stench and annoyance, the weight and burden of them?

For these iniquities do move God to anger: and it is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of God in his displeasure: for even our God is a consuming fire.
Now we see in David's example, how combersome a few sins are, and what fear,
what agony of heart, what grief, what shame they bring. We have cause to lay
this to our hearts: for when we shall see our many crying, bold, presumptuous
sins together in order before us: when our conscience shall tell us, not
only that we have received the grace of God in vain; but that we have turned
the grace of God into wantonness, and have abused his best ^avours, and
despised his threatenings: At once carrying in our faces Cains frowns, and in
our heart Cains malice against our brother, having Esa^s profaneness, Achans
theft, Ahabs oppression: out-sinning those who are in the holy story the spots
and blemishes of their times. How does Satan benight us, if we discern not
our fault, and our danger? How does he harden our hearts if we feel not the
burden? How does he benumme and dead the conscience, if the lash of our
iniquities do not smart upon us?

We have cause to think upon it now, if our Land after so great blessings of
God, swarm at this day with impious sins, if Religion has suffered symonie
and oppression, pride and drunkenness. Sodom and Gomorrah were modest sinners
in comparison of us. It will be easier for them one day: for we live in the
light, we have more knowledge of our Masters will then our fathers had.

Pulpit and Press have filled the ear and eye with the ways of life. And we
are filii tenebrarum sons of darkness still, and walk in the paths of death.
We are hearers only, deceiving our own selves, and the more we know of our
Masters will, the more stripes it will cost us that we have done so little of
it; we have gathered such dross to our gold, that it will ask an hot fire to
refine us. God in favor yet forbeareth us, expecting our repentance: and there
is no hope of his love but in that way.

To fast and mourn for a day, to ask God forgiveness, to promise amendment,
is no more then Ahab may do, and it may spinne out the time, and put off
judgment for a while. But plangere commissa, to bewail sins committed, is
but a part of repentance, and it has lost the labor, and our tears shall
never be put into the bottle: if after we do committere plangenda, commit
sins to be bewailed.

Transgressions, iniquities, sins; these are our disease, and that which
threatens it mortal, is our dangerous impenitencie.

2. What remedy?

Mercy: this is the sovereign remedy: this heals all diseases: but some few
drops of this balm will not do it here. David knows that God has sundry
vessels of this wine, some stronger then other: he desires to draw of the
strongest, and for quantity he desires the multitude, a great measure, and
that running over: for quality, his tenderest and dearest compassions. Those
that are extracted and distilled to the height of strength, sins of
ignorance, sins of infirmity and weakness: sins committed with
reluctation and resistance, the Fathers have called venial, because a small
measure of Gods mercy will remove them and their punishment: but studied sins
acted after deliberation, and practiced upon advise, and used to hide and
shelter other sins, have a more provoking quality in them to kindle the
wrath of God, a worse deserving condition to draw that wrath upon us. David
needs the most, the best and strongest of these mercies for his transgressions.
Saint Augustine, Attendis contemptores ut corrigas, nescientes ut doce^^,
confitentes ut ignoscas: Thou observest the despisers, to correct them; the
ignorant, to teach them; the confessors of sin, to pardon them. Zachary
calls these mercies that he beggeth, (...), the bowels of the mercy of our
God. Sicut pater miseretur, as a father takes pity: Christ has given us a full
example of such a Father in the parable of the prodigal. Look how high the
heaven is above the earth, so high is the mercy of God to them that fear him:
that is nothing in comparison: for mercy cannot be numbered. This is that which
boundeth the waters of the Sea, that they do not return to drown the earth.
This keeps his fire and brimstone bound up, that it falls not upon our
Cities and Towns, our persons, and cattle, to consume them. This locketh up
the earth underneath us, that it does not open the mouth to swallow us up
quick. This keeps the key of his treasures of judgments, that they cannot
come abroad to destroy and consume the world, as Jeremy says: Lam 3. 22.
It is of the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. They are new every morning. 23. 32.
Though he cause grief, yet he will have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies: for he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
children of men. They that love lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.

The mercy of God is called our mercy, for God has no occasion to use his
mercy any where else but among the sons of men. The Angels that sinned are
not capable of it. The Angels that stand in their first estate never came to
misery, and they stand by the providence and love of God. But sinful man
makes God called merciful, and he puts him to his multitude of tender
compassions. This is the rock of our refuge, our strong City of refuge against
the pursuer, it is our hiding place. In nothing does God comfort us more.
Therefore be ye merciful with this sicut: Sicut pater vester coelestis: as your
heavenly Father.

There is nothing that flattereth sin more, and that gives it growth and
vegetation amongst us, then the overweening of this mercy. Every wicked man
can say, God has multitude of tender compassions: and his mercies are more
then my sins: it is true. But what interest such a one may have in those
mercies, he little considers. For with the Lord is mercy, that he may be
feared: and that a sinner may apply himself not to continue in his finne
presuming upon it, but for sake it believing it: for he that confesses and for
saketh his sin shall have this mercy.

Let us therefore begin with David at Confitebor contra me, I will confess
against my self, and say: Peccavi contra Dominum, I have sinned against the
Lord: with a conscience of our sins, and a sense both of the pollution of
them within our selves, and of the provocation of Gods due displeasure against
us for them. Then it will be in season to call for mercy.

But if we over-weene our own integrity, as some justiciaries do: Sani non
egent medico: the whole need no Physician: or if we sin on in confidence of
mercy at last: We shall find that God sits in his throne, and judges
uprightly; and that the ungodly shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in
the congregation of the righteous. For the Lord knows the way of the just:
but the way of the ungodly shall perish.

3. What effect he desires of these mercies? This is varied in phrase, for he
is passionate, and exceeding earnest with God, and plieth him with strong cries
and supplications.

1. To blot out his transgressions. 2. To wash him thoroughly. 3. To cleanse
him.
1. The blotting out of his transgressions, has reference to the books of God,
wherein all our transgressions are recorded.

1. The book of Gods remembrance. 2. The book of our conscience.
1. The book of Gods remembrance. God is a Seer, and there is nothing hid from
his eye: and he does consider the sons of men: his eyes are upon all his
ways. There is not a thought in our hearts, but he knows it long before we
our selves know it. As he sees, so he remembers, and that we call his book of
accounts, wherein he records all that is said, done or thought: that he may
judge us according to all that is registered in that book whether it be good or
evil. He is said to blot us out of that book, when our true repentance, and
his free pardon has removed our iniquity from us. Two Doctrines arise from
hence.

1. One of terror: all our sins are booked and kept upon record. 2. Another
of comfort: they may be blotted out thence.
1. Doctr. Knowing the terror of the Lord, we must be wariehow we sin
against him; for though we love sin, he hates it. He is a God that loves
not wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with him. Though we slight
sin, and pass it over gainsomely and pleasantly; yet he takes it to heart,
and records it, that he may be able to set all our sins in order before us,
when time comes. This is a black book, and it will be a fearful and shameful
thing to behold all our sins inventoried together.

All our idle words, vain, lascivious, malicious, false, slanderous speeches:
all our loose thoughts; all our vast and unlawful desires, all our ungodly
works done; all the good duties omitted; all the evils we would have done; all
the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts: are not all these things
written in his book? We may conceive it by this. David has the honorable
memory of walking in all the ways of God always, save only in the matter of
Uriah the Hittite.

That matter is recorded in this living book of holy Scripture: so are many of
the infirmities of his holy ones: chiefly for terror of his children, that
they might fear to sin against him, who keeps so exact a score of all our
transgressions.

These are called debts, and God our creditour keeps his debt-book very
perfect. The Steward in the parable called his Masters debtors: they could tell
every man what he owed: but who knows how often he has offended? We have no
hope to pay these debts: and therefore we desire mercy to blot them out of the
book.

And if we look back upon the transgressions of our whole life, we shall see
need not only of the loving kindness of the Lord; but of the multitude of his
tenderest compassions.

2. Another book is the book of our Conscience: this also keeps a record
against us. It was called of old, our inwit; for though our appetite and witbe
so corrupt that the deceivable lusts of the flesh do often transport us to Gods
offense: yet our understanding, and reason, and memory, inform our conscience
of our sins, and that booketh them. This book is not so exactly kept as the
other, because

1. Many sins pass us, which we are not aware of. 2. Many thoughts, words,
and works escape us, which we think to be no sins, our consciences not being
rightly informed. 3. Many sins our memory does not retein, which should give
in evidence to our conscience against us. 4. The conscience it self may be
corrupted, benumbed, seared, and so many foul deeds may escape unrecorded. Yet
for all this, if we had no other book opened against us to convince us of sin
but this: This alone would call us guilty, and expose us to wrath.
David sueth to have his transgressions blotted out of both these books. For if
the tender mercies of God should blot his book, and the book of our conscience
remain against us, we should live upon the rack in a perpetual torture, our
spirit wounded within us.

It is well observed of Cardinal Bellarmine, Sciebat David ex action peccati
relinqui in anim^ reatum mortis aeternae: David knew that by the acting of
sin, in his soul was left the guilt deserving eternal death. You may
discern the convulsions and strong cramps of the soul for sin in David.
There is no rest in my bones because of my sin. So long as we live in sin
we feel not the pain of Psalm. 38. 3.
it* David for ten months found no great need of these mercies of God.

For a sinner during his impenitencie is as a man besides himself: but reversus
ad se, returning to himself, then he bethinketh in what case he stands before
God. Demersus in profundo, drowned in the deep, the Sea above him seems not
heavy. Elementa in loco non ponderant: Elements in their places are not heavy.
But take him from his sin a little, and set them within an optique distance,
that he may see them: he will both see the in numberablenesse, and feel the
heaviness of them.

We believe a day of judgment designed and ordained of God for a severe audit
of all our sins. We are in that day judged by both these books of Gods
remembrance, and of our own conscience. For so we shall be our own judges: and
there can be no hope for such as have these books opened against them. God
cannot forget. Our conscience cannot but accuse, so that we are all children of
wrath, and in a state of condemnation. The judge may say, Quid opus est
testibus? What need of witnesses? for the least, one of these legions of sins
that we are guilty of has weight enough to weigh us down to the bottom of
hell. All these will make the pit shut her mouth upon us.

2. But against this David does show comfort, when he prays to have his
transgressions blotted out of Gods book. For this shows that there is a way
out of the danger of the vengeance to come. The book wherein all our debts are
recorded may be crossed, and the offenses may be blotted out. The way is,

1. The justice of God must be satisfied, our debt paid: for God can neither
falsify his truth, who has threatened sin with vengeance: nor satisfy and
silence his justice without it. So that we must find Jesus Christ in this
prayer, without whom there is no acceptance to God for a sinner: for our life
is hid with God in Christ; we appear in our selves no other but dead in
trespasses and sins. But Christ is our life: and the loving kindness that
David prays for here, is that wherewith God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten Son, that we might not perish, but have everlasting life.

And the tender mercies which he craveth, are those of which Zachary does
speak: Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from on
high has visited us. To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death: and to guide our feet into the way of peace.

Here is Via lactea, the milkie way, the very way of salvation: for the tender
mercies of God give not only light of comfort to cheer our hearts; but light
of direction also, to guide our ways, and that is the blotting away our
repented sins.

2. Another phrase follows, which shows how this foul record may be
blotted out of Gods Tables.

VERSE 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity*
THis shows that Iniquity is a foul and defiling 1
blemish, and needs washing.

So foul as no washing will do it, but 2
Lava tu, wash thou.

So foul, as it will need his washing 3
thoroughly.

1. Lava, Wash.

His calling for so much mercy shows his fear of iniquity: his calling for
all this washing shows his shame of it. He does not desire to have it hidden
from sight, but quite removed. Not removed only from the book of Gods
remembrance; but washed out of the book of his own conscience also.

Sin is of that foul nature, that it defiles the conscience of a man, and
makes him unclean.

I think no man will deny but David notwithstanding this sin, was a
regenerate man. For even this Psalm which confesses this uncleannes^e in him
is part of holy Scripture: and the penne-men of Scripture were all holy, and
wrote as they were guided by the Spirit of God. He sees and confesses a
pollution, and would feign be quit of it.

Yet some of late have so cleared a regenerate man from all sin, that they
say, God can find no sin at all in them.

It is true, that God sees no iniquity in his elect, to condemn them for it:
for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. But then they
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. But if any of the elect turn
out of the way for a time to walk after the flesh, as David here did: he sees
that sin, he hates it, he punishes them for it, and till he has washed them
from it, they remain defiled with it. Therefore they pray to be washed.

Naaman for a leprosy in the body, must wash in Iordane. Sin is the leprosy
of the soul: and as the bodily leprosy did defile the person that had it, the
clothes that he wore, the bed that he lay upon, the very walls of the house
where he remained, that all must be purged, and it cast him that had it out of
the camp: So the leprosy of sin makes all things unclean within and without
us that we do but touch. Whatsoever the unclean person touches, Number. 19. 22.
shall be unclean.

This is the cause of the groaning of the creature: for though it has gone the
way of the creation from the beginning, yet it is become subject to vanity by
the pollution of our sins: and our iniquity reaches to the heavens, it
defiles the celestial bodies above us, and the earth beneath us, because
these have been aiding and assisting to us in our sins; not of any evil
disposition in themselves, but by our abuse of them to Gods dishonor. All this
presses a necessity of our continual washing: both for the defiling which is
within us, and for the pollution that comes from us. We must hate the garment
that is spotted with the flesh. This made David desire to be washed thoroughly.

Multiplica lavare, multiply to wash, some do render it: others, Amplius lava,
wash me more, as Peter, Not my feet only, but my hands and my head.

Naaman must wash seven times in Iordane, to put off his bodily leprosy. Sin
which is the leprosy of the soul cleaves so close to us, that we had need of
an often and a scouring lather to rinse our defiled souls. For as to the pure
all things are pure: So to them that are defiled is nothing T^^ ^. 15.
pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled. There is nothing that
nourishes sin more in us then an opinion of an easiness to repent, when we
will to put it off.

Beloved, diseases are never so painful to us, as when we are put to it, to
take much physic for them. For for the time, the physic is more painful then
the disease: violent purgings, strong vomits, languishing sweats, bleeding,
bitter pills, and potions, unpleasing diet: yet great diseases ask a suffering
of all these for health. But in a dangerous disease, we call upon our Physician
not to spare us, so he recover us. Ths is it in the state of our diseased
souls, we must take strong physic to remove violent and dangerous diseases.

David describing his sin, says; My wounds stink, and are corrupt: Do you
know the pain of washing such ^s^^ 38* 5.
wounds? Do you not perceive the necessity of it? There is no dallying in such
cases, lest our negligence make the malady gangren, and prove immedicable. It
will ask sharp water to wash these wounds, and they are tender, and this must
be done often.

Beloved, let me tell you that Satan befooleth us with many false pleasures of
vanity, which make these wounds in our souls: We pay dear for them, when we
come to this washing. And he that considers it well, will know the terror of
the Lord, and be afraid to give way to temptations that may put him to the pain
of repentance.

It is true that nothing in this world is so painful as true repentance. It is
called mortification, killing the old man: not every kind of death, crucify
the flesh, Mors l^nt^, violenta, dedecorosa: a death slow, violent,
disgraceful. It is called the breaking of the heart: the renting and t^aring
of it in pieces. It is sackcloth for clothing* baldness for beauty: it is
Amaritudo animae, the bitter ness^ of soul. Yet for all this, Multiplica
lavare, multiply to wash. I^ dross be mingled with our gold, it will ask an
hot fire to purge it out, and that is repentance.

Behold Niniveh doing penance for her sins. The King ^o^^h 36^
arose from his throne, he laid his roabe from him, and covered him with
sackcloth, and sat in ashes: proclaimed; Let neither man nor beast taste any
thing, let them not feed, nor drink water. But let man and beast be covered
with sackcloth. Here is a City washed thoroughly in a bath of repentant and true
tears. Ecce Rex t^ns venit tibi mansuetus; Behold thy King comes to thee meek:
the true and living picture of mortification. He that sat on a throne of
majesty and honor, a glorious King, arose from his throne, as if his throne
trembled under him in a we of the supreme throne which is set for justice upon
all the world. He lays down his glory, and casts his Crown at the footstool
of the most high. All the ensigns of honor and principality above men he
puts off, and puts himself into the number and rank of common men. He puts
off his royal garments, the habit of glory. He puts on sackcloth, the dress
and trim of repentance and humility. He casts himself on the ground: there
he sits in an heap of ashes. He depriveth himself of his food: and then,
Regis ad exemplum, according to the Kings example, all do so. What can be added
to this unworthying of himself? He thought himself neither worthy of honor,
nor raiment, nor ease, nor food. Not made only a common man, but as one of the
beasts of the earth: they were also clad in sackcloth.

Job in cinere, in ashes: dust to dust. Thus the sin of pride does penance,
in coming down and abusing themselves. The sin of vanity in apparel does
penance in sackcloth. The sin of delicacie and niceness: in a seat of ashes.
The sin of drunkenness and gluttony, in fasting: not bread, not water. The
sin of contempt and scorn of one another, does penance in an equality of
like condition: behold and see which is the King, which is the Subject; nay,
which is the man, which is the beast, all in one Liverie of sorrow and shame,
all in sackcloth. Yet let me use the words of our Savior of this sight:
Solomon in all his glorious royalty was not apparreled like one of these.

Never did Niniveh show fairer in the eyes of heaven then this day: never was
Nineveh so thoroughly washed, never so clean.

Me thinks I hear the voice of God, saying, as of Ahab, so much rather so, of
Niniveh. See thou how Niniveh humbles it self before me? It was a day of
Ninivehs 1* Reg* 2^. 29.
purification: and God was appeased, the doom of her destruction graciously
reversed.

David himself in this story feeling the hand of God upon him in the
visitation of his child refused his bed, laid him down on the earth, would not
wash, or anoint, or change garments, refused to eat his bread.

We visit the Courts of Princes in our bravest trim. We find the face and
favor of God soonest in our worst clothes, and meanest accoutrements. All this
is thought nothing: the Penitent says, I will yet be more vile. When Benhadad
the proud provoker of King Ahab was down 1 Reg. ^0. 31.
the wind, his Servants had this hope only left to propound to him. Behold
now we have heard that the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings: let us
therefore, I pray thee, put sackcloth upon our loins, and rops upon our heads,
and go out to the King of Israel, etc. They did so. Thus must they do that will
have a guilt of sin washed away thoroughly: and so our God being a merciful
God, our life may be spared.

3 David desires God to wash him: for the truth is, he may say to us all, as
once to Peter: Nisi ego te lavero, non habebis partem mecum: Except I wash
thee, thou shall have no part in me. David says, I will wash my hands in
innocence: and Isaiah bids, Wash you, make you clean.

The work of our purification is not performed thoroughly: but in the
concurrence of both these we wash our selves in our true repentance: God
washes us in his gracious pardon. Yet even in our repentance God does wash us
too: for he gives both the grace and power of repentance: he works all his
works in us: our spirits and faculties work together with him; we are not
merely passives in our own washing, but we give our affections and desires of
heart to it, we offer the service of our sighs, and groans, and tears, and
bring our bodies in subjection.

The Spirit of God does not all it self, but it helps our Romans ^ ^^.
infirmities, (...): the word is of strong signification, for here is a burden
too heavy for us to bear: the Spirit of God comes to our help, and (...) alone
were a carriage: (...) is over against us, as when a burden is born between
two; (...) decompoundeth the word, and joyneth him in the burden with us. So
he leaves not all the burden upon us, whose weakness cannot undergo it. He
takes not all the burden upon him, and from us, but he bears with us: and as
it ever falls out between two that bear the same burden, the weaker does
ease himself upon the stronger: so it is here: the most of our burden in this
act of repentance, lies upon God, therefore Lava tu Domine, wash thou, Lord.

Many would feign cast all the care upon God of their washing: David does his
best, and craveth here but Gods assistance. For we must not sit out in our
burdens and duties, we cannot exonerate our selves so. The manner how God
works this lotion in us is,

1 By his word: so Christ, Uos mundi est is propter sermonem Ioh. 15. ^.
quem ego locutus sum vobis. You are clean, by the word which I have spoken
unto you. Saint Augustine shows how the word does cleanse us: for it is
Verbum fidei, docens, gignens, alens fidem: the word of faith, teaching,
begetting, nourishing faith. And our hearts are purged by that faith. Verbum
lavat non quia dicitur, sed quia creditur: The word washes, not because it is
spoken, but because it is believed.

2 God washes us by the water of baptism, which is therefore called, the
Laver of our new birth. Which though it be received but once in our life, as
the Nicene Creed says: I believe one Baptism for the remission of sins: Yet
it is available for our whole life, and the virtue of it extends to our last
gasp thereof. The Sacrament of Baptism is for our new birth: and as S.
Augustine notes: As we are born once for our life; so new born but once; For
the Lords Supper is renewed being for nutrition: But the gift of God is without
repentance. David needed not a new circumcision after his fall: his repentance
renewed the virtue and power thereof.

3 We are of Gods washing by the faith of Christ in his blood, which cleanses
us thoroughly from all sins. That is the true and perfect lavatorie, the
fountain which God set open to the house of David, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, that is, to the whole Church of God, for sin, and for
uncleanness. For,

He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from ^^Sapn^^ ^. 14.
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works.

3 Cleanse me. See how fervent David is in his prayer, he renews the same
petition for his purification: he has but changed the phrase, the suit is the
same it was, to be washed thoroughly; but he expresses it to the effect: that he
may be clean.

Sin of all pollutions is the foulest, it makes unclean eyes, unclean
hands, foul feet, foul consciences.

A little washing of foul hands does but foul them more: we must wash till we
be clean. No unclean thing shall ever enter into the new Jerusalem. So soon as
the Angels had sinned, they were cast out of Paradise aloft: And so soon as
Adam had sinned, he was cast out of Paradise below. So soon as Cain had
sinned, he was cast out of the presence of God: and became a vagabond on the
face of the earth. The pure in heart shall see God: who Psalm. ^4. ^, 4*
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place?
He that has clean hands, and a pure heart.

Therefore make me clean: wonder not that David is so importunate with God for
his full purgation from his sin, being so sensible of the danger of his
impuritie.

For the reason why our uncleanness remains upon us unpurged, and we
continue untroubled at it, is, we are not enough sensible of the foulness that
defiles us, or the danger that it brings along with it.

Some of us pretending holiness can be well content, and can pray to be washed:
but we affect not a perfect cleanness. We have some sins that bring in
profit: as usurie, symonie, bribery, fraud, lying, perjurie, and such like.
Some that put us forward in the world: as ambition, pride, flattery, etc. Some
that give us pleasure and delight, as adultery, fornication, immoderate eating
and drinking, chambering, and wantonness, etc. Some that please our malicious
disposition; as revenge, secret in^idiations, cunning under minings, satanicall
libellings, and wit-blasts, etc. David is for cleanness: he would have no
remain left upon his conscience of any unrepented sin: Wash me thoroughly,
and make me clean.

It is true penitence to forsake and abhor sin, all kind of sin, and to
let no iniquity have dominion over us We cannot so long as we live here, put
away sin, so that no remains shall annoy us. If we can quite the dominion of
sin, that we suffer it not to reign in our mort ll bodies; this is our utter
most.

And so long as sin dwells in us not a received inmate, but a violent
intruder, we shall find that the Spirit of God will aid us so against it, that
as the Spirit in us does daily grow with the increasing of God: so the flesh
will loose ground, and the old Adam will grow weaker and weaker. Our wounds
which now stink and are corrupt through sin, will be so clean washed, that
there will be way made for healing of them up. Medicus est, offer ei mercedem:
Aug.
Deus est, offer ei sacrificium. Is it a Physician? offer him a reward: is it
God? offer him sacrifice. The Prophet has found out one alter in this Psalm.
Cor contritum, a contrite heart.

VERSE 3. For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.
2 HIs confession: wherein,

1. He at large, and in a generality confesses his sins. For I acknowledge
my transgressions. 2 He shows the motive to this confession: a perpetual
sight of his sins. 3 He considers both the generality of his sins, and
this last special sin in the offense by it given. 4 He recounteth his
original sin, the fountain of his corruption. 5 To aggravate his digression,
he compares himself in a state of sin with that condition which God exacteth
of him, and which he will hereafter work in him.
1 His confession at large. After a ^ight and sense of sin in the work of
repentance, confession follows.

1 David confessed to Nathan, sent of God to him to charge him with his sin:
and that authority Christ left in his Church in the new Testament with the
Priests thereof. Whosoever sins you remit, they are remitted unto them:
absolution is not rightly administered, but upon a fair evidence of a true and
serious repentance; Which must begin at confession: and therefore the power of
absolution does suppose a duty of confession.

The abuse of confession in the Church of Rome has gotten it an ill name, some
of them having many times corrupted it to their own ends to ransack the
consciences of men, and to romage the hearts of men to find how they may serve
their turns.

Yet was it an holy institution in the intendment thereof, that a man should
often survey all his thoughts, and words, and actions. Censure them with
grief; tremble at them with fear; confess them with shame; cure them with
good counsel; expiate them with some revenge; extinguish them with full
purpose of amendment of life: and establish their hearts with some healing
comforts from the holy Word of God, administered as cordials from our souls
Physicians.

But as Auricular Confession has been sometimes practiced, it is a kind of
encouragement to sin: for believing, as some do, that their confession, and
penance, and absolution does wash them thoroughly from all their iniquities, and
cleanse them from all sin: They spare not to commit all kinds of sin in
trust of this remedy, making the remedy of sin a provocation to sin. Like
those mountebanks, that in sight will wound themselves, to show the virtue of
their salve, and drink poison in confidence of their antidote.

Penances also have been sometimes so easy and perfunctorious, as they may
make a sport at sin, study it with deliberation, practice it with delight,
and expiate it at short warning. But such pardons were not afoot in David's
time, he confesses to Nathan, and undergoeth a sore penance after Nathan had
absolved him.

Good use might be made of this in the Church. If a true Penitent revealing his
wounded conscience to some learned and godly Physician of his soul, and
declaring his true grief did establish his repentant heart with the comfort of
the Word, and receive the benefit of Gods gracious pardon in the way of Gods
holy ordinance.

In businesses of our estate we may hear wise men speak out of experience, and
reading, and observation: but it is safest to trust such whose profession and
practice in the laws may give us more full satisfaction in all our doubts.

In diseases of the body, reading, experience, and observation may accommodate
men unprofessed to speak rationally, and to advise wisely: but health is a
dear commodity; they do most safely that consult the learned, studied, and
practiced Physician: he is the likeliest to direct for our good.

In the occasions of the soul, although many great Scholars have profited to
ability to inform the judgment in the truth, to convince error, to instruct
and comfort: yet seeing God has ordained some in his Church to do this ex
officio: and has sent them to teach, to baptize, to commend the prayers of the
Church to him, to absolve penitents: our using of their ministry in these
things is strengthened with warrant: and in this case, Nathans absolution is as
good as on Angels.

2 We find David confessing here to God his wickedness. Nathan has used all
the good and discreet ways that may be to bring David to a sight and sense of
his sin.

1 He showed him his sin in a parable, borrowing another person to represent
to him his sin.

2 He showed it in the commemoration of Gods manifold favors to him, which
cannot but show, that God had better deserved of him then to be answered with
transgression of his commandments. For he might plead, Do you thus unkindly
requite my love!

2 He came to the point, and opened his wounds, and showed him the rottenness
and stench of them in an hoc fecisti; Thus have thou done, and I held my peace
all this while.

3 He reveals to him the purpose of God for his correction, by a severe
punishment of his faults diverse ways, as you have heard. This made him cry God
mercy, and crave aid of Gods tender compassions to wash him.

For I acknowledge my wickedness. Which teaches; That true repentance arises
from a knowing, and begins at confessing our sin.

They pray but faintly and weakly for mercy to wash them, that do not well
discern and confess their wickedness. The woman of Canaan that came to
Christ for her daughter, cries loud for his help, the disciples cannot still
her. Blind Bartimeus runs hard, and cries loud for his sight. The woman with
the issue of blood pressed through the crowd as near as she could to Christ,
to touch the hemme of his vesture. David sometimes cried, till his throat was
hoarse. Moses prayed till his hands fell. All that feel need of help from God,
and know it no where else to be had, will ply him heartily, and give him no
rest. So forceable is the knowledge of our sins to put us upon God in
importunate e^^lagitations of mercy. Such know that there is no state here on
earth so unhappy, as the state of a sinner. Let us never hope for peace in our
conscience or favor with God, till we come to see and confess our wickedness.

Oh that there were such an heart of piety and holy zeal as to search and try
our own ways, and to detect our own sins, as we have hearts of malice and
curiousitie to dive into the transgressions of others. I would we could
discern our own beams as clearly, as we see the motes in our brothers eye. I
acknowledge my wickedness, I search no further.

Let me now turn your eyes upon your own hearts, and put you to the search of
them to the bottom, that you may confess your wickedness to God between you
and him alone. For wounds must be searched before they can be cured. And then
shall you be prepared to hear the story of Christ's bitter passions, that he
sustained for you, which shall shortly be recounted to you out of the Gospel
by appointment of the Church. There you shall see the loving kindness of God,
and the multitude of his tender compassions: you shall see what need your wounds
had of his stripes; what need your voluptuous lives had of his dolorous throws
and pangs: what need your crown of pride had of his crown of thorns: what need
your crying sins had of his strong prayers and supplications: what need your
deserved curse had of his undeserved cross. If all tears were wiped from our
eyes for our selves, and that our mouths were filled with laughter, and our
tongues with joy; yet if we did consider in what liquour we were washed, the
precious blood of a Lamb without spot: Pilates Ecce homo, Behold the man,
showing us our Redeemer newly come from his cruel whipping, his precious body,
the glory of humanity ploughed up with scourges into deep furrows to save our
skins whole: Uox sanguinis, the voice of blood, speaking better things then
the blood of Abel, crying for our purification: and his dying plea even for his
enemies; Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

These and a thousand more considerable passages in his dolorous passion were
enough, to turn all our harps into mourning, and all our organs into the voice
of them that weep; to make our heads fountains of tears, to melt us into
passion, to distill us into spirit of compassion, for him that paid so dear
for our souls. Sic Deus dilexit mundum, misit filium suum, dedit unigenitum, as
August, dedit unicum, ut non esset unicus: So God loved the world. He sent his
Son. He gave his only begotten Son. He gave his only Son, that he might
not be his only Son. And in the manner of giving, Non pepercit filio suo: he
spared not his son: he laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Will you find
the cause of all this? the root of bitterness, the gall and wormwood that
made his potion so corroding? Search your heart for sin, and wash the bloody
wounds of your Redeemer in a bath of compassionate tears, your own putrified
soars in a bath of penitential tears.

And as Israel brought forth Achan, and put him in sight Josh. 7.
who had trespassed in the accursed thing: so let our confession put our
transgressions in sight, saying with David, I acknowledge my wickedness; And
with Achan: I have Verse. 20.
sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done.

That which undoes Religion, and destroys the fear and service of God, and
hinders our repentance, and evacuateth all our acts of piety: that which
makes the word to us a dead letter, that which weakeneth the power of our
Baptism, and makes the Lords Supper an eating and drinking of judgment; that
which makes all our praises of God a sacrifice of fools; that which turns
all our prayers into sin, and transformeth the grace of God into wantonness,
is;

We either hide our sin out of sight caute closely, 1
wherein we may deceive the world: but we cannot shut up the eye of God, or
benight the light of our own conscience.

Or we plead, Non est factum, not our deed, against two 2
witnesses at least; one in heaven, another in our own bosoms.

Or we put on some honest names upon our dishonest 3
carriages, calling wantonness recreation; and prosecution of revenge, a
standing upon our credit, and a maintenance of honor.

Or we face out our sins with society, as drunkards plead they do no other
then is done in Court, in City, in Country, and amongst all sorts and degrees
of men these times; add women too, for many will not sit out in a fashion. And
if we reprove such, they regest that some of our selves are good fellows too.
Here the proverb fails, The more the merrier: when they go in the ways of
death.

Or we devolue our fault upon others, as Adam, Mulier quam dedisti: the woman
which thou gave me. It falls upon God. Vinum quod dedisti inebriat: vestes
quas dedisti superbum me, cibus gulosum, etc. The wine which thou have given me
makes me drunken; the clothes thou have given me make me proud; thy meat,
gluttonous, etc.

Some proceed further, the full growth of impudence and 5
impenitencie justifying their sins, and calling evil good, and good evil,
treading under foot the blood of the covenant Jude 13.
as an unholy thing; raging waves of the Sea foming out their own shame,
wandering stars, for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever:
whose condemnation sleeps not. Beloved, your reason, and judgment, and
common understanding does call swearing blasphemy. It calls doing that which
you would not suffer, injury. It calls immoderate eating, gluttony:
intemperate drinking, drunkenness. It calls unlawful copulations, adultery
and fornication. By the light of nature, and of Religion we abhor the
denomination of these sins: who is willing to be called a blasphemer, an
oppressor, a glutton, a drunkard? If the names of these sins be shameful,
make conscience of the sins themselves.

For it was ever in fashion in the world, and will be; that they which do
wickedly and foolishly, shall be called wicked and foolish persons. I conclude
with Joshuahs speech to Achan: My son, give I pray thee glory to the Lord
Josh. 7. 19.
God of Israel, and make confession unto him: tell now what thou have done, and
hide it not. He that hides his sin shall not prosper: shame and fear are
the two great hindrances of confession, they are also the rods of sin. These
should rather move us to confession and repentance: for repentance removes
them both: ut ante.

And my sin is ever before me.

2 Here is a great motive to confession: for David found his sin troublesome
to him. Sin is taken commonly for the fault, and so our fault always in
sight brings shame.

Sin is also taken sometimes for the punishment, and that in our sight
always brings fear. It must needs be combersome to have these two rods
always lashing of us: shame and fear.

Sin is also said to be before us.

1 Either in the eye of understanding, and judgment, and reason, knowing and
disliking it. 2 Or in the eye of our conscience pleading guilty to it. And this
is ever so, till our repentance and Gods pardon has removed it.
Our first parents in paradise did see the forbidden fruit:

1 That it was good for food. 2 It was a desire to the eyes. 3 To be desired to
make one wise.
They considered not that the eating of it was against the commandment, that it
was certain death to eat of it. I he sin was not before them. In every
temptation to evil, and commission of evil, there is a pleasure that offers
it self to the eye; upon that our yielding weakness fastneth. That is ever
before us, to put us into sin: and when we have done it, that is before us to
keep us from repentance. That was it that corrupted David's holiness, at first
to sin, and that held him so long impenitent. But when God had awaked him by
his Prophet, then the pleasure of finne ceased, and the shame, and fear, and
sorrow of it succeeded: then was his sin ever before him.

The words of David's complaint weigh heavy; if we take the full weight of every
one of them, they amount to a talent of lead, and we may call them, The Burden
of David.

1 Here is sin. 2 My sin. 3 Coram, in sight. 4 Coram me, before me. 5
Semper, ever.
1 His complaint is of sin. All sins are not alike deadly, nor all of
equal provocation.

There be different magnitudes of sin: one sin differs from another in
quality: Some more offensive then 1
other to God, to man, to our selves.

Some in quantity of number has more sins retaining 2
to it, then others have: for no sin does ever go alone.

Some in quantity of dimension greater then other, more 3
provoking.

Some in quantity of weight heavier, and more incurving and slooping toward,
and immerging deeper into the 4
gulf of perdition.

Some in quantity of measure, more filling, and more 5
heaped up, more pressing down, more running over.

Some in the seed of concupiscence; some in the root of delight; some in the
blade of consent; some in the ear of perpetration; some in the full growth and
ripeness of custom; some shedding and self-sowing by defense and
justification of it, and by public profession and maintenance.

When Satan would strike us with a fiery dart, he will show us our sin at
the worst.

In confession of sins to God we must consider, that we are in his eye to
whom all things are manifest; from whom no thing can be concealed: and
therefore there is no slubbering or mincing our confession. We must confess
all, as we desire to be made clean from all: let us be as particular as we can
in the enumeration of our sins. And because our memory may fail us in
particularities, let us help it with opening before God: our Corpus peccati,
body of sin. So I understand here, my sin, that is, Corpus peccati, the
body of sin, in the gross sum is ever before me. David does come to
particular sins after in his confession.

This peccatum, sin, is that corruption of nature, which is ever striving
against the Law: that flesh which is ever rebelling against the Spirit, that
old man which is corrupt according to the deceiveable lusts of the flesh. The
bed of sin in us, the stool of wickedness, the throne of Satan, the
remnants of sin, which abide even in the regenerate; upon which S. Paul
complains so much. I know that in me, that is in my flesh, is no good thing.
And this he charge with all his aberrations from the way of God: law. Not I:
that is my regenerate part: but sin in me, that is, my natural corruption
not yet mortified: my flesh not yet brought in subjection to the law and will
of my God.

2 Meum, my.

David owneth his sin, and confesses it his own. Here is our natural wealth,
what can we call our own but sin? Our food and raiment, the necessaries of
life, are borrowings. We came hungry and naked into the world, we brought none
of these with us, and we deserved none of them here. Our sin came with us, as
David after confesses. We have right of inheritance in sin, taking it by
traduction and transmission from our parents: we have right of possession. So
Job: Thou make me to possess the Job 13. 16.
sins of my youth.

We plead ancient custom and prescription for sin: for we were never without
it, since we first came into the world. Peccatum meum, my sin, is David's
grief* David in piety to God, and in charity to his neighbor, did mourn and
weep rivers of waters for them that kept not the law. But other men's sins are
not put upon his account, and require not his repentance, except they were
committed by his counsel, example, or approbation. He is now to declare his
repentance that extends no further then to peccatum meum, my sin. This may
aggravate a sin much: for as is the person, so is the sin: here, Meum, my,
touches the person of the offender: Nehemiah urges, Should such a man as I
fly? David was a person; take him not beyond his private estate, as the younger
son of I shall: favored by God, defended from the Lion, the Bear; from
Goliath, from the Philistines, from Saul, and from all his enemies.

Adams sin which many slight as no great matter to draw such a judgment
upon all flesh, was the greatest sin that ever was committed by man in
respect of the person. For being in a state of innocence, and having freewill
to do good, and in the fresh glory of his creation, and in the fullness of his
makers image; and in the fatness of the earth: the fitness of an help meet
for him: amounting to, what could I have done more that I have not done? his
trespass was prodigious, nefarious, abominable. To defile his holiness; to
benight his wisdom, to corrupt his goodness, to evacuate his righteousness,
to forget his happiness: and to see God for a fruit: having paradise before
him, and all the fruit at his service: his sin was infectious, it did not
only vitiate and deflowre his person, it also impoysoned the fountain of
blood, which was to propagate, a posterity to fill the earth.

We know that peccatum meum, my sin, the sin of the Angels that fell was so
aggravated by the consideration of their persons who fell, that God cast them
off for ever, and reserveth them in chains of darkness for a great day. David
a public person, a king, Gods king; Posui Rege^ meum super montem sacrum
meum: I have set my king upon my holy hill of Sion. Regis ad exemplum, etc.
David an holy Prophet: vices that are slighted in common persons, in men
professed holy are twice themselves, and Satan glories more in the corruption
of a Prophet or Minister of the Word, then in many common men* God is more
offended, and the Church more scandaled.

Let every man judge his sin by consideration of himself. In his person, in
his place and office, in his received favors from God.

Meum, my, will so make great weight.

Meum, has special reference here to David's sin, 3
which does put him to this penance.

1 His lust upon the sight of beauty. 2 His adultery. 3 His making Vriah
drunk. 4 His corrupting of Joab. 5 His murder of Vriah. 6 His ten months
impenitencie.
This is peccatum meum, my sin. Every one of these very heinous: for lust,
adultery, and making men drunk, and a constant or rather obstinate
impenitencie. These be sins in fashion, and many think the better of
themselves for them. It is the pride of many to boast of their unchaste and
lascivious lewdness of life, of their making their companions drunk, and no
sense of the abuse of Gods good creatures; the wrong to God, to their
neighbor, to their own bodies, thereby exposed to diseases. Beloved, if all
these, if any of these sins belong to any of you; I charge you not: let your
consciences save me the labor, and do you own it, and call it peccatum meum,
my sin, as David here does. Put it before you in sight, and confess it to
God, that you may find mercy. If none of these call you guilty, search your
hearts for that darling sin, Peccatum meum, my sin. The pleasant, the
profitable sin, that reigns in you. You see confession spares not any
sin: whatsoever you call meum, mine, must be all brought forth.

3 Coram, Before.

This sin was now come before, as August* observes. Sin is behind our
backs, when we are first tempted to it, when we first commit it. Satan shows
the pleasure and profit of sin, but he concealeth the trespass and the
danger thereof.

1 It was in sight of God from the first motion and yielding to it. 2 It was in
sight of the Devil and his Angels that suggested it. 3 It was in sight of
those agents of the King who did negotiate it. 4 It was in sight of the common
man, who could not but take notice of it. 5 It was in sight of the Church, Gods
faithful ones, who were much scandalized by it. 6 It was in sight of the
enemies of God, who thereby took great occasion to blaspheme the name of God,
and his Religion. 7 It was in sight of Nathan, Gods holy Prophet, who was sent
of purpose by God to reprove it.
Nathan charged him, Thou did it secretly: see the deceiveablenesse of
Satan; no sin dare look the light in the face: Qui male agit, odit lucem: He
that does evil, hates the light. One of the greatest encouragements to finne
is an hope of secrecy, and therein for the most part the sinner mis-carrieth:
for not only God, which hates the sin, but Satan also that tempted to it,
do both find means to bring it to shame.

Yet the heart of David was so hardened, and his conscience so blinded with the
pleasure of sin, that he felt no remorse of it. Some sins are much more
hardly repented then others, especially those sins which please the natural
man best, repented hardest.

4 Coram me, Before me.

Now at last his sin is come to the light of his own understanding, to the
sting of his own conscience. Now he sees what need he has of mercy, Miserere
mei Deus, etc. Have mercy upon me O God. Now he sees what commandments he has
despised, as Nathan charge him. Now he sees what offense he has given to
God, to his Church. What defiling to his own soul and body; what danger to
both. We can never repent heartily till we come to this: and we are very loath
to come to it. Now David sees his sin clearly, the whole sin, the motives,
the means, the acts, the colors, and conveyances there, all coram me, before
me.

Coram populo, before the people, shame to him: Coram Ecclesia, before the
Church, grief to them: Coram inim^cis, before the enemies, joy to them: Coram
Deo, before God, anger against him: Coram Nathane, before Nathan, a chiding.
But if any hope of repentance and amendment, it is in Peccatum meum coram me,
my sin before me. Here is the distress of a sinner, he never discerns how
unhaphie he is, till his sin is before him. Excused be the masks of sin:
pleasure is the sweetning of sin: secrecy is the night of sin. Remove all
these, and let thy sin appear naked, and stripped of this shelter: Mulier
formosa superne turpiter atrum desinet:

The fairest woman's face,
Foul nether parts disgrace.
How quickly could David see his own sin in another person in the parable of
Nathan? It was ten months before his own sin was before himself. We are very
blind to behold our own faults: yet we are most beholding to them that help
our weak sight, and clear our eyes that way.

It was the wish of a well-minded heathen man, that he might ever dwell either
by a true friend, or some very malicious and spightfull enemy, because either
love or malice would ever tell him his own, and he should be sure to know his
faults.

Christ: What say men that I am? we must use all the means we can to search
our wounds, that they may be healed. To know our disease, ut curetur, it is S.
Gregor. note upon this Text: Ascendat tribunal mentis suae, constituat se ante
se: Videat foeditatem suam at corrigat, ne nolens videat and erubescat: Let him
ascend the tribunal of his mind, and place himself before himself: let him
see his foulness to correct it, lest against his will he see it, and be
ashamed at it. Some put all their virtues before themselves: as the Pharisee;
he gave not himself an ill word in his confession. I am not like other men, I
fast, I pay tithes: I give alms, I pray, etc. The poor Publicane could not
see any good Corn within his field it was so overgrown with tares. Lord be
merciful to me the sinner.

Great persons have so much the more danger from sin, because they have so
many flatterers to keep their virtues ever in their sight, or to lay virtues to
their charge that they have no right too. And so few Nathans to show them their
sins, and to say, Tueshomo, thou art the man. How can they repent, when their
sin is yet behind their backs, and no body dares put it in sight? Or if it
come in sight, there may be fo^nd law to make it good.

Sins when they are grown to have countenance of authority, and strength of
custom to establish them, are no longer sins, Leges fiant, they are made
laws. And time calls that a sin now, which anon is a singular virtue. But let
us call sins and virtues by their proper names, and let them be in our sight,
and we shall beg the grace of repentance very heartily.

5 Sempe* always.

Sin is sweet in the mouth: Job speaks of hiding it under the tongue; but in
the stomach it is unwholesome and upbraiding. David found it so; when once it
came before him, it was ever in his sight: as before he said; There is no rest
in my bones, propter p^ccatum, by reason of my sin. Sometimes he thought how
he had sinned against Vriah a faithful servant in defiling his bed, in
betraying his life; sometimes how he sinned against his own ^oul and body, in
defiling it with the flesh: Sometimes how he had sinned against Joab, to make
him an instrument of injury against Vriah, to defile him also with innocent
blood: Sometimes how he abused the good creatures of God, to make Uriah drunk:
how he twice wronged the honorable state of matrimony: once desiring to make
Vriahs repair to his house a cover for his sin: and when that failed, and
Vriah was slain; he veiled his sin with his own marriage of the defiled
widow: always he thought how he had sinned against God This case of David is a
lively piece describing to the life the unrest of an unquiet conscience
overcharged with sin.

That which Poets feigned of Furies ever disquieting some persons; was nothing
else, as Tully found and applied it, but a troubled conscience which has no
peace. And we can never attain to peace, before we have felt the sting of
sin, the rigor of the law, the terror of the Lord, the rods and scorpions
of an afflicted and unrestful conscience. And this will hold till our
repentance and Gods pardon seals our quietus est: no company, no pleasure, no
comfort will help this, no such sorrow, as Animus dolet, the mind is
sorrowful.

VERSE 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned: and done this evil in thy
sight.
3. HIs confession expresses where he has given offense: which has two
parts. For,

1 He accuses himself. 2 He clears almighty God.
1 In his self-accusation.

1 Here is the height of sin against God, Tibisoli, etc. Against thee only.
2 Here is the boldness of his sin* In thy sight.
In the first here is,

1 Ego, I: the person. 2 Peccavi, have sinned: the trespass. 3 Against thee,
Pars laesa, the party offended.
1 Ego, I: the person.

This comes in still: for it makes weight always in the confession. Some
charge the malevolent aspects of their stars, some charge Satan with all
their sin: Others have other put-offes to save themselves harmless. David
takes all upon himself, his own corruption; his own rebel flesh: his
unregenerate part, his old Adam did it.

Me, me, adsum qui feci: Here, here I am that did it. I whom thou tookest from
following the ewes great with lamb: whose sheep-hooke thou have changed for a
Scepter, whose sheep for thine own people Israel, upon whose head thou have set
a crown of pure gold. I whom thou did lately invest in the full Monarchy
of thy people, to whom thou gave the possession of Jerusalem from the
Iebusites. I who settled peace, Religion and Courts of justice in Jerusalem,
that thou might be served and honored: and I would feign have built thee an
house there. Ego, I, to whom God committed the trust of government to rule
others, the trust of judgment to punish others, as King, over his inheritance.
I, to whom God committed the care of others souls to guide them by his word, to
direct them by good counsel, to allure them by his gracious promises to
terrify them by his threatenings: as the Lords holy Prophet. I who both ways
as King and Prophet should have been an example of holiness and
righteousness to all Israel. Nathan said, Tues homo, thou art the man, in just
accusation, and now David says, Ego sum homo, I am the man: in humble
confession.

Great Princes and persons in eminent rank can take it upon them highly in
terms of honor: then ego, I am the man. They must do so here also.

2 The trespass, Peccavi, I have sinned: David ever had a tender conscience
for sin: he never slept in any of his trespasses so long before or after, as
in this. For when he 1 Samuel 24. 5. 2. 24. 10.
had opportunity to come so near to Saul, as to cut off his skirt of his
garment, his heart smote him. So did it after he had numbered the people: now he
feels the weight of sin upon his conscience, and cries, Peccavi, I have
sinned. Every true penitent does so: but every one is not a true Genesis 4. 13.
penitent that does so: for Cain said more, Mine iniquity Marg. K. Bible.
is greater then it can be forgiven. Pharaoh said as much: I have sinned this
time, The Lord is righteous, I and my people Exodus 9. 27.
are wicked: for the thunder and hail mingled with fire. After he said more
upon the judgment of the locusts, I Exo. 10. 16, 17
have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you. Now therefore forgive,
I pray thee, my sin this once, and entreat the Lord for me. Judas went
further: I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. He
repented, Mat. 27. 3, 4, 5.
says the Text, he said with the price of his sin in his hand in the act of
restitution. But Cain and Judas confessed in final desperation. Pharaoh shrunk
only at the punishment, the sin grieved him not. David's peccavi, I have
sinned, had more in it: he knew his sin fully, it was ever before him. And he
was more troubled with his fault then with his punishment; he made the worst of
it: yet he had faith in the loving kindness, and in the multitude of the
tender compassions of God, he had the spirit of supplications, and prayed
fervently. His first suit is for his washing, and his strong cries are like
them of the Leper to Christ: Lord, that I may be clean: and the further we go
in this Psalm, the more pregnant remonstrances he makes of his true
repentance, the more clear example does he give for ours. As fear shook him,
and as shame covered his face: so faith supported him, and prayer to God
sanctified his mortification.

Such a peccavi, I have sinned, so open in confession without, so stinging with
compunction within, so quickened by a lively faith, so winged with zealous
prayer, will soon find the ready way to the throne of grace, and find mercy
there in a time of need.

3 Parslaesa, the party offended. Here the spirit of David is troubled, he is
full of passion.

1 He confesses the wrong done to God: Contra te, against thee. 2 He resumeth
it with a duplication, Against thee. 3 He puts it home with a soli, Tibi,
tibi soli peccavi: Against thee, thee only have I sinned.
1 Contra te, Against thee.

That is the sting and torment, the rod and scorpion of the conscience: when
we consider that our trespass has been bent and aimed against God. Si non
Jehova pro nobis, If the Lord had not been on our side, is Isreal's word, we
had perished. Auxilium nostrum a Domino: O^r help is from the Lord; In his
favor is our life. This makes every wilful sin we commit mortal, because
it trespasseth the majesty of God: therefore no sin in this nature is
venial: and this makes every sin of infinite merit, because it is a sin
against an infinite majesty. And for that our persons are finite, and not
capable of infinite punishment; there is no way to satisfy this infinite
majesty offended, but by eternity of punishment. This appears in this
sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: The smoke of their torment shall
arise for evermore. The worm never dies, the fire never goes out.

We have many great motives, to make conscience of trespassing against this
majesty of God.

1 For the good that he is. 2 For the good that he does.
1 For the good that he is.

He is one that hates iniquity: no evil shall dwell with him; He is all
holiness, and righteousness.

2 For the good that he does.

1 He is our faithful Creator: He made us, not we our selves: he fashioned us
in the womb, he kept us there, he took us thence. 2 We came naked into the
world, he clothed us: we came hungry, he gives us daily bread: we came
ignorant, he taught us: weak, and he strengthened us: unclean, and he washed us
in the laver of regeneration. 3 We were born children of wrath: he adopted us
heirs of grace and glory, and redeemed us with the dear cost and expense of
his Sons blood. 4 He is the preserver of men, he gives us spiritual and
temporal favors, His loving kindness and mercy follows us all the days
of our life.
3 We may add, for the evils that he does.

For is there any evil or punishment which he sends not? He is velox ultor,
a swift revenger; and his right hand does find out all his enemies. We would
not willingly anger a person that has power to do us hurt, though we have no
hope that he will ever do us good. But our God is a father as well as a judge,
and with him is mercy that he may be feared, that we may not run our selves
upon the edge of his sword.

Let us consider how all things else serve him but we only, and the Angels
that sinned. They unhappied their estates by sinning against God, and of
glorious Angels became unclean devils: there is no part of the work of Gods
hands so eternally cast away, reserved in chains of darkness for the judgment
of the last day. We had a way opened to us, a new and living way.

2 He therefore resumeth this, against thee, either doubling the consideration
of his sin; or doubling the consideration of the party offended by it: both
which shows, that he had laid it to heart, and that lay heavy upon his
conscience, he had thoroughly considered against whom he offended. We cannot
think too much of it, we cannot confess it too often, we cannot deplore it too
bitterly, that we have sinned against God. For many are the pressures of this
life; but they are all comforted with a sure refuge to God. He is our help in
trouble: Vana salus hominis, the help of man is vain.

But when we sin against God, we lop the tree that should shelter us from a
storm. We undermine the tabernacle of our dwelling. Whither shall we go for
our healing when we are wounded? Whose counsel shall we ask when we are sick?
Who shall feed our hunger? etc. Who shall then have pity upon thee, O
Jerusalem? or who Ier. 15. 5.
shall be moan thee, or who shall go aside to ask how thou do? Thou have
forsaken me, says the Lord, thou art gone backwards, therefore will I stretch
out my hand against thee, and destroy thee, I am weary with repenting.
Whatsoever we do against God, we do it against our selves. Whatsoever we do
evil is against God: it opposes his will, it resists his word and
commandment: it valueth the pleasure of sin more then his favor, and
exchangeth God for a vain delight. Is not this an high offense?

3 He puts it home, Tibi soli peccavi: against thee alone have I sinned.

Some question is made, how David can say, Soli, Thee alone. Did not he offend
Vriah in defiling his bed? in sending for him to color his adultery? in taking
him home, under a pretense of entertainment, to make him drunk. After all to
procure his death, did he not sin against Bathsheba to defile her? Did he not
sin against Joab, to make him a murderer? Did he not sin against his own
body, to destroy the temple of the Lord, and to defile a vessel of holiness
with uncleanness? Did he not trespass the Church which was ashamed, and
grieved at his aberration? Did he not trespass his double unction of King and
Prophet? how then does he say; Tibi soli, against thee alone? Mr. Calvin does
two ways answer this question.

1 That he had done this sinful act secretly, and so had Sol. 1.
none to make his peace withal, but God: who only knew the offense. This does
not help: for Joab knew that he was an instrument of David's injustice: he knew
he had defiled his own body: she knew. And no question but it was resented of
many. But this Psalm was made for the use of the Church, after all was out
against him.

2 That he denies not the full extent of his fault; but 2
making his confession to God, he declares what did most cruciate and disquiet
his conscience; only this, that he had sinned against God, and provoked his
anger against him. This may pass for a good solution of the question, for the
sin against God extends to both Tables of the Law: and when we trespass
our own selves, or our neighbors, we sin mainly against God in both.

The full extent of our sin is only against God. Every sin has a
branching and dispersion, like so many brooks running into one maine stream,
all empty themselves into the Sea, all finally wrong, God.

Mr. Calvin adds his own judgment, Tibi soli, against 3
thee alone.

Howsoever, the secrecy of my sinful acts may keep it out of sight from some:
and the flattery of others may cast excuses or defenses upon it: and the
charity of others may like Sem and Japhet, cast a garment upon it to hide it:
may connive at it, or pardon it: To thee I have sinned: thou do know it, and
it appears only to thee in the full and true proportion, I cannot hide it
from thee. This also may be well received. 4


He adds; that he names God only, because God only has the vengeance in
his hand, and he is in no danger but of him. For who on earth has power to
chasten Kings for sin, but God only? There was no Pope above Kings in
David's time. The high Priest, a type of Christ, was nothing so great a man as
the Pope, the Vicar of Christ. But the truth is, when Christ came to reveal
himself, then began Satan first to lay claim to all the kingdoms of the
earth, and the power to dispose of them: and he made Christ a great offer, to
give them all to him. But what Elisha would not, Gehezi his man would: what
Christ refused, his Vicar sticks not to accept of after.

Saint Augustine clears the doubt another way: Tibi 5
soli peccavi; quiatu sol^ss sine peccato: ille justus punitur, qui non habet
quod puniatur: Against thee only have I sinned; because thou alone art without
sin. That just one was punished, who had nothing in him to be punished.

Some read, to thee only, Peccavi, I have sinned, because 6 Isa. 43. 25.
none but he can pardon sin, as God says: I am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake.

I best may satisfy my own judgment with reference of 7
this complaint of David, to the reproof of Nathan. Wherefore have thou
despised the commandment of the Lord to 2. Sam. 12. 9.
do evil in his sight? David strikes here at the root of his sin, from
whence all his other iniquities, and transgressions, and sins, of which he
complained, derived themselves.

It was my sinning against thee in the contempt of thy word, that has undone
me, and made me a prey to Satan. He that in the Serpent found that way to undo
the first Adam in Paradise, by drawing him away from the word* he ever since
has tried that conclusion with all his posterity, and has much advanced his
kingdom by it: he tried the same way with Christ in the wilderness, but he
kept him to the word; Scriptum est, it is written. And therefore he tried him;
by the word, and urged Scriptum est, it is written, to him, hoping by the word
to have recovered him from the word. And ever since his great agents,
especially Heretics, and Schismatics, are great Textmen. This clearing of the
words of David points us to the beginning of all sin in us, which is at
swarving from the word of God. David found it so dangerous, that the whole 119.
Psalm is aimed at that sin. Verse. 1. and 2. he pronounces them blessed that
walk in this way, and keep his testimonies. Verse. 3. They do no iniquity, etc.
Verse. 4. he urges Gods commandment for this to keep his precepts diligently.
Verse. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! 8. I will keep thy
statutes, O forsake me not utterly.

His desire to the word, his comfort from the word, his joy in the word, his
estimation of the word, his love to the word: all the Psalm is full of these
holy meditations. We may all confess in this respect with David, that we have
sinned against God only, for having the word in that plenty, and so many
helps by hearing and reading to take benefit of it.

Our ungodly lives testify, that we depart from it. Which of our sins does
the word of God favor, which does it not threaten with loss of the kingdom
of heaven, as the Angels that sinned lost their habitation, and Adam his
paradise for departing from that word?

Israel Gods darling people lost their Canaan, and first ten Tribes were lopt
from the Church, then cut off from the state, and carried away and never heard
of. The remain lost all, and live now in dispersion: it is our sin, and we
begin to stink in the nosthrils of God: hear and fear.

And done this evil in thy sight. 2 Here is the boldness of his sin,
wherein let us consider,

1 The person, I. 2 The commission: done. 3 The trespass, evil. 4 The
particularity, this. 5 The daring of it: in thy sight.
1 Of the person.

It is again pressed and may not be omitted in our consideration. For let every
one consider his own person in all his delinquences, and he shall find so much
more quarrel against himself for it. Personal considerations do much
aggravate or extenuate sins. Sins of ignorant persons are nothing, so
defiling them and provoking God, as sins of knowledge. Sins of younger
persons, in whom the passions of youth are more unruly, and understanding and
reason as yet but in the blade, offend not so much as sins of aged persons,
whom time and experience should both inform and confirm in better ways: they
have felt more comfort of the favor of God, and seen more examples of the
justice of God; and have been longer taught in the word of God, and where God
sows liberally, he expects to reap plentifully.

Sins in poor persons who have received little at the hands of God,
displease him not so much as theirs whose cup does overflow: whose paths are
anointed with butter, and their bellies filled with the treasures of his
plenty. Sins in inferior persons not so offensive as in Magistrates and
Princes, and eminent persons: whose examples may prove infectious to corrupt
many.

Generally the same sins in the people are less then in the Minister: Cujus
in ore verbum vitae, cujus in more should be vitaverbi: In whose mouth is the
Word of life, in whose conversation the life of the word. Therefore when David
remembered his own person a King, and an holy Prophet, so much beholding to God
for his high favors, his heart did the more smite him for his trespass.

And thus should the example work with us upon any temptation to sin; to
consider with Joseph, How should I do this great wickedness: and there take
occasion to recount the favors of God to us: the fruits of the earth, the
fruits of the womb: of our cattle, our peace, our health, our daily bread, our
friends, and all the comforts of life: concluding thus. God has deserved
better at my hands, then so, that I should give way to this temptation, and so
sin against him, whose loving kindness has followed me all the days of my
life. Should I blaspheme his Name by swearing, in whose name is my help? Should
I profane his Sabbath, who has allowed me six days for my work, and this one
for my rest, and relaxation of all cares of life to attend his service? Should
I offend my neighbor, whom God made in his own image, for whom Christ shed his
precious blood, and for whom he takes care as he does for me, that he may live
in peace by me?

And as this in early consideration may prevent sin: so in a later
consideration it may serve to hasten our repentance, and to make it more
serious, when not withstanding so many reasons against it, I have yielded to a
temptation, and committed a sin. The more cause I had not to do it, the more
must my repentance be.

2 The Commission, Have done evil.

Sins of omission wherein God is neglected, or our neighbor in duties of
piety or charity give great offense. You may see it in the sentence: I was
hungry, Et non pavistis me. Ite maledicti: and ye fed me not. Go you cursed.

Sins of desire, though not effected and perpetrated, do more offend: for as
our good desires do stand for acts, and receive rewards; so our evil and
unlawful desires express the malignity of our corrupt dispositions, and merit
just vengeance.

Satan does corrupt the heart first, and then out of the foul treasure of the
heart proceed all kinds of evils. Peccatum animae, the sin of the soul, is
the pollution of the soul, and God sees it. David was an adulterer, when his
desire was first enflamed with lust: but now it is done; Vriahs wife is
defiled: Uriah is slain: here is a sin of commission. Sins of this kind
which corrupt us, and do hurt abroad cannot be recalled: so long as sin is
but in desire, it defiles at home only; but when it comes abroad into action,
it is a complete and full unrighteousness.

Therefore in repentance we must especially have care of such evils as are done
by us, which we cannot recall* to repent them heartily, and to wash them clean
from our consciences: for they cleavefast to us, they scatter their poison
abroad. And if sins of omission do smart so upon offenders, and sins of
desire; how deep is the scarlet dye of sins of commission?

3 The trespass: I have done evil.

Evil, is a creation of our own: for all that God made was exceeding good.
This we can do of our selves, yet Satan puts us on by his temptations. Yet not
under the name or show of evil: the delight and pleasure of the flesh seemed
in the temptation like the forbidden fruit, fair to the eye, and pleasant in
taste.

The evil we commit, if we think of, it will soon appear like it self to our
understanding and reason, but especially to the Spirit of God in us. But our
appetite has not the leisure to advise with these: in general delight is good,
and pleasure is the gift of God. But if this be not regulated by the Canon of
manners, which is the holy law of God: there may be a latent evil which we are
loath to see for fear of depriving our selves of our desired delight. But when
lust has conceived, we see the birth of sin quickly succeeding. Then the
pleasure is gone and nothing remains, but the evil, the guilt of sin, and
the burden of the conscience. That is done, and there remains behind the
sting of it anguishing the conscience: or the custom of it searing the
conscience.

Every evil we do is an injury to God, and a contempt of his Law. If God
should for his pleasure scourge, and torment us, and make it his sport to hear
our groanings, and to see our tears: who could challenge him for using his own
creatures, according to his own will: but as a father he loves us: our pain
his smart. How is it then that we take pleasure in evil, which God hates, and
which so offends him, that his soul abhors all them that work wickedness?

It is a better way to be before hand with quid faciemus, What shall we do?
good Master, what good thing may I do to obtain everlasting life? then to cry,
Quid feci? what have I done? Oh what evil have I done to deserve death? Or as
Job, Peccavi, quid faciam tibi? I have sinned: what shall I do unto thee? The
name of evil should loath us, it is so foul; and it should fear us, it is so
dangerous. Therefore in all temptations to it, it will be our wisdom and
holiness to abstract the pleasure of evil from the evil: To part them, and
weigh them by themselves. We shall find the pleasures of sin in weight
lighter then vanity: and in such firm conjunction with vexation of the spirit:
and for their lasting, so short lived, and so soon gone, and leaving such a
bitterness in the soul behind them, that the very thought thereof in sad
consideration will call such mirth madness, and say to such pleasure, What
meanest thou?

Again, evil weighed by it self will prove the burden of the conscience, the
fear of a deadly blow, the trembling of our hearts, the shame of our faces,
the disquieting of the whole man. This shows us what a body of sin we bear
about us: for as the proverb is, Wickedness proceeds from the wicked: this
calls the heart unclean, and the conscience defiled. Cease therefore to do
evil, and learn to do well. This is the way of life, to escape the paths of
death.

Evils are a shamed of themselves, and Satan dare not be so open in his
temptations, as to tender them to us barefaced; but he puts either some
matter of virtue upon them, to hide them out of sight; or some pretense of
great pleasure or profit to sweeten them, that they may go down with us without
distaste. Let us but take so much leisure as to take off this disguise, and
behold evil in it own proper colors, and we shall see such a loathed
deformity, we shall feel such an abhorred complexion of stench and
commistion of filthiness, as will discourage us from it. We shall discern
danger in the touch of it, and death in the committing of it. Libera nos a
malo: Deliver us from evil.

4 The particularity: This sin.

Here David's repentance does come home to his present disease: this great
exemplarie teeming and pregnant; this parturient sin which brought forth so
many, so horrible sins.

Lust when it conceives brings forth sin. Lust was David's sin: see the
present issue and increase of it: it broughtforth adultery. Two bodies defiled:
Matrimony, Gods ordinance polluted: Gods good creatures abused to drunkenness.
Joab corrupted, Uriah murdered: This sin cherished, veiled with a marriage:
and for ten months unrepented. I have done this evil, all this, beside all
the other sins of my life, I have added this also.

No doubt but he did consider this sin also in the punishment of it.

1 With vexation in his conscience. 2 With shame in the world. 3 With the
grief of the Church. 4 With the joy of Gods enemies. 5 With the anger of God.
6 With the chiding of Nathan. 7 With the death of the child. 8 With a
continual incumbent punishment in his own house; Non discedet gladius, etc.
The sword shall not depart, etc. Before he craved mercy against his
transgressions, and iniquity, and sins.
Now he comes to this eminent and notorious sin. I have done evil, this
evil. Which teaches us, when we come to repair the decays of our spiritual
man by repentance, to have special care of those particular sins which have
especially corrupted us, and provoked God against us.

A general peccavi and inique egi: I have sinned, and done wickedly; will not
serve without we come to this evil. As the people of Israel did, when the Lord
affrighted them with thunder and rain in their wheat-harvest: they confessed
and said to Samuel: Pray for thy servants unto the 1 Samuel 12. 1^*
Lord thy God, that we dye not, for we have added unto all our sins this
evil, in asking us a King.

We say of some man, he is a very true hearted honest man: but he will
sometimes over-drink; or he will sometimes swear in his passion: or he will
over-shoot himself in his anger: or he is somewhat covetous, or prodigal, or
wanton, etc. Let every man so account with God for his sins, as to confess
with grief, shame, and fear, this evil, to which either some corruption of
nature, or some continuance of custom, or some temptation of pleasure and
profit, or some present occasion for want of grace by some sudden surprise has
prevailed with him to give him a fall.

Opportunity does often tempt and prevail against a great measure of
knowledge and grace: and God sometimes leaves us to our selves, to try our
strength how we can resist Satan. If we prove too weak for him, and that he
do over-beare us, we have no remedy but this particular repentance. All sins
foul us: therefore David prays to be washed; some sins steine us, and an
ordinary washing will not clear us: therefore he prays, Wash me thoroughly
and make me clean.

It is our wisdom to discern this difference of our sins, and consider
which be dyed in crimsin, which in scarlet, and to bring them to the washing
especially. So shall we be purged from our great offense.

Here is Noah's drunkenness: and Lots drunkenness and incest: Paul's
persecution of the Church: Peter's denial of his Master: In multis offendimus
omnes: in many things we sin all.

But if we survey our consciences carefully and inquisitively, we shall find
this evil some especial sin that we have either much accustomed our selves
to, or that we have once committed, overtaken with some sudden strong
temptation which we may call this evil. How evil this evil tasted in the end
we see: his appetite desired it before as a chief pleasure; and now it is
become his grief and greatest pain. He was very wary after of falling into
this sin. Yet another temptation put him into new sin of numbering his
people; when he had done this evil also he fell to this remedy of particular
repentance: And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have 1.
Chron. 21. 8.
done this thing: but now I beseech thee do away the iniquity of thy servant,
for I have done very foolishly.

He that has many of these gross and high-growne sins; blasphemies,
prophanations of the Lord's Day, adultery, drunkenness, etc. to account for,
is in heavy case. If one at once smart so sh^rply, and weigh so heavily, what
will many do? Aperiantur ut operiantur: sanemus ut sanemus. Let them be shown,
that they may becovered* let us reveal them, that we may heal them.

5 The daring of this sin: In thy sight.

He had conveied this sin as closely and warily as he could: God took notice
of that also. Thou did it secretly: Bathsheba was secretly sent for, and
entised, and defiled: Vriah dyed in a just war. But now David seeeth that all
this was done in the sight of God, he sees what the hand does, and what heart
sets it awork. David could not be ignorant of this: but we willingly embrace
temptations to evil, which we can keep out of the worlds eye.

The searching eye of God cannot be benighted: it is over all the world, and
discerns both good and evil. Will any man steal, whilst the owner looks
on? Dare any man trespass a King, when his eye is upon him? A king sitting on
the throne of judgment drives away all evil with his eye. He was a fool
that said in his heart, Non est Deus, there is no God: he says so that denies
him a sight of all things.

There is no power like the power of God: there is no strength to execute
power, like the strength of God. There is no fire so hot as the fire of his
fury. There is no threatening so surely accomplished, as his menaces. Yet when
we are afraid of every eye of man in our secret sins, we dare adventure them
upon the eye of God. Yet he is privy to the first suggestion, to the first
consent, elelight, procuration, action, etc. all the circumstances of our
sin. Never was sin conveyed so closely, as to be concealed from him: this
David did know, and teach, and discovers their vanity that thought they could
hide their error from him. Yet they say, the Lord shall not see, neither shall
the Psalm. 94. 7. ^.
God of Jacob regard it. Understand ye brutish among the people, and ye fools,
when will you be wise? He that formed the eye, shall not he see, etc. Achans
close theft: Rahels stolen gods, Laban found them not, God revealed to Moses
where she hid them. Gehezies secret lie and covetousness, Judahs secret
incest: all in sight.

Flatter not thy sin with hope of secrecy; and remember, nothing is so bold
and facing as sin. Thou do it in the sight of God, his eye is open upon it
to discern and hate it, to detect and punish it: darkness hides not from him.

VERSE 4. That thou may be justified when thou speak, and clear when
thou judge.
2. HE clears almighty God, for having freely and fully confessed his sins
in general, and in particular this late eminent, notorious, scandalous, and
provoking sin: he adds this; Ut justificeris in sormonibus, etc. That thou
may be justified in thy sayings. Which place is cited by the Apostle, and by
him we are directed to a right understanding of it. What if some did not
believe? Shall their Romans 3. 3.
unbeleefe make the faith of God without effect? God forbid: 4.
yea let God be true, but every man a ly ar: as it is written. That thou
might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art
judged. The Apostle urges these words to this purpose, to show that the sins
of those who return by repentance, can no way hinder, but do rather advance the
justice of God. God declares this justice in two things.

1 In accomplishing his threatenings of punishment to correct them with the
rods of men; and so these words of David have reference to that threatening of
Nathan: Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house. He
confesses, that God is by his open and offensive sin, just in those his
words of commination, and all the world may see, that God is no favourer of
sin in any of his chosen, but he has ready rods to chasten it, to which
justice he submits. God has occasion given him by his confession fession of
his sin, to declare his justice in the well deserved punishment of it, so
far that when he shall execute that judgment upon him and his house, he
shall be found clear from any cruelty.

2 But this is not all: for David had received many gracious promises of mercy
from God to his own person and government, and to his posterity. And there
might be a fear that this crying sin of David might reverse these promises,
and call in those favors of God from him. Here David openly confesses his
sin, and declares his strong faith in those sure promises of God, believing
that though he have sinned against him, and done this great evil in his sight,
yet he will graciously accept of his true repentance, and pardon him his sin,
and make good his former promises to him: So shall he be declared just in his
sayings, and promises of mercy, and shall be clear when he judges him of
violating his truth. Whereby it appears, that the elect of God, when they fall
into any grievous sin, do put God to it to declare his justice both ways:
for it is justice in God,

1 To perform what he has threatened and promised. 2 To carry an even hand in
the trespasses of his children; that neither his justice suffer in bearing with
sin: nor his mercy in over-chastening the sinner. The Text now thus cleared,
1 We have in God two things in his carriage toward his elect in their falls and
transgressions. 1 His justice in chastening them. 2 His mercy in pardoning.
2 We have in David two things.
1 His humble patience, submitting himself to the punishment. 2 His strong
faith apprehending Gods gracious pardon.
1 Of the justice of God.

It will do well in our reading the stories of the false and trespasses of Gods
Saints, if we do withal observe the proce^^ of Gods judgments following them.
He soon taught us what we should trust to, in the fall of our first parents.
For when they had sinned in the forbidden fruit, he left them awhile to the
mercy of their own accusing consciences, and to the scourge of shame, and the
scorpions of their own fears to cruciate and anguish them. Then in the cool
of the day he came himself and convented the offenders, and in a judicial
session he examined the parties by the evidence of fact. And finding them
guilty, he pronounced against them a sentence of mortality, he accursed the
earth under them, he adjudged the man to labor and sweating for his bread: The
woman to subjection to her husband, and to great anguish in her childbirth.
That all posterity might by their example fear the justice of God, and
refrain from sin which brought so much evil upon the committer thereof. Yet
we doubt not of their salvation.

Noah was drunk once, and lay uncovered in his tent: his own son discovered
his shame: Noah deserved punishment, but his son should not have punished
him: but God used the unnatural evil affection of his son, as his rod to
punish the sin of the father.

I could be full in examples for this proof, that God does not leave sin in
his Saints unpunished. I only produce these two great examples.

1 In the beginners of the first world. 2 Another in the repairer of it.
The first man made in the image of God in holiness and righteousness. The
second, the only righteous man whom God found in that age. I produce them as
clear examples of the justice of God in punishing sin, even in persons most
in favor. And the rather for the condemnation of their sins which now are
afoot in the world, and are scarcely confessed to be sin.

1 The forbidden fruit is desired before any fruit of the garden: stolen bread
is sweet. The name of God which by a special law must not be taken in vain,
what name so blasphemed? Is it not a shame to Religion, that after the word had
been freely preached about 60. years in the free liberty of the Gospel, and
the Law of God in Pulpits and in print so learnedly expounded, that there
should be need of a special statute law for conservation of this name from
profanation, and to set a corporal punishment or a pecuniarie mulct upon
swearers. But neither Gods Law, nor Acts of Parliament can save that name of
God harmless.

I will press no further instances* tell me by this taste, whether the
forbidden fruit be not most desired?

2 For Noah's sin, it was but once drunkenness: and God left it not
unpunished with foul shame.

In the Apostles time, it was a modest sin, he says, They that are drunk,
are drunk in the night. Now day 1. These. 5. 7.
and night are both guilty of it: it is a sin in fashion: meetings of purpose
called and intended for it. The farewels of friends parting, the welcomes of
friends returning, the celebration of great Festivals, as if Bacchus had washed
us in the blood of the grape from our sins.

But God will be justified in his sayings: he will declare his justice in his
severe punishment of this sin here: and if it be not sincerely repented, he
has told us home what he will do: No drunkard shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. I should lay your sin to my own charge, if I should not let you know
the terror of the Lord in this case. The defense of it by the society of
sinners aggravateth the sin: God hates it so much the more. Malum quo
communius: Sin the more common, the worse.

2 He declares his justice in the performance of his mercy to his elect. For
even in these examples in my text alleged;

1 To Adam he showed mercy, who sinned having only a Law for his obedience,
with a penalty threatened in case of disobedience; but there was no promise a
foot, if he should trespass that Commandment. And that made Adam when he had
sinned, hide himself from the presence of God, ashamed and afraid to come in
sight. But God in free favor did seek him out, and before he called him to his
answer for his sin, he reveiled mercy in the promised seed. When he laid his
curse upon the Serpent that tempted him, and therefore ever since his time
sinners have a way of grace opened in that promise, and no sins if sorrowed
for, can evacuate the force of that promise, it stands good to all that truly
and sincerely repent. So as David says: In judgment he remembers mercy.
There he did so in the very sentence of judgment upon the Serpent, was the
first revelation of mercy to man. He had no Obligation of a former promise to
bind him to it, but it was a free and voluntary tender of favor growing out
of his own perfect and absolute goodness. In the tender whereof he has given
us strong assurance that if in free favor he would do so much, much rather
when he had put us in security thereof by promise.

2 The example of favor to Noah does justify God in his sayings: for he
showed him much favor after his fatherly correction of his fault.

1 In verifying his blessing upon his two sons. Sem of whom Abraham came, and
the twelve Patriarchs, and David; and Christ Jesus. And to whose tents in the
fullness of time he invited Japhet and brought in the fullness of the Gentiles.

2 In accomplishing his curse upon his youngest son many years after, by
giving away their Land from them, and rooting them out with a violent
destruction. This performed upon the repentance of Noah; which thought it be
not in express and full terms set forth in the story; yet we may take it so
signified, when Moses says; And Noah Genesis 9. 24.
awoke from his wine, that is, not only recovered after sleep to sober
judgment, but to a penitent recognition of his sin. And by the spirit of
prophecy he was enlightened to look into times to come, and to foresee the
future estate of his posterity: and by the spirit of supplication to desire
God for his eldest son: and by the spirit of faith to believe in the resolved
goodness of God to his second son. And in all the story of holy Scripture we
find, that the sins of repentant men though chastened with some temporal
rods of affliction, yet never failing of mercy.

David's children that transgressed were threatened with the rods of men, but
with reservation of favor: not to take his mercy utterly from them, as from
Saul.

2 We shall now see how David did bear himself in the wise consideration of
these two things.

1 When he confessed his sin, whereby God was justified in his threatenings of
judgment. He declares his own humble patience, submitting himself to the holy
hand of God: q. d. I confess all my sins, this my horrible and crying sin;
that the world may see thy justice in punishing me, and my patience in bearing
it. Stripes were ordained of purpose, for the backs of fools; I am one of them,
and I put my self under thy punishing hand. He is content, that as he has made
himself an example of a grievous sinner: so God should declare in and upon him
an example of his severe justice, and so be justified in his sayings.

If God did forbear all other punishments of our sin in our own persons, in
our house and family, in our goods, in the necessaries of life, in which
kinds he ordinarily avengeth himself upon offenders; yet if the sinner shall
but truly repent him of his sin, repentance it self is a greater punishment
then all these.

There is more in it: when it is said of Peter, that he went forth and wept
bitterly, then in the disciples, Reliquimus omnia, We have left all. And Saint
Paul felt more smart in the thorn in his flesh, and the Angel of the Lord
bufferring of him, then in all his dangers by Sea and Land; his stripes,
shipwreck, imprisonment. When our own consciences are upon torture, our souls
upon the rack, when we judge and take vengeance upon our selves, it is
judgment without mercy: We ever fear we underdo. Therefore the conscience of
his sin does bear witness to the justice of God, and he finds no fault
with his punishment.

Surely murmurers that repine at the punishing hand of God, and think much of
his judgments, inflame the anger of God more by their resisting his right hand
which has found them out. If they went in David's way to take a just dimension
of their sin, and did confess it contritely to God, they would be content
that he should declare his justice in their punishment, and they would see that
he would overcome if he came to be judged. Speak thy conscience: when thou
abusest thy drink to drunkenness, if God punish thee with thirst, have not
thou well deserved it? If thy meat to surfeit; if thy strength to wantonness,
etc.

2 He shows faith. For notwithstanding these many, and this foul great
sin, he believes that God will be justified in his sayings, that is,
declared just in his gracious promises of mercy.

The sins of the elect cannot outgrow the mercies of God; nor our offenses
make his truth fail. David is so full of this faith, that as he spends part
of this Psalm in a deploration of his sins: so he bestows also part of it
in supplications, whereby he declares his faith.

VERSE 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother
conceive me.
4. HE recounteth his original sin, the corrupt fountain of all his
impurities: he makes way to it with an Ecce, for now he is at the head of sin.

That we were all in Adam in the day of his creation, needs no proof, for
out of him was the woman created, and of them made one flesh by marriage, was
all mankind propagated. So that these first parents of our flesh did stand or
fall to the benefit or loss of all their posterity. But man stood but a while
in honor, and by his fall he not only corrupted his own person, but his
nature; whereby there remained an infection of sin to the pollution of the
whole nature of mankind. This the Apostle has affirmed disertly. In Adam all
dye, that is, all are subject to the law of mortality: and all are under the
curse of the law for the second death. God concluded all under sin, that is,
both the infection of sin, and the punishment thereof.

David speaks here of his original sin in the pollution thereof, and
confesses that from that root of bitterness, this and all his other sins
derived. Therefore he confesses the beginning of it not only at his shaping,
and formation in the womb, when God gave his body a composition in the womb,
and set every member and part of his body in the proper place, but he goes
higher to his first conception. In peccato fovit me: in sin she nourisht me:
his first warmth which put the first natural heat to the radical moisture of
which we are created. This appears in the difference between the first man
created and the first generated; for ^f Adam it is said: In the image of God
made he him. Genesis 1. 27.
But de primo generato, of the first begotten: for in the account of the
Genealogy he reckons not Cain, who was gone from the presence of God: nor
Abel who was by Cain murdered. But the Genealogy begins at Seth; of whom we
read. And Adam begat a son in his own Genesis 5. 3.
likeness, after his image, and called his name Seth. For Cain he needed not
to say so, for the corruption of his foul heart showed him borne of corrupt
seed. But Seth was one of the holy Fathers of the Church, yet begotten in the
image of Adam, now corrupt, and not in the image of God: as Adam was created.
How could it be otherwise? for our first parents being defiled, who can bring a
clean Job 14 4.
thing out of an unclean? Not one.

The Fathers with full consent refer that speech of Job to our original
sin, as Pineda upon that place recounteth and quoteth them.

I should not need to prove this point of original sin, having so clear
evidence for it, as my Text in hand: But that the Pelagians long ago denied any
such sin, or natural corruption, affirming, Verba Pelagii: Ut sine virtut^,
ita sine vitio procreamur, atque ante actionem propriae voluntatis id solum in
homine est quod Deus condidit: The words of Pelagius. That as we are begotten
without virtue, so without vice, and before the acting of our own wills, that
only is in man, which God made. Saint Augustine long ago took this heresy to
^ask, and learnedly confuted it. But of late, Ann. 1620. there was a Pamphlet
stolen out in print, and vented from pocket to pocket by some Anabaptists at
home, who yet refuse to be so called. In this the heresy of Pelagius is
revived, and original sin denied, and peremptorily it is affirmed, that no
sin is derived from our parents. We take, say they, from Adam vanity,
corruption, and death. This vanity is only a weakness and impotencie in
nature, to know and do the duties of the Law of God. But they deny it to be
sin. Their reason is. Adam was made of the earth: we were made of Adam: Adam
was made of the earth only, in respect of ^i^ body: for God first made the
body, and then infused the soul in it. The body was free from sin, the soul a
spiritual substance infused by God was also free from sin: so Adam was
created without sin. But we were no otherwise made of Adam, then Adam was
made of the earth: and we were no more in Adam when he sinned, then Adam was in
the earth before his creation.

First, according to the body, Adam had no commandment given him, till he had
understanding to embrace it, and will to receive or refuse it. Adam sinned not
till he departed from the commandment. They conclude hence, that we receiving
nothing but our flesh from Adam, cannot sin, till we have understanding to
know what is commanded us: ergo, no original sin.

To all which we answer. That the flesh which Adam took from the earth, was
pure; for so was the earth. But the flesh that we take from Adam is tainted
with sin. And true it is that no actual sin can be committed without the
Law. But we may be guilty of original impuritie without prevarication of the
Law.

Adam had only the matter of his body from the earth, we derive more from
Adam. For whereas as God breathed into the body of Adam all at once the breath
of lives: We live three lives. The life of plants in our vegetative: The life
of bruits in our sensitive: The life of Angels in our rational soul.
Philosophers and Physicians, and the learned Scholars of nature do resolve,
that we traduce two of these lives from our parents: the third is immediately
both created and infused by God.

The proper seat of original sin is in the sensitive part of man, and that
corrupts our reason; and as it grows faster then our rational does, so it
over-groweth it, and keeps it down; until our new birth does cut it and keep
it short, and the good Spirit of God give us strength to resist it, and to
subdue it. This God himself has in both Testaments fully detected in two holy
Sacraments: first Circumcision. This was to be administered so soon as an
infant was capable of it, even after the first critical day, and that part of
the body was chosen for this Sacrament, which might best show our generation
unclean: it was a Sacrament of purgation the impuritie of our natural
generation. In the new ^estament the Sacrament of Baptism was instituted to
the same purpose.

And where our Anabaptists do charge us, that by our doctrine of original
sin we bring upon infants a danger of eternal death, and thereby we revive
that wicked Proverb, The fathers have eaten four grapes, and the childrens
teeth are set on edge. We regest this calumny upon them in just imputation. For
when they confess that we traduce from our parents vanity, corruption, and
death: these are the punishments of sin, and if we have no sin of our own,
it is our parents sin, and so our teeth are on edge for their sour grapes.

The doctrine of original sin was ever taught in the Church; and when Saint
Augustine did meet with the Pelagian heresy denying it, he opposed it
strongly: and because the adversary urged the faith and doctrine of certain
Heretics denying original sin; S. Augustine produces the constant contrary
asseverations of the most orthodoxe Fathers of the Church in their own words.
For he cites, Ireneus, Ciprian, Reticius, Olimpus Hispa^. Hilar. Ambrose,
Innocentius, Gregor. Basil. Magnus, Chrysostom. and Jerome: which is a full cloud
of sacred witnesses of antiquity, believing and teaching the same doctrine.
This upon the Text in hand Saint Augustine does clearly avouch. Nunquid David
de adulterio natus erat? quid est quod sie dicit, nisi quia trahitur iniquitas
ab Adam? Nemo nas^itur nisi trahens poenam, trabens meritum poenae. Was David
born in adultery? Why speaks he so, but because iniquity is drawn from Adam.
There is none born which draws not punishment drawing that which deserves
punishment. He urges the words of the Apostle, Corpus mortuum est propter
peccatum, propago sumus corporis mortui. The body is dead by reason of sin.
We are the offspring of a dead body.

Julian the Pelagian did urge against original sin the honorable state of
Matrimony. So Saint Augustine charge him: Tu autem dicis nuptias sine dubio
dam^ari, ab omni sit liberum obligatione peccati. But thou say, The
condemning of marriage is no sin. But marriage was ordained, and the blessing
of propagation was given before the sin of Adam. And marriage is honorable
among all men, and the bed undefiled. The sin of Adam did not discommand
marriage, nor reverse the blessing of increase. And Saint Augustine upon this
Psalm does answer. Opus hoc castum in conjuge non habet culpam: sed origo
peccati trahit secum debitam poenam. Non enim maritus quia maritus mortalis non
est: a^t aliunde nisi peccato mortalis est. Matrimonial function is without
fault, but original sin draws with it the punishment due to it. For the
husband, as a husband brings not death, nor any way but by sin.

God provided a remedy, the seed of the woman against sin, and suffered
humane infirmity to pass on, that he might show mercy where he pleased. But
you may demand what any spirit of contradiction can allege against David's
disert confession of his formation and conception in sin?

Our Anabaptists answer, That it is a question, whether his confession here
intend himself, or his mother. It was a poor shift to busy our thoughts about
such a question: for why should David confess any thing here concerning his
mother? If any, why not both parents? This confession must have coherence, and
correspondence with the former. I acknowledge my wickedness: my sin is ever
before me. But what if it concern him? Then thus: he confesses and desires
God to consider whereof he was made, of dust: weak flesh, unable to resist the
tempter when the Law came unto him, through which weakness he was overcome.

This is that which we call original sin, this Carentis justitiae, wanting
of righteousness; this impotencie to all good acts: this seed of corruption,
which is the teeming and pregnant spawne of all sins. But they would have it;
that as Christ because he had our flesh, and was made sin, yet was no sinner:
So David, though confessing himself conceived in sin, was not by conception
and birth a transgressour.

To which we answer.

1 That the comparison is blasphemous between Christ and David: for Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost: David in the ordinary way of flesh. 2 That we call
not original sin transgression of the Law in origin: for that is the
definition of actual sin.
For original sin is defined:

1 Est corruption naturae a prima perfectione: It is the corruption of nature
from the first perfection. 2 Est corruption naturae hominis quae efficit ne vere
obediamus legi Dei, nec simus sine peccato: It is the corruption of humane
nature, which makes us unable to obey Gods Law, that we cannot be without
sin. 3 Est ignorantia inmente, and concupiscentia in carne: It is ignorance
in the mind, and concupiscence in the flesh. 4 But the fullest is this. It is
an hereditarie corruption of nature which brings forth in us the works of the
flesh, and proneth us to all evils, and thereby does fasten upon us a
guiltiness, whereby we are in desert and danger of the wrath of God. And this
is the sin which David here confesses, which began with him in his very
conception.
But they allege, that the words of David may have reference not to himself,
but to his mother. Then we must understand him thus: that David does not
confess sin as a fault, but as a punishment, and so it has regard to curse:
I will multiply the sorrows of thy conceptions. So he only means his mothers
punishment for the fall, and his weakness through the fall. That weakness we
call original sin.

But why David in his repentance, should repent his mothers punishment we
cannot so well discern: for true repentance has respect not to the punishment
deserved, but to the sin deserving it. Therefore these poor flashes, of
humane wisdom which is carnal, sensual, and diabolical, cannot elude the
evidence of truth, that David bewailing his sin does repair to the root of
it in his conception, confessing the first seminary of this weakness to begin
there.

But our Anabaptists urge further, that if the matter of which David was made
was tainted with sin: Then was also the matter of which Christ was made
tainted with sin: for he was conceived in the womb of a mother.

We reply, That he was conceived by the holy Ghost, and it was an holy thing,
that was born in his mother: so the Angel says to her.

They reply, that then Christ was not true man, for he was not born of the
substance of his mother.

We answer, That Christ was born of the very substance of Mary, and that in his
miraculous generation by the holy Ghost, the substance was not changed, but the
quality of it.

For when David prays after for a new heart, he does not desire to have the
substance of his heart changed, but the quality thereof: that of a sinful and
unclean heart it may be made a pure and holy heart: a fit Temple for the holy
Ghost to dwell in.

Thus, I hope, I have to any sober judgment cleared both our received doctrine
of original sin, and the interpretation of my Text against these old and new
Pelagians, and so the confession of David stands good; that beside his
actual transgressions of the Law, he stands guilty before God of original
uncleanness; from which corrupt fountain all his streams of actual
iniquities do derive.

I will now fortify this doctrine with plain demonstrations of the truth from
the Scripture.

1 Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the Romans 5. 12*
world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, (...), in whom
all have sinned. Nevertheless Verse. 14.
death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them, that had not sinned after
Adams transgression.

Saint Augustine understands this sin to be, that original sin that
David here complains of: for Adams was actual, and death reigns not but
where sin reigns. The same Apostle finding in his understanding enlightened,
and in his zeal inflamed, and in his will rectified by the Spirit of God, good
motions to serve God uprightly: yet those discouraged and ineffectualled in him
often: he charge all this upon his corrupt nature, which he calls Peccatum
inhabitans: Sin dwelling in him: Verse. 20. Romans 7.
Lexmembrorum, the law of his members: Verse. 23. Corpus mortis: the body of
death, Verse. 24. The flesh. Verse. 25. With my mind I serve the Law of God:
with my flesh the law of sin. This the Author to the Hebrews does call Heb.
12.
(...), The sin that does so easily beset and inviron us.

For this, little Infants unborne and newborn are subject unto death, and to
charge death without a charge of sin would call the judge of all the world
unjust. That there is original sin, and that David here complains of it,
we have made it clear.

Now observe that David in his repentance to make it full, does apply all his
sins to the multitude of Gods tender compassions. For a full confession
makes way to a full absolution.

When Jeremiah advise thus to search and try our ways Lam. 3 40.
first, and then to turn to the Lord: he intends that we must examine our
hearts in this search to the bottom, and go so far back in this inquisition
as to the mother sin, the primitive and original mass of corruption which
empoysoneth our nature: which cancreth our manners, and in time gangreneth our
whole conversation mortally, to the very dominion of sin. David does so, for
here he looks back so far, as to his first conception, and diggeth so deep
as the root of his sin. For he charge all his transgressions upon this
beginning of sin, which indeed in all the children of Adam is not only a
natural pollution defiling us, but it is a corrupt seed shooting out in time
into a blade, and bearing a full ear of actual prevarications. Therefore no
man knows his own heart, and let no man be so bold of his own strength, to
promise resistance to such temptations as have corrupted others. It is the
Apostles good counsel. Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a Gal 6. 1.
fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. In which words, The
considering of thy self, is no other then the wise remembrance of thy original
corruption: for there is tinder in thee apt to take fire from a little spark.
There is in Satan both cunning and malice enough with his temptations to
strike this fire.

The Apostle uses a fit word, (...), si anticipetur, for sometimes we are by
sensual motives persuaded, and by semblance of good deceived, or by
entisements of pleasure or profit allured to evil.

When the Serpent, as with Eve, disputes with us, and corrupts our
judgment, darkeneth our reason, blinds, benummeth, or deadeth our
conscience, and so we not only take, but gather and give the forbidden fruit.

Sometimes Satan catches us by surprise, and with a sudden temptation, having
all opportunities for sin to friend, he overtaketh us, and embarketh us in
some trespass, before we have leisure to advise our selves. So was Troy taken
at last by a cunning stratageme:

Vict^mque quamvis videat,
Vix or edit sibi potuisse vinci.
She saw her self overcome by foes,
Yet scarce believes she what she knows.
Thus was David here caught, he was at leisure, in peace, in glory, and power,
at ease, his mind now quiet: his breasts full of milk, his bones of marrow, and
walking on the leads of his house, his eye no sooner was fastened on the
beauty, but his heart was fired with lust after Vriahs wife: he enquired of
her, sent for her, defiled her, prevented, and surprised with a sudden
temptation. This he imputes to his natural corruption by his original and
birth sin.

So some that have ever made conscience of an oath: yet upon a sudden passion
sometimes rap out a fearful oath to Gods great dishonor, and their foul
offense.

So some that make conscience of giving, Suum cuique, to every one his own, yet
upon an opportunity offering them another goods upon fair terms of likely
secrecy, have robbed a neighbor. I have upon like occasion given examples of
this work of corrupt nature in the sons of a. Reg. 8. 11, 12, etc.
men: in Hazael, who brought a present from Benhadad to Elisha, to demand
whether his master should dye of that disease. The man of God looked Hazael so
steadfastly in the face that Hazael was out of countenance: but the man of God
wept. And when Hazael demanded why weepeth my Lord? He answered, Because I see
the evil, that thou will do to the children of Israel: their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou destroy with the sword, and wilt
dash their children, and wilt rip up their women with child. And Hazael said:
But wh^t, 1*
is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing? Yet presently he
returned to his master, brought him comfort of his recovery, and on the morrow,
he took a thick cloth and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, that he
dyed. He reigned in his stead, and did like a dog all that evil, etc.

When Christ said one of his twelve should betray him: Judas was one of them
that demanded with the rest: Nunquid ego Domine? Is it I, Lord? But a sudden
temptation surprised him. Then entered Satan into Judas Iscariot: And Luke 22.
3.
he went his way, and communed with the chief Priests and Captains, how he
might betray him unto them. Most memorable is the example of Peter, whom Christ
forewarned Ver. 31. etc.
of his denial of him. A thing so far from Peter's heart, that he took it ill
to be so charged, he protested against it, and vowed to dye with him or for
him, rather then he would deny him. Yet being in the high Priests Hall, when
Christ was ill used there, for fear of his own skin he denied, and forswore
him thrice. This body of sin we do all always bear about us, and therefore
we pass the time of our so journing here with fear: for which of us may not
be thus surprised? For there is no kind of sin which our heart abhors
most, but we are in danger of it by reason of our natural corruption:
wherefore Christ taught us to pray: Et ne nos inducas in tentationem* And lead
us not into temptation. Therefore, a wise man fears and departs from evil:
but a fool rages and is Prove. 14. 16.
confident. Folly is rash, and goes on inconsiderately, and trusts to his
own strength.

We live in perpetual danger, by reason of this natural corruption* for the
Spirit has his eclipse, and often upon our grieving him, leaves us in our own
ways, that we may see our natural impotencie to that which the Law requires
of us, and be so much the more wary how we walk in the way of that roaring
Lion, which goes about continually seeking whom he may devour. But here
remains a great scruple: Was not David circumcised? and has not that
Sacrament according to the intention of Gods holy ordinance this proper effect
to remove and purge original sin? And now in the time of the Gospel, is not
Baptism the laver of our new birth? does it not wash away original sin? Why
then does David yet complain of it? or why do we who are baptized stand daily
yet in jeopardie of it?

To clear this point, we resolve, that since the fall of man, his infirmity
has ever been such, as all the means of grace ordained by God have fallen
short of working their full and perfect effect upon us in this life: The word
teaches us; and yet so long as we live here, we know but in part: The word
begets faith; yet so weak, and so imperfect is our faith, that Christ
bids us to pray to God to increase our faith. The word of the Gospel is the
power of God to salvation: yet he does magnify his power in our weakness. Our
hope is imperfect, for it is mingled with fear. Our joy is not complete: for
we rejoice in trembling. The Sacraments of Circumcision and Baptism were
ordained against original sin, yet for want not of efficacy in the gift,
but of capacity in the receivers thereof* they fall short of the full effect
here.

It is therefore far from us to limit God by his ordinances, to bind him to
pass his graces no way but by them. As far is it from us to extend the force
of his ordinance to that latitude, that which way so ever his outward ordinance
goes, his grace must necessarily follow the same. We go in a middle way
between these two extremes, affirming that according to the good pleasure of
his will, so the Sacraments of our regeneration do work their effect more or
less in his Church.

For my own judgment, I have believed and taught, that Baptism does so purge
away original sin, as it does regenerate us. It works the same work at
once, the killing of sin, and the life of Christ in us. As we perceive our
regeneration imperfect, so we must confess our mortification imperfect.
Therefore after Baptism there remains yet a ^ome of our original sin,
because Christ has not the entire possession of us. And yet there is a seed of
grace, because Christ dwells in us. Both these seeds grow in us till the
harvest. Yet as Jacob and Esau they strive in the same womb: for the flesh
lusts; the spirit sigheth, and groaneth: the flesh striveth against the
spirit, the spirit is contrary to the flesh. From the seed of the flesh which
we call original sin, all our evil thoughts, words, and works do proceed.
From the seed of the spirit arise all good motions whereby we resist the flesh.
And if any of Gods people be overtaken with offense, he is not straitway as a
limb cut off from the body, but as a bone out of joint for the time. It is not
a laxation from the body, but a laxation in the body. It is the Apostles word:
you that are spiritual, restore such a one, (...), put him in joint again. So
we deny not the grace of Circumcision or Baptism, we do not weaken the power
of Gods ordinance, but we allow it the efficacy of congruitie with the
subject. For it fills secundum capacitatem vasis, according to the capability
of the vessel; when God enlarges our heart, we shall receive his gifts more
fully.

You now see how much cause David had to complain of his original sin, as
the seed remaining in him, from whence these great offenses grow.

I conceive the proper use of this point to be this: To Use.
stir us up by David's example upon all occasions by our fallings into any
sin, to look back upon this root of sin in us, that we may put the strength
of our measure of grace to it, to grubbe it. It is such, as that if there
remain but a thread of it in our ground, by the sent of water it will take in
sap, and gather strength, and put forth, and grow up as a plant, as Job says.
Therefore we know our spiritual growth in grace by the withering of this old
man, and the vegetation of the new man in us.

The Prophet here in the from of this confession sets an Ecce, Behold, which
may be directed two ways.

1 For he may divert his speech from God to whom his address is, to the
Church, and to his fellow members of that body, as partners with him of the
same nature, of the same infirmity.

See whence these ^oule evils came, even from the sin that came with me:
Peccatum oriens: from the sin that abides in me, Peccatum habitans: from the
sin that encircleth me, Peccatum circumstans: from the sin that defiles
me, Peccatum comm^culans. That every one of us may look to that breeder, and
keep it from teeming in us, or if lust do conceive, and bring forth sin, then
to take the little ones and dash them against the stones.

We do not enough study this point, we do not behold and see into it as we
should, to look for no good out of this Nazareth, to confess our weak and
wicked beginnings of nature: to amend by culture and industry our barren soil
impregnant of any good fruits. To plough up the fallow grounds of our hearts
with discipline and mortification: to sow them with the precious seed of the
Word. Leaving them to the clouds of grace to rain upon them: and to the Son
of righteousness to shine on them. Eli^hs faith will open heaven for that rain.
Joshuahs prayer will make that Son stand still.

2 Behold, to God, he may desire him to consider in his Use.
mercy, that this mother-sinne came with him: it was a corruption of his
nature, before he had either appetite, or sense, or will to embrace it: yea
that corrupted all these, and reason it self, and the conscience that defiled
all.

I deny not, but that it was sin at first in the conception; but David does
not say, Formatus sum iniquus: or Conceptus iniquus: but, In iniquitate, I am
not formed or conceived wicked, but in wickedness. The matter that I was made
of was unsound, and unholy: for David was not David, till his reasonable soul
was infused; then was he sinful.

So that I conceive this behold urged to God, to move compassion in him, that
seeing he could not help it that he was so framed (and surely God is merciful
to that sin in us) therefore David says of him; Like as a father pittieth
Psa. 103. 13. 14.
his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. For he knows our
frame, he remembers that we are dust. Therefore this Ecce, behold, to God,
does move him to compassion of his most miserable condition in regard of the
corruption and frailty of his frame and composition. But our fault is, that we
do not husband our talent of Gods grace, and of Christ's merits, to our
amendment of nature, and to the expurgation of our sin. Yet for Infants that
have no sin, but that to answer for, in the ordinary way of Gods favor; I
make no question of their salvation by Baptism: for so the Apostle, Baptism
saves us. Yet the want of the outward Sacrament which cannot be charged upon
little Infants, does not deprive them of the favor of God, because the
covenant is not limited by the sign of it. The promise which is the soul and
life of the Sacrament, is past to you and to your children.

The Church of Rome denies unbaptised infants a place in heaven, and they have
built them a Limbus, an upperroome above hell, where they place them: but they
cannot agree upon their estate there: Some of their learned depriving them of
the fruition of heaven, but allowing them life everlasting without pain, and
with some measure of happiness. Others allow them an earthly paradise of
natural felicity for ever. Thomas, and others, that they are deprived of the
sight of God, and have no poenam sensus, pain of sense, inward or outward.
Driedo and others affirm, both poenam damni and sensus, pain of loss and
sense. But Saint Augustine says, he could never read in Scripture of more
then two places; heaven for the saved, and hell from that distanced very far
off, for the damned, Locum tertium non reperio, I find no third place.

We confess, that original sin without Christ is mortal; but Christ became
man, and was born of a Virgin, and became an Infant, for Infants, to preserve
them from hell, and we believe charitably and comfortably of them, that he
receives such to himself.

The conclusion of this point is, that seeing we are thus born filii ira, the
children of wrath, we should make it the exercise of our whole life to strive
against this natural corruption, and to weaken the force of the flesh all we
can, by mortifying the deeds thereof, and to grow daily in wisdom, and
knowledge, and faith, and obedience, perfect, thoroughly perfect to all good
works, making our election and calling sure in our own consciences, to the
establishing of our hearts, till we grow up to be perfect men in Christ Jesus,
for if we mortify the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, we shall live.

VERSE 6. Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden
part thou shall make me to know wisdom.
5. TO aggravate his own digression, he compares himself in this state of
transgression, with that condition which God exacteth of us, and which he will
hereafter work in him.

In which words we have,

1 David's fear. 2 David's faith.
1 David's fear, He confesses his transgressions and iniquities and sins,
and would very feign be quit of them, because he finds them so contrary to
the holiness and pure perfection of the divine nature: for David had lived in
the open profession and practice of religion, he had established both religion
and Courts of Justice in Jerusalem, yet secretly his corrupt heart had embraced
a temptation to sin, and he had effected it, whereby he had displeased God:
for God is not pleased with an outside and semblance of religion, which may
pass current with men, who see no deeper than the show; he is a searcher of
hearts, and desires not a seeming and show, but truth, and that not in a face
of holiness, in an outward profession, but in the inward parts.

2 David's faith, that notwithstanding this his grievous declination from the
ways of God, yet God in his mercy will repair him again, and make him to
know wisdom in his hidden part: that is, in his understanding and in his
heart.

Thus we must understand this text, following our new translation, but former
translations do alter the sense, and change the matter of this verse. The
vulgar Latin, the Spanish, the Italian, the French, the old English, the
Geneva reading: Junius, Pagnine, Calvine, and generally all the translations
that I have read, and Comments: Saint Augustine, L^dolphus, Saint Ambrose,
Saint Gregory, Cardinal Bellarmine, etc. do all read one way.

Thou have made me to understand wisdom secretly.

Which does also add weight to the burden of his sin; for seeing God
requires truth in the inward parts, and had secretly informed him with
wisdom, to know so much, and to direct him in the way of obedience; This
makes David's sin greater, who not only transgressed Gods Commandment, but
sinned against the knowledge and wisdom which God gave him, against it: only
Montanus his interlineare reads it in the future, whom our translators of the
Kings Bible have followed: the original does bear it well, and I choose
rather to see David in faith, then in fear, and therefore I embrace our
reading: wherein David believes, that God will make him wiser hereafter,

1 Concerning his fear, he had cause to mistrust himself, when his conscience
accused him of hypocrisy, for having maintained an outward expressure of
religion, his heart proved false to God, and his eye walked in wrong ways, and
misguided his heart.

God who looks not only upon our outward man, but upon the heart, soon
found him out, and saw the abominations there, for he is searcher of hearts
and reins. There is not a better rule to manage either our conversation, or
our faith, or our repentance by, then this: to consider what God requires of
us, and wherein he delights. Micah the Lords Prophet says, He has showed
thee O man (...) ^.
what is good, and what the Lord does require of thee: He is our Lord, and it
is fit that we take notice of his will, and what he requires; he will show us
nothing but good; the old way, the good way, that walking in it, we may find
rest for our souls He desires our ears to his word: Let him that has ears
to hear, hear what the spirit speaks, etc. He desires the eyes of our
body, that we keep them from beholding vanity: that we li^t them up to the
hills, unde auxilium, whence comes our help. He requires the lifting up of
our hands in prayer, the stretching out of our hands in alms, in good works,
in labor in our callings, in subvention and supportation of the weak, in
taking up such as are fallen. He requires our tongues in voce laudi^, in the
voice of thankesgiving; we must make his praise to be heard. In prayers and
supplications with strong cries. He requires our feet to tread in his Courts,
to stand in the gates of Jerusalem: and cave pedi, take heed to thy foot. He
requires our knee, for he has sworn in holiness, ^gressum est verbum, etc.
the word is gone forth, Every knee shall bow to me.

O come let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord: but all
these are forms, which an hypocrite may put on, and personate and act, and who
can say but he is religious and fears God? This vernish and guilding may
deceive men, and all is not gold that glisters: therefore to regulate our faith
and manners, our best rule is to compose our selves not to the eye of man, but
to the eye of God: for what need we fear the judgment of man?

With me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of 1 Cor. 4. 5.
you, or of man's judgment. It was the praise of Noah, Thee only have I found
righteous before me. Righteousness before God, is that which in my Text is
called truth in the inward parts, sineeritas cordis, purity of heart.

My son, give me thy heart: This is the difference between Prove. 23. 26.
true and false religion. In false religions it is enough to present the
service of the outward man, the heart is not required. But true religion lays
the ground of devotion in the inward man, according to the first commandment
of the Law, with all the heart, and soul, and then with all the strength. This
Christ calls, fac^re veritatem, to perform our service to God sincerely.

Those gods that cannot discern the inward parts, neither can distinguish
between sincerity and hypocrisy, may be easily put off with any formal
service. But the eye that sees profunda cordis, the depth of the heart, and
searches in abscondito, the hidden part, must not be dallied with. David could
say, If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Two things here arise doctrinall:

1 That God searches so deep as our inward parts. 2 That he requires sincere
service from them.
1 O Gods search.

It were no matter for more then show, if Gods search went no further then our
outward man. I here were those Psalm. 78. 36. 37
that spoke him fair, and f^attered him with their mouths, but their heart
was not upright toward him, neither were they faithful in his covenant; he
detected them: for so he put difference between the sacrifices of Caine and
Abel, between the prayers of the Pharisee and the Publican.

This people honors me with their lips, but their heart, etc. By David's
rule it must be so, he that formed the eye, should not he see? he that made the
ear, should not he hear? he that framed the heart, should not he search the
heart? Such as our hearts are, such is our service, and so accepted.

2 He requires in this heart, truth: for only such hearts are like a field
which the Lord has blessed, they are only the good ground for the seed of the
word, who receive it into an honest and good heart.

There is not a more foolish sin in the world, than that of hypocrisy, for
it serves our turns only with a show of goodness. Which convinces the
conscience, as Chrysostom says, Si bonum est bonum ad parere, melius est
bonum esse: If i^ be good to seem, much more to be good. It serves our turn
only with men, such as daily are taken 2
away from us, and we dye from amongst them, but God remains ever with us to
behold all our ways. And when we go hence, we remove to the judgment seat
of God. So the benefit of hypocrisy is soon lost, the joy of hypocrites
perishes, but the guilt and punishment thereof abides for ever.

The last reward of hypocrisy is deadly, for all the wicked 3
are threatened to have their portion with hypocrites. The phrase is varied
thus, with the devil and his Angels.

There was a divination in use amongst the Romans, by opening of beasts* and
looking upon their inwards. Aruspices, Soothsayers. God has ever used that
kind of inspection, to distinguish seeming from being his servants. And
therefore we knowing how patent our hearts and ways are to the all-seeing eyes
of God, ought to purge our consciences from dead works, to serve the living
God. Our inwards are that Temple of the holy Ghost, there Christ stands at
the door, and knocks, and would feign come in to abide with us. Let not Gods
house of prayer be made spelunca latronum, a den of thieves.

We confess that we have not in our selves either wisdom or goodness
sufficient to plant truth within us, and to purge this temple. Christ must make
the whip, and scourge out the defilers thereof. But seeing God delights in
truth and sincerity, this I dare say, there is not a sin to which our
free will may extend, and against which our own natural strength may serve us
better then against hypocrisy. For though it be not in the power of my
freewill to embrace truth, yet I may choose whether I will be an hypocrite, I
may appear as I am. This makes the sin of hypocrisy so damnable, because I
may eschew it if I will. And knowing how contrary it is to the pure and holy
divine nature, how unworthy of GODS creature, how provoking to GOD; our sin
is the greater.

It is our wisdom to observe what God desires, and to apply our selves wholly
to the fulfilling thereof. We would have him deal so with us, and when we do
only affect his favors in desire, before we come to be petitioners to him,
He hears the desires of the poor. Alas, what benefit is the truth of our
inward parts to him? he desires it for us, that we may be holy, and so we
shall come to see the face of God: for without holiness, no man shall see God.
I have set God always before me, says David, that is the way of true
holiness. For comparing our selves with him, we shall see our own impurity
the better. Job did so: I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but
now Job 41. 5. 6. etc.
mine eye sees thee; therefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and
ashes.

David now in the way of repentance takes God into his sight, and considers
what he requires, and finds his sin so much the greater, by how much he
has failed of that which God desires. If we come not to this of our selves,
God sends his Prophets to us to tell us of it, and to put it home to us, as
he did to his own people. For ye dissembled in your hearts when you sent me
to Almighty Jer. 42. 20.
God, saying, Pray for us unto the Lord our God, and according to all that the
Lord our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do it. And now I have
this day declared it to you, but you have not obeyed the voice of the Lord your
God, nor any thing for the which the Lord has sent me unto you. Now therefore
know certainly that ye shall dye, etc. They be great losers by it at last,
for they live in fear of being detected and laid open, whereas he that lives
uprightly, walks boldly: The righteous is bold as a Lion. And they dye
damnably, for when they are stripped out of their borrowings, and appear naked
in the sight of Gods pure eyes, they have the reward of hypocrites. Yet they
abuse this Text, who because God desires truth in the inward parts, care not
how they outwardly carry themselves. Some such there have been, who because
Nicodemus came to Christ by night, and yet went in the common way of the
Priests and Scribes in open conversation, have therefore resolved, that if they
be true to God, and his religion, in their inward parts, it is no matter
though they join with all people where they come in outward duties of the
religion of the place where they live.

Amongst the tenants of Gods holy Tabernacle, they are Psalm. 15. 2.
reckoned who speak truth in their hearts*: here is truth, and as the heart is
the feat of it, so the tongue voyceth it; here is but one truth in both, for
there is a double conformity required in speaking of truth.

1 Of the speech with the mind, to speak as we think.

2 Of the mind with the thing it self: that we embrace truth in our mind,
as the thing is. Saint Augustine says, it is not David's meaning that in cord
loquamur veritatem, ore mendacium, in heart we speak truth, and lie with our
mouths. Therefore David calls such as have this truth in their inward parts,
such as walk uprightly; and the virtue here required of us is, integrity and
sincerity. And it is an unfeigned desire in the servants of God, to approve
themselves such as they seem.

As this has reference to God, it is free from hypocrisy; as to men, it is
void of guile. This virtue is rewarded with grace and glory.

Regula signorum, the rule of signs.

1 The upright is sound in his conscience before God. The hypocrites care is,
ut videatur, that he seem. 2 The upright are most careful of the
Commandments of God: the hypocrite is more observant of the commandments of
men. 3 The sincere man loves religion for it self: the hypocrite for other
ends. 4 The upright hates sin in himself, the hypocrite in others. 5 One
makes conscience of all, the other but of some sins. 6 The upright love the
best and most righteous, but despise the wicked: the hypocrite despises, and
hates all that are better than he, 7 The care of the upright is for the
greater duties of the law, but the hypocrite is for Mint and Cummin: Nullus in
magnis, magnus in minimis, nothing in great things, great in nothing. 8 The
upright is humble, the hypocrite proud: He that lifts up himself, his soul
is not upright in him. Hab. 24.
9 The upright is bold as a Lion: the hypocrite flies, nemine persequente,
when no man follows. 10 The upright is never removed, he persevereth to the
end, but the hypocrite is as the morning cloud, and as the morning dew, (...),
his profession, for a time. Hos. 6. ^.
11 The upright join duties of piety and charity, the hypocrite parts them:
show of religion, none of charity, no truth in the inward parts.
2 David's faith, And in the hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom.

1 Here is the way found to amend all, by knowing ^
wisdom. 2 Here is the seat of this knowledge and wisdom, in the hidden
part. 3 Here is David's confidence, that God will make him know,
1 Know wisdom, sin makes us fools, for all sin is folly, all sinners
fools. Take heed you walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 16.
not as fools, but as wise. Can there be a greater folly then to leave the
fountain of living water, and to make our selves cisternes that hold no water?
sin is departing from God: it is an evil heart of unbelief that does so. We
have warning of it. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of Hebr. 3. 12.
you an evil heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God: for God says,
If any man draw back, my soul shall H^b, 10. 38.
have no pleasure in him. Where are we then? yet are we in the presence, and
within the verge of the power of God, within the sight of his eye, within the
reach of his right hand, and his right hand will soon find out all his
enemies. It is David's saying, when he fled from the face and fury of his
rebel son Absolon: if God thus say, I 2 Samuel 15. ^6.
have no delight in thee, here am I, let him do to me, as it seems good unto
him: he must tarry by it, there is no slying from his hand. It is our folly
then, by sin to depart from him, who has us always in his sight and power.

2 It is our folly to sin and offend him, to whom we must resort for all good
things: For in him we live, move, and have our being, every good and perfect
gift comes from him: of him we have our daily bread, he formed us in the womb,
he took us thence, on him we depend from our mothers breast: and if by sin
we go away from him, by repentance we must return to him with shame enough,
as she did, who said, I will go and return to Hos. 2. 7.
my first husband, for then it was better with me than now.

God knows that our necessities will force us to him again, and he mendeth
our pace with his rod. I will go Hos. 5. 15.
and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my
face: in their affliction they will seek me early.

3 It is folly to sin, and thereby to hazard the loss of those things which
we affect most here, such as concern our temporal welfare, for we hold the
things of this world by no other ten^re, but of his good pleasure. To hazard
the loss of grace here, and glory hereafter: for only godliness has the
promises of this life, and of that which is to come; the knowledge of wisdom
does help all: but that is not sapientia carnis, the wisdom of the flesh, or
saeculi hujus, of this world, which is carnal, sensual, and divellish: this
is foolishness with God, and befooleth us. It is wisdom to salvation, the
wisdom of God, it grows not in us, it is infu^ed into us, and the Apostle
calls it wisdom from above: He describes it by the effects which it
works in them that have it.

1 It is pure, for it makes us so: the word is (...), and James 3. 17. 2 Cor.
11. ^.
signifies chaste, to which Saint Paul alludeth: I have prepared you for an
husband, to present you a chaste Virgin to Christ: Christ is our high Priest,
and in the law it was ordained, that the high Priest should marry a Virgin, not
a widow or a divorced woman, or profane, or ^evit. 21. 13. 14.
an harlot: not a widow, because he could not have her first love, not a
divorced woman, because she had forsaken her first love: not a profane person,
because she could not yield him holy love: not an harlot, from whom he could
neither expect first, honest or only love; so that if we desire to be espowsed
to Christ, we must be pure, able to yield him our first, our holy, our only
love: and the wisdom which is from above, works this effect*

1 Puritatem scientiae the purity of science. 2 Conscientiae, the purity of
conscience.
1 Scientiae, of science, or knowledge, against

1 Vanity, which affects idle and unprofitable studies. 2 Self opinion,
which advances heresy and schism. 3 Curiosity, which does (...), and would
know supra id quod scriptum est, above that which is written.
2 Conscientiae, of conscience. And herein I endeavor always to have a clear
conscience before God, and toward (...). ^4 ^5.
men. This wisdom will repair such a delinquent as David is, and making him
as he after desires, whiter than snow. Saint James adds other effects of
wisdom: it is peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and
good fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy. I content me with the
first and last, for David having defiled his inward parts with sin, hopes for
remedy from this wisdom, to purge his conscience from dead works: and having
trespassed in hypocrisy, seeming outwardly religious, yet having so much
inward unc^eannesse, he hops for remedy from this wisdom, to remove his
hypocrisy, and in stead thereof, to plant integrity and sincerity in him.

To relieve man after his fall, Christ was sent, who was made to us of God,
wisdom, and he is that wisdom which in Salomons Proverbs lifts up her
voice, and offers to instruct all the fools of the earth in knowledge to
righteousness.

I doubt not, but the faith of David did here look so far as to this
wisdom, the holy son of God: for he says, Thou shall make me to know
wisdom.

1 Thou shall make me to know my Redeemer, whose wisdom shall both open me a
way out of the danger I am now in, and shall direct me in a course of
repentance of what is past, and amendment of life for the time to come. For
this is life eternal, to know thee, and him thou have sent. So we must
understand David here, for non est aliud nomen, there is no other name, there
is no other wisdom in the world that can recover us from the folly and
frenzy of sin, but Christ Jesus only.

It is our way, when we have fallen by any transgression, to advise with this
wisdom, and to rest therein: for he that is our wisdom to show us the
right way, and to guide us in it, is also our righteousness whereby we
appear just in the sight of God, so that nothing can be laid to our charge:
and he is also our sanctification, by which we are holy in our selves, and do
so appear before men: he is also our redemption, whereby we are cleared both
from the guilt of sin, and the deserved punishment thereof. So that in
repentance we must look unto this Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.
Know him, for he must bear all our iniquities, and in his name only must the
horn of our salvation be exalted.

2 The seat of this wisdom, in the hidden part. Saint Augustine reads this
otherwise, occulta sapientiae tuae manifestasti mihi, thou have shown me the
secrets of thy wisdom: and he has a comfortable observation upon it. The
secret of Gods wisdom is his secret purpose to show mercy to such as truly
repent. Great sins threaten great wrath, and many heavy judgme^ts are menaced
to notorious offenders, yet God reveals to them the secrets of his wisdom:
when he lets them know that he can make their crimsin and scarlet sins as
white as wool and snow. Upon what hope else did Niniveh repent, hearing Gods
peremptory judgment. Niniveh destruetur, Niniveh shall be destroyed: the time
also limited, but GOD made manifest the secret of his wisdom to her. But I
follow our own reading, and find the seat of this wisdom prepared in the
hidden part. David means here the same place where he had hid his sin, and
that is in prosundo cordis, in the depth of his heart. Saint Peter calls this
seat, (...). 3. 4.
The hid man of the heart. Here David hid the word of God, that he might not
sin against God. And when he resigned this secret place to lust and unclean
desires, and banished this wisdom thence, he fell down right. This is the
place before mentioned, where God desires truth in the inward parts. These are
secret parts.

1. To the eye, and search of the world without us, for that cannot ransacke
and romage the conscience. Some overtures may be made thereof: we say, ex vultu
virum, we know a man by his face, and vultus index animi, the face shows the
mind: trees be known by their fruits: our words, our works, our gestures,
our pens, do give some testimony of the heart, our company also. But God has
reserved the inquisition and judicature of the heart, by special appropriation
to his own prerogative royal. Deep is the heart of man, and no man can sound
it.

2 This is called a secret part, in respect of our selves, for no man knows
the depth of his own heart, wherein there is closely couched, as you have
heard, a seed of unrighteousness, our remain of original sin, which
spawneth and issues many transgressions: yet there may be hidden there also a
seed of grace, which may put forth in time and bring forth fruit to life.

2 Great examples of the secrecy of these parts to our selves.

1 In Judas one of the holy College of the twelve, for neither was he suspected
by others, neither did he in himself discern that seed of evil, which lay
long concealed in his hidden and secret part, which after brought forth treason.

2 Another in Saint Paul, who living long a cruel enemy of the Church, when
Christ was once revealed in him, he became both a vessel to carry precious
treasure into the Church, and a patient sufferer for that truth which before he
had persecuted. Here is the hope of David, that he shall now obtain wisdom
of God in this secret of his heart. And this accomplisheth repentance, when we
set our inward parts to rights: for the corruption of these is the generation
of all kinds of sins. Wisdom asks this seat of us, My son give me thy
heart, and if we keep it for wisdom, it is fortified against all temptations.

The heart of man is the little City, and Satan is the great king that
besieges it, and builds bulwarks against it. wisdom is that poor man
that saves this City, and removes, yea destroys the enemy of it. Wisdom
when it does no more but swim in the fancy, and float in the brain, rather
swells then fatteneth us: but when it possesses the heart, which is the seat
of affections, it then commands all; for then the eye, the ear, the tongue,
the hand, be all set aworke, and all those parts which were before the weapons
of unrighteousness to commit unrighteousness, turn their service another
way, to the work of truth to please God.

It is the happiness of Gods Saints to store this wisdom in this hold of the
heart. This is that bonus thesaurus cordis, good treasure of the heart that
Christ speaks of. And when Solomon says, omni custodia custodicor tuum, keep
thy heart diligently, he means that we should freight it with this wisdom.
For our adversary, besides his professed hostility wherein he proclaims open war
against the Church of God, has his secret insinuations by which he windeth
himself into the hearts of men. So he entered into the heart of Judas, and
Saint Peter says to Simon Magus, Thy heart is not right in the sight of God.
Satan had been secretly Ac^s 8. 21.
working upon his heart, into which he had infused some gall of bitterness.
Against this, David's receipt was Absconds in cord sermonem tuum, ut non
peccarem contra te, I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. When he let that word go, Satan came in and sowed the seeds of
lust. Intravit mors per fe^es^ras, Death came in at the windows, he let it in
by his eyes, for no sooner did his eye look, but his heart did lust, and then
all his parts proved instruments of sin, and traitors to the spirit of God
that was in him.

This sets us a work to furnish our secret part with wisdom, for so it
will be a fortification against open war, and a privy coat against a sudden
stabbe of temptation. This wisdom, though thus secretly stored, cannot be
concealed, but it will speak in the tongue, the language of Canaan, For ext of
the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. It will be seen in the face,
for the wise do set their faces toward Jerusalem, and you may see by their
looks, which way they are bound: all their works and whole conversation will
taste of it. The greatest hinderance to good conversation, to good works, and
to repentance of our evil ways, is the unsoundnesse and rottenness of our
secret part: that is,

1 Vanity in our understanding, when we busy our thoughts, and exercise our
wits, either only in the things which concern this life, what we shall eat,
what we shall drink, where with we shall be clothed, for which the heathens
take care, who know no God to take that care for them: or when we spend our
brains in impertinent disquisitions, studying genealogies, and intricating our
thoughts in vain questions, which are not worthy our study.

2 Our inward part is mortally diseassed by corruption of our will, when we
live in a perpetual pursuit of our own desires, and go in the way that
seems good in our own eyes: for so the strength of sin is the law, and the
more we are restrained, the more we strive both against the Commandment that
bids, and forbids, and against the word of exhortation, that puts the
Commandment upon the conscience.

And against those good motions of the spirit of God, and of his good Angels
which continually labor to compose us to obedience. The way to heal all this
is by wisdom in this secret part, for that will teach,

1 For the world, there is no cause to care, for the Lord cares for us; and
for impertinent studies, the word will show us, unum necessarium, the one thing
needful, against the vanity of mind.

2 For our will, this wisdom will correct it, and teach it subjection to the
will of God, whose will is our best friend, for by that we were chosen,
created, redeemed, saved: fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done.

3 David's faith, Thou will make me to know. The natural man does not perceive
the things of the spirit of God, neither can he. They that are born sinners,
are born fools, darkened in their understandings, and hardened in their
hearts, the light that is in them is darkness, and therefore qu^nt^ tenebr^,
how great darkness / Therefore they must be made to know wisdom, and none
but God can do it, he teaches man knowledge, and David believes that he will
do it. Christ says, All shall be taught of God, Job. 6. 45.
for he offers himself a teacher to all. Wisdom cries in the streets, and
utters her voice in the high ways, and calls the simple and ignorant to
her school to be taught. Wisdom has many auditors, few proficients, many
truants that come not to school, many dull and indocile, that learn little:
but David believes two things:

1 That God will teach him.

2 That he will make him know; our apprehensions are often more quick to
conceive wisdom, then either our memories to retain it, or our affections to
embrace it. We are never said truly to know wisdom, till we know the want
of it, the giver of it, the value of it, and the right use of it. Seneca could
teach his scholars, that the inquisition and posing of students in Philosophy,
is Non quantum in philosophia, sed quantum in vita profecerint. Not what profit
they have received in philosophy, but how much in their lives. The way of
furnishing us with this wisdom, is,

1 By the Word working upon our understandings, for that gives light to the
simple.

2 By the spirit stirring up our spirits, and setting them aworke. If any man
love God, he is taught of God. David 1 Cor 8. 3.
now repenting and returning to himself, has faith in the goodness of God,
that he will give him this wisdom to repair him: which shows, that our
wisdom may for a time be lost, for David had it before, and guided all his
former ways with discretion, but being overtaken with this temptation, he
committed folly; wisdom for a time departed from him; his understanding was
darkened, his heart was hardened: sin had possessed his inward and secret
part, the hid man of the heart. So that he is now to learn wisdom again,
and so is cast much behind hand. And make him to know it in his hidden part.
Great comfort here is given to the true penitent: for his sincere repentance
removes both sin and punishment, and quickens the graces of God in him, so
that though he stumble, he cannot fall; quia Dominus supponis manum, because
the Lord puts under his hand, his faith lays hold upon that hand, and
keeps him upright.

VERSE 7. Purge me with hysope, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be
whiter than snow.
3. HE returns again to supplications, and he has many suits to God.

1 For his purgation from the pollution of his sin, Verse 7. 2 For comfort
against his sins, and the punishment of them, Verse 8. 3 For pardon of them,
Verse 9. 4 For newness of life, Verse 10. 5 For a constant course of the grace
and favor of God, Verse 11. 12. 13. 6 For particular pardon of his last great
sin, Verse 14. 7 For ability to perform the service of Gods holy worship,
Verse 15. 16. 17.
1 For purgation from sin: he doubleth his request here as in an important
business, dearly concerning him: for,

1 He finds himself so foul with his sins, as he needs washing and
purging, and he needs Gods washing. 2 To show yet his pollution more, he
presses to be washed with hysope. 3 To show what innocence and purity he
affects: he first desires to be made clean, he resumeth the suit, and
expresses his desires in full measure, he would be whiter than snow.
1 His importunity to be washed and purged, does seem to declare in him,

1 A Conscience sensible of his pollution, and weary of it. 2 A^ervency of
spirit, breathing importunity with God in strong cries and supplications to
remove the annoyance of it.
1 A conscience thoroughly touched with sense and remorse of his sin, for he
has been earnest with God already in this Psalm before for this, and has
begd of God to blot out his iniquities that they might not remain upon record
against him: to wash him thoroughly, and cleanse him from his sin: and now he
renews and re-enforceth his petition to the same purpose. The reason I
conceive to be, because he has now been deep in the confession of his sin,
and in contemplation of the holiness and purity of God, and of that integrity
which he exacteth of us. For if our thoughts could be at lei^are to think
effectually of these things, we should apply our desires more to the servcie of
God, and to the declining of evil: we should find our sins sit blushing in
our faces, and bleeding in our wounded consciences. The tenderness of the
heart would yearne at any offense done to him, from whom we receive so much
good, and the terror of his power, who is able to do us so much hurt: and the
shame of requiting him unthankfully, who has declared so much patience in our
aberrations, would work upon us to love and fear, and seek him with all our
hearts.

Now we may see in David an holy weariness of his evil ways, we may feel
sin a burden oppressing him, we may see it a pollution annoying him, no rest
in his bones, because of his sin. We may also discern some present effect
of that wisdom which God had taught him, which begins at the fear of God,
to eschew evil and do good.

2 Note the fervency of his spirit in this importunity of his strong
supplications. He that feels want of any thing good for him, will not be said
nay. The unjust Judge that fears neither God nor man, shall have no rest till
he do his poor petitioner justice.

The Disciples cannot still nor drive away the poor woman that petitioneth
Christ for her distressed daughter. The diseased of all sorts did pursue Christ
for remedy. The paralitique is let down through the roof of the house to be
presented to Christ.

This teaches us fervency in prayer, for the fervent prayer of the just
prevails with God. It is the Apostles precept, (...): therefore he must be
washed and Romans 12.
purged till he may be clean, and he must be of Gods washing: for who else can
find out all the secret conveiances of sin? who but he can sound the heart
and search it to the bottom? none but he can purge this temple of our bodies,
and whip out the defilers of it, and make a den of thieves an house of prayer
again.

2 Yet more, to show his pollution, he desires to be washed with hysope,
wherein he has respect to the ceremonial Levit. 14. 4.
purgation used in the Law for the cleansing of a Leper. Sin is a leprosy,
and as the leprosy was purged with hysope dipped in blood, so must sin be
purged with the sprinckling of blood. But the first mention that I read of the
use of hysope, does interpret this suit of David best: for in the institution
of the Passover in the land of Egypt, they were commanded to kill a Lamb, and
it is said, And ye shall take a bunch of hysope, and dip it in a basin Exodus
1^. 22.
in the blood, and ye shall strike on the upper door post, and on the two side
posts, with the blood that is in the basin. This sprinckling of blood with a
bunch of hysope, was a type of the blood of the Lamb without spot, Christ
Jesus, used for,

1 Purgation, to remove the pollution of sin.

2 For propitiation, to remove the punishment of sin, to keep the destroying
Angel from our houses, and to establish 1 Pet. 1. 2.
safety there against all evil. Saint Peter directs his Epistle to the
Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification
of the spirit, and sprinckling of the blood of Jesus Christ: for, if the blood
of Hebr. 9: 13. 14.
Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh. How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself to God without spot,
Purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God: so that we may
say of David in this Petition, that he is now come, To Jesus the mediator of
the new Covenant, and Hebr. 12. 2^.
to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.

Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory do refer this Petition to the humility of
Christ in his passion, whereby we are purged. Surely David had respect only
to the blood of Christ for his purification from sin: for all the lotions and
purgings of the old law did look that way, and were representations and types
of that full purgation which was to be accomplished by the blood of Jesus
Christ: for though temporava iatasunt, the times are changed, yet fides una,
faith is one and the same. But give me leave to search somewhat deeper into
this mystery, for David's last confession was of his original sin. And this
Petition following it so close, calls to my remembrance a Law of purgation of
uncleanness mentioned, with hysope dipped in water to sprinckle the tent, the
vessels and the persons of such as ^^m 19. 18*
were unclean: which I conceive to be a type of our Christian Baptism, which
Christ instituted as a remedy against original sin, and which the Apostle
calls the Laver of our new birth.

Cardinal Bellarmine was before me in this meditation: Aperit unum ex occultis
mysteriis divine sapienti^, quod videlicet, tempore novi testamenti aspergendi
essent homines aqua munda in Baptism. He opens one of the hidden mysteries of
divine wisdom, that in the time of the new Testament men were to be
sprinkled with pure water in Baptism. Both ways the blood of Christ is the
liquor of our purification: and David so many years before the fullness of
time, in which he came actually to perform the work of our redemption by the
saerifice of his blood, did by faith apprehend both this remedy and the full
effect of it: for it was ever the way of our cleanness since the fall of Adam,
and therefore Christ is called agnus occisus ab origin mundi, the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world. The grace of the holy Ghost inwardly purging
the conscience from sin, by the application of the blood of Christ was not
perceptible by the sense and reason of man. Therefore it pleased God in the law
to relieve their weakness with external types, figures, and representations,
and Sacraments of strong signification, to make these things more demonstrable.
The body of these is Christ, and it is his only blood by which we are washed
from all sin both original and actual.

A Sacrament of that purgation we have in Baptism, which we receive once for
all our life, though it be not barely the external act that cleanses us, but
the answer of a good conscience to God. To this is added another Sacrament of
nutrition, by which we are invited to a spiritual feast of the body and blood
of Christ. To which our preparation must be a putting on of holiness. But as
Iehoshus the high Priest was first stripped out of his filthy raiment, and then
had clean clothes put on: So must we lay aside the old man, corrupt with the
deceiveable lusts of the flesh, before we can be renewed in the spirit of our
mind, and put on the new man in righteousness and holiness. I herefore for
our better preparation to this Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, let
me commend to you the holy example of David. Let us begin at a search and
survey of our hearts for sin, even so deep as our birth-sinne, and original
uncleanness. Let us compare what we are in our inward parts, with that which
God desires, and the folly that possesses us with the wisdom which God will
give us, if we ask it of him: then shall we see what favor God has done us
in his holy Sacrament, to offer us the benefit of his passion, and the
sprinkling of his blood, to keep the destroying Angel from our houses. This
full example tendreth us all the ingredients in an holy preparation for Gods
Table.

1 Knowledge both of our disease and the remedy of it. 2 Repentance of our
sins, as being sensible of the burden, and weary of the annoyance of them.
3 Faith depending upon God both for his tender mercies to pardon them, and for
his holy wisdom to prevent our relapsing after repentance into them. 4
Charity to our brethren, for David after promises to teach sinners, and to
direct them in good ways. God can wash without hysope, he can teach without
the word, he can cleanse without Baptisine, he can nourish without the Lords
Supper. But having ordained outward types and signs, and Sacraments, and
means for our purgation, and nutrition: David teaches us hereto, 5 To add
prayer to God, not only for the spiritual grace, but for the outward means
also. Teach me by thy word, wash me with thine hysope, feed me with thy Supper.
So ought we to pray with David, for the power of grace in the outward ordinance
of God. And that is the way to sanctify our selves both to the Word and to the
Sacrament.
There is nothing that does more ineffectuate this blessed Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ to the receivers thereof, then their uncleanness, for
Pearls are not to be cast unto Swine. And we must wash our hands in innocence,
before we compass his altar. Those corruptions which are within us in our
heart, are they that do defile us; for out of the heart proceed murders,
adulteries, drunkenness, strife, and envying, and these things pollute us.
These ask a great deal of hysope to sprinckle us with blood, to drench and
steep us in, to fetch out the deep steines which they have made in our
consciences. These removed, or our endeavor done to remove them, we may eat
of this bread and drink of this wine that he has prepared.

3 In resumption of this Petition, we still see how weary David is of his
filthiness, how ambitious of a purification. For being yet in the stench and
deformity, and foulness of his sins, he believes that if he might be of
Gods washing, he should be whiter than snow. Saint Paul biddethus desire the
best gifts.

In things concerning this life, we have no warrant to desire above a
competency. Agur the wise son of Iakeh, has left us his prayer, and it is
part of our Canonical Scripture, Give me not riches, give me not poverty, feed
me with food convenient for me. Christ has limited our prayer for daily
bread, that is, the necessaries of this life. The Apostle bids, if we have
food and raiment, to be therewith content: but in the spiritual and eternal
favors of God, a greediness, an ambition, a covetousnes for the most and
best, and highest of them, does best of all. Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness. There be degrees and measures of spiritual
graces, there be diverse quantities of them. As in the dye of sin, some are
crimsin, some scarlet, so in the wash of repentance, some attain to the
whiteness of wool, some of snow. As David in the judging of himself, finds
none so unclean as he is; so in his desire of purging, he affects the
whitest innocence. They that have truly tasted the heavenly gift of holiness
here, and the joys of the life to come, desire the uttermost of both, and we
cannot overdoe in coverousnesse of the one, or ambition of the other.

But how does David promise himself this whiteness Quest.
above snow?

Saint Augustine answers, that this innocence is but Sol. 1.
begun here, it comes not to any perfection in this life, but his faith
apprehends the complement of it hereafter.

2 We may conceive in these sicuts, these comparisons, Sol. 2.
the fullest measure of innocence, that we are capable of here and hereafter.

3 Or we may comfort our selves in dignatione divina, Sol. 3.
in Gods approvement, in whose gracious acceptance we appear so white,
because he accepts us, who calls things that are not, as if they were.

Or we may extend it to the full effect of the blood of Sol. 4.
Christ, which makes a perfect work of our purification.

VERSE 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.
2. HE prays for comfort against the terror of his conscience, for his sin:
wherein,

1 We have his grief, his bones broken. 2 His suit, fac me andire, etc. Make
me to hear.
1 In his grief consider,

1 The affliction it self, bones broken. 2 The author hereof, Thou.
2 In his Petition, observe,

1 Where he seeks remedy, of God. 2 In what way, by prayer. 3 What is his
suit, to hear joy, etc. 4 What effect, ut ossa gaudeant, that the bones may
rejoice.
1 His grief therein. 2 Of his affliction, ossa confracta, the bones broken.
This is a figurative speech, whereby extreme affliction is often in Scripture
expressed. Satan to God, of Job, Touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
curse thee to thy Job ^. 5.
face. It was Jobs complaint, My bones were pierced in me in the night season.
David uses often to complain of his Job 30. 17.
bones, as, there is no rest in my bones, because of my sin: his meaning is,
that the vexation of his conscience for his Psalm. 38. 3.
sin, is as painful to him as the breaking of his bones.

How are we deceived in the temptation to sin, in the pleasute of sin, when
we drink it down like water, and hide it under our tongue? if ever we come
to repentance of it, it will be bitterness in the latter end: it will not be a
luxation of our bones, putting them out of joint, but a breaking: literally
this must not be understood of the breaking of bones, neither the contrary
spoken also by David. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Psalm.
34. ^^. ^^.
Lord delivers him our of them all. He keeps all his bones, so that not one
of them is broken; for we know that not only alive, but dead, the bones of
the Lords servants have been violated: their dead bones lie scattered like
chippes of wood at the mouth of the grave. By bones, the strength of the body,
the inward strength and vigor of the soul is meant. And the conscience of
sin, and the terror of judgment does break the heart of a true penitent,
so long as he beholds his sin deserving his death, his judge ready to
pronounce the sentence of it, hell open to receive him for it, and the evil
Angels Gods executioners at hand to hurry him to it. Here is extremity of
anguish, even anima doloris dolor animae, the soul of sorrow, the sorrow of
the soul, enough to make a man go weeping all the day long. I beseech you lay
this example to heart: David that walked with an upright heart, and the holy
Ghost has testified him unblameable, save only in this matter of Vriah the
Hittite.

Yet see how he afflicts himself for all his other transgressions which were
not laid to his charge, his conscience forgiveth him nothing. No question but
David had many infirmities, and many other aberrations, some upon record, yet
they were all by his repentance and the favor of God past over, yet they
upbrayd him now all of them, come upon him like a breach of waters with so
fierce irruption, and so deluging inundation, that they steep him in deep
waters, and cover him all over with affliction.

The reason is, as in sin, the fault, he that breaks the least
Commandment, and repaireth not himself by repentance, is guilty of the whole
law; so in transgressions, he that repents of all the sins he has done,
and has his pardon under seal, by the next offense is liable to all the
evidence again of his former sins, he cancelleth and forfeiteth his pardon,
for pardon ever binds to good behavior. This breaks the bones of David, to
have all this weight upon him,

2 The author of this, Thou have broken. God in favor to his children, does
afflict them for sin, and the very phrase of breaking his bones, though it
express extremity of misery and pain, yet it has hope in it: for broken
bones by acunning hand may be set again, and return to their former use and
strength, so that a conscience distressed for sins, is not out of hope: yet
upon that hope no wise man will adventure upon sin, saying: though I am
wounded, yet I may be healed again, though I am broken, I may be repaired: for
let him consider;

1 Who breaks his bones, Thou, he that made us our bones, and put them in
their several places, and tied them together with ligaments, and covered them
with flesh, he that keeps all our bones from breaking: it must be a great
matter that must move him to break the bones of any of us. The God of all
consolation that comfort us in all our distresses, when he comes to
distress us, this makes affliction weigh heavy.

It was Jobs vexation, The arrows of the Almighty are (...) 6. 4.
within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit: the terrors of God do
set themselves in array against me. He will not suffer me to take my breath,
but fills me (...). ^^.
with bitterness. What greater sorrow can be, then to have God in opposition?

2 The pain of the affliction expressed so feelingly in the breaking of bones,
which as is said, is the anguish of the soul for sin, and fear of the
consuming fire of Gods wrath, and the tempest as Job calls it, of anger.

3. The pain of setting these bones again: for though bones dislocate, may be
put in joint, and though bones broken may be set again, yet this is not done
without pain and great extremity to the Patient. Repentance sets all our
broken pained bones, it recovereth the soul from the anguish thereof; but he
that once feels the smart of a true repentance, will say, the pleasures of
sin which are but for a season, are as hard a bargain as ever he made, and
as dear bought: they cost tears, which are, sanguis vulner aticordis, the
blood of a wounded heart: they cost sighs and groans which cannot be expressed:
they cost watching, fasting, taming of the body to bring it in subjection, even
to the crucifying of the flesh, with the lusts thereof. Therefore let no man
adventure his bones in hope of setting them again.

But how did God break the bones of David here?

1 Outwardly by his word sent in the ministry of Nathan Quest. Sol. 1.
the Prophet, for the word and voice of God is a two edged sword. This was all
the strength by which Jeremie was sent forth by God on that great business:
over nations, and over kingdoms, to root out, to pull down, and to destroy,
and to throw down. Behold I Ier: 1. 10.
have put my words in thy mouth. This is the sword of the spirit, and though
our doctrine drop as the rain, gently and easily, if we drink it in, and
become fruitful by it: yet when our sins do overgrow, we shall find it a
sharp Conlter to rend the fallow grounds of our hearts: we shall find it a
rod of iron to break our souls in pieces, and this word runs very swiftly:
it is gladius versatilis, a sword that turns every way.

2 But it is a dead letter, and draws no blood, till it come to the
conscience: for so long as it beats the ear and air only, and works no
further than the understanding, there is no great cumber with it: as we see in
those who daily hear their swearing and drunkenness reproved in the house of
God, and threatened with loss and deprivation of the kingdom of God, it
works not upon them, but when Nathan comes home to their consciences, tu es
homo, thou art the man, God has sent me to thee to charge thee with this
sin, and to tell thee he is angry, and is whetting his sword to cut thee off
for it; this breaks and shattereth the bones, and though our public
ministry do not descend to such particulars as tu es homo, thou art the man,
and our private reproves are subject to ill constructiou, yet a plain dealing
death bed will roar it in our ears of our inward man. Tu es homo, thou art
the man, thou have lived a blasphemer of the name of God, a glutton, a
drunkard, etc. This fills the souls of many dying persons with so much
bitterness, that when the sorrows of death are upon them, and the judgment
of their whole life in sight, the conscience of their sins does make their
souls much sicker then their bodies. One of these in this distress can tell
you, whether this be not a breaking of their bones. Let the Word therefore work
upon us, and let every hearer, when he hears his sin reproved, take the
reproof to him, and prevent an accusation, tu es homo, thou art the man; with
a confession, Me, me, ad sum qui feci, I, I have done it. So breaking our bones
with remorse and contrition, we shall save them from his breaking, we shall
reserve them to his healing and binding up. I conclude this point in the words
of our Savior: (...)
He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him:
the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.

2 David's suit, wherein,

1 Where he seeks remedy, it is from God: the hand that ^^oke his bones, can
set them again, no other hand can do it. Come, let us return to the Lord,
for he has torn, (...)
and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. David knows
that God has a multitude of tender compassions, he laid that foundation of his
faith, repentance and prayer, Verse 2. Whom have I in heaven but (...) 73. ^5.
26
thee? there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my
heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
David had good friends in heaven, Abraham the father of the faithful, Isaac
the seed promised. Jacob that wrastled with God, and prevailed: yet he seeks
to none of these, and I never read in either Testament of any one that had any
suit to Abraham, but the rich man in hell. To countenance the use of invocation
of Saints, yet that has no life in it to encourage any such mediation. All the
book of God through the address of prayers, has been only to God, and he
has revealed so open a way of access to him, that we need not go so far
about: for David says, He also will hear their prayers, and will help them.
David was put to it to try all the ways of comfort, and he used no other
invocation. The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of hell gate Psalm
116. 3. 4.
hold upon me, I found trouble and sorrow: then called I upon the name of the
Lord: O Lord I beseech thee, deliver my soul. God makes this good use of our
sins to bring us to him, and sin never undoeth us, till it drives us away
from God to seek help elsewhere. You see what good success the richman had
with Abraham, he could not get a drop of cold water: he was sent to Moses and
the Prophets for his brethren. They sought no help any where, but immediately
in God: he has healing under his wings: wings are the emblemes of speed, he is
swift to hear our complaints, to heal our sores: He heals all our
infirmities, and forgiveth us all our sins.

2 How he seeks remedy, by prayer; he does not come pharisaically to God, to
justify himself by his former conscionable living: he does not ^lledge how he
has walked, 1 R^g. 15. 5.
and done that which is right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside
from any thing that he commanded him, all the days of his life, save only in
this thing. All our former (...) 18. 1^
holiness will not bear us out in any one sin, but when we fall, we cause
all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned: in his
trespass that he has trespassed, and in the sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he dye, rather our sin is aggravated thereby; therefore the way of
prayer is the way of remedy. Let us seek the face and favor of God so, by
confession, deprecation, and supplication. The fountain is deep, but we have
wherewith to draw up the waters thereof: our prayer is a bucket that will not
come up empty. The Apostle bids, semper orate, pray always: Christ bids,
ask, seek, knock. This the Prophet calls, buying without money, when we
have all good things for asking. The Church of Rome has not a worse bar to
keep her children from God, and other men from their communion, then by
teaching them to say prayers in a strange tongue, for all such petitioners have
their answer, nescitis quid petatis, ye know not what ye ask: our
understanding, our affections, our faith, our hope, all must be exercised in
our prayers.

3 What is his suit? Make me to hear joy and gladness. Quest.


We may demand why David does desire this now, seeing he had no sooner confessed
his sin, but Nathan pronounced his absolution, he heard joy in his pardon, he
heard gladness in the remedy of his punishment: non morieris, thou shall not
dye.

1 David had heard this comfort from Nathan, yet he Sol. 1.
desires further assurance of it from the spirit of God: for in so sudden
joys we are not our own men, so are we transported with the gladness
thereof. When thou broughtest again the captivity of Sion, we were like to
them that dream. Our foul sins do make us fear that it is too good to be
true.

2 He desires more of this comfort, more joy, and more gladness. The joy of
sin, and delight of sense, does much hinder repentance: the joy of the holy
Ghost, does crown repentance.

3 David opens himself in his phrase of Petition, he does not say, give me
joy and gladness, but, make me hear, for the vessel of his heart was not yet
capable of the joy that was now tendered to him, grief and anguish had filled
it, he prays therefore for capacity to receive this gladness.

Five notes grow upon this point.

1 When he had heard already, he desires to hear more* they that have once
tasted of this joy, are never satisfied, but cry always, give, give, till they
come to the fullness and fatness of Gods house. 2 See what a distressed man a
sinner is: Enosh* he is ^^ fraid he shall never have joy enough, ^^^ (...)
prays here for double joy, joy and gladness; joy in his pardon of sin,
gladness in his favor. 3 See how long the conscience of a sinner is tossed like
to the sea after the wind is laid. 4 Observe how he would have his joy come to
him: ex auditu fac me audire, by hearing, make me to hear: for, ex auditu
fides, faith comes by hearing: he lost his joy by harkening to the voice of the
Serpent. 5 It will not come so except God make him hear, fac me a^dire, make
me to hear: he must say ephata, to our ear, that we may not only receive the
sound of comfort in our ear, but sound comfort in our heart. If the four
winds should breath nothing but joy and gladness, and all the Prophets and
Angel^ of God should like Ababs Prophets prophecy good to us: unless God by
his spirit did suggest to our spirits this joy, we were still in evil taking,
for till our spirit witness with Gods spirit, we have no joy. He desires
assurance in his faith.
4 The effect, ut ossa exultent, that the bones may rejoice: David had sensual
joy, he had the full desire of his heart, yet that proved the breaking of his
bones, and the wounding of his conscience: his faith is, that God will heal
all with his saving grace. There is no such joy here below, as the forgiveness
of our sins: and the Ministers of the Gospel in no part of their Ministry,
do bring fuller tidings of peace then in absolution of penitents. O quam
speciosi pedes, etc. O how beautiful are the feet, etc. The wicked man has
none of this peace. Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, etc. Let
the children of peace comfort themselves, all their tears are botteled, all
their sighs and groans numbered, all their bones set and healed, the storm of
Gods threatenings, the tempest of the conscience calmed. But none but God can
do this.

VERSE 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.
3. HE sueth for pardon, he doubleth his request, and varieth the phrase: still
importunate with God.

1 He desires that God in mercy would not see his sins, but hide his face;
as Sem and Japhet looked another way when they came to cover their fathers
nakedness: which phrase of hiding the face of God, cannot be literally
understood: (...), he speaks after the manner of men, for men hide their
faces from that which they would not see. But the face of God cannot be hid,
and it is impossible to conceal our sins from him; impossible for him to put
our sins out of his sight: his eye sees all things, yet David in this phrase
does show, that desiring to be washed and purged, he would have his sins now
forgotten, and no more laid to his charge: for as Saint Augustine says, Vnde
se Deus non avertit, advertit: si advertit, animadvertit, From whom God turns
not away, he turns unto; if he turn unto, he observes: he would have God
look upon him still, but not upon his sins, for that is his suit; ne averte
faciem t^am ^^ me, turn not thy face away from me. God is said then to hide
his face from sins, when he pardons them, and that is David's suit.

1 I observe here that the face of God, and our sins are 1 Note.
incompatible: his face is all holiness, and it cannot endure to behold sin,
for his soul loatheth it. Our sins are all works of darkness, and cannot
endure the light of his face. We are very careful to keep our gross sins
out of the sight of men, whose power extends no further then our goods, our
reputation, or our life here. Christ says, Fear not them that kill the body,
and can do no more, fear his face who has power of soul and body to cast
them both into hell.

The face of God is fearful to a sinner: for God threatens the disobedient
to his Commandments, I will set my (...). ^^.
face against you: then follows, ye shall be slain before your enemies, Qui
ode^unt vos regnabunt super vos, fugietis nemine persequente, they that hate
you, shall reign over you; ye shall fly, no man pursuing you. How dare we
tempt that face, and provoke it against us! nothing is hid from the light of
it, and there is no suggestion more foolish, or that declares us more shallow
and simple then Dominus non videbit, the Lord shall not see. We are sure that
all our sins are seen, numbered, recorded before his face.

2 This phrase to my understanding imports, that as 2 Note.
David before prayed to be washed, purged and cleansed from his sins, that
they might no more annoy him: so he desires God to turn his face from them,
that they may no more offend him. For a true penitent is more grieved at his
offense given to God, than at the shame, or fear, or pain, that sin puts
him to: therefore Averte faciem tuam, turn thy face away, amounts to a
request, that God would no more take offense at his sins.

3 The phrase imports an absolute and full pardon desired: 3 Note.
for so long as there is any sin, the face of God must be against it: but
when he desires, averte faciem, turn away thy face: he desires a remove of
his sin, which cannot be clear from his countenance any way, but by his
gracious pardon: for Gods pardon does extinguish all iniquities, so it is
equivalent to our petition, Dimitte debita nostra, Forgiveus our trespasses.

2 He resumeth the same Petition, and re-enforceth his suit for Gods pardon in
a phrase before used, verse 1. Blot out mine iniquities: which has reference
to the two books, one of our conscience, the other of Gods remembrance, in
which all our sins are recorded, ut ante, as before. Only here he adds a
request for pardon of all his iniquities, that he may have a clear conscience
within himself, and an even reckoning with God.

If any shall wonder why David urges Gods pardon so earnestly, and with such
importunity of strong supplications: let him know that such offenses as provoke
God, are not easily pardoned; we must pray heartily, and ply him continually
with our requests to have our sins remitted: for though God be very ready to
forgive in respect of his mercy, yet he is wise to see some cause for it. And a
sinner is not capable of mercy presently till his soul has been in
bitterness for his trespass, and is humbled before God.

It is our fault, and it corrupts us much, our overweening of the mercy of
God to us, for though he be full of tendernesse^ yet is he full of holiness,
and nothing provokes him more, then our bearing our selves too bold upon his
mercies. Master Calvine, Ubi quis defunctorie pro remissione vota concipit,
nondum didicit quam horribilis sit Dei offens^o, He that slightly prays for
pardon of sins, has not yet learned how horrible the offending of God is,
Saint Augustine commends this Petition of David, he says, Been rogas, thou
well ask: for,

1 He opened his own face, and then he desires God to hide his face, his face
was opened to behold his sin: For I acknowledge my wickedness, and my sin
is ever before me. Si tu peccatum ^u^^^^ derso ponis, dens ib^ facsem ponit. Tu
peccatum e^^m ante facio^ pone; sivis ut deus auertat faciem suam ab e^. Sie
securur rogas and exandi^: If thou set thy sins behind thy back, God
sets them before his face: set thy sin before thy face, if thou will have God
turn away his face from it. So thou safely ask, and he hears thee.

2 He desires God to blot out all his iniquities out of the book of his
remembrance. But he puts them into this Psalm, and commends this Psalm
to the Master of Music, and so depositeth the record of it in the perpetual
use of the Church: so the greatness of the fault is kept in fresh memory of
all ages. We have no such way to blot our misdeeds out of Gods book of
remembrance, as this, to publish our own faults, and our repentance of them,
as David here does.

From the whole petition we gather one substance of request, which is, that God
would forgive him all his sins: which petition is grounded upon an Article of
faith, the tenth in our Apostles Creed: Forgiveness of sins. It is also the
fifth Petition in the Lords Prayer, dimitte nobis debita nostra, Forgive us our
trespasses. David says, Credidi, propterea loc^t^^ sum, I believed, and
therefore I spoke. If we believe the Article, we may move God in the Petition.

It is as great an honor to God to be a forgiver, as to be a giver. Amongst
our selves we know that it is one of the hardest taskes of our religion, to
forgive an injury. Our hearts rise against them that do it, our blood boyles,
our countenance falls: it is much more easy to win us to give gifts to our
brethren, then to forgive injuries: yet we are never out of that Petition to
God, and in our daily prayer, as we ask bread for the day, so we ask
forgiveness, because our soul needs pardon, as much as our body needs
food.

I may say much more, for we may go in the strength of one meal some hours,
but there is no moment of our life, which does not need to cry God mercy, and
to ask his pardon for our sin. The necessity whereof is such, that our
Savior takes advantage of it to establish our charity to our brethren that
way. That we might beg no pardon for our selves, but with a Sicut ^os
dimittimus, As we forgive. The phrases used in Scripture in petition of Gods
pardon, are much varied: Christ bids us say, (...)* put them away, which
Isay does render thus, Thou have ^^^^ 8. 1^
cast all my sins behind thy back. Micah is more full in this expressure,
He will turn again, he will have compassion Micah 7. 19.
upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all our sins into
the depths of the sea. This David does call, washing, cleansing, purging,
hiding Gods face from them, and blotting out.

All meet in one full point of gracious pardon: for all these phrases desire
an absolute, total, and final remove of our sins, both from the displeasure
of God, and from both the annoyance, and the punishment of our selves. And we
can have no peace in our conscience, till we be comfortably persuaded hereof.
Sins are called debts. Agree with thine adversary, for fear of the Prison,
thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost farthing:
blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven.

I his text teaches, that we must strive and (...), Doctrine.
contend with God by our prayers for the forgivenes of our sins. Observe the
contents of the Lords Prayer, in which would all our lawful petitions are
cast, and by which model, the whole building of our supplications is erected.
The three first Petitions respect the glory of God. The latter regards our
good in two things.

1 In our esse, our being, Give us bread, that is, let us live; we pray for
supportation of our being. 2 Our been esse, our well being, and that consists
in these three things mainly.
1 In the pardon of our sins past, Et dimitte, and forgive, 2 In the
prevention of temptations to come: et ne nos inducas, and lead us not. 3 In
deliverance from punishment, and from the power of Satan.
Which three Petitions have respect to our sin: so important is our suit for
pardon, that Christ begins our been esse, well being, at dimitte, forgive.

Do but observe your selves how importunate you are with God for ease and
health when you are sick; your mouth is full of miserere mei Deus, have mercy
on me O God. You call upon all that visit you, to comfort you with their
prayers, you send to Church to crave aid of the congregation, you give God no
rest. How is it that in your sins, the mortal diseases of your souls, you
are not thus earnest with God for his pardon, which is the only physic for a
diseased soul? David says, God heals all our infirmities, and he shows
how, he pardons all our sins: therefore the way of cure in all griefs of
the body, is to heal the soul first: so David, Sana animam meam, etc. Heal
my soul, etc. How came it sick? quia peccavi contrate, because I have sinned
against thee. Christ usually in his cures began his healing there, fili
dimittuntur tibi peccata tua, son thy sins are forgiven thee. But the
reason why we are so importunate for our body, so slight and negligent for our
soul is this: we feel the aching and smart, the convulsions and crampes, the
cold shakings, the fiery inflammations, the trembling palsies, the griping and
grating collickes, and other afflicting diseases which cruciate the body: we
are not so sensible of the spiritual disease of sin, till we come to remove
it by repentance, then all other griefs fall short of the grief of sin;
that is a breaking of the bones, as before it is expressed.

Surely if I were limited to one petition, and no more, for my self I would
choose this before any, Dele omnes iniquitates meas, blot out all mine
iniquities, for there is nothing can be ill with him that has no iniquity to
answer for: his soul shall dwell at ease, I therefore press the doctrinall
example of David.

Let us never leave begging of God the pardon of our sin.

I will not streine my self to multiply reasons of this doctrine, Reas^^s.
that were to follow the new fashion of preaching; for we also are at our
fashions. One maine reason hereof may serve. There is nothing so much
displeases God nothing so much endangereth this life, and that which is to
come, as sin. This I think no man will refuse to put for granted. Then I
say, there is no way to be found out of this danger of our sin, but by Gods
pardon.

Come to the Court of justice, the law condemns us. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Cursed is every one that confirms not all the words of the law to do them.
Come to the judgment of most voices, all the people shall say Amen; for who
will bless where God curses?

Come to the Court of Conscience, our own heart condemns and smites us, for
our sin is ever before us. What have poor sinners then to say for
themselves, why death should not be the wages of sin? The fault is capital,
here is no escape from the justice of the Law, but by the Kings gracious pardon.

In our Ecclesiastical Courts we have power in the discretion of the Judge in
causes criminal, commutare poenam, to change the punishment, to let offenders
buy out a shame of public disgrace with some pecuniary mulct to be employed
in pios usus, in religious uses. If in causes capital there have been
Commutatio paenae, change of punishment, and that the purse has saved the
life, yet that is but the price of intercession. But the Kings pardon only
saves life. It is so in the state of our souls: sin is a capital fault,
and the wages of it death, and no way of escape from this just judgment, but
by Gods gracious and free pardon. We cannot purchase a mediation at any rate to
avail us without true and unfeigned repentance, and then we have but one
Mediator to the Father, and he must purchase our pardon with his blood: he
must be wounded for our transgressions, and we must be healed by his stripes,
and he must dye for us, that we may live in and by him.

Let Papists seek heaven by their righteousness at their own peril. For my
self, I am so far from trusting to any merits of our own works, that I
dare resolve, that if the salvation of all mankind had been put to the plunge
that Sodom was at, with the other Cities, to find ten righteous, from Adam
to the last man that shall stand upon the earth; all mankind must have
perished for want of ten such. I dare adventure further in resolution, that
if the bringing one good work before God, done in all the generations of men,
performed without any taste or taint of sin, might save all mankind: I except
none but Jesus Christ. I do believe that he that searched Jerusalem, with
candle and lantern, even his seven eyes which tun to and fro through the
whole earth, cannot find out one such good and perfect work: the caske
distasteth the liquour: who is he that does good and sins not? who does good
and sins not in the very good he has done? To make a work perfectly holy
is one thing, to make it meritorious is another. If no good work we do can
come from us holy, it is not possible it should ask wages. Our corruption of
nature sprinckles every word, work, and thought of ours, with some grains
more or less of our old Adam: for as we consist of flesh and spirit, ever
conflicting, there is of both in all we are or have: it cannot be otherwise,
for the imaginations of the thoughts of our heart are only evil continually,
and from that neast these birds do fly, Adultery, Fornication, Strife, etc.
But if we could do any work holy and pure ^^o^n blame, yet there goes more
to it then holiness* to make it meritorious.

1 It is required that we be able to do it of our selves, for no thanks to us
for any good we do, if he land us the faculties and abilities of doing it.

2 It is required, that he which deserves, should do something for the
benefit of him of whom he deserves: but our well-doing extends not to God.

3 It is required, that he which meriteth, do his good work out of his own
free will, ex mero motu, non ex debito, merely by his own mooving, not as of
due debt. For what we do of duty, we pay, we do not give.

4 It is required that the reward be proportionable to the work, for else
whatsoever is more, is gift, not wages. They that wrought all day, deserved
their penny, they that came late had more gift then wages; eternal life is too
much reward for any service we do. This puts works of supererogation
quite out of countenance: to name them is to shame them. Micah 6. 6. Where
withal shall I come before the Lord? burnt offerings, Calves of a year old?
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand
rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my transgressions, the fruit of
my body for the sin of my soul? He has showed thee etc. To do justly, to
love mercy, to walk humbly before thy God. The way of repentance and crying
God mercy, is the way of humility: we cannot pay our debt, we cannot buy out
our fault, we have nothing to give: our plea is, miserere, have mercy: we can
find no way out of our sins, but by Gods gracious and free pardon. This is
not so easy a favor obtained, as many think, for suppose the pardon were
obtained and sealed for, God have mercy, yet there is no moment of our life in
which we do not forfeit it, and therefore we must renew it continually. When
you pray, say, Pater noster dimitte nobis, Our Father, forgive us, and semper
orate, pray always, Be sure to renew your pardon by repentance and prayer
continually, especially at such times when we come to the house of God, to the
Table of God: now wash us thoroughly O Lord, now O Lord have mercy upon us: now
purge us with hysope, now hide thy face from our sins, and blot ont all our
iniquities: Now make us hear joy and gladness, which thou impartest to us in
the Sacrament of thy sons passion. Our Church service is holily accommodated to
this: for we begin at the words wherein God makes us hear of joy: and we
humble our selves to God in a contrite deploration of our sins: O Lord hear us
from heaven, and when thou hear, show mercy.

VERSE 10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within
me.
4. HE prays for newness of life. Here also he doubleth his petition, and
changes the phrase.

1 For his heart, the seat of his affections. 2 For the holy Ghost, to
sanctify him throughout in his body, soul, and mind.
In the first observe,

1 His suit is for the heart. 2 He desires that clean. 3 He wishes it so by
creation.
In the second,

1 His suit is for the spirit. 2 He would have that right. 3 He would have it
by renovation.
1 For the heart, there breed adulteries, murders, and all other sins, as
Christ has taught us, and that was the neast of all his sins. The message of
God by Nathan descended into the secrets of his heart, there he hid the word:
he says before, Thou requirest truth in the inward parts: he found his heart
no fit habitation for truth, as it was. It is our chiefest care to look to the
heart, because Christ asks that of us for himself, My son give me thy
heart. The Church of the Jews in tender care for the Church of the Gentiles
complains: We have a little sister, and she ^^^^. ^. ^.
has no breasts: what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be
spoken for? that is, how shall we do for her, when Christ shall be speak her
for a Spouse for himself?

That should be our care, every one for his heart; we have a foul and
unclean heart: what shall we do for it, or how shall we answer when Christ
says, My son give me thy heart? Our care therefore must be for it, to
prepare it so, that we may neither be ashamed, nor afraid, when Christ calls
for it to present him with it. Here Solomon advises well: Keep thy heart above
all keeping, for out of Pro. 4. 2^.
it are the issues of life. This heart of ours has many enemies, etia^
domestici ejus inimiciejus, the enemies be homebred. Job amongst many other
aberrations of men, whereof he acquitteth Job 3^. 7.
himself, says, if mine heart walked after mine eyes; for when our eyes
behold beauty as David did to lust, we lose our heart by it: Dinah is
deflowred, if she gad. If our heart walk after our ear, we may entertain
wanton and lascivious words, which corrupt good manners, calumnious and
slandercus reports, which deprave our neighbors: dicterious and satanicall
invectives which hurt their good name: profane and blasphemous words which
dishonor the name of God. If our heart walk after ou^ taste, we may defile
our bodies and souls with surfeiting and drunkenness, to the distemper of our
bodies, the corruption of our souls, the displeasing of God, the defiling of
our consciences, the abuse of Gods good creatures unthankfully, and the
corrupting of others by our evil example. So when Christ shall say to thee, My
son give me thy heart, thou have no heart to give him: for whoredom, wine,
and new wine, take away the heart. It is good for us to take into our
consideration, what is good, and what the Lord requires of us. We see the
fruit of it in David, for having before considered that God requires truth in
the inward part, he now becomes careful of his inward parts, and is an humble
suter to God for his heart: they that meditate not on these things, lose their
hearts.

2 He desires a clean heart: so he interprets his former petitions: wash
me, cleanse me, purge me with hysop; me, that is, my heart; there is a deep
steine in it of original sin, there is a foul issue from thence of all
other sins: these make the conscience sick of an infectious leprosy, even to
the second death: these make our words and works, and our whole conversation
noxious to our brethren, obnoxious to the wrath of God. The purging of the
heart is the cleansing of the whole man, for out of the abundance of the heart
the tongue speaks, the ear hears, the eye sees, the foot walks. The
heart rules and guides all the rest of the man: if the fountain be clear,
the streams that flow thence will be pure, and the waters sweet: else they
will be like the waters of Marab, bitter waters.

Saint Augustine wonders at the folly of man, be desires every thing for
himself good, and of the best: he loves clean clothing upon him, he loves
clean feeding, clean lodging, he is next to a bruit beast that is a sloven,
and yet few desire to have clean hearts. Clean garners for your grain,
clean warehouses for your commodities are desired. Your heart is the granary
for the pure seed of the word, the warehouse for the rich commodity of Gods
spiritual favors and graces: if that be nastie and noisome, stenched with our
abominable sins, tenanted by unclean spirits, Non est lo^us in diversorio,
there is no room in the Inn. Though the Savior of the world was borne in a
Stable for want of a fitter room, his good spirit will not house it self in
hearts that like Stables are fitter for bruit beasts, than for the Son of God
to be entertained there. Beati mundi cord, blessed are the pure in heart,
says Christ: and S. Gr. upon that says, Si illum qui ab omni peccato mundus
est, in cordis nostri hospitio habere volumus, oportet primo ut cor ab omni
vitiorum sorde purgemus; If we will have him in the Inn of our hearts, which
is pure from all sin, we must first purge our hearts from the foulness of
vices. Our bodies be the temples of the holy Ghost, our hearts the Chancell of
the Church: the Sanctum Sanctorum, where the Ark of God is to be placed, and
where God should sit between the Cherubins. He that defiles the house of God,
him will God destroy. David asks the question, who shall ascend to the hill
of the Lord, and who shall stand in his Psalm. 15. 3, 4.
holy place? he answers, He that has clean hands, and a pure heart; for no
unclean thing shall be admitted to enter that holy place. They that think
well of this, as much as they desire salvation with God in heaven, so much will
they strive with God by prayers to obtain of him a clean heart, and an
unstumbling conscience.

3 He desires this of God by way of creation: crea in me, create in me.

1 He desires this of God, for he only is the purger of hearts, who is the
creator of them: he takes it upon himself, Ezech. 36 ^9.
I will save you from all your uncleanness: we must go out of our selves for
this, for so Jeremy confesses, O Lord I know that the way of man is not in
himself: it is Ior. 10. 23.
not in man that walks to direct his steps: therefore help O God, as
before, do thou wash and cleanse, and purge me with thy hysope, and I shall be
clean: if we be of his washing, we shall be whiter than snow.

2 He requesteth this by way of creation: to create is to make something of
nothing. Our hearts are so foul and corrupt, that there is no repairing of
them* we must have n^w ones made of purpose to serve God with; which God in
wisdom knowing, and in mercy pitying, says: A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of (...) ^6. 26.
your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh.

2 Petition.

1 He desires of God his spirit: this is the spirit of sanctification. ^^^s.
5. 23.
This Saint Paul prayed for the Thessalonians, And the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly or throughout. The spirit of natural life does animate
the body, and makes it fit for actions of life. The spirit of God does quicken
us to actions, thoughts, and words, which belong to holy life. We are by nature
dead in trespasses and sins: it is the good spirit of God by which we are newborn, and without this we are the children of death; for except ye be borne
again of water and the holy Ghost, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven: he that is so borne of this spirit, has a seed remaining in him.

2 He desires a right spirit, the margent of the K. B. does more naturally
express the original, calling it, a constant spirit. For David had received
the good spirit of God, which so enlightened his understanding, and so
sanctified his affections, and governed his whole conversation, that he was a
man after the heart of God. But when he embraced that mischievous temptation,
which carried him away from the Word and Commandment of God, and opened his
ear to the persuasions of flesh and blood: then that good spirit forsook him
for a time, and he lay like a dead man, insensible of his fault, of his
danger. Therefore now returning to God by repentance, he petitioneth God for a
constant spirit that may abide ever with him to guide him, that he may never
fall again; for they that are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God,
therefore David petitioneth God here for a constant spirit, such as may give
him wisdom to resent a temptation, and holiness to hate it, faith to resist,
and fortitude to overcome it.

3 He desires it by way of renovation: the Apostles counsel is, but be you
transformed by the renewing of (...)
your mind. Little or no external difference does appear for the time
between one elect and a reprobate. David being guilty to himself of this
desertion, desires the stirring up of the gift of the holy Ghost, and renewing
of the G^g.
power thereof within him: Vide ordinem: primo cor munduns, secundo spiritum
rectum requirit; prius enim omnis a cord vitiorum foeditas eliminanda est, ut
omne quod agitur, aut dicitur, expurae intentionis origin emanet: consider the
order: first, he desires a clean heart: secondly, a right spirit. For first
the foulness of sin is to be taken from the heart, that whatsoever is done
or spoken, may flow from the fountain of a pure intention: for the holy Ghost
will not dwell in an unclean heart, but when we have purged our consciences
from dead works, he says, Here will I dwell for ever, for I have a delight
herein.

There be two faculties in the soul of man, first understanding; secondly,
will. The understanding in a regenerate man may be darkened for a time, and he
falling into sin, may be beside himself, for sin is a kind of madness,
the worst kind. It is said of the prodigal in his great famine, reversus ad
se, returning to himself, he said, Ibo ad patremmeum, I will go to my Father.
The will may be corrupted by a strong temptation, and so way made for the
perpetration of sin. Sometimes the understanding breaks forth like
lightening, and discerns the fault to convince the will of sin. This we
call the conscience, which is awaked of purpose to detect and chide our sinful
aberrations. But when God has sufficiently expressed to us our weakness, and
p^one disposition to evil, and his own long suffering and patience, he
stirs up his gift in us, or in Saint Paul's phrase, he reveals Jesus Christ
in us, and this we call renewing of the spirit; this clears our
understanding, and reformeth our will, and mends all. The petitions of David
for holiness of life, thus opened:

1 We observe the manner how David desires to be repaired, being by sin so
ruined.

1 In his understanding, in the hidden part thou shall make me to know
wisdom, for repentance must begin in intellectu recto, in the understanding
rightly informed: this is our light, and if we walk without this, we know not
whither we go.

The haughty policy of Rome to keep her children dark, does hinder both the
finding of the good way, and the going on in it: so our ingression and
progression both hindered, we seek heaven darkelings. God has sent wisdom
abroad to utter her voice, to call an audience, to instruct men in the ways of
life, to escape the paths of death. Christ is made to us of God wisdom.

2 He desires of God the pardon of his sins, which is no other but
justification before him. This is the washing and purging, and blotting out of
iniquities by him desired* for wisdom to know our sins without
justification by faith, which apprehends the pardon of them, were the broad
way to despair; but being justified by faith, we have peace with God, and
peace also in our own consciences. Christ is made unto us justification. David
leaves not here, but,

3 He desires in this text the spirit of sanctification, by which he may be
renewed to holiness, to all pleasing of God. And this is Christ also made to
us, for whom God justifies, them he sanctifies. Some have confounded these
two graces of justification and sanctification, and so commedled them, as if
they were all one and the same grace. For the clearing whereof, and to declare
the difference between them, understand,

1 We are sinners, and by faith in Christ we are justified, and so the debt of
our sin discharged: this is by the inherent righteousness of Christ imputed
to us, and it is the proper work of the second person.

2 By the holy Ghost applying this righteousness to us, we are sanctified to
rewnesse of life. The first saves us from hell, the second seasoneth us for
heaven. David therefore adds this suit for sanctification, that being
cleansed thoroughly from sin, he may become a new creature. I may abridge all
our learning in the school of Christ to this one lesson, and comprehend totum
hominis, the whole of man, in this short compend of duty, as the Apostle does.
Circumcision profits nothing, uncircumcision hinders nothing, all that God
requires of us, is, that we be new creatures, leaving off and laying aside
the old man, and renewed in spiritu mentis, in the spirit of our minds: we
are never complete penitents till we have this spirit of sanctification in some
measure. It is the hardest work that is accomplished in us, because our
natural corruption and the manifold temptations amongst which we live, and the
sensual delight which we take in sin, do sow our hearts all over with
tares, and leave no room for better seed. To root out these is one labor, to
proseminate grace is another: yet we neglect the labor of our sanctification,
as if it were a work which we could do at a very short warning, and too many
do leave it to their death beds. And another impediment is, that many upon
some good motions of the spirit, some flashes of piety and scintillations of
zeal do overweene their possession of this spirit. Me thinks if they did
examine their hearts by this text, here is enough in it to reveal any man to
himself, and to tell him si habeat hunc spiritum, if he has this spirit.

1 Let him examine his heart and spirit within him, to see if there be truth
there and wisdom: for many fair seemings and outsides of godliness are put
on, whereby we deceive others, and flatter our selves, quite out of the way of
salvation, therefore try if all be sound and sincere within.

2 Let him enquire of this heart, si cor novum, if it be a new heart; we may
soon know that, si canticum novum, si novitas vitae, if there be a new song,
if newness of life. It is not a new dresting and trimming up of the old heart
in a new fashion that will serve, it must be all new, and that may be discerned
in our thoughts, in our words, in ou^ works, and ways: for if we abhor and
forsake our former sins, and embrace better courses, this makes faith of a
good change.

3 If it be a constant spirit that holds out to the end cheerfully and
unweariedly, we may conclude comfortably, that our old heart is gone, and we
have a new in place thereof.

VERSE 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit
from me. 12 Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy
free spirit. 13 Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee.
HEre he petitioneth for a constant course of Gods favor for hereafter: wherein

1. Deprecatur, he prays against, v. 1^ 2. Supplicat, prays for, Verse 12. 3.
Promittit, promises, Verse 13.
1 Deprecatur, prays against, 2.

1 Gods casting him away from his presence. 2 Gods taking his holy spirit, etc.
1 Cast me not away from thy presence.

Our sins deserve that God should deny us to come before him: for why should
the children of darkness press to the light, or the children of death to him
in whose presence is life? Our first Parents soon found how unfit they were
for the presence of God, and therefore so soon as they had sinned, of their
own accord they fled from the presence of God, and hid themselves. When Cain
had G^^. ^. ^^. ^^
done that murder upon Abel his brother, it was Gods just punishment, a
fugitive and a vagabond shall thou be. And he was sensible of it: Behold, thou
have driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall
I be hid. And Cain went out from the presence of the Verse ^^ Psalm. 5. 5.
Lord. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight. This is excommunicatio major,
the greater excommunication. When Exodus 10. 28.
Pharaoh was exasperate against Moses, he said, Get thee from me, take heed to
thy self, see my face no more. When David heard how Absolon had slain Amnon,
he was moved like a father for the death of a son, more, that he suffered
that grief from a son: yet when the strong fit was off, he could not but
return to his fatherly affection to Absolon: yet neither his own natural
inclination, or the persuasions of Ioab by the woman of Tekoah, did yet readmit
him to the Kings presence. The King said, let him (...). 14. 24.
return to his house, and let him not see my face. Much more sorrowful is the
punishment of exile from the face of God: for David prefers the presence of
God before all other good whatsoever.

Many say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou Psalm. 4. 6.
up the light of thy countenance upon us. Christ is the light of Gods
countenance: a light to lighten the Gentiles. God Luke 2. 3^. Exodus 33. 14.
^s^. 63. 9.
to Moses, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. Christ
is called the Angel of his face. So David prays, that Christ may not fail
him, and that he would not in respect of his sins deprive him of the comfort
of his Redeemer. Saint Gregory says, he prays here against Cains sin of
despair, for, A facie dei projicitur cui spes veni^ post peccatumnegatur, He
is cast from the sight of God, to whom hope of pardon after sin committed is
denied. Augustine has a good note here, prius dixit, averte faciem a peccatis
meis, first he said, turn thy face from my sins: but here, ne projicias me a
facie tua: Cujus facie^ timet, ejus faciem invocat. Cast me not from thy face:
whose face he fears, his face he desires to see. It was Abraham's prayer, O
that Ishmael might live in thy face, or before G^^. 17. 18.
thee ^he would ask no more of him.

They that walk uprightly and conscionably before God, are not, cannot be
ashamed to behold his face. As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness: I shall be satisfied, Psalm. 17. 15.
when I awake, with thy likeness.

1 Here, in the righteousness of Christ, I shall see thee; but hereafter I
shall fully enjoy thee, when after I have borne the image of the earthy, I
shall bear the image of the heavenly.

2 Take not thy holy spirit from me. Christ calls this spirit a Comforter:
David had need of him now in distress, because of his sins. This spirit he
promised, a guide to lead us in the way of all truth. David had need of him,
for seeing God loves truth in the inward parts, and he had gone in false
ways, he needs this guide to guide his feet in the ways of peace. When
David hearkened to the voice of temptation, and his eye did walk after his
heart, then did God withdraw his spirit from him, and left him to go alone. He
finds the want of that faithful guide of his ways, and prays, O take not
thy holy spirit from me. David had a double portion of Gods holy spirit: for
he had,

1 The spirit of holiness to direct and guide his life and conversation as a
private man, and by that he became a man after Gods own heart. 2 He had the
spirit in plentiful measure, in regard of his office and place, and that also
was double; for,
1 Juveni Davidem servum meum^ oleo sancto meo u^xi eum, I have found David my
servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him: he had not only Samuels
external unction, but God gave him a spirit fit for a King, to go in and out
before his people. Else how could the youngest son of Ishai, bred abroad in
the field, and taken from following the ewes great with lamb, have been fit
to have come from managing a sheepe-hooke amongst his fathers cattle, to have
managed a Scepter in Israel, the Lords inheritance? And we have example
hereof in Saul his predecessor, of whom we read, that when he parted from
Samuel, who anointed him King, God gave 1 Samuel 10. 9.
him another heart: for so Samuel had told him, that the ante v. 6.
spirit of the Lord should come upon him, and he should be turned into another
man. He that called him to be a King, accommodated him for government.

Thus did God also deal with David, Then Samuel took an horn of oil, and
anointed him in the midst of his brethren, ^ Sam. ^6. ^3.
and the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward. So that he
not only was sanctified in further measure as a private man, but was endued
with heroical graces fit for a Prince. And it is said, after this, that,

1 He walked wisely. 2 He governed prudently.
2 David was a Prophet also of the Lord, herein not inferior to Saul, for it
is said of him that he prophesied, and it was a wonder: Etiam Saulinter
Prophetas? Is Saul also amongst the Prophets? David is called the sweet singer
of Israel, and we have many of his holy Psalms, whereof the Church of God
makes singular use. No question but the sin of David had much weakened the
power of the holy spirit in him all these ways, and he seemed now to himself
as a man divested of these graces in such sort, as was grievous to him:
besides, he had the fearful example of Saul his predecestor, of whom it is
said: But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from
the ^ Sam* 16. ^^.
Lord troubled him. Now charged with the conscience of his sin, and
peradventure comparing his sin with Saul's, he feared the like punishment.
Saul departed from the word of the Lord in sparing the life of an enemy: David
in taking away the life of a friend. Had he not cause to fear at least an
equality in his punishment, whom he had exceeded in his sin? no question but
God gives his graces with his holy callings, and we hazard the withdrawing of
them from us, when we embrace sin. We find examples too frequent in all
sorts of men, that they do lose by their falling into sin, the graces of
God, which commonly do follow their lawful callings. When Kings leave good
counsel, and embrace enemies of their state, to the grievance and vexation of
the Commonwealth, on when they turn sensual and attend only their loose
delights, God takes from them the spirit of government. When Ministers study
nothing but riches or honor, or follow pleasures, God takes from them the
spirit of prophecy.

In ordinary mechanical and manual professions, many excellently able in
their way, perish and drown their abilities in idleness, in gaming, in
drinking, etc. Yet when any of these come again to themselves, and refrain
these evil courses, the spirit of God returns again to them, and they do
well.

Saul had many graces of the spirit, but the maine he wanted, and the other he
lost: and that example puts David into this suite, Spiritum sanctum tuum ne
ausera^, take not thy holy spirit from me.

VERSE 12.
2. SUpplicat, he prays for: herein also he is double, and desires two
things: first, restitution: secondly, confirmation.

1 His restoration.

Restore to me the joy of thy salvation: he means that inward spiritual joy
which before he had in the faith of his salvation. For having fallen so foully,
and thereby deserved so ill at the hands of God, he was jealous of himself
that he had lost the favor of God, and the salvation of his soul. The word in
the original has Jesus in it, The joy of thy Jesus: for he believed that
Jesus the Savior should come of his seed. That was joy to him, and his sin
did shake his faith therein: ne Deus ei offensus Greg.
subtraheret quod pacatus promiserat, formidavit, he feared lest God offended
should withdraw that which being pleased, he had promised, So before him, Saint
Augustine understood David: Read exultationem. salutaris tui, i. Christi: quis
enim sine illo sanari potuit? nam in principio erat verbum: tempora variata
sunt, non fides: restore the joy of thy salvation, that is, of Christ. For who
can be saved without him? the times are changed, not faith. Our observations
from hence are,

1 That David's joy was in making sure of his salvation: 1 Note.
he had now made experience of a carnal and sensual joy, he finds it
loathsome and defiling, and the end bitterness, therefore he returns to the
pursuit of that joy. So in a better mind the Church said, I will go and
return to my first love, for then it was better with me than now. The truth is,
there is no such joy here as in the favor of our God, and the faith of our
salvation with him. David once said, Thou have put gladness in my heart more
then in Psalm. 4. 7.
the time that their corn and wine, and oil increased. This is our summum
bonum, our chief good, and upon our deathbeds we hearken to them that speak
comforts to us of our salvation, when we must part with all here. But the
Apostle would have it the maine care and business of our whole life, to work
out our salvation with fear, and to make our election sure. As the Seaman
regards so the business within board, as always observing the way of his
ship, and also looking to his Chart and Compass for the accomplishing of his
voyage.

In the comforts and joys of life in things temporal, we ever hope that to
morrow will be better than to day, and when that comes, we fall short still.
Deterior semper posterior dies, seldom comes a better. But for the joy of our
salvation, the more we taste of it, the more we thirst after it, and as we grow
in grace, we increase in spiritual joy; and as our taste, so our desire of
eternal life does increase, that we think long till we appear before our God
in Sion.

2 Sin depriveth us of this joy: for when our conscience 2 Note.
accuses us of having done that which displeases our God, how can we hope
that he who is not the God of our obedience, should be the God of our
salvation? Sin is a thing so hateful to God, that his soul abhors it.
Adam the first sinner hid himself: Caine believed himself banished from the
presence of the Lord. The spirit of God departed from Saul: sin turns our
prayers into it self: If I regard wickedness in my heart, Dominus non
exaudiet me, the Lord will not hear me: sin turns our praises of God into
the sacrifice of fools. There can be no peace to the sinner: so long as we
continue in a state of sin without search of Gods gracious pardon, we are in
the deep pit: if we then despair, the pit shuts its mouth upon us: if yet
we hope, there is no health in our bones because of our sin, till God has
sealed our pardon, and that his spirit do witness with ours, that we are in
his favor. Do not our own corruptions, and the evil counsels of the
ungodly, and the temptations of Satan, work strongly upon us, when they
prevail against the joy of our salvation? We under value that joy very basely,
when we change it for any other that holds out in number, weight, and measure:
that fills the measure full, and presses it down, and makes it run over.
Dic animae meae, salus tua sum, say to my soul, I am thy salvation: let me
have thy word for that, and then as Saint Augustine says, hic ure, hic seca,
here burn, here cut me: we shall not fear them that kill the body: for if we
had all the joys of the world, we could hold them but during this life, this
joy survives our death. Satietie of other joys breeds surfeit: of this, thirst:
beati qui esuriunt, etc. blessed are they that hunger, etc.

Whereas David desires to be restored to this joy, we 3 Note.
see our evil condition, we cannot tell when we be well: when we have joy, the
best and truest joy that can be, we part with it for vanity of vanities, and
when we feel the want of it we complain. It is the weakness of our
judgment, we cannot value good things so priceably in the possession of them,
as in the subduction. Carendo magis quam fruendo, by wanting, more then
enjoying, is an old rule of our imperfect reason. Godliness should ever be
joined with contentedness, and our desires should be limited to our enjoyings,
when we affect any thing beyond Gods allowance, we are often abated in the
allowance: and our vast and unlawful desires are corrected by withdrawing from
us the good that we possess. When provender pricketh us, the way to check our
wantonness is, to set us a while at a lean manger, and to take from us the
good which we cannot tell well how to value at the true price. It was the sin
first of the Angels, then of man, they kept not their first estate, neither
were content with the joy of their creation. The Angels affected to be like God
in omnipotency, and became devils. Man affected to be like God in his
omniscience, and turned sinner: they lost heaven by it, he Paradise. When they
bethought themselves, it is no question but they would have been both glad to
have been where they were, and would then have been content with it.

I remember Job in his extreme affliction, remembering times past, and
complaining in the bitterness of his engrieved soul. O that I were as in
months past, in the Job 29.
days when God preserved me. When his candle shined 2 3 6
upon my head, and when by his light I walked through darkness: When I washed
my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of water. It were
great wisdom in us to know when we are well, and keep us so.

4 This petition puts us in comfort, that though by 4 Note.
our folly we have provoked God to take away our joy from us in his just
judgment, yet it is not so lost, but there is hope left of restoring it again
to us, for else David's suit were cold. And truly God is so full of compassion,
so free from passion, so open handed to give, so loath to take away, so ready to
forgive, and so easily persuaded to restore what we have forfeited into his
hands by our sin, that we may comfort our souls with hope even when our joy
is gone, that he will not continue long in his anger, but will return to us
and visit us with his favor. That is it which makes the devils so spightfull
and malicious to man, so rebellious to God, they have no hope nor means left
to restore them to the joy that they have lost, because they being in fullness
of grace and intellectual light, did corrupt themselves, and were their own
tempters. But man being overtaken with the surprise of a sudden temptation,
when being good he suspected no evil, fell from the obedience, but not from
the pity of God: he fell from the possession, but not from the restitution of
his joy.

The time of our life is called spatium poenitendi, a season for us to work
our repair. A lamentable change it is that sin has wrought in us, that man
created in the image of God in holiness and righteousness, should now spend
all the days of his appointed time here, in recovering some measure of that
joy of his creation, and when he has attained to it insome degree, may lose it
by sin, and be to beginue again. The way to recover it is here opened in
this example, repentance, faith and prayer: Repentance to remove sin, faith
to apprehend mercy and grace, prayer to obtain these of God, and to sanctify
them to us. In this way David sought the recovery of the joy of his salvation.

2 His suit is for confirmation, Uphold me with thy free spirit: some read
spiritu principal, with thy chief spirit; as desiring a full measure of the
holy Ghost: so the Apostle bids us to desire the best gifts of all, for we
shall have need of them all against our own corruptions, and the manifold
temptations of Satan. But the Prophets phrase of a free spirit does well
express the holy Ghost, which he desires: for Christ calls him the spirit
of truth, and promises Job. 14. 17.
that he shall lead us into all truth. And he says, Job. ^. 3^.
The truth shall make you free. David had lived in the chains and bonds of
iniquity a long time, and his repentance had recovered him again to liberty:
and now he desires to be confirmed and established in that liberty. Christ
directs our prayers so: for after dimitte nobis, forgive us, we pray, ne
inducas, lead us not: which is for confirmation, that we do no more so. Such
is the corruption of our nature, that we have cause to fear our selves for all
sins. For what sin has any man committed, but we may fall into the like?
seeing our original corruption yet remaining in us, is the seed of all sin,
and our natural impotencie to all good, disableth us to resist, and the
perpetual watch that our enemy does keep upon us to take advantage of us,
does facilitate his temptations to our hurt. And we see great examples of men
falling into sins, which their hearts have abhorred to think of, being by
surprise overtaken: as adultery, murder, theft, and such like, opportunity
the pandor of sin inviting thereto. And what sin have we ever committed and
be wailed, and repented, but we may relapse into the same, and double the
transgression and the anger of God thereby?

This petition of David does declare that we have no strength of our selves
either to abstain from new sins, or to keep us from relapse into our former
sins, without the holy Ghost: whose office is,

1 To show us the right way, and to put us into it.

2 To underprop and support us in the same that we fall not. For from our
natural propension to evil, proceeds an easy sequence of our own corrupt
inclinations, and a ready harkening to Satan's subtle temptations, against
which we need corroboration from the spirit of God. Amongst all the sins that
defile our conscience, and corrupt our manners, and displease God, and hazard
our souls, those are most dangerous, which bring with them the most sensual
delight, for these have a sweetness and lushiousnesse which makes them for
the time very tastfull and delectable, and when the bitterness of repentance
is over, Satan will renew to us the remembrance of the pleasure that we had in
them, and there by ^^-engage us often in the fresh persuit of them. We are as
little children that cannot go alone, we need a stronger arm to carry us, a
loving bosom to hug us, a (...) ^and to supportus. In all these things our
God relieveth us.

1 For the arm of God, that shoreth us up: so he promised Psalm 89. 22.
David, with whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen
him.

2 God said to Moses of his Israel, Carry them in thy Numb. 11. 12.
besome as a nursing father carries a sucking child, unto the land that God
swear to give their fathers. Moses was but a figure and type of a greater and
more tender shepherd, of whom I say prophesied, saying: He shall feed his Isa.
40. 11.
flock like a shepherd: be shall gather the Lambs with his arm, he shall
carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young.

3 I taught Ephraim also to go, leading them by the arms. Hos. 11. 3.


Thus the grace of corroboration is described, by which we are not left to our
selves, but supported in our ways: Psalm. 71 ^. Verse 1^.
therefore David says, By thee have I been holden up from the womb, and
resolves to trust to that supportation. I will go in the strength of the Lord
God. We have many great examples in the best of Gods servants, of falling into
great sins, Adam and Eve, Noah, Abraham, Lot, Isaac. Jacob, David, Solomon,
Sampson, Peter, etc. This fear shakes David so that he craveth aid of the
good spirit for corroboration. This is a singular mark of a just man; so David
describes him: he guides his ways by discretion: Surely Ps. 112. 5, 6, 7. 8
he shall not be moved for ever; his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, his
heart is established. We see here, that the grace of repentance, whereby
weforsake sin, and turn to God, and put our selves into the way of a new
life, will not serve, unless the grace of confirmation do establish us, and
keep us from evil.

We are the Lords husbandry, there is no end of that kind of work in the
culture of ground: there must be breaking up of our fallow grounds, stirring
and plonghing till it be fit for seed. There must be semination and hrrowing,
to cover the seed. There must be weeding of it, and watering from heaven, then
an harvest: then begin again, else,

Grandia saepe quibus mandavimus bordea sulcis:
Infelix lolium, and steriles dominantur avenae.
Often the furrows where we sow good seeds,

Are overgrowne with cockle, darnell, weeds.

In the story of the widow that was so much in debt, and 2. Reg. 4.
her exactious creditours demanded her two sons for bondmen in satisfaction
of the debt; we read that she made her moan to Elisha, he finding nothing in
her house valuable, but a small pot of oil, bade her borrow empty vessels, and
pour out, and sell the oil, and pay the debt, and said, Live thou and thy
children of the rest. The Prophets care extended beyond the payment of the debt
to her maintenance.

In this miracle of Gods mercy, here is a lively representation of his love to
his elect. For our sins do make us debtors, the justice of God is the
creditour, the graces of Gods spirit are the oil, he gives of this
plentifully to clear the debt. That is not all, for this spirit which David
here prays for, he gives for our after-maintenance, that we grow not
necessitous again, and renew our debt. These two cares must not be parted, the
care of repentance and of a constant good life. Christ joined them together.
Ecce sanus factus es, Behold, thou art made whole: and then, noli amplius
peccare, sin no more. The corruption of nature is such, even in the
regenerate by the remains of sin, that as tinder, we are apt to take fire by
the touch of the least spark. How then shall we be fenced against the fiery
darts of Satan? The grace of the spirit to bear off these, and that which
preserves us from this fire is the shield of our faith, for that establishes
our heart, and moysteneth it so with the blood of Jesus Christ, that it cannot
be apt to kindle suddenly. And that faith does David here request of God, which
is our best munition against these fiery assaults. To show what need every one
of us has to make this petition to our God for his confirming spirit,

1 Let us see the miserable and unhappy condition of such as do want this
spirit. 2 The singular benefit of such as have obtained it,
1 Of the want, we may all complain of it, for that want unheavened the Angels
that kept not their first estate, and turned the best of Gods creatures into
devils and unclean spirits, the rebel and professed opposites of God, and
corrupters of man. This want unparadised our first Parents, and made them
woeful spectacles of scorn, Ecce homo factus est ut unus, etc. Behold, the man
is become like one of us. What wanted in these two creatures to consummate the
glory of their creation, and to make their very making and happiness, but this
free spirit of God to confirm and establish them?

It may be a wonder in reason and in religion, why Almighty Qu^r.
God did not accomplish his work of creation by this addition of this spirit,
to the prevention of that misery, that for want of it befell the creature, and
to the preservation of his own work from that malignity which followed sin.
For hereby the creature became in it self corrupt and abominable, to the
fellow creatures noxious, and to God himself peccant and offensive; all which
had been stayed by this one free spirit here desired. I remember in the plea
of God for his own full care of his people, he urges that, Isa. ^.


1 He chose a fruitful hill. 2 He fenced it. 3 He gathered out the stones, 4
He planted it with the choicest Vine. 5 He built a Tower in medio, in the midst
of it. 6 He set up a Wine Press in it, and then he says: And now O
inhabitants of Israel, and men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and my
Vineyard, what could have been done more to my Vineyard that I have not done
in it? may we not hear his like complaint of Angels and man? I created them in
mine own image, I gave the one the fruition of heaven, the other of Paradise:
the Angels saw my face. Man was but a little lower than these Angels* crowned
with glory and honor, invested in the dominion of his sublunarie creatures, in
the service of the very Angels and celestial bodies. What could have been
done more to these Angels and to man that I have not done in them? may we not
all answer, Yes Lord, thou might have given with these great favors, thy
free spirit to confirm and establish us in that happiness, and so we had
been always as thou had made us.
In answer to this quere, I could say, who knows the Sol. 1.
mind of the Lord! or who has been of his Council? we may step too far
having our shoes on our feet, if we adventure to set our feet on holy ground:
the secrets of Gods will must be adored, not searched: God is not accountable
to his creatures for his purposes or his actions.

With men the rule holds, qui just faciunt, bis justi sunt, they that do
justly, are twice just: but with God it is so, that fecit omnia ^ene, he has
done all things well; and if he do, or say, or decree, or will any thing, it
is therefore just and good in high perfection, because he does it. But you may
take this for a put off, and yet go away unsatisfied. Therefore seeing God
calls to the men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, to judge between
him and his Vineyard: I think we may boldly sit upon this cause, and hear it
indifferently. God pleaded, what could have been done more? clearing himself
from all defectivenesse or failing on his part toward his creature. Man
replyeth, one thing wanted, even this spirit that David here desired.

I answer for God against all the world, that that spirit Sol. 2.
was also given to Angels and to man. And to make them complete creatures,
images of himself, he gave them free will to continue their own happy
condition for their own good, or to forsake it to their ruin. They both by
their own fault forfeited their present estate, and by affecting more of the
glory of God than he had communicated them, lost that which they had, and so
this good spirit did forsake them.

But it is replied, if they had this good spirit, why did it Quer.
not confirm them in their estate that they might not fall?

I answer, man had not been led by this spirit, but forced Sol.
and necessitated, if this spirit had limited him, it had been a spirit of
compulsion, not of confirmation.

Man was not content with the state of his creation, the Angels were not
content, they resisted, they grieved this spirit. The Angels therefore having
sinned, never found a Mediator to relieve them, because it is plain that
their trespass was against the holy Ghost. For man, he had this spirit also,
but he hearkened to the voice of his wife against this spirit.

Let me add also, that after the fall of man, Christ was promised. Where God
gives or offers his Son, he offers his spirit also, these are tendered to
all universally. Grace is offered, Christ promised the Holy Ghost to teach, to
lead, to comfort, to confirm: we have all the means of grace that may be, to
put this talent to use, and we may charge our perdition upon our selves if we
miscarry. For in the creation, when we were yet but in matter, rudis
indigestaque moles, unfashioned, formelesse: if God had made us crooked, lame,
deformed, disproportioned, or any way ill featured, we had suffered no shame of
it, for he made us, and not we our selves: Thy hands have made me and
fashioned me. But God does not now work upon us, as he then did upon earth, a
dead and ^ens^l^sse element.

We have vital, animal* intellectual parts and faculties, we do^ know the
want ^^ t^is spirit, we know where it may be had: it is spiritus Dei, the
spirit of God: we know how, potent^ ^^, to them that ask shall be given: we
know how he must be used not grieved; and if we have it not, or be not
confirmed, it is our fault. We see in the story of the Bible, and in continual
experience in others, and feel it in ourselves, how many defections in us, and
des^rtions of God do ^ollow the want of this confirming spirit to establish
us. For what is it that makes the often relaps^^ into the s^^e sins, for
which we have so often cried God mercy? ^^ wanton against defiling his body
after repentance, the drunkard like a dog returning again to his vomit, the
covetous like a swine to his mire, for so basely and contemptibly are such
relapses resembled by the spirit of God. Many whose consciences within them
convince them, touched with the sword of Gods spirit, the word of God, and with
the reproof of their friends, and the shame of the world, are heartily sorry
for these sins, and bewail them with tears, and ask God forgiveness for
them, and purpose and promise never to return to them; yet for want of this
spirit to confirm them, relapse and make their latter end worse than their
beginning.

2 On the contrary, those who have this spirit, are proof against temptations:
all the sins in example, all the evil counsels of the old world, cannot
infect or corrupt Noah: all Sodom cannot taint Lot: Joseph's Mistress cannot
allure Joseph. Daniel cannot be tempted to ^ate of the Kings delicates: yet at
some other time this spirit may leave even some of these to themselves, and
then they show by what strength they were kept from falling, and knowing their
own weakness, they do more earnestly desire, as David here, ^c tollas
spiritum, take not away thy spirit; and confirma me, strengthen me. We see
David's good example, praying to him that is able to keep us, that we fall
not: and desiring him who has begun a good work in us, to perfect it to the
end.

This spirit is oil in our lamps, to keep them light against the bridegroom
comes. It is a wedding garment to admit us guests to his bridal feast. They
that truly and unfainedly repent, will more desire this spirit, for it is but
half a repentance, plangere commissa, to bewail sins committed, this
accomplisheth it in keeping us, ^^ committamus plangenda, that we commit not
sins to be bewailed.

VERSE 13.
3 PRomittit, he promises. Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and
sinners shall be converted unto thee. This was Peter's charge, t^ cum conversus
fueris, confirma fratres, when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. In
this verse, first, promittit, he promises: secondly, prophetat, he prophecies:
or I promittit Deo quid pro eo facturus est, he promises to God what he will
do for him: secondly, promittit vicino quod ^i; he promises to his neighbor
what he will do for him: thirdly, promittit sibi successum; he promises
success to himself.

1 Promittit Deo, he promises to God: David had done God wrong, to scandalize
religion, and by his evil example to corrupt many: for great and eminent
persons sin infectiously, their iniquities are catching. He now promises
that he will make amends to God in becoming a teacher to convert others to
righteousness: exemplo, consilio, authoritate regia, prophetica, by example,
counsel, authority royal, prophetical. For as we are accountable to God for
such sins as are done in others by our occasion, so we do owe God a duty of
endeavor to keep others as near him, and draw as many to him as we may.

2 Promittit vicino, he promises to his neighbor. He is sensible how far
his corrupt life has extended to corrupt others, he owes them an amends also,
and promises himself a teacher of them. This is one of the fullest
expressions of pious charity, that we can make one to another, to communicate
to each other the knowledge of salvation, and the way to it, and to put one
another in that way, and to put them on with cheerfulness to run in it.

3 Promittit sibi, he promises to himself. He is confident that he shall have
good success in this way and holy course, and that sinners shall turn: for
the example of repentance in so potent a King, cannot but work strongly upon
such as he shall undertake to teach.

Our lesson from this example is in sight: for when God Doctrine.
has wrought a good work upon us in turning us from sin to true repentance,
it is our duty to labor the conversion of other sinners to God. A perfect
convert is the best teacher of the ways of God that can be, for he knows
these three things which will most move to conversion.

1 He knows the foulness, the foolishness, the burden and vexation of
sin; he has seen the danger of it, and has by woeful experience found how
uncomfortable a thing it is to live in the displeasure of God, and to be
deprived of the comfort of the holy Ghost. He feels how the conscience is
oppressed with sin, and how we are made to remember all our evil ways from
the first sin. We see all this in David, for the filthiness of his sin, he
does earnestly desire to be washed, and washed clean, washed with hysope, that
he may be whiter than snow. For the burden of sin, it lay so heavy upon him,
that he desires to be made to hear of joy and gladness, for his sin and
the fear of Gods judgments had broken his bones. For the departure of God
from him, he was so sensible of it, that he prays the spirit of God not to
depart from him. For his former sins, they all lay upon his oppressed
conscience, that he remembered them from his conception and birth: and he saw
the danger of temptations, and therefore desires the confirming spirit of God
to keep him from falling into new, or relapsing into old sins.

2 A true Convert knows the bitterness of true repentance: he that has kept
an ill diet, and thereby lost his health, and is put to it to sweat, to purge,
to bleed, to abstain from all toothsome and pleasing eats, and is kept to a
diet, and enforced to live medice, misere, in physic, in misery, for the time
till his health be repaired: such a one will give warning to others, to
abstain from such things as hazard our health. He can tell how dear it does
cost the purse, how much it restrains a man's liberty, what pains he
suffers in his body, how much his mind is disquieted in his bodily
distemperatures, and all to repair what some ill diet has corrupted in his
body. So is it with the true Convert, he can relate the bitterness of
repentance, which is the souls physic for sin: there is nothing in the
world so smarting and a king as true repentance is. In the generality of men,
the most presume upon this remedy: they sin on, and flatter themselves that a
miserere, have mercy, at last, will set all to rights. It is true, that
repentance does amend all, it purges us, and restores us to the favor of
God, but they consider not the bitterness thereof: for the souls of the
penitent are heavy within them, even to death, their eyes run rivers of
waters, their throats are hoarse with roaring and crying for mercy, their tears
are their drink day and night, they have sighs and groans which cannot be
expressed. The sorrows of hell, so David does call them, do compass them round
about: they call upon God, and he will not hear them: they do seek him, and
he will not presently be found: like Mariners in a storm, their cunning is
gone, they are at their wits end. Sometimes they cry, quid feci? what have I
done? and remember all their sins; Satan then comes in to help their
memory, upbrayding them with those very sins to which he enticed them, with a
non est salus ti^i in Deo tu^, there is no safety for thee in thy God. God
says, but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee.

The word of God scourges us, that when we hear it preached, and find our
own sins detected and threatened, we think the Sermon intended against us.
The contrary good life of others, walking in good ways, reprovesth us, and
cries shame on us that we have not done as they do, that we might have had
peace, but especially our conscience within us is a thousand witnesses against
us, and is a record written within and without, like Ezekiels scrowle, with
lamentations, mourning, and woe: sometimes we cry like Saint Peter's auditors,
quid faciemus? what shall we do? or as Job, quid faciam tibi? what shall I
do unto thee? hide our selves from God we cannot, we cannot go out of the
reach of that right hand which finds out all his enemies: excuse our selves
we cannot, for who can answer God one for a thousand? his spirit searches
hearts and reins, nothing is hid from the eye of his jealousy. He is wise to
discern, holy to hate, just to punish. A soul thus anguished and embittered
with remorse of sin, is emblemed in Prometheus his Vulture, ever feeding upon
the heart: wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me?

David has many very excellent expressures of penitential fits, which do
lively set forth the pain that true repentance does put a man to: but one
amongst the rest to my opinion does render it in the height of bitterness,
and makes it a non ficut no such, I remembered God, and was troubled: Psalm. 77.
3.
for what refuge has a sinner, but God, and what comfort can a sorrowful
soul have but in him? yet sin is so contrary to him, that a guilty soul
cannot think upon him but as an enemy. You see it in the first sinners, the
first thing they did after they had sinned, was to fly away from the presence
of God. Let a true Convert tell sinners all this, and see what joy they can
take in sin, when it is like to cost them all this, breaking of the heart,
confusion of face, confession of mouth, confession of soul. A true penitent
must keep a session within himself, he must give in evidence against
himself, his conscience must accuse him, his memory must bear witness
against him, he must judge himself, that he be not judged of the Lord: he must
after sentence be avenged on himself by a voluntary penance, afflicting his
soul, chastening his body, restraining it from pleasures, humbling it with
fasting, wearying it with labor, weakening it with watching, and by all means
bringing it into subjection.

Beloved, sit down, and cast up the cost and pain of this spiritual physic
for a sinne-sicke soul, and if there be any of you that has past this course
of physic, and kept you to it without shrinking or shifting from it: I dare
say such a one can say, Nocet empta dolor voluptas, Pleasure hurts that is
bought with pain, and docet teaches too: he will scarce eat of the forbidden
fruit, it is fair to the eye, it is delicious in taste. But it is the dearest
bargain that ever we bought, a momentany short delight, with many weary days
and nights of penitential remorse and anguish of soul.

3 None so fit as true Converts, to teach transgressors the sweet benefit of
reconciliation to God, the comfort of the holy Ghost, and the peace of
conscience. Such perceive the difference between the bondage of sin, and the
freedom of the spirit. They know what it is to lose the cheerful light of
Gods gracious countenance: they can say that in his favor is life, light, and
delight. As their longing desire was great to come and appear before God, and
as they thirsted after the full river of his pleasures, so the recovery of that
joy, over-joyeth them.

When thou turnedst again the captivity of Sion, we were like those that
dream. Our mouths were filled with laughter, and our tongues with joy. Then
they said, the Lord has done great things for us, the Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we rejoice.

As God is described in the shepherd who recovered his lost sheep, and in the
woman who found her lost groat, and in the father who recovered and received
his prodigal son, with more joy than the shepherd had in his 99. than the
woman had in the rest of her money, than the father had in his eldest son
that had always been with him: So a converted sinner, delights more in God
after his conversion, then he did before. Ibo and revertar ad patrens moum, I
will go and return to my father. I will go and return to my first husband,
for then it was better with me than it is now.

A Convert can tell transgressors how his father espied him a far off, how he
met him upon the way, how he fell on his neck and kissed him, and bade him
welcome, how he brought first stolam primam, the chief garment to cover him:
how he killed vitulum illum, that calfe, and had music and dancing for joy
for his return. One of the greatest fears of a sinner who has sold God for
some vain pleasure, is, that God will never be recovered to favor him again,
and that is one of the Scorpions wherewith the very Saints of God are scourged.
Satan abetteth that fear in them, with terrible overtures of the impartial
justice of God, and it is the voice of the wicked of the earth; Tush, God has
forsaken him, and there is none to help him. David was heart-sicke of this
disease. Many there be that say to my soul, there is no help for thee in thy
God. A true penitent reconciled to God, can tell such that they belie the holy
one of Israel; with the Lord there is mercy that he may be feared. He gives
pardon for sins, and forgiveth all thine iniquities. He continues but a
while in anger: if a sinner will not come to him, he will whet his sword, he will
make ready his bow, and prepare his arrows for execution: But if a sinner will
forsake his evil ways, and return to him, he will behold him a far off,
and meet him upon the way, and embrace him with his savor. This is the chief
errand that we have from God to his Church, to carry to them the word of
reconciliation, to preach peace to them that are near, and to them that are
far off, liberty to the imprisoned, and to such as are oppressed, the taking
off of the yoke.

He that has been scorched with the flames of hell, who has felt the sting
of a cruciating conscience, who has been shaken and shattered with the terror
of the Lord, and has found joy and comfort upon his repentance, he can
testify for God, that he is gracious and merciful, that he may be entreated:
so David, Come hearken to me all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul. There is a Psalm of purpose for Psalm. 116.
it, wherein the Prophet magnifieth both his own misery, and Gods singular
mercy, with a probatum est, so it is: experto creed, believe him that has
found it by experience: he tells what he has comfortably found, and the Church
has joy of it.

Seeing a convert is so fit for this service, let all sinners Use 1.
labor to hasten and accomplish their conversion, of purpose to do God this
good service in teaching others. This would multiply teachers in the Church,
and turn us all into ministers of reconciliation. Every one should teach his
neighbor the fear of the Lord. We cannot put our selves in a fairer way to
glory: for, They that turn many Da^. 12. 3.
to righteousness, shall shine as the stars in the firmament. Be they
Ecclesiastical or Lay, be they such as do it ex officio, out of duty, by
virtue of a special calling, or ex charitate, from the love they bear to God
and their brethren: Their reward is with God, and they shall eat the fruit of
their labors from the tree of life in the midst of the garden. It is the
nature of goodness, for, Bonum est communicativum sui, Good is of a spreading
nature: bonus malum bonum esse vult, ut sit sui similis, the good would have
the evil to be good, that he may be like himself. We cannot more holily, more
charitably express our conversion to God, than by teaching transgressors his
ways. We cannot want scholars: for totus mundus est in maligno positus, the
whole world is set upon evil: what if some say, Nolumus scientiam viarum
tuarum, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, and hate to be reformed: yet
others will hearken, and even they may by the favor of God be softened to an
impression.

In our evil conversation we were forward enough to draw in others to the
society of our evils to corrupt and pervert good manners. So thieves that say,
we will all have one purse: and immoderate drinkers sit together, till strong
drink inflame them.

Me thinks the Apostle is very reasonable, Sicut dedistis membra vestra, as
you have given your members, so give your members. I may say to a Convert, do
but the same diligence in converting thy brother, that thou have done and used
in corrupting him, and it will pass current: let thy counsel and example
look that way, and think thy conversion effected for this. The father of
mercies, and God 2 Cor. 1. 4.
of all comfort, comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which be in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. The rule holds throughout, as in consolation, so in
instruction, and in reprehension, and in conviction of the conscience. As every
one has received any measure of grace from God, so let him communicate his
knowledge and his grace to others in love, remembering that we are members one
of another. This is the way to advance the building up of the Church of God,
and to demolish the power of Satan's kingdom.

None can plead exemption from this duty, for when David the King offers his
service this way, who can sit out! The more eminent the person is, the more
effectual is his teaching, and the sooner will transgressors give ear to him.

See here the wisdom and goodness of God, how he Use 2.
has wrought good out of evil: for he has stooped the Majesty of a King, to
the service of a teacher, and has sanctified the person of a transgressor, to
the conversion of transgressors. The corrupter of his own ways becomes a
guide to others. This also does encourage our labor for our conversion,
because it is a new making to us. The proof of it we have in Saint Paul, who
no sooner was himself converted, but he labored the illumination of such as
were in darkness, the confirmation of the weak, and the conversion of all
that were in their own crooked ways to the ways of God. I deny not but
Scribes and Pharisees in Moses chair may teach well who live ungodly, and being
unconverted themselves, may be instruments of the conversion of others. But
this is done by no virtue or grace in them, but by the power of Gods ordinance
in their calling: for grace follows the calling sometimes, where it forsakes
the person.

Lastly, we see the way to recover transgressors, which Use 3.
is by teaching them the ways of God. Transgressors are such as go out of the
way, ambulant in via non bona, they walk in the way which is not good, and
nature is no good guide: for corrupt nature is like to the earth under the
curse, it brings forth nothing but brambles and thorns: teaching is the
culture of it. The reproof of sin from the law, breaks up the ground,
doctrine sows the good seed, exhortation and continual inculcation in
season, and out of season, does water it: the son of righteousness shines
on it, and gives it vegetation. Therefore so many as have any desire to know
the ways of God, let them hearken to teaching. The word is given to profit
withal, and it is a singular blessing of God to that place where teaching of
the ways of God is plenteous, and where the way of obedience and salvation is
declared: else, all we like sheep shall go astray, and walk in crooked
paths. God in wisdom knowing how useful this would be in his Church, to
have some to instruct and teach others his ways, began himself to furnish the
first beginners of the world with abilities for this purpose: for the state of
innocence needed no other than its own light to show it the right way. After
the fall, yet the remains of intellectual light, helped with special grace
in the fathers, served for books, and laws, and rules of good life, all the
first age of the world. Then the Preacher of Righteousness survived to see and
begin a new world, his son Sem, of likelihood that Melchizedeck King of
Salem, so famous for a King and Priest to Abraham. Abraham (God knew) would
teach his children: Moses first received the Law from God, he was assisted by
the holy Prophets till Christ: hunc audite, hear him: Then he sent, Goeye into
all the world, teach; and he established the Evangelicall Priesthood in the
Church: yet if all converts did join with them, the great harvest could not
want laborers.

2 Prophetat: and impiieonv ertentur adte: He prophesies; and the wicked shall
be converted unto thee. This is finis praedicationis, the end of Preaching: the
word is given to profit, Haec utilitas, this is profit: omnes sicut oves
aberravimus, reduces ad ovile, we have gone astray like sheep, thou shall bring
us back to the sheepefold. Opus, 1 arduum: 2 gratum, a work, 1 hard, 2
acceptable. 1 arduum, hard. Much more then creation, there his dixit, said, was
fecit, did: to make man of earth was opus verbi, the work of his word, rather
verbum opus, the word his work. To recover man from Satan, it was fortitudo
brachii, the strength of his arm: verbum factum, factumcaro, the word made,
made flesh; for it is more easy to make a convert a Saint, than to make a
sinner a convert.

In the creation of man, no repugnancie of the matter; in the conversio^ of a
sinner, a new creation, nay reluctation.

In the creation, God infused, the body received the spirit of life, and we
became templum spiritus, the temple of the holy Ghost: Sed cum domus creationis
facta esset spelunca latronum, but when the house of creation became a den of
thieves? When man had lost his holiness and righteousness: beside the
privation of grace, there came in also a corrupt habit of perverse opposition
to God: so that when God offers grace, man refuses it, and is loath to admit
the holy Ghost a guest.

When we do receive him, we often grieve, sometimes quench him, naturalis homo
non potest percipere, non vul^ recipere, non potest retinere, the natural man
cannot perceive, will not receive, cannot retain. We are ill husbands of this
talent: the Son came to call sinners: Satan has got the hand of us, for we
would not be converted: his temptation not only corrupted our manners, it also
empoysoneth our affections. Christ on earth declared his power by sea and land,
yet his brethren the Jews, nor by miracles, nor by example, nor by doctrine
would be converted. Facilius est rempublica^ novam constituere quam depravatam
corrigere, It is easier to make a new Commonwealth, than to amend that which
is corrupted. All the imaginations only evil: querela patris, filii non
vultis venire ad me, the complaint of a father, children you will not come unto
me: quoties ego vos ad me, noluistis, as often as I would have gathered you
unto me, you would not. Venite omnes ad me, come ye all unto me; venientem non
cjiciam for as, him that comes unto me, I will not cast forth.

2 Gratum, acceptable, first, in subjecto, in the subject: for, licet maligna
nature a patiatur jugum, though depraved nature bear the yoke, yet man once
converted, would not for all the world be as he was.

There is great difference between the pleasure of sin, and gaudium
spiritus, the joy of the spirit. The one a luscious and surfeiting sweetness,
which kills appetite, and is but for a season: the other has a pleasant
mixture of delight and desire, rejoices with joy unspeakeable and glorious, it
is ever in growth and vegetation: crescit incremento Dei, increases with the
increase of God: Ovis redux nollet esse iterum in deserto, nec pr^digus extra
patris domum, the sheep brought back would not be again in the desert,
neither the Prodigal out of his fathers house. Latro in cruce conversus regnum
cogitat, the thief on the Cross converted, thinks upon the kingdom of God.
Psalm. 119. 176
I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant.

2 Gratum in Ecclesia, i* militanti, acceptable in the Church militant.

1 This mends their companies, I am a companion of Ps. 119. 63. Verse. 115.
all them, etc. Away from me ye wicked, etc. 2 It comforts their grief, it
adds voices to the convert, Sin is the sorrow of the Church, Mine eyes
gush, V. 130. 158.
etc. I saw the transgressors, and was grieved.
2 In triumphanti, in the triumphant.

1 Inter Angelos: hi nos diligunt, amongst the Angels, they love us: these are
ministering spirits, our guard. 2 Inter sanctos: coelestes animas, quer. an
sciant? amongst the Saints. Qu. Do the Saints know one another in heaven?
Romanists say, in Deo tanquam in speculo vident omnia, in God as in a glass
they see all things. For the contents of the beatificall vision, I dare not
number or esteem them: Saint Augustine. They may have intelligence from earth
by the souls that go hence: this do I believe and teach.
1 That their joy is not yet full. 2 That the knowledge of such conversation
here would add to their joy. 3 That God is free to fill up their measure, how
far and in what kind, Ignoramus, we know not.
3 Gratum in instituto, acceptable in the thing it self. No comfort to piety,
or charity like to communication. The liberal man is in his trim quando
distribuit, when he gives: in such chests reponit thesauros, Christ lays up
his treasures. It is my joy to say, my bread, my wool, my friends, my purse,
my hand, my letter made such a one. In charity, aurum m^um in altari Domini,
my gold upon Gods Altar. Of all the friends we have, we esteem them best that
have converted us from sin to righteousness, by reforming the errors of our
judgment, or the vices of our conversation. He that of a poor man makes me
rich, he fitteth me for this world. He that of a wicked, lewd, lascivious man,
makes me godly, fitteth me for this life, and that which is to come, for
godliness has the promises of both.

We hold our calling and means by this service, we do it ex officio, out of
duty. We lift up our voices like trumpets to tell the house of Jacob their
sins: not to shame, but ad dignam emendationem, to am^nd them. No calling
requires more integrity, more fidelity, (...); who is sufficient? none has a
greater reward: our reward is with God, yea God is our exceeding great reward.
We have the office and name of Jesus, servabis teipsum and quite audiunt, thou
shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. They that turn many to
righteousness, shall shine like stars: he tells the number of these
stars, and calls them all by their names.

4 Gratum Deo, acceptable to God, he is emblemed in the father of the
Prodigal* Bring my sons from far, and my Isa. 43. 6.
daughters from the ends of the earth. Good Ministers undergo a great hazard
in this service, for if any perish in his sin for want of our warning, his
blood is upon us.

Ob. But does not David presume to promise this?

Sol No, our labor is not in vain in the Lord, for,

1 If some sinners like the high way, non recipient bonum, receive not the
good, as they that hate to be reformed, sin reigning in them, crying, Nolumus
scientiam viarum tuarum, non possunt audiri: strepitus in domo: We desire not
the knowledge of thy ways: they cannot be heard: there is a noise in the
house. Christ would gather them: noluerunt, they would not. 2 If some like
stony ground receive seed, and it wither for want of moisture. 3 If some
receive it with joy, and the cares or pleasures of life choke it. 4 Yet there
is some good ground, which cultured and well ploughed and stirred by the sharp
coulter of the law, watered with the tears of their teachers, and the dew of
heavenly grace, will take the seed, and bring forth fruit.
Saint Ambrose to Monica Saint Augustines mother, impossible est ut filius
harum lachrymaru^ pereat: it is impossible that the son of these tears
should perish. True it is, many conne^s little thank for laboring their
conversion, yea the^ are angry with us for it. Thou thankest him that puts
thy stray beast into the way: why art thou offended with him, qui teipsum
vellet reducere aberrantem? which would bring thee thy self back going
astray? Bonam Aug.
vis domum, uxorem bonam, and cur non teipsum bonum? thou would have a good
house, a good wife: why not thy self good? Let us cut a passage through all
impediments, with zeal, and faith, and love, believing that this good work
cannot miscarry.

True it is, that good works exact our uttermost of performance, propter se,
for themselves: successus est extra nos, the success is out of our power, yet
our hope and faith may cheerfully look to the success. David's faith has
ground,

1 From the fitness of him to teach. 2 From the acceptablenesse of the work.
3 From the dignity of the subject, vias tuas, thy ways. 4 From the auxiliarie
cooperation of God: (...), fellow-workers with God. From this passage observe,
God has sundry ways to teach.
1 By Catechism: so Lois and Eunice did teach Paul's Timothy. The Creed, oration
dominica, lex, Lords prayer, the Law; Three Sermons, teaching, credenda,
petenda, agenda, things to be believed, to be asked, to be done.

2 By reading the Word, these are sure oracles, able to make thee wise to
salvation. Moses of old time has in every City, them that preach him, seeing
he is read in the (...) 15. 21.
Synagogue every Sabbath day.

3 By Sermons, giving the sense of the word, dividing and applying it aright.
Where able men are wanting, the Church provideth Homilies profitable. In Conc.
Vasensi, Anno 444. Si presbyter infirmitate prohibente non potuerit pr^dicare,
Sanctorum patrum Homiliae a Diaconis recitentur. If the Priest by reason of
infirmity, cannot Preach, let the Homilies of the holy Fathers be repeated by
the Deacons.

Some hold good preferments in the Church, that are very sick of an impotency
to that service: these have this help. Preaching learnedly and conscionably by
labored Sermons, has ever had great honor, and has great efficacy: but
Cavete quomodo audiatis, take heed how ye hear. There may be danger in the
failing of the Preacher, in judgment or discretion. For some vent their
fancies for truth, their own self. flatteries for the spirit of consolation,
their own furies for zeal, their own spleen for reprehension, and turn the
bread of life to gravel. Try the spirits si ex Deo, if they be of God: as they
of Berea: Scrutamini Scripturas, search the Scriptures.

4 Here is another kind of teaching, when converted sinners turn teachers.
This is the rich man's suit, si unus ^ mortuis, if one from the dead. Benhadads
servants showed comfort to their drooping Master, saying, We have heard that
the Kings of Israel are merciful men. If one of them could have said it by
any experience, or a King in his case had found it so, how had he comforted
him? David could say, Dicam quid fecit animae meae, I will tell you what he
has done for my soul. I was in misery and he helped me, I sinned foully,
provokingly, scandalously, I continued in sin impenitently. At last I was
chidden: I was sorry, I was ashamed, I cried God mercy, he heard me, forgave
me, and received me to favor.

They that speak from hearing, reading, or contemplation, speak not so to the
heart, as they that have had experience. Give me a grieved man comforted, let
him tell his own tale. There is no oratorie, no varnish or gilded speech,
wrought and labored by the sweat of art, that may compare with his plain
tale. He has cor in lingu^, his heart in his tongue: no music like his
voluntary. David will loose no time. Then will I teach: then when I hear of
joy and gladness, when my broken bones rejoice, etc. These words do further
afford a very clear description of repentance: which is the conversion of a
sinner to God: Et peccatores ad te convertentur, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

1 The subject wrought upon, sinners. 2 The work, to turn them. 3 The object
to which they are inclined; God. 4 The author of this conversion.
1 The subject, Sinners: a very cross unto ward piece to work on. Creation
made us Saints, our fall transformed us to devils, and originally we are no
better than the children of darkness, blind to all that may please God:
children of weakness, unable to perform any good service to God: filii ir^
ad p^^am, sons of wrath fitted for punishment: so the name of sinner does
contain,

1 A total corruption of nature deserving.

2 A necessary obligation, ad poenam, to punishment. In the one there is pudor
maleficii the shame of evil doing: in the other is terror judicii, the terror
of judgment. Take a sinner as he is in himself, without grace sanctifying
him, and mercy pardoning him, he is the vilest and unworthiest of all the
creatures that God made, in whom the image of God is blemished, and almost
utterly defaced. The Angels that stand in integrity, are as they were made, and
they do his will who made them. The celestial bodies keep their places, and
do the service for which they are made. The Sun knows his rising, and the
Moon her going down. The Sun goes forth as a Bridegroom, and as a Giant to
his race; as if these heavenly bodies had reason to do their makers will; so
are they guided evermore by the law of their creation. The earth and the bruit
creatures in their kind, follow the rule of that first law, only devils and
men resist it, and go their own ways, to Gods dishonor, and their own
hurt. The devils in malice to God, and in envy to man, ever laboring to
pervert the ways of God. Sinners go in their own crooked ways, yea, they
run violently in them, as an hot and fierce horse into the battle.

Such are we all naturally, conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, and
after drawing sin to us with the cords of vanity. For our natural corruption
first defiling us, and the example of evil infecting us, and the temptations
of Satan instigating us, and the sweetness of the pleasure of sin enticing
us, and the custom of sin hardening us, we become abominable, and to every
good work reprobate. Miserable men that we are, who shall deliver us from this
body of death! And that which makes our misery most miserable is, Israel does
not know, My people do not Isa. 1. 3.
consider: have ye no regard all ye that work iniquity! No, they have no
regard.

Let a man ayle any thing in his health by sickness or soreness, he feels
it, he complains of it, he seeks for remedy: so Jeremy, My bowels, my
bowels, I am pained at Ier. 4. 10.
the very heart: Ezec bias boil, Asaes gowt, make them very full of grief.

Let a man ayle any thing in his estate, he is very sensible: the poor widow
makes great moan to Elisha, being in debt. Help O Lord, the King, cries the
woman of Samaria, in the famine thereof. Only the sinner, whose soul is
divested of grace, habited in sin, in hazard of hell, neither feels the
want, nor fears the danger: neither complains of what it is, nor seeks
remedy. David himself who had tasted and drunk deep of the spiritual
favors of God, lies ten months together wallowing in the mire of
uncleanness, sleeping in the deep and dead sleep of sin, and not thinking
upon a recoverie. A sinner during the time of his impenitencie, stands
suspended from the holy temple of God, which is excommunicatio minor, the
lesser excommunication. The faithful cry, Away from me ye transgressors, and
God himself hides his face from him.

There is not amongst vegetables, a bramble, a thistle, things unvalued and
noxious. There are not amongst the animate creatures of the earth, not the
least of the winged flies in the air, or the creeping worms on earth, which
the unheedy foot of man or beast compoundeth with the earth it goes on; but it
has more of God in it than a sinner has, during his impenitencie. These are
as he made them: but a sinner not returning to God, has lost himself, and
Gods image in him is defaced. All other creatures stand to health in their own
natures: man is diseased: morbus est, he is all disease.

It is worth the noting, that God corrupted not the nature of any creature to
punish the sin of man; he would not lose the glory of omnia been fecit, he
did make all well. In wrath he remembered mercy, for those creatures that are
the curse of the earth, brambles, thistles, and thorns, are also of singular
virtue and use for the good of man: only he used these for rods to scourge
man. This it is to be a sinner, and such as these was David, and upon such he
promises to work.

2 Opus; convertentur: the work; shall be converted. This is repentance
begun, for the impenitent goes on still in his wickedness: he goes of
himself, for we may go down the hill easily, nostro pondere ferimur, we are
carried with our own weight. The faster and the further we go in a wrong way,
the more we err; it is not profectus, a going on, but aberratio, wandering. All
we like sheep have gone astray, errabund^ vestigia, our footsteps are wandering.
A travailer that regards his way, and heedeth his journey, is still asking
the way. Therefore the Prophet alluding hereunto, bids us from the Lord,
thus says the Lord: Stand upon the ways, and behold and ask for the old Jer.
6. 16.
way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for
your souls.

It is no loss of time, no^ hinderance to our speed, to stand upon the ways,
to ask for the good way, for they that go out of that way, find no rest. God
has left us certain guides of our way, his word and his spirit: let us ask
of them the way, they will direct us aright. Ask the Patriarchs, the Prophets,
the Converts of all times, the Son of God, and his holy Apostles, they have
gone this way themselves, and knew it perfectly; these will say, haec est via,
ambulate in ^^, this is the way, walk ye in it: turn not to the right hand,
nor to the left, keep on forth right, for that is the way of true wisdom.
They that keep the right way, must take heed of turning. Remember Lots wife,
do not so much as look back, but let them that either do know they go
wrong, or doubt whether they go right, stand upon the ways and behold: let
them look about them and see, if by their own judgment they can direct
themselves: but let them not trust that too far, let them also ask for the
good way, for there is a way that Prove. 16. 25.
seems good in a man's own eyes, but the end thereof are the ways of death:
This is via^on bona, the way not good: we must turn out of it: here repentance
begins. Leave to do evil. Natures way, the way of corrupt will, Isa. 1. 16.
the way of our lusts, the way of the world, are beaten ways, many travail
them, but these are new ways which are called our own crooked ways: turn
out of them.

3 The object; to the Lord.

This may seem to import very small comfort for transgressors to turn to the
Lord: for he has declared himself a jealous God, and a consuming fire, he
has dug a pit for sinners, his wisdom cannot but see his laws broken;
his holiness can do no less than abhor it, his justice cannot but punish
it. To turn sinners to God, is to bring stubble to the fire: but mark the
sequence of my text: First he will teach sinners Gods ways, and then there can
be no danger of their turning to God. For Adam, when he had turned from God by
disobedience, it was no wonder that he turned not to God by repentance, but
fled from his presence and hid himself, because the way to God was shutup,
till God himself opened it in the promised seed* yet there is no record of his
turning kept.

This point affords the most comfortable doctrine that we can preach, or you
hear, That a sinner may turn to God, and be welcome to him: it is the oil of
gladness, it is the bread that strengthens man's heart, Manna reconditum, the
hidden Manna. It is a flagon of wine from the Lords Cellar. It is the fullness
and fatness, and marrow of Gods house. It is the living water drawn from the
rivers of Gods pleasure, which refresh the City magni regis, of the great King.
It is the very extraction and distilment of the two Testaments of the Law and
of the Gospel. Let a sinner upon survey of his conscience, and the detection
of his sin, whilst his iniquities are in number, and are set in order before
him, even then in the cold fit of fear, resort to the Lord, and cast himself
at his feet, and seek his face. There be great reasons for it.

1 There is a necessity in it, there is no help elsewhere, Reason 1.
none can forgive sins but God only. The Apostles and Ministers of the Word,
forgive sins upon repentance, but ministerially they do pronounce Gods
pardon, ex officio, by their office. Therefore the Jews accused Christ of
blasphemy, for forgiving sins, for they knew him not to be God. He heals
all our infirmities, and pardons all our sins.

2 God, though he abhor sin, yet he loves the person Reason 2.
of the sinner: he cannot despise the work of his own hand: he has sworn by
his life, that he will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he turn to
him. All the while that he has his hand in his bosom, while he is plucking of
his sword out of the sheath, while he is whetting of it, while he is lifting it
up, all this while he is expecting our repentance, and if we turn not, he
smites home; if we do convert, he says: Put up thy self into thy scabberd,
rest I^^. 47. 6.
and be still. He deals not withus as with enemies, at arms end, but
forbeareth us, and opens his bosom, and reveals to us the bowels of his
compassion.

The two greatest and dearest loves that are, he takes upon himself, to
declare his tenderness over us: 1 the love of an husband; secondly, of a
father, for under these titles he has desired to appear to his Church; yet he
takes an holy pride to transcend husbands and fathers in their natural love:
for thy Maker is thy husband, the Lord of Isa. ^4 50.
hoasts is his name. What husband will receive again a disloyal divorced
wife, that has given her body to be defiled, and has scornefully abused him,
and borne children to strangers? yet God receives us after all this wrong:
yea* whilst we are in the height of this sin, he wooeth and courteth us, and
seeks our conversion. I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness,
and speak friendly to ^^e ^. 14.
her heart.

Though fathers provoked by disobedient children, forget natural affection,
and mothers cast off all compassion, yet God cannot: yea, though he do for a
time forbear, yet upon repentance, if thou turn to him* In the place where it
was said, ye are not my people, there it shall be O^e ^. 11.
said unto them, ye are the sons of the living God. He was that father who
saw, met, received* and clothed, and welcomed his unthrifty son: he sent
not after him, but when he returned, he embraced him* Our God is kinder than
that father, for he sends into the far Country after to seek us out: he
sends his Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, Ite in universum mundum, go into
all the world: he rises early to send them. God himself offers his own
wings: how often would I have gathered you? some parables express chiefly what
God does: somewhat we should do. The parable of the Prodigal chiefly shows,
quid nos, what we. The parable of the lost sheep, quid Deus, what God.

3 We have comfort from Gods often inviting sinners Reason 3.
to him: nothing shall dismay us, for he requires and commands our resort to
him, with a non obstante, nothing ^ Sam. 12.
hindering: and Samuel says to the people, ye have done all this wickedness,
yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your
heart: and Christ says, Come all weary and heavy laden.

4 God takes more pleasure in the return of a sinner to Reason 4.
him, then he conceived anger for his departing from him. When God had lost
Adam by his sins, the grief was not so great as his joy was, when he
recovered him by the seed of the woman. The second Adam had twice from heaven
proclaimed over him, Hic est filius meus dilectus, this is my beloved Son.
There is a parable for that more joy for the lost sheep, than the 99. Sin is
an act of depraved nature, it is opus nostrum, our work: Grace is opus Dei,
Gods work: he loves his own works more than he hates ours.

Jacob: Satis est, vivit filius meus, It is enough, my son Genesis 45. ^
is yet alive. The father in the parable, pleaded and justified the cause of
his joy, My son was lost, and is found. This shows the sure mercies of God,
which declare him God. But because of us sinners, thou shall be called
merciful: Es^^^s ^
for, ubi non est miseria, non est misericordia, where there is no misery,
there is no mercy.

The first sinners were Angels, they fell not all, and those that fell did
corrupt only themselves, there was no propagation of that creature. When Adam
and Evah fell, they corrupted the whole nature of mankind; and this magnified
the Creators mercy, when he raised up an horn of salvation to preserve a
creature, whose generations had else been subject to ruin.

God is above his law: his laws bind him not, neither Reason 5.
is his truth or justice prejudiced, or any way blemished by his dispensation
and indulgences and maintenance of his prerogative. His revealed will holds
in the general, but limiteth him not: he will show mercy on whom he will.
Neither is he bound to his own ordained means of grace, but he can save
without them: and no doubt he does also; therefore though sin deserve hell
fire, yet he may forgive this punishment where he will, without violence to his
law, which much encourages our turning to God: for, though it come to a
decree, yet before the decree come forth, it may by repentance be delayed in
the very egression: the child may come to birth, and no strength to bring it
forth. And howsoever we find no way of salvation without the Church, nor
means of grace without Jesus Christ, yet let me tell you, I dare not say, that
all those moral heathen who lived in the light of nature only, yet by the law
written in their hearts, did conscionably perform that which that law did
command, were certainly damned. I will show you what hope may be.

There was a law given to Adam, poena, ^ors, punishment, death. When Adam
sinned, he saw nothing but death before him, he had no hope of favor, God had
reserved an unrevealed means of mercy in his own secret wisdom and will. It
was not a contradiction to the will revealed, but a gracious dispensation to
declare him all in all.

Now seeing it is so excellent and so beneficial a duty to Use.
turn to the Lord, consider that God has concluded us all under sin, and
that must be the lesson of us all, to turn to him.

What then is required to a perfect conversion to God? Qu. Sol.


1 A search of our hearts for sin, comparing our ways with the rule, which
is the law of God. This is that the just man does, when he meditateth on the
law of God day and night: for that meditation serves,

1 For information of the judgment, quomodo ambulandum, how we are to walk. 2
For search of our conscience, quid feci, what have I done? 3 For full
resolution, quid mer^i, what have I deserved?
2 Upon this follows, percussio cordis, the smiting of the heart: a true
sorrow and penitential deploration, and confession of sin: for he that
confesses shall find mercy.

3 A present, holy and constant reformation of life to the uttermost of our
power and desire, with care and fear for the future: all this David here
promises in, peccatores convertentur ad te, sinners shall be converted unto
thee. But how shall this be unto me?

4 The Author of this. Here David is modest: he begins with docebo vias, I
will teach thy ways* but he says not, et convertam, and I will turn: he will
not take that upon him, nor convertent se, they will turn themselves: he will
not promise so much for them. Convertentur, they shall be turned: it must be
Gods own work: turn us, and we shall be turned.

Christ has delivered us from the extreme rigor and exaction of the law, and
by the good favor of God it will now suffice, that we labor our conversion to
God, using the means by him ordained to that purpose, and cherishing in
ourselves the good motions of Gods Spirit, abstaining from sin all that we
can, and declining the occasions thereof: and when we find our selves falling
away from him, to take our selves in the manner, and speedily to cry God mercy
for it, and to be more wary hereafter, by taking heed to our words and
thoughts, and ways, that we may do no more so. If you desire to know whether
you do abide in him or not:

1 Examine your selves by the fruits of holiness and righteousness in your
selves, for Christ says, He that abides ^^b. 15. 5:
in me, and I in him, he brings forth much fruit. 2 You shall know it by your
zeal in prayer, and the success thereof: for, if you abide in me, and my
words abide in you, you shall ask what you will, and it shall be verse 7.
done unto you. 3 By your following the example of Christ, in walking as he
walked; for as the merit of his obedience serves for our justification, so the
example of his holiness advances our sanctification: for he has said,
discite a me, learn of me* he is a Doctor as Bernard says, Cujus in ^re
verbum vitae, cujus in more vita verbi, in whose presence is the word of life,
in whose conversation is the life of the word. His love, his patience, his
meekness and humility, his obedience to his father, are all exemplarie; and,
Blessed is the servant whom his Master, when he comes, shall find so doing.
Where we affect and endeavor this way, he is assistant to us, and will not
fail either in the work to aid it, or in the reward to crown it.
VERSE 14. Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse O God, thou God of my salvation,
and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
6 HE supplicateth in particular for pardon of his late great sin of blood,
in the murder of Uriah.

1 Orat, he prays, 2 promittit, promises.

In the petition observe,

1 Quid petit: libera me ^ sanguine, what he prays for, Deliver me from blood.
2 A quo: Deus, Deus salut is meae, from whom he asks, O God, thou God of my
salvation.
1 Quid petit, what he asks: here we are directed in Doctrine.
our pursuit of pardon, to search our consciences for sin, and to crave
special pardon for such sins in particular, as do most disquiet our
conscience, and offend God, and scandal our profession of religion abroad, and
grieve the Church of God at home.

Such was this notorious sin of David, the crying sin of murder, the
murder of a loyal faithful servant. Though all sins are mortal, yet they
are not all of equal magnitude; the circumstances of persons, time, occasion,
place, motives, and such like do either aggravate or extenuate them. This
murder of David's has full weight, a King appointed by God to be (...), a
shepherd of the people, to be the butcher of a subject: a preserver of men to
be (...) a destroyer. He on whose head God had poured his holy oil, to rent
gall and wormwood to any subject, to turn tyrant. A Prophet of the Lord
appointed to guide others in the way of life to become a plotter of death. This
bloody execution done on a subject, so ready to expose his life in defense of
his Sovereign, so deserving honorable reward, so receiving dishonorable
injustice. And this to revenge an honest good affection to his Master, and to
make way for a marriage to conceal a shameful adultery, a former injury
done also to him in defiling his Subjects bed.

Some sins affected with strong desire, and committed with sensual delight,
do charge the conscience, after the gloss of their fair seeming is worn
off, with great anguish and remorse, that our souls groan under the heavy
burden of them. These would not be foulded up in a general confession, but
offered in particular and single presentation to the throne of mercy. For the
better satisfaction of the divine Majesty who is pleased with a broken and
contrite heart, as it after follows: for the better quieting of the
conscience at home within us, which has no other way to exonerate itself, but
by a penitential and remorsefull self accusation: and this I before taught
from David's former confession* I have done this evil in thy sight; as before
Verse ^*
in his confession he did particularly acknowledge this ^inne, so here in his
supplication for pardon, he mentions it by name, and cries God mercy for it.
Some sins do but hang on, and these are easily shaken off, but some cleave
so close, and stick so fast, that they ask more care, and labor, and pain
to remove them. And generally the sins that most please flesh and blood, do
most offend God.

It seems, that David fell into the recovering of it. And for some sins, he
desired only that they might be blotted out, which alludeth to the dash of a
pen, and soon d^ne. But some fouled him, so that they needed washing
thoroughly.

Some must be washed with bysope, a lather of blood to fetch out the steines*
which they left in the conscience: sins of a deep scarlet tincture, of a
crimson dye. There is a great difference to be put between our common
infirmities of nature from our ordinary temptations, and some special sin
into which we fall by a sudden surprise of Satan. The Apostle seems to
refer to some such sin, saying, Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault,
(...), Gal. 6. 1.
be prevented before he could advise wisely with the word, or the spirit of
God. And many of us are so caught, ere we were aware, in sins, which our
christian and religious hearts do abhor. Thus, many that abhor
drunkenness, are sometimes in over-merry company, overtaken, to their great
after-griefe. Observe it, the first example in all the Book of God of
drunkenness, was Noah, whom God only found righteous in the old world. It was
the first sin that we do read of after the flood; the world has been
sick of it ever since.

The first sin that Lot fell into after his deliverie from Sodom, in both
sharply punished: for Vinegar is the daughter of Wine, the end of it is
sharp. In such a case, when a professed sober man is so overtaken with wine,
when an opportunity has corrupted any man's conscience, and defiled his soul
for gain or pleasure, or revenge to commit evil. Let him in his suit for his
pardon, crave a special quictus est against that sin. Let him not esteem it
the less, because he never but once committed it: rather let him take
dimension of the magnitude of it, and the danger attending it, and in
especial, make his peace with God for that. Here I save my self a labor,
which you reflecting your eyes upon your own hearts for disquisition and
scrutiny, to search if there have been in any of you any such overtakings of
sin, to seek your peace with God for them in especial.

Despise not, neglect not this necessary exhortation to make use of it in time,
to make your peace with God for the more offensive sins: for if you neglect
them, and have not the pardon of them under seal, you will find them like
some ill diet to thank you hereafter, and upbraid you. Satan knows his
seasons for it, and husbands them to our greatest vexation: two seasons
specially.

I When any extraordinary trouble comes upon us otherwise per adventure
undeserved of us; for some sins escape a present vengeance, and are reserved
for a future judgment: as Joseyhs brethren sold him, abused their father with
a cunning collusion and their hearts did not once smite them for it that we
read. Twenty three years after, when the famine forced them to seek bread in
Egypt, and their brother Joseph, then to them unknown, being the Vic^roy of
Egypt, received them very hars^ly, hear the Genesis 42 ^1
story: And they said one to another, we are veril^ guilty concerning our
brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us* and we
would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us.

Observe the brethren of Joseph now in trouble, innocent and clear from the
crime charged upon them of coming as spies: yet knowing that God never
punishes but where he finds sin, their consciences accuse them of an old
sin yet owing for to God. At one time God touched all their hearts with
remorse of that sin. They were all in distress, pares in poena, alike in
punishment, and therefore they remember the transgression wherein they were
pares in culpa alike in fault.

Observe also how they fr^me the enditement against themselves, for if all the
Prophets whom God did ever send to tell the house of Jacob their sins, had
laid the indictment against them* if Satan the great accuser of the Brethren
^ad put in the information against them, none of them all giving their best
diligence, or the worst of malice, could have pressed or expressed their fault to a
more full accusation, than the voice of their own guilty consciences enforced
it against themselves: for, without extenuation or excuse, they plead all
guilty with a strong asseveration.

We are verily guilty, not one or more, but we, all we, not as accessaries, but
all principals, all we guilty.

The person wronged aggravateth the fault, it was not 2
concerning a stranger in blood or nation, whom yet the communion of charity
did bind to entreat justly and friendly: nor concerning a countryman of ours,
whom the law of compatriots does bid us ^ender: nor concerning an enemy, whom
religion commands to use favorably, and it is the exaltation of charity, to
requite his evil with goodness. But concerning a brother, one that called
every one of them brother, the son of the same Jacob the father of them all.
Would not this have served? no, they declare, they aggravate, and engrieve the
trespass.

1 He was a brother in anguish: enemies recover tenderness and softness to
enemies in anguish: cruelty resumes humanity in distress.

2 Here was anguish of the soul, amaritudo animae, that is the soul of
anguish, for Joseph had many vexations: for them that wronged him, who
unthankefully requited his painful and loving search for them to see how they
did, and what they wanted. For their unnatural unkindness to himself and
their loving father, who sent him to them: for the danger he was in of his
life: death is fearful.

3 We saw it: to hear of anguish any where, moves compassion; to hear of a
brothers anguish, aches an heart of flesh: but to see it present, and in the
strength of the fit, this were enough to soften an hard heart, to thaw a fro^en
heart, to melt an heart of brass or iron. A grief so inward, as in anima, in
the soul, yet so sensible, as nos vidimus, we saw it. How were the rivers of
their blood which run in the channels of their veins, to water the earth, of
which they are made, frozen and congealed, that they had neither mercy to pity
their fathers son, nor so much tenderness as to look another way? nos
vidimus, we saw.

Seeing malice and envy had taken away their hearts, why had it left the eyes
open to let in so unpleasing a sight?

Thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother* O^^^. ^^. ^^.


Thou should not have looked on their affliction in the day of their
calamity: oculi aug^^^ dolor^m, commonly, that the eye sees not, the heart
grieves not: here the mercies of the brethren were all turned eruell.

4 I but perchance Joseph might thank his own stout heart for their cruel
usage of him: for many times our own untemperate carriage in afflictions,
brings fuel to the fire that scorcheth us, and blows more breath into the
tempest of wind that bestormeth us. But Joseph's brethren have not this excuse,
they confess their brother resisted them not, but with humble entreaties they
confess he besought us.

The petition of a soul in anguish faire-spoken and humble, has pierced hard
hearts, and relented cruel intentions of evil: but it wrought not here: for,

5 They confess, we would not hear. They did hear the request of their
brethren, but they would not hear, for they will not hear, that do not hear
to do what they are requested.

I have pressed this example the more, to declare how troubles awake the
conscience from a dead sleep, and turn our eyes into our own bosoms, that if
there lie a notoriou^ unrepented sin in the heart, stoned, as low as Jonah,
who lay asleep in the bottom of the ships Hold, affliction will romage the
ship, and will cry as the Mariners to Jonah, Awake thou sleeper, and bring it
above hatches. Therefore it is wisdom, by confession, by repentance and
prayer, to quit our consciences so soon as we can of such sins.

Here is a sin of blood, almost a full year old, and though Nathan has
pronounced Gods pardon of it, the conscience of David is not yet at rest, his
thoughts are upon it, and his prayers be concerning it.

2 Another of Satan's seasons to call such special sins to remembrance is,
when we are near our end; that is a season wherein many of the faithful
servants of God have dangerous and fearful conflicts with Satan.

After his 40. days temptation of Christ in the wilderness, it is said, that
he departed from him for a season. Once he borrowed the heart and tongue of an
Apostle, even of Peter, to tempt him, but Christ resented him, and said, Get
thee behind me Satan: but he confesses a little before his passion, The
Prince of this world comes, but he has nothing in me. There is his advantage
against us, when any special sins lie upon the conscience unrepented, then
he has something of his in us. This makes many an aching heart upon deathbeds,
for then judgment is at hand, and the old flattery of sin, Dominus
tardabit, the Lord will delay, is removed by the sensible decay of the body,
and the evident symptoms of approaching death. The widow of Sarepta, when her
only son was dead, was in a storm at Eliah, and said unto him: What have I
to 1 Reg. 17. 18.
do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to call my sin to
remembrance, and to slay my son? Did the death of her son call her sin to
remembrance? bethink you then, how our own death in sight and sense will call
all our sins to remembrance that we have done. And in this Inventorie, if
there be any capital sin texted and recorded by the conscience, in great and
capital letters, not yet blotted out by our repentance and Gods gracious
pardon, how will that sin present it self to present remembrance? how will it
cruciate and torment the inward man, even the hid man of the heart? Judas his
last words gushed out the bowels of his despair, as his last passion did the
bowels of his body. I have sinned in betraying innocent blood: he had not the
heart to breath one miserere, have mercy, to comfort the agony of his
despairing end.

The penitent convert thief on the Cross, was in a better mind, he glorified
God and his Son Christ, by a free confession: for, he rebuked his blasphemous
fellow thief; saying, Do not thou fear God, seeing we are in the Luke 23.
^0.
same condemnation? and we indeed justly, for we receive the reward of our
deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. This had been the Cross of his
soul, as that he hung on was of his body, if his faith had not nailed his
sins as fast to Christ, as Christ was nailed for them to his Cross, which he
declared in the next words. And he said unto Jesus: Lord remember me when thou
come into thy kingdom: which was answered with body mecum cris, to day
thou shall be with me.

It is worthy our observing, that Jesus Christ did institute the holy Sacrament
of his Passion, the evening before his suffering, as it were acting his death
in visible demonstration, before he under-went it. To teach how effectual the
death of Christ is against our sins, and for preparation of the soul for her
remove hence.

And from hence it is, that the holy Church has not only offered this
Sacrament as the bread of our spiritual life to nourish it, but has commended
it also to sick persons upon their death beds, as viaticum animae, the
provision of the soul, so the Council of Nice calls it. That the conscience
being then purged from all sin, may receive Jesus Christ in^o it.

And in this holy action, our search of our hearts will soon find out any
eminent and notorious sin to confess and repent it, that the conscience may
be disburthened, and that the soul of man may be domus pacis, the house of
peace: for otherwise we receive that Sacrament unworthily to our condemnation.
Our Savior is precise in this: If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, More, if God have ought
against thee, leave there thy gift: Go and be reconciled: et offer, and then
bring it. This is a Sacrament from God to us, it is a sacrifice from us to God.

If any great extraordinary sin lie upon the conscience, we had best
exonerate us thereof: for we and our gift will else be unacceptable to him. If
God receive our gift, he will not refuse us, for he looks first upon Abel,
then on his sacrifice: we make our offering acceptable, not that us. Now
because our sins lie so heavy, especially our notorious sin, this or that
particular transgression upon our conscience in the agony of death. Christ
has ordained a gracious remedy, that upon our repentance, the faithful
Minister of the Word should have power in his name to pronounce his absolution
and free pardon of that, and all the rest sincerely repented: saying, Whosoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted. And the true penitent has comfort to his
heart in that absolution. Some of our own brethren at home have quarrelled
this as popish, not well advised of the ordinance and institution of Jesus
Christ our Master, by whose commission we perform this, as the clear Text
does warrant.

Tertullian calls the Clergy a distinct order separate from all other
callings to a special work of Gods holy service, for the enlightening of
ignorants, and converting transgressors, and comforting the disconsolate, and
confirming such as are weak. And what greater comfort can we administer, then
the assurance of forgiveness to distressed souls, languishing under the
oppression of their conscience for their sins? Therefore Christ in our
Commission uses the same word for our pardoning of sins, that he teaches us
to use in our own prayers to God for our pardon, (...), Whosoever sins ye
remit. Job. 20. 23.
(...), Forgive us. A departing soul being to leave the world, and hearing
that he that hides his sins shall not prosper, having the sting of
conscience, and the Angel of Satan buffetting him, can no longer hide this
fire in his bosom which burns him, but he brings it forth in confession.
And we find in the capital punishment of malefactors, that the fear of
judgment, and terror of conscience, a little before their end has detected
many murders, adulteries, felonies, and foul transgressions, which till then
lay hidden in the secret of their hearts, concealed from the worlds
intelligence and suspicion.

In such cases having disburdened their souls, and declared their repentance,
our absolution is of force, and then the penitent cries, N^nc dimittis servum
tuum Domine in pace, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace: and as
one that has his yoke taken off, and his burden eased, he removes hence with
joy.

2 This petition teaches, that the sin of shedding innocent 2 Doct.
blood, oppresses the conscience, and is of a crimosin dye, hardly washed out.
After the fall of our Parents, the first sin we read recorded, was murder,
the first death by it. He that makes inquisition for blood, begins his
search and vengeance at the blood of Abel. That sin of blood in Caine is set
for terror in the beginning of the holy story of the Bible, to advise us of
that roaring Lion, who goes about continually seeking whom he may devour. He
was a liar and a murderer from the beginning: he practiced upon the souls
and bodies of our first Parents, and by a cunning lie brought in death upon
them in Paradise. Then he incensed a brother against a brother in the first
infancy of time. Observe that murder,

1 In the conception of it. 2 In the act and execution. 3 In the sequel and
event of it.
1 In the conception: the provocation was only Gods accepting of his brother
in his service, and his refusing him, which made his death a persecution in
Caine, a Martyrdom in Abel. This put murder into the heart, God saw it there,
yet he takes notice of it by the countenance of Cain: Anger cannot well
conceal it self: and God is so tender, as not to endure a frowning
countenance in us to one another. He expostulated the cause with Caine: he
laid the fault upon himself: If thou do well, etc. he gave him place of his
brother, and promised him his subjection. He would have cured Caine of this
disease, but he would not.

2 In the act. It was the foulest that could be: Cain talked with Abel his
brother: no question but it was a fair ^poken parley which tempted him ^alone
with him into the field, and there he arose against him and slew him.

A strange act, worthy to be recorded! The first borne in the world a
murderer: the first recorded sin in the generation of man, murder: the
first brother a murderer: the first death, murder. Death followed sin, God
would rather have it performed by the hand of man, than by his own hand: the
better to show the effect of his justice, and man's sin according to the
sentence: Thou shall dye the death.

3 The sequel: to that I hasten: for,

1 Cain sought not out God, said nothing to him: the text says, The Lord said
unto Cain: he spoke first, and enquired after the murder, he makes
inquisition for blood. 2 His question: where is Abel thy brother? he calls
for him by name, Abel, God names him by the name that his Mother gave him. He
challenges a right in his person, he challenges their right in him who named
him. And the interest that the murdered had in the murderer, frater tuus, thy
brother. 3 When this would not bring forth a confession and repentance of the
fault, but was frowardly answered: first, with a nescio, I know not, a lie,
then with a surly question, Am I my brothers keeper? Then God replieth with,
1 Detection of the murderer, What have thou done? for he so troubles the
conscience of such persons as shed blood. 2 Production of evidence, vox
sanguinis fratris tui de terra inclamat me, the voice of thy brothers blood
cries unto me from the earth. 3 Upon so clear evidence he proceeds to
judgment.
1 The earth is cursed for his sake to him: so before in his fathers sin: we
think much if the earth serve us not with the fruits thereof: we may thank
our sin. 2 His person is cursed: a fugitive and a vagabond shall thou be on
the earth. 4 When he stood convicted in his conscience, by the voice of the
Judge, and evidentia facti, the plainness of the deed done.
1 He turns desperate, and speaks a speech which bears a double
construction: My punishment is greater than I can bear: or, My iniquity is
greater than that it may be forgiven. 2 He takes upon himself a necessity of
grievous punishment, which he distributeth into four great griefs.
1 Thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth. 2 And from thy
face shall I be hid. 3 And I shall be a fugitive and vagabond upon the earth. 4
And it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me, shall slay me.
Observe the first punishment of murder in this full example: for it is
notable.

1 In the Judge: secondly, in the judgment.

1 The Judge is God himself: he takes it into his own judicature,
conventeth, convinces, judges the offender himself. The fault is expressed in
the words of my Text, vox sanguinum, the voice of bloods: for he not only
spilled the blood of his brother, but he destroyed the posterity that might
have bin derived from him, and he is called Abel the just: so he might have had
semen sanctum, an holy seed. All this hope of after-generations, all their
blood spilt in him.

The judgment an heavy curse.

1 Without him in the earth. 2
2 Excommunication from the face of God* 3 A wandering unsettled life. 4 Terror
of conscience.
Observe the effect upon himself: for,

1 He repineth at the justice of God for inflicting too much punishment. 2 He
despaireth of the mercy of God: he neither hops nor asks Gods pardon. 3 He
looks for retaliation: whosoever meets me will kill me: he holds himself
now no better than a man of death.
The reason why God declared himself so soon, so quick, Reason.
so sharp an avenger of murder is, because he is author of life, and
conserver of it. Job gives him that title, the preserver of men, and he cannot
bear it, that he taking care of all to preserve their lives, men should
unsive one the other. In the plantation of Paradise, he set in the midst of
the Garden, a tree of life, not only a Sacrament, but an instrument of life.
It was one of his quarrels with the old world: For the earth is full of
violence, because of men. Genesis 6. 13.
Therefore when he renewed the world after the flood, he expressed his care of
man's life: Surely the blood of your lives Gen 9. 5.
will I require, at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand
of every man, and at the hand of every man's brother, will I require the life of
man. Whosoever 6
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God
made he man. Cains conscience thought this just, when he said: whosoever
meets me will kill me. This was after established for a law: whosoever kills
any person, the murderer shall be put to death. Numb. 35. 31.
Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer which is
guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death: he gives two reasons of
this severe law.

1 For blood defiles the land, and the land cannot be Vers^ ^^
cleansed of the blood that was shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it. The Jewish Doctors interpret this law thus. The avenger of blood cannot
pardon wilful murder, because the blood shed is not the possession of the
avenger of blood: i. e. of the Magistrate, but it belongs to God.

2 For I the Lord dwell among the children of Israel. This agrees well with
their exposition of the Law. God takes this into his own judicature: his
peremptory law must stand: Salomons doom is, A man that does violence Proverb.
28. 17.
to any man's person to blood, shall fly to the pit, let no man stay him: God
unpriviledgeth him: Thou shall take Exodus ^1. 1^.
him from mine Altar, that he may dye. In overt acts of murder, this law is
clear and just. There be covert acts, as when our hand is not the actor, but
our instigation and proxy: as in Naboths case, whom Ahab murdered by a
colored process: and in David's case here. Consent and approbation in the
Court of conscience, extends so far as drawing in a party as principal. So
Paul confessed that he slew Stephen, who sa^e by and kept the garments of them
that stoned him. Yet God favored the lives of such as by Numb. 35. 26.
misadventure without malice, which our law calls Chance-medly, had shed
blood: he privileged Cities of refuge for them to fly unto, where they
continued till the death of the high Priest, then they had liberty. Which
showed that involuntary murder needed the expiation of the death of Christ,
our high Priest. For shedding of blood in our own defense for preservation of
our lives in an assault, nature, reason, religion, and the laws under which we
live, do all excuse it. Yet there ought to be a tenderness in us to favor
life as much as may be, because the law of God is so express: proximum ut
teipsum, love thy neighbor as thy self; but wilful murder is my Text.
David's fault was no less and against the vengeance of that sin he here
prays. For engagements to duels, which in point of honor do often inflame
great spirits to bloody executions.

Let us wisely weigh the matter, and we shall find manifest injury maintained
on one side, professed revenge on the other, both naught. The heinousness of
this sin of blood thus detected, in culpa and poena, in the fault and
punishment. Our use of this point is,

1 A caution, ne fiat, let it not be. 2 A remedy, post factum, when it is.
The first I confess, is not in my Text: yet seeing how heavy this sin lay
upon the conscience of David, we may 1
deduce this use of it, knowing the terror of the Lord, to admonish all men to
look to the law, non occides, thou shall not kill. For these things are
written for our learning: as the Apostle applies the commemoration of the old
sins of Gods people to them to whom he wrote. Not to lust after evil things:
not to be idolaters: not to commit fornication: not to tempt Christ: not to
murmr as they did: so we may admonish, not to shed blood as many have done.
Take heed of murder: I may use the words of Gamaliel, Lest happily ye be found
even to fight against God: for it is against God. Act. 5. 39.


1 In his law, not occides, thou shall not kill. 2 In his image: for man is so.
3 In his Magistrate, who bears not the sword in vain: he wears it as a
defender of thy life, and as an avenger of thy blood.
2 For remedy, post factum, after the sin committed. David was a King, and in
no danger of temporal laws to avenge the blood by him shed, and it was
carried so cunningly, as he appeared not to it. But had Zimri peace who slew
his Master? or had David any peace who slew his servant? he repaireth to God by
holy devotion and prayer, to be delivered from bloods: for this blood had
defiled him. If blood do make the land unclean in which it is committed, it
does much more defile the person guilty of it, till it be avenged. And surely
now we come to the reason why David does not before pray; Lord forgive, remit
or pardon; but wash, wash thoroughly, make me clean, wash me with hysope; blot
out all my sins. For blood defiles, it is no ordinary pollution: it is a
foul steine, it will not easily out, it is a crimosin, a scarlet dye. No man
can ever wash out that tincture, no man can pardon that sin. We may say as
our Savior does: with men this is impossible, but with God all things are
possible: he must be sought by prayer, libera me, deliver me. The words of
David's petition, libera me Deus, delive^ ^e O Lord; do show that David is in
durance: for this is ^^x Captivi, the voice of a captive. He is in laqueo
diaboli, in the snare of the 1 Timothy 3. 7.
devil* so the Apostle calls the guilt of sin, and before, Verse ^.
he calls it the condemnation of the devil. The devil has his snares like
a cunning fowler, as well as his paws, being a roaring Lion: he makes snares
of our own sins to hold us fast: and David himself says of God, Upon the
(...).
wicked he shall reign snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest.

1 Snares to hold them, then if they be not delivered, follow fire and
brimstone, and they cannot escape. This is the case of a sinner if he repent
not; if God pardon not, he is in the snare of Satan's temptation, he is in the
snare of divine vengeance: let him therefore cry aloud for his deliverance,
that he may have his feet in a large room. The wicked lay snares for the
righteous, but God either preventeth them that their souls ever escape them,
or else he subventeth them; The snares are broken, and we are delivered. No
snares hold us so fast as those of our own sins: they keep down our heads,
and stoop us, that we cannot look up: a very little ease they are to him
that has not a seared conscience.

2 A quo petit, from whom he asks: Christ directs us to say, Pater noster
qui es in coelis, Our Father which art in heaven, libera nos a malo, deliver us
from evil. David directs his prayer to God, the God of his salvation. This
prayer is like to speed.

1 Oration plana, an open prayer. It is confession and prayer, for in that he
prays to be delivered from bloud-guiltinesse, he pleads guilty to the
evidence of blood. Confession has a great efficacy to induce mercy, prayer of
great force to obtain it. Here they are in composition, and they show that the
two punishments of sin, shame and fear are upon him. Confession shows his
shame, prayer shows his fear of Gods anger and just vengeance: so it is
oration plana, an open prayer. 2 Legitima, lawful. It is an honest lawful
request: his soul is Gods: for he says, all souls are mine: he desires
deliverance of their soul. 3 Plena, full. He desires two things herein: to be
delivered from the sin of blood, ne relabatur, lest he relapse into it: from
the vengeance due to that sin, ne corruat, lest he perish by it: so it is
oration plena. 4 Recta, right. He knows that this is a sin which none but
God can pardon: he has not left the dispensation of pardon of this sin, to
any subordinate Magistrate on earth: he has deputed under him an avenger of
blood, no pardoner: therefore he directs this prayer only to God: so it is
oration recta, it goes the right way: as he says, I will direct my prayer to
God, and will look up. 5 Fidelis, faithful. It is full of confidence: for he
calls God to whom he addresseth himself, the God of his salvation: My
Savior, my King, my God, challenging a propriety and interest in him, so it is
oration fidelis. 6 Fervens, earnest. It is full of zeal and holy earnestness
and importunity, as appears in the ^ngemination here used: O God, he
resumeth it and takes better hold of him, Thou God of my salvation.
1 O God, is a good invocation: for he hears prayers. 2 Yet to distinguish
him from all false Gods, he is so particular as to single him from all other:
thou God. 3 And to magnify him, and to reenforce his Petition, he calls him
Deum salutis, the God of Salvation, which expresses him able to deliver him:
for it is his nature and his love, and his glory to be a preserver of men. 4
And to bring home this joy and comfort into his own heart, he adds salutis
meae, of my salvation. So it is oration fervens, and the Apostle tells us,
that such a prayer prevails much with God.
For God may be a Savior and a deliverer, and yet we may escape his saving
hand, his right hand may skip us.

We can have no comfort in the favors of God except we can apply them at
home; rather we may think on God and be troubled.

I find that in David himself, My God, my God, Psalm. 2^. ^.
why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the
words of my roaring?

2 O God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season,
and am not silent. This would never have troubled him, if he had seen that all
had fared alike, if he had heard none complain: but it follows.

Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted in thee, and Verse 4.
thou did deliver them.

They cried unto thee, and were delivered.

But I am a worm, and no man, despised, etc.

His enemies upbraided him: he trusted in the Lord, that he would deliver: Let
him deliver him, etc.

But a steadfast faith laying hold on God as my salvation, the decreer, the
worker, the giver of my salvation: that armeth me against all the malice of the
world, against all the sins of my soul, against all the devils of hell.

Why art thou so sad, etc. Confidam in Domino, ipse mihi salus, I will trust in
the Lord: he is my salvation.

But here is a Quaere: why David does in particular desire Quaere.
to be delivered from the sin of blood, and mentions not his great sin of
adultery, for which he did commit that murder?

That that sin was the fulness and height of his transgression, Sol. 1.
as the Apostle says; when sin is finished, it brings forth death: so that
is the comprehension of the whole transgression. If he be freed from that, he
is c^^ere of all. When Judas made confession of his sin, he says no more,
but I have finned in betraying innocent blood, that passes for a full
confession: yet he sinned in covetousnes also, for so one of our Ancients
says, Auaritia Christum vendidit, Covetousness sold Christ: yet because his
treason was the finishing and full growth and stature of his sin, that
comprehends all the rest.

The word [blouds] here used is by Saint Augustine, Sol. 2.
Saint Gregory, and others interpreted according to the frequent use of
Scripture, to contain our whole natural corruption. In multis sanguinibus
tanquam in origin (...).
peccati, multa peccata intelligi voluit. In many bloods as in the original of
sin, he would have understood many sins. Ad peccata respiciens, looking to his
sins, and plus dicit, he says more; Caro and sanguis non possidebunt regnum
Dei Flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Refert ad Vriae
caedem: and referri dicit ad omnia (...).
ejus peccata morta^i^. He has reference to the murder of Uriah, and says,
that all his mortal sins are to be referred to it.

So Saint Gregory, and after them Master Calvine. Both David's sins were sins of
hot blood: First, blood enflamed with lust. Secondly, blood enflamed with
anger, and revenge. Here was the right blood of lawful marriage extinct by
murder, a propagation of illegitimate blood added by adultery. Uxor, a wife,
became mulier ahenea, a brazen-faced woman, a shameful and hateful title; So
both sins here contained.

3 The greater sin is here named: for murder is a more Sol. ^.
heinous sin then adultery: Adultery defiles the body, that may be
thoroughly washed and made clean; but murder destroys the body, and spilleth
the blood on the earth like water, which cannot be gathered up again.

Adultery increases the world, though with an illegitimate issue: murder
depriveth the world of a legitimate. Here adultery defiled a woman: but murder
lost the state of a faithful servant. Adultery is an act of peccant nature:
murder is against nature, contrary to humanity: S^vire in propriam speciem, to
be cruel against our own kind, is heinous, and therefore lay more heavy upon
the conscience of the offender, was more offensive to God and man, and needed
more special deprecation.

4 Sins are much weighed according to the measure of Sol. 4.
comfort given to them, and therefore such sins as are done upon a sudden
temptation, be commonly no other then sins of infirmity; Satan's surprises, and
our overtakings. Such was David's adultery, for he was idle, he walked on the
roof of his house: Vidit, concupivit, accersivit, convenit, etc. He saw,
desired, sent for her, confers, etc. caetera quis nescit? the rest who knows
not? But his other sin, a deliberate act of study, a premeditated mischief,
seen and allowed. Here was fullness of malice, depth of cunning, fairest
pretexts of high favor, all to palliate a close designed practice against the
life of a faithful servant.

Sins on the by are often more heinous then the maine sin. As here the making
Uriah drunk, and killing him, worse then the adultery.

So when we have deceived a neighbor in bargaining: the maintenance and
supportation of our deceit by lying and swearing, defiles the conscience more
then the first sin, Sins that come on for the shelter and occultation or for
the defense and justification of any sin, weigh twice their own weight:
because they seem to make sins out of measure sinful.

Adultery should have been declined; but being committed it should have been
presently repented: but when in stead hereof sin is added to sin, that
over-measure of iniquity is more then the first transgression. Therefore here
wanted not cause from the monstrous and provoking condition of this sin, to put
in a special caution by prayer against it, that it destroy not utterly.

5. When David purposed to build an house to God: Sol. 5.
which was before this fall of his: God refused his offer. Thou have shed blood
abundantly, thou have made great ^* Chron. 22. 8.
wars; thou shall not build an house to my name, because thou have shed much
blood upon the earth in my sight. If the blood of lawful war shed in the
quarrel of God and his Church did foul David's hands, and made them unfit for
that work: No question, but now David does consider how he has shed the blood
of war in peace: How he has defiled his hands with innocent blood, wilfully
shed, which takes from man the privilege of Gods Altar.

And the conscience of this might well stir him up to this particular
request. To be delivered from bloods: all serves to admonish us,

1 To be very careful how we do charge our consciences with deliberate sins,
for they cleave fast, and they weigh heavy.

Repentance has somewhat to do to put them off. So long as we go no further
then the evil we would not do, and commit sin with reluctation and grief,
we are within the verge of mercy. But when once we commit (...) with
greediness and delight, and bear out one sin with another, we forget and
forsake, quae ad pacem, what concerns our peace.

2 To do our best to preserve the life of our brother: It is our blood that
runs in his veins: he is caro de carne nostra, flesh of our flesh, and calls
Adam and Eve, father and mother, as well as we. The vexation that David
sustained for this sin may discourage any man to have bloody hands. There is no
conveyance to hide and conceal it; and grace is hardly obtained to pardon it.

2 Promittit, he promises. And my tongue shall sing aloud of thy
righteousness.

1 Quod promittit, that he promises. 2 Quid* what.
1 Quod* that.

This may bear a double construction:

1 As a vow, Lingua mea, my tongue, etc. 2 As a declaration of the effect of
that deliverance desired.
1 Votum, a Vow. These be noble and holy, great and good thoughts. As Araunah
spoke like a King to David, when he offered him his Floor, Oxen, etc. So David
speaks like a King to God, when he promises to do somewhat for him.

All receive daily benefits of donation, of condonation: every one desires his
own turn served, but few think of returning to give thanks: as the tenth of
the Lepers. Many seek the face of God for such things as they want, spiritual
or temporal: few bethink, Ego autem quid Domino! What shall I render to the
Lord! David joyneth Petition and Promise with a conjunction copulative.
Liberame: and lingua mea: Deliver me: and my tongue, etc. They should not part:
Beneficium, Benefit, Officium, Duty. With us one good turn asks another; and
they speak to purpose, who when they request do also promise. And it is happy
for us, that we have to do with one that may be entreated to do us favors,
and to expect our retribution after.

Thankfulness is a great loser by our times.

1 It has got an ill name: for bribes and all gifts either to buy or to
corrupt justice, are called thankfulness. 2 It has not the liberty, it had;
it had wont to be free, now forced. 3 Only it has got place: for it had wont
to follow a benefit, now it commonly goes before it. Nothing loses us the
favor of God more then our barrenness: If like the earth we would bring
forth an harvest for the seed sowed in us: if like the Sea we did evaporate:
If like rivers we did return to our Sea, whence we came, we might have spem
augustiorem, a fuller hope, but commonly we are sepulchra beneficiorum, graves
of benefits.
2 These words may be understood only to declare the effect of Gods pardon,
for the joy of it will set him a singing: and the favor of it will set him a
work to magnify the righteousness of God.

It is David's own rule. O give thanks to the Lord, Let Psalm. 107. 1, 2.
the redeemed of the Lord say so. But indeed the Prophet here desires God to
set his instrument in tune: that he may sound his praise. For till God deliver
him from the foulness of sin, he is unclean, and cannot be admitted Psalm.
50. 17.
in chorum, into the number of singers. God will refuse him as before: What
have thou to do, to declare it? But if God be pleased to remove all his sins:
then he shall be a fit instrument to sound the praise of God. Therefore
Augustine, August.
Admonet, non ut deponat praedicationem, sed ut assumat poenitentiam and
obedientiam. It is not as if he ceased to praise God, but that he takes to
himself repentance and obedience. Ex bono thesauro bona. Good things from a
good treasury. God looked on Abel and his offering. So soon as sin is removed,
we are presently fit for praise. It is the general part of our service of
God, and it makes our prayers and praises miscarry, when we come to God charged
with sins, without repentance; wash you, make Esaias 1.
you clean, etc.

Then come and let us reason together.

2 Quid promittit. What he promises. Here observe:

1 What instrument he will use for Gods service, lingua, the tongue. 2 Lingua
mea, my tongue. 3 Cantabit, shall sing. The manner of his service. 4 Aloud: the
intention. 5 The argument of his song: justitiam, righteousness. 6 Tuam. Thine.
1 Lingua, the tongue.

This is tuba animae, the souls trumpet. The best member that we have for this
service. So our old English Church Psalms do read, I will sing and give
praise with the best Psalm. (...) 1.
member that I have. The K. B. reads, I will sing and give praise, even with
my glory. So Awake up my glory, awake Psalm (...). ^.
Psaltery. Calvin reads: Exurge lingua: arise o tongue. For that is the
glorious instrument of Gods praise. The tongue has an ill name in Scripture,
because it is the instrument of Gods dishonor and our neighbors great hurt
oftentimes.

The tongue of David had lasciviously courted Uriah's wife, and had spoken him
fair to his hurt. The tongue often blasphemeth God, the common crying sin of
the time, lying, swearing, flattering, slandering, false witness: multiloquium,
much-speaking, turpiloquium, filthy-speaking: cursing, boasting, etc. There are
so many sins of the tongue, that Saint James says; If any man offend not in
(...)* 2.
word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the wholebody. But if
any man seem to be religious, and bridleth (...)* (...).
not his tongue, this man's religion is vain. It is David's first note of the
tenants of Gods house aloft, He that speaks (...).
the truth in his heart, and backbiteth not with his tongue. And it is the
first rule for him that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see
good. Keep thy (...)*
tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. No lesson so hard to be
learned of us here, as the wise and ^^^creet government of the tongue. David
promised a singular care of this. I said, I will take heed to my ways, Psalm ^9
1.
that I sin not in my tongue. Socrates reports of one Pamb^ L^^ ^^ 1^.
an honest wel-meaning man, who came to his friend, desiring him to teach him
one of David's Psalms, he read to him this Verse. He answered: This one Verse
is enough: if I learn it well. Nineteen years after he said: In all that time
he had hardly learned that one Verse.

David is now in a good way to employ his tongue in the service of God. For
they are out, which say, with our Psalm 1^. 4.
tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? he that
distinguished man by this excellent gift from all other his creatures, meant it
not to him for a rod to scourge himself, for a Scorpion to sting his neighbor:
nor for man's own self punishment. There is better use to be made of it, as here.

2 Lingua mea, my tongue.

God cannot want praise and glory from his creatures: for Coeli e^arrant
gloriam Dei, the Heavens declare the glory of God, and one generation prayseth
him to another. But that is no thank to thee; Lingua mea, tua, sua, thy
tongue, mine, his. As David, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord.
So let every thing that has a tongue sing aloude, etc. Thou God of my
salvation, let it be lingua mea, my tongue that sings. To say the truth, why is
it lingua mea, my tongue, but to serve mine own turn in offices of piety and
charity? it has not a better employment then the praise of the Lord. When any
thing of ours does omit or slight duty to our maker, our interest in it
cease. For our bodies are temples of the Holy Ghost, and our tongue is the
Organ of the Church; he that made it tuned it to his praise. Christ cured the
dumb as well as the blind, deaf, and lame, etc.

3 Shall sing.

This is the voice of joy and gladness in the tabernacles of the righteous.
These carry forth their seed with tears: they sow in tears, their dwelling
is in convalle lae^rymarum, in the vale of tears. Though they sit by the
rivers of Babel: they never hang up their Harps: they can and do sing the song
of the Lord in a strange Land. For whatsoever their outward calamities are,
which often wash their faces with their tears, they have upright hearts to
God, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.

There is in every one of the Elect an outward man, which negotiateth in
outward things, and he has his hand full. There is also an inward man, and
he is willing, but weak. The calamities of life, the dishonours done to Gods
name and glory by others, the failings on our own part in duty, our fallings
from it, doall work our grief, and turn our organs into the voice of them that
weep. Yet in the midst of these sorrows, we may rejoice in the Lord, like
Music in the cabin, when the ship is in a storm. My song shall be always of
the loving kindness of the Lord.

Amongst all the favors of God none tastes stronger of his divine nature,
none happieth us more in the peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost,
then his pardon of our sin, and deliverance from it. Fills dimittuntur tibi
peccata tua, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee, answers David's suite, Sana
animam meam, heal my soul: for donation, the Lord does not magnify himself
so much in it, seeing he has power over all. But to pardon sins, which do so
violate his Majesty, and are so contrary to his holiness, and do so abuse his
bounty and free favor: this may make us sing.

I never read that any thing which God gave away grieved him; but the sins of
men grieve him at the heart, and make him repent his making of them. Therefore
no such provocation to sing, as deliverance from sin by pardon.

Songs were in fashion of old: the Church was full of Music, the old
Testament full of songs.

Some of our curious Zelotes cry it down in Churches: it did well when time was
^ but every particular person receiving Gods gracious pardon of his sin in the
spiritual comfort of his conscience shall do well to declare his thankful
recognition of it, and his singular delight in it, the cheerfullest way he can.
Is any merry? let him sing.

4 Alowd. This ^ for God, for himself, for the Church.

1 For God. That his honor may be proclaimed, therefore they borrowed the voice
of still and loud instruments. David: make the voice of his praise to be heard:
Dicit^ in gentibus, tell it among the nations. Sicut in C^lo, as in Heaven,
there the quire of the new Jerusalem cease not day and night to voice the
praises of God with cheerful intention.

2 For himself. Having received such a benefit, he cannot contain himself,
this new wine of spiritual joy which fills his vessel must have a vent.

All passions are loud. Anger chides loud: sorrow cries loud, fear shrieks
loud, and joy sings loud. So he expresses the vehemency of his affection:
for to whom much is forgiven, they love much.

3 For others. Iron whetteth iron, examples of (...) and devotion affect much,
and therefore solemn and public Assemblies do generally tender the best
service to G^^ ^^c^^^e (...) ^^^^oketh another.

^n^ (...) ^^ong the Prophets. A con^^ie^c^ ^^ce discharged from the burden
and annoyance of sin, cannot contain it self. O (...)* and I will will you,
(...).

5 Justitiam, Righteousness.

Here is a Quere: why (...)of the Quere.
righteousness of God: for righteousness is evere, and punishes according to
the rigor of the La^^.

1 We answer, that God has promised (...) pardon, Sol. 1.
and it is just with him to perform his promise. True repentance h^ (...) had
ve^^^e enough against ^^^e to remove it.

Forty days repentance in Niniveh did (...) from the sins of so^ty and many
more years of sin. These be the ^^gons of wine out of Christ's own Cellar, the
comfort that we have of Gods promise, and the effect that we feel of our true
and unfeined repentance.

2 We may disc^^ne by his former petition, Purgome Sol. 2.
with Bysop, that he had respect to the sacrifice of Christ, and the expiation
by his blood, and there he might challenge the righteousness of God: for it
is just, s^mel punire peccatum, once to punish sin: it smarted in Christ, etc.

3 The full solution is: by righteousness here is understood Sol. 3.
the whole comprehension of all the attributes of God, for so the word is used
often, (...). So it is used often, even to this purpose, and for thy
righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble. Christ lo calls him: O
righteous Father. The pardon of our sins sets us in a state of innocence,
which makes the righteousness of God our song.

6 Tuam, thine. We sing Gods righteousness, not our own. David had no
righteousness of his own worth a song: none of us have. Our righteousness
never came into fashion all the old testament through, the best of Gods Saints
have felt the want of it, and complained heavily of their poverty that way.

We are well apaid, that Christ is made to us of God, wisdom to believe and
know the truth, and righteousness to justify us in the sight of our God: and
sanctification to purge us in some measure from our unrighteousness: and
redemption to save us from the dominion of sin, and the curse of the Law. So
David, I will go forth in the strength of the Lord, and will make mention of
thy righteousness only. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, let them rejoice
whom he has delivered, whom he has called, whom he has justified. This
righteousness of God in Christ shall stop the mouth of accusation. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge? etc. It is God that justifies.

Mercy is that which provideth the remedy for our sins, but righteousness does
exact the debt to the utmost farthing: Christ is our ra^some, and then
righteousness gives us the reward of our faith, even the salvation of our
souls.

VERSE 15. O Lord, open thou my lips: and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
DAvid having made a large promise in the former Verse, Lingua mea cantabit, my
tongue shall sing, bethinketh himself of his natural impotencie to this
service: and he adds this petition for Gods help, and then renews his
former promise. In the former he professes that his spirit is willing: here he
confesses that his flesh is weak.

To make good his former promise, he craves aid of God here, and then renews
his promise: Et os meum annunciabit, etc. And my mouth shall show forth, etc.
This Versicle the Church has chosen to begin divine Service, and has placed
it in the next place after the Confession, and Absolution, as David did in this
Psalm: for when our sins are removed by our repentance and Gods pardon, then,
not till then we are fit for prayer and praise. The words contain,

1 A Prayer. 2 A promise.
1 The prayer. Domine labia mea, etc. Lord, open thou my lips. There is a
season for all things under the Sun, a time to open, and a time to shut our
lips. David says, I will Psalm. 9.
keep my mouth with a bridle: I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even
from good. Yet here he desires to have his lips opened, but he would have
them of Gods opening, Greg in Psalm.
not his own. Hactenus os meum ego aperui, and ide^ in vaniloquio peccatum
contraxi: nunc ui tu aperias defidero, quia nihil nisiquod tu sugges^erisloqui
concupisco. I have hither to opened my mouth, and therefore in vain-speaking I
have sinned: now I desire thee to open it, for I desire to speak nothing but
what thou shall put in my mouth.

There is a door of utterance which none but God does open, he keeps the key:
he opens, and no man shuts; he shuts, and no man opens.

Saint Paul desires the prayers of the Colossians for Coloss. 4. 3.
us, that God would open to us a door of utterance, to speak the mystery of
Christ. That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak. For we cannot open
this door our selves to speak as we ought to speak.

Saint Ambrose says, seeing God says to the wicked, Quare tu enarras, etc?
Claudit Deus os peccatoris. Why do thou preach, etc. he shuts the mouth of
the sinner. Cujus os Deus aperit, hunc peccati absolvit reatu. Whose mouth God
opens, he frees from the guilt of sin. Justos decet laudatio. Praise becomes
the upright. Non est speciosa (...). ^^* ^^.
laus in ore peccatoris. Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner. Weigh
thy words in a balance, and make a door and bar for thy mouth. The Lord God
has Isay 50. 4^
given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in
season.

If unseasonable speaking to men may make anger, we have more cause to beware
we speak not to God out of time. And if God open our lips, we are out of that
fear: Acts ^. 4.
for as he opens our mouths to speak, so his spirit gives utterance.

Saint Gregory is very full in this point, and says, illius os Deus aperit qui
attendit: his mouth he opens, who observes,

1 Quid. what. 2 Quando, when. 3 Ubi, where.

4 C^^ loquatur, to whom he speaks.

1 Quid, What, We must speak (...) in cord, Psalm. 15. ^.
the truth in our hearts* Our speech seasoned with s^lt. It must tend to
edi^ying. The heart of the wise guides his mouth wisely. 2 Quand^*, When. How
good is a word in due season! A word spoken in season is like apples of gold,
and Prove. 25. 11.
pictures of silver. 3 Ubi, Where. As there is a time, so there is a place to
open our lips. Christ was like a Lamb, non aperies es, thou shall not open thy
mouth, before Pilate. 4 Cus, to whom. David refrained even from good words,
whilst the ^icked ^^^ before him: Counsel and reproof are cast away upon
fools and mad men, and scorners.
Saint Gregory adds, there must be, 1 Gravit^^ in sensu, Weight in the sense.
2 Mo^^^ in verbis, Measure in the words. 3 Po^d^^ i^ sermon, Weight in the
words. Otherwise we open our own mouths, God opens them not* It is David's
prayer to God, Set a Psalm. 141. 3*
watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips.

Saint Augustine notes, that it is os^i^m ^ri^, ergo and aperiatur and
claudatur. Aperiatur a^ confessione^, ^ laudatur ad excusatione in peccati. The
door of the mouth; therefore let it be opened and shut: opened to confession,
shut to excusing of sin. And Lu^olphus faith, Aperiri debet Deo, clauci;
diabolo aperiri Deo in oratione, claudi in vanal^cutione. It must be opened to
God, and shut to the Devil; opened to God in prayer, shut to the Devil in
vain-speaking.

David for ten months together was mute, sin had shut up his mouth, for as
long as we live in impenitencie, a spirit of dumbnes possesses us, we cannot
neither pray or praise God. In this time his acultery did cry alowd: so did
Uriah^ drunkenness, so did his letters to Joab, to did the murder of Uriah.

Now he prays that the mouth of accusation may be stopped, and that God would
open his mouth, that he may speak for himself against these accusing sins, that
he may magnify the loving kindness of the Lord.

1 I conceive, that this petition for the opening of his lips, intends a
^itting and preparing of him for the praise of God.

We advise well before we put up a petition in the causes of our estate, or
good name to any superior authority. More ought we to God: he best knows
himself how to accommodate us to his service, and therefore, Domine aperias,
Lord, open thou.

The necessity of an holy preparation for any part of Gods Service, does
admonish and exact an holy advice with God before we go about it. Reading of
his word, meditation, invocation of his Name by prayer, that he would put our
hearts in tune, and set our song of his praises for us, that we may sing
Canticum Domini, the song of the Lord: and then it will be Canticum Domino, a
song to the Lord.

2 We may also conclude from hence, that though an inward worship of the heart
be much commended to us in Scripture, so Mary, My soul does magnify the Lord,
and my spirit rejoices ^n God my Savior, and David stirs up his soul to
this service; My soul praise thou the Lord, etc. Yet that men^all and animal
service is not all that God requires: he would have the service also of our
lips, and of our tongue, which is our glory. And to make the voice of Gods
praise to be heard, be says: I will praise God with my glory. Awake Lute and
Harp, awake my tongue of my glory. And he calls upon the Church, to praise
him in the sound of the trumpet, with timbrell and pipe, with stringed
instruments and organs. Upon the loud Cymbals, upon the high sounding Cymbals.
For as we have our private Chapels for our private duties; the secret of our
heart, and the closets of our conscience: So we have our part in Cho^^ in the
Congregation of Gods Saints: and there we must sing cheerfully and loud, that
God may be praised according to his excellent greatness: this is heaven upon
earth.

3. The bold sinners say: Our lips are our own, who is Psalm 12 41
Lord over us! These assume to themselves both power and skill to menage their
tongue, and acknowledge no Lord above them, to restrain or check them.

David in his Domine aperias, Lord, open thou, confesses a Lord above him. And
there is no such way to impudent freedom of speech, as a bold contempt of
authority. It is one of the provoking sins of our time, the overbold liberty of
speech and procacity of the pen, censuring and depraving Superiors,
scandalizing all that our dislike has set light.

The ground of this gall and wormwood in the tongues and pens of the time, is
a vain opinion that there is no Lord over us to stop our mouth, and to
tongue-tie us. Yet we know the lash of the Law smarteth upon some that shoot
for arrows bitter words, and some are made examples of terror to awe others.

But if men fear not those Lords and Laws which take this petulancy of the
tongue to talk, David confesses a Lord in my Text, to whom he commits the
opening of his mouth. Domine aperias, Lord, open thou.

Let us take heed how we rule our Lips, and how we open them before him: for
by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

And of every idle word that we speak, we shall give account to him in the day
of judgment.

Evil words corrupt good manners: and such as do evil are but hardened and
exasperate by Libels, and scandalous obloquies.

When Michael the Archangell disputed against the Jude v. 9.
Devil, about the body of Moses, he durst not bring against him a railing
accusation.

True and just quarrels by intemperancie of the tongue may turn into railing
accusation: and it is not reproof, but railing: so Aug. Quicquid lacerato
anim^ dixeris, male dixeris. Whatsoever thou speak with a distructed mind,
thou speak evil. Beloved, there is a Lord over us, who has dominion of all
our parts: if he open our eyes, we shall see clearly; if he open our ear^s, we
shall hear quickly: if he open our lips, we shall speak wisely and soberly.

This is our Masterpiece, to govern our tongue well; to open and shut the
door of our lips wisely and seasonably.

He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life: but he (...). 1^. ^.
that opens wide his lips, shall have destruction*

The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips: ^^ov ^2. 13, 14
but a man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth. Who so
keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps Pro^. ^^. 23.
his soul from troubles. We have no better way to decline the danger of the
tongue, to reap the good fruit of it, then

1 To pray, as here, Domine, labia, Lord, open thou my lips: or as David. Let
the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be acceptable, etc. Set a
watch, O Lord, before my mouth. 2 To resolve as David, to take heed, ne
peccemus lingua, lest we offend in our tongue. To keep our mouth bridled, not
to speak thine own words. Esaias 58. 1^.
3 The promise subjoyned, sets the tongue a work, and gives it matter of
long and speech. And my mouth shall show forth, etc.
Saint Gregory observes the sequence of the text: first, 1. Note.
he desires pardon, then he promises praise. Junuens, quod illi soli
possunt percipere dulcedinem laudis, qui peccatorum impetraverint remissionem.
Implying, that they alone can taste the sweetness of praise, who have obtained
remission of sins.

Another note he has, that the wicked do not praise 2. Note.
God ore suo, with their own mouth, for such as have enslaved themselves to the
Devil by sin, and as the Apostle says, have made their members servants of
sin, they have no mouths, nor tongues, nor eyes, nor hands of their own. We
cannot call it os nostrum our mouth, except we recover it from the service of
Satan. God is not praised, but dishonored in such mouths.

Saint Augustine observes a good argument for discourse 3. Note.
well chosen by David, to set his tongue a work; the praise of God: here a man
may begin, and never want matter to magnify the name of the Lord: for his name
only his excellent, and his praise is above heaven and earth.

Saint Augustine appl^eth this text to the present occasion, and names three
favors showed to David, all well deserving this praise.

1 Quia ut confiterer monitus sum. Because I am admonished to confess my sin.
2 Quia pecca^s non derelictus sum. Because sinning, I am not forsaken. 3 Quia
ut securus essem mundatus sum. Because I am cleansed, that I may be secure.
These are all worthy of our praise of God all our life's through.

4 Saint Augustine says of God. Nec melior est si laudaveris, 4. Note.
nec deterior si vituperaveris. He is neither better, if thou praise him, nor
worse if thou disprayse him. He is so sel^sufficient, as nothing can be added
to him to make him greater, nothing can be abated to make him less then he is.
Justos decet laudatio. Praise becomes the upright. it becomes us well, and it
exercises our love, and duty, and zeal, and inciteth others by our example,
to give the Lord the honor due to his name.

Origin and Ambrose both observe, that the only way to magnify and praise the
name of the Lord i^, to renew his image in us by repentance and good life in
holiness and righteousness before him: for so he may appear greater in us,
though he cannot be made greater by us, for he is Optimus Maximus, the Best
and the Greatest.

So Augustine, Quimaledicit domino, ipse minuitur, qui benedicit, ipse augetur.
He that speaks evil of the Lord, he himself is diminished; he that
blesses him, is himself increased. The more we praise him, the more we grow
from grace to grace. How can we employ our tongues better, then in speaking his
praise by whom we speak? The Creeple that was repaired by the ministry of Acts
3. 8.
Peter and John, leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into the
Temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God. Then are the favors of God
sown in good ground, when they come up again in praise and thanksgiving. This
is an heavenly negotiation, the importation of Gods mercies and blessings: the
exportation of Gods due praises, and our hearty thanks-givings.

Annunciabit, shall show forth, is another note: for so 5. Note. ^^^l. 40. 10.
David professes, I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart: I have
declared thy faithfulness, and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving
kindness, and thy truth from the great Congregation.

David was a public person, both sicut Rex, as a King, sicut Propheta, as a
Prophet, and he had given public offense to the Church by his sin: to the
State by defiling his Land with blood, and killing a faithful servant of
State: he had cause to declare the praise of God openly for his pardon and
reconciliation. The heart is the secret temple of Gods praise: but zeal and
devotion if it be sincere, cannot contain it self, So David, My heart was hot
within Psalm. 39. 3.
me; while I was musing the fire burned, then spoke I with my tongue.

A good man has bonum thesaurum cordis, a good treasure of his heart, and from
thence profert bona, he brings forth good things: he does not always hide
them there, that I may speak wisely, that I may speak heartily, that I may
speak seasonably, that I may speak openly of thy praise, Domine, labia mea
aperias, Lord, open thou my lips.

Laudemtuam, thy praise, not meam, mine. Cease from 6. Note.
man whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be praised? Great
persons are unhappy in that they have too many flatterers to praise them beyond
measure, which breeds that disease of greatness, which is called, tumor
cordis, the swelling of the heart. Let them be never so faulty, they shall be
praised whilst they live, for fear or flattery.

David teaches all the Church here, and very often in his Psalms where to
bestow praise, even upon God, where there can be no fear of over-doing. Yet we
justly praise David, the holy Ghost does so, saying, that he served the Lord,
and walked before him recto cord, with an upright heart: Save only herein,
We praise his open confession, his humiliation, his deprecation, his
supplication, his full repentance.

For our selves, if we look about us well, we shall see Applic.
great cause to praise the name of the Lord. But if we look well into our
selves, we shall discern a great unfitness and weakness in us to do it. If
thy soul would praise the Lord, forget not all his benefits. Recount with thy
self what he has done for the Church, for the State in which thou live, for
thy self in thy own person, in thy parents, in thy children, in thy soul, in
thy body, in temporal, in eternal favors, corporal and spiritual. When
thou have cast up the account of thy debts, and see how much praise is due to
God, how unable thou art to pay this debt, here is thy remedy. Domine, labia
nostra aperies, Lord, open thou my lips, etc.

This and in my text affords one note more, for this 7. Note.
fitting of us to Gods service, exacteth of us performance of duty. If God open
our lips, our mouths must show forth his praise. Else we shall prove ill
husbands of Gods spiritual talent.

There is no such spiritual thriving in the graces of God, as by a present
employing and using of them. Ape^ies, thou shall open, and annunciabit, and it
shall show forth. Lose no time: here is no full point at Domine, lab^a mea
aperies, Lord, open thou my lips: the promise treads on the heel of the
prayer, and the mouth must no sooner be opened, but the praise of God must be
presently declared. We are in haste with God when we want any thing, O Lord,
make no long tarrying. Do as thou would be done to: when the clock is wound
up, the wheels are presently in motion to make the clock strike.

We have every day fresh matter of praise to open our mouths. Let the hearts
therefore of them rejoice that fear the Lord: Rumpantur and ilia Codr^. With
envy thrice accursed, Let Codrus bowels burst.

VERSE 16. For thou desire no sacrifice; else would I give it: thou del
ghtest not in burnt Offering.
HEre is reason given why David craveth help of God, to enable him to his
praise: and he declares,

1 In the negative, what kind of Sacrifices, if they be not otherwise
accompanied, do not please God, Verse 16. 2 In the affirmative, with what kind
of Sacrifices God is pleased.
In the first he shows,

1 His own for wardnesse in that kind of service, I would give it thee.

2 Gods distaste,

1 Non desideras, thou requirest not* 2 Non delectaris, thou art not delighted
with.
1 Of David's forwardness for outward worship and service, by the ceremoni^^^
and legal oblations. Else I would give it thee: for the Law imposed a
necessity of such Sacrifices.

1 David was a King, and therefore able to perform these: he was not so
penurious to spare his purse, to deny God his due. His poorer subjects did not
think much of it, to perform the impositions of the Law.

2 David was a Prophet, and he stirred up others to this duty, and was willing
to perform this.

3 God to whom these oblations by the law were tendered, had required this kind
of service. I would give it thee, there is nothing that we have too good for
him: he opens his hand, and he fills ours. And we give him but of his own,
whatsoever we give to him: he lays claim to all our offerings as his own.
For every beast in Psalm 50. 10, ^1.
the for rest is mine: and the cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the
fowls of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine. So here
moves no thrift of parsimony in David, he has a full hand, he has a willing
heart to do God this service: and he holds God worthy of his offerings.

This meets with the hypocrisy of some Professors, who are free in the
calves of their lips; which one calls well labia vitulorum, the lips of
calves, but they love a cheap religion that saves their purses. They grudge to
honor God with their riches, and think much to be at any charge in his
service. They tender God, themselves and their hearts, but not their treasure
where their hearts are. Such were they whom Malachie reproves, whom God there
calls to account. Ye have snuffed at it, says Mal. 1. 13, 14.
the Lord of hosts, and ye have brought that which was torn, and the lame, and
the sick. That ye brought an offering, should I accept this of your hand, says
the Lord? But cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and
voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King,
says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen. They that
think either nothing at all, or the worst of all good enough for God, are
branded with the curse of God.

This Prophet reproves the peoples wretched sparing in two things, whereby the
honor of God was blemished, and God was robbed.

1 In sacrifices which were offered immediately to himself, which the Law
required.

2 In tithes which were ordained for the maintenance of Gods holy worship, in
the sustentation of the Priests who attended his altar and service.

In both these God was robbed and his service hindered by the covetous sparing,
and wretched miserableness of the people: which brought the curse of God upon
their persons and their goods: he bids them tender such Verse ^.
presents to their Governor, as they do offer unto him, and see whether he
will be pleased with them, or accept their persons.

God would not have his Priests serve, and sterve at his altar: You have robbed
me (says he) in tithes and offerings. Mal. 3. 8, 9.
Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me. He shows them a way of
his blessing, and their thrift. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse,
and prove me now (...) 10.
herewith, says the Lord of Hosts: If I will not open you now the windows of
Heaven, and power out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes: and he shall not
destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit
before the time in your field. You see there is nothing lost by that which is
bestowed toward the supportation of Gods worship: yea a blessing of plenty and
increase is promised, and the curse of the Lord is declined and put off by such
service. Therefore David pro^esse^h that he would willingly give sacrifice to
God, and (...) of that which the law requires of him toward his worship.

Else would I give it thee. And good reason it is, that we who ^^e daily at the
beautiful gate of his Temple begging alms of him, and receiving from his open
hand, who opens his hand, and fills with his plenty every living thing,
should not think much to return to him again such offerings of our goods as his
law requires.

For as exchange of gifts does much maintain friendship here between man and
man, which imports a communion of goods between friends: So no question but
it confirms the mutual love between God and his children, and faithful
people, when God opens the Heavens, and powers down blessings upon them, and
when they again in first fruits, tithes, and sacrifices, and oblations in
charitable alms, benevolences, gifts, and holy legacies, living and dying,
remember to honor God with their substance.

Let me commend this holy example of forward zeal in David to our imitation,
that we would be willing to give God any thing that we have, and think nothing
too much, too good for his service. For we were the children of death, and he
bought us with a price, the hardest bargain and dearest peniworth that was ever
bought, the hottest perquisite. For we were not redeemed with things
corruptible, as gold, and silver, but with the blood of his Son, as of a
Lamb without spot, the Son of his bosom in whom he was well pleased, he
spared not that Son, but gave him: gave him to death, the death of the
cross: gave him for us who were his enemies, who sought no salvation, and
asked none of him, but rather fled away in our first parents from his presence,
and hid our selves from him* he sought us out in the cool of the day, and
offered us his Son, the seed of the woman to bruise the head of the Serpent,
that we may say, His glory is great in our salvation. This Son has made so
easy and open a way to the throne of grace, and has opened the hand of the
Father so wide to us, that if we open our moutnes wide, he will fill them. And
whatsoever we ask the Father in his name, he will give it.

I never read that gifts given to God did make the giver poor: and the rich
young man in the Gospel might have taken Christ's word for it, that giving all
he had to the poor, and following him had made him no loser upon the account.

2 From this, utique dedissem, I would have given, if we observe what he had
given, which was sacrifice. This expresses the time in which David lived under
the law, wherein sacrifices were in season: and if we read the law concerning
them, and the practice of the Church in those times, We shall see how costly
Religion was under the law. That law was made and established by God in Moses
his time, and the precise manner of ordering that service punctually set down:
yet the law of sacrifices was as old as the World, the press injunction, and
express elucidation of the law was reserved to Moses his time. The moral Law
is an everlasting law, and the ten Commandments were a^ justly exacted from
the beginning as at any time since; yet the solemn public proclaiming of the
Law was on Mount Sinai, when God gave it to Moses in two tables of his own
writing. For then God began to establish a full and entire body of a Church in
Ecclesiastical, and Moral, and Civil government: that it might enter so into
Canaan.

For the antiquity of Sacrifices, we read first of them in the story of Cain
and Abel. For so soon as we read of their birth in the two first Verses of the
fourth Chapter, the third and fourth Verses report their Sacrifice, which does
not conclude, as some would have it, that this was a will worship of their own
devising, approved by God, and by him after made into a law. This were to make
man after his fall the author of this law. Rather we conceive that this was a
service commanded by God to Adam, and by him practiced and taught in his
Family, and so derived to aftertimes.

For we read of Noah when he came out of the Arc, that he builded an altar to
the Lord, and took of every clean Genesis 8. 20, 21.
beast, and of every clean foul, and offered burnt offerings on the altar: and
the Lord smelled a sweet savor, and he said in his heart, I will not again
curse the ground any more for man's sake. And long before Moses, Abraham being
Genesis 2^. 13.
commanded by God to offer his son* built an alta^, and God sparing his
son, he offered a Ram for a burnt offering in stead of his son.

Saint Augustine concludes from hence, that God commanded De Consensu Evang^^.
* 8.
this kind of service: for by the light of nature Socrates who was by the
Oracle pronounced the most wise o^ all men then living did affirm, Unumquemque
Deum sic coli oportere* quomodo se ipse colendum esse praeceperit. Every God is
so to be worshipped, as he himself has commanded. For Every man is br^tish by
his knowledge: Ier 51. 17. Romans 8. 8.
and the Apostle says, They that are in the flesh cannot please God. For it is
written, I will destroy the wisdom 1. Cor. 1. 19.
of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Flesh
and blood cannot reveal to us the mystery of Gods worship. Ye shall not do
every man whatsoever Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
is right in his own eyes; concerning the worship of God: but he directs it,
and so it must be.

The use and intention of Sacrifices declares this: for they were

1 Either for pacification of God provoked against us for sin. 2 Or for
testification of our faith in the Mossiah promised, of whom these Sacrifices
were a figure. 3 Or for expression of our thankful duty to God for his
favors. All which declare the Commandment of God, and not the wit, or will of
man to have devised and established this manner of service. But that which does
conclude the point against all contradiction is Gods declaring of himself by
his law after established to approve this service, and to command it to
posterity by so particular and precise injunction: for this clears it to us,
that he was not the approver only, out the author of this service.
And indeed seeing that there was no use of the bodies of beasts or fowls
before the flood for food, no flesh being then eaten, and the fruits of the
earth susteining the life of man. The use of them for sacrifice was convenient
for those times, and God was gracious in his accepting of them to that use,
though he needed them not.

It is no improbable opinion of them who think that after God had given his
judgment upon our first parents, and reveiled Christ to them, that they
offered to him a sacrifice of clean beasts in token of their thankfulness,
and in purpose, and with vow and promise of future obedience, and that God
clothed their nakedness with the skins of their sacrifices.

In the whole time before the flood, the Commandment was easy for sacrifices,
because there was little other use of the bodies of these creatures.

But when the law of Ceremonies was established in Moses his time; the cattle
of the people were a great part of their wealth, and then it grew very costly
to serve the Lord so.

There were sacrifices of course, as the Juge sacrificium, which spent two
Lambs a day constantly: one in the morning, the other in the evening.

There were burnt offerings which were all consumed by fire upon the Altar:
adreverentiam majestatis, in reverence of Gods majesty.

There were sin offerings for propitiation.

There were peace offerings for reconciliation and thanksgiving.

David in respect of his duty to God and offense committed against God, should
have offered all these sacrifices, and he protests a willingness to give
them. Else would I have given thee: Especially now at last having obtained
peace with God, he ought to have expressed his thankful duty to God in a
peace offering: which he was willing to have done.

Let me only observe in this passage, how costly the Religion of those times
was under the Law. The common charge of the Sanctuary: the maintenance of the
house of God, with all things necessary for Gods service. The maintenance of
the persons employed in the special ministry in holy things.

The cost of sacrifices of all sorts: the labor and cost of journey to the
solemn Feasts. Every private persons necessary sacrifices and oblations upon
particular occasions, amount to a very great charge, which yet was imposed by
God, and born by the people.

We live in times of much more outward ease of body, much less charge of the
purse.

We have houses of our God ready built to our hands, the supportation of them
is esteemed a burden. Our fathers set out competent maintenance for the
Ministry, our brethren have weighed it and found it too heavy for us. It is
the vicissitude of times, one age gathered stones together, another scattered
them. The Church was complained of to devour the Commonwealth. The
Commonwealth has made it self amends. We have no cause to complain of the
cost of our Religion. But such as are faithful in it are of David's mind: that
if God desired their goods, their labors, their blood, their lives in
sacrifice, they would give all, to him who is all in all. You see the aim of
my observation from David's words. If thou desiredst it, I would give it thee:
to persuade you to hold nothing you have too precious or dear for God.

Superstition might over-do in the menaging this principle; but true judgment,
and truth it self have established it. When the willing hearts of the people
brought Exodus 36. 6.
more then was needful to the Sanctuary of God, curious superstition could
have found vent for it all in costly adornments.

Moses in wisdom set a non plus to their offerings. There is a satis an enough
in them also.

And though our willing minds would tender the whole heap to the service of
God: our well guided wisdom will remember what is holy, and what is comely.

2 Gods distaste of this kind of service: non desideras, non delectaris, thou
desire not, thou art not delighted with.

You may demand how this may be. Seeing there is so Qu^^^
express Commandment in the Ceremonial Law for sacrifices?

Scriptures require wise Readers, else they may be perverted to the Readers
destruction as the Apostle says.

1 Then we answer, that all the negative propositions Sol. 1.
in Scripture, are not to be understood (...), in their full and peremptory
sense.

Some do include a comparative relation, and do intimate the manner and measure
of the thing denied. Let no man think that David does contradict the express
law of sacrifices, that were to walk contrary to God: yea David were contrary
to himself, if he should absolutely and in peremptory sense deny Gods requiring
or his performing sacrifices to God. For we all know that David lived in a time
wherein sacrifices were in season: and himself concludes this Psalm after this
manner, thus saying, Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of
righteousness, with burnt offering, and whole burnt offering, then shall they
offer bullocks upon thin^ altar. Therefore the words of my text are not true in
a peremptory, but a qualified sense. We must take heed that we do not set
Scripture against Scripture: there is no strife of tongus in Gods tabernacle.
When God says, I will have mercy, Math ^^.
and not sacrifice; he does not peremptorily deny sacrifice, but he shows
which of these two do best please him. Both: but rather mercy then sacrifice.
For sacrifices be oblations, alien^ carnis, of another flesh, but mercy is an
oblation nostri cordis, of our own heart. Therefore Christ says, Go and learn
what that means. For we must notpress the letter, but the meaning of the H.
Ghost in that saying. So in the words following, I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance: he came to call the righteous, such as
were already settled his, and to confirm them, and to make their calling more
effectual* but his chief business was to call sinners to conversion. So when
wisdom says, Receive my instruction, and not silver: he does (...) 8. 10.
not interdict the use and receipt of silver, but desires that we should rather
give our hearts and desires to affect wisdom then riches. The following words
clear it, and knowledge rather then choice gold: and so Christ says When Luke
1^ 12.
thou make a dinner or supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren,
neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors; but the poor, the maime^, the
lame, the blind.

Christ directly forbids not the invitation of our friends: we have many
examples in Scripture to the contrary: but he directs hospitality to the
exercise of mercy. So Saint Paul, He sent me not to baptize, but to preach 1.
Cor. 1. 17.
the Gospel. He does not directly deny his mission to that: for it is his
commission. Ite, and praedicate baptizantes, Go and preach baptizing; And he
did not transgress his instructions when he baptized Crispus and Gaius, and
the household of Stephanas. But the chief use of his ministry was preaching the
Gospel. These examples clear my text, that sacrifice and offerings by fire
were not peremptorily refused by God from David, but that these outward
services which might be performed by Hypocrites were no amends for David's great
and provoking sin; there was somewhat else rather to be done, which God would
accept better, which is set down in the next Verse. And we must apply our
selves to such srevice as will best please our God.

2 Let us consider David as a Prophet of the Lord, Sol. 2.
and this Psalm published for the perpetual use of the Church: and so it has
regard rather to that kind of service which should ever continue in the
Church, then to the Ceremonies of the present Law which in Christ should end.

And so we may say in peremptory sense, that God desired not, delighted not in
sacrifice. And referring these words to the time of the Gospel, they hold in
fullness of sense.

For this we have good warrant, sacrifice and offering Psalm. ^0. 6.
thou did not desire: burnt offering, and sin-offering have thou not
required. Then said I, Lo, I come, etc. This has prophetical reference to the
time of the Gospel, to the coming of Christ.

4 These sacrifices offered according to the Law were Heb. 10.
the ordinance of God, yet the author says: It is not possible that the blood
of Bulls and Goats should take away sins.

5 Wherefore when he comes into the world he says: Sacrifice, and offering
thou would not, but Corpus aptasti mihi: A body have thou fitted for me.

6 In burnt offerings and sacrifice for sin thou have had no pleasure.

Then said I, Lo, I come. Verse 9.


He takes away the first, that he may establish the second.

This clears the place well: for the words having reference to Christ, the
only true and sufficient sacrifice for sin, we may say with David: non
desideras, non delectaris: thou requirest not, thou art not delighted with. So
distingue tempora, distinguish the times, and all is well.

3 The service of God required both an outward and Sol. 3.
inward man, outward and inward acts of Religion, both imposed by the Law.

The outward service without the inward God desired not: The outward served
only to express the inward. When the outward goes alone, God goes beyond
non desidero, non delector: I desire not, I am not delighted, to an hatred and
abomination thereof: as to the Jews. To Esaias 1. 11.
what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me: I am full, etc. When
you come, Quis requisivit, Who has required 12.
them? Bring no more vain oblations, incense is abomination 13.
unto me. New Moons, Sabbaths, solemn assemblies I cannot away with it, it is
iniquity. My soul hates 14.
them, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. When you spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes: 15.
when you pray I will not hear.

They that come to reconcile themselves to God for sin, must not think that
God is taken with these outward things.

In the first sacrifices that we read of in the Bible, Cain was refused, Abel
was accepted. For God looked not, quid in manu: what in the hand, but qu^
cord, with what heart.

So David must be understood here: that God desired not sacrifices or burnt
offerings, he delighted not in them: true it is he commanded them, but not for
themselves, but as outward expressures of inward affection and zeal, and
devotion, faith and repentance. Therefore it is said, by faith Abel offered to
God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, Heb ^1. 4. (...)*
by which he obtained witness of God, that he was righteous. By which faith,
or by which sacrifice filled by faith he had that witness. David having so
heinously offended God as you have heard, declares, that outward service by
sacrifices, is not the way of reconciliation.

The Jews put too much confidence in this kind of worship, and we had need to
rectify Religion in this point. Outward duties are severely exacted by the
ordinance of God. But the desire of God is not to them, nor his delight in
them: his Commandment and his desire, his precept and his delight, are a full
sacrifice, outward and inward. When these are parted, it is not religion, but
formal and ceremonial profession only. The outward service of God is but the
body and carcass of the service: the inward is the soul; and as a body
without a soul is dead, so is the outward without the inward.

The Jews were very peccant in this kind, and placed their Religion much in
these outward Ceremonies. The Pharisees who were the Puritans of those times
did affect outward appearances, praying and giving alms, and fasting, and
disfiguring their faces to be seen of men: and all their austerity of life was
in sight, to breed opinion of holiness, which Christ detecteth, and detesteth.

This was the leaven of the Pharisees that sowred all the mass of their
Religion. And David would teach us here, that God never desired these outward
things alone, or for themselves, but for the better advancement of his service,
(...)
for the further and clearer remonstrance of our loving duty to him.

For what cares God for any thing of ours, who have all that we possess of
his free gift? And why may not an Hypocrite have as full an hand, though not as
free an heart to offer sacrifice to God, as the most holy and devout servant of
God has?

You see the lesson here read to you, that you must not think to please God
with outward things alone, For except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. Scribes and Pharisees were for external worship, the most precise
observers of the Law, that ever made profession of Religion. They did strive to
over-doe the law in many things therefore S. Paul calls them (...) the most
exquisite Sect of all. Acts 26. 5.


The Law says, six days shall thou labor, the seventh rest.

They divided their working days into three parts:

One for Prayer. A second, for reading the Law. The third for Work.
Two thirds they gave to God.

In oblations to God, and in tithes they exceeded the Law, and gave more then
was exacted. Two days in the week they fasted wholly from from all food: for
alms, they gave beyond their ability: generally, in outward things they spared
neither cost, no^ pains to seem religious. Yet Christ puts us to it, to
exceed not their outward show and performances, but their righteousness.

Here was hasty running, but it was out of the way: all this that they did
might be done without any true righteousness. It is but so much more pain
taken to go to hell.

There is somewhat else in it, that we must look to, and that is delivered by
David in the next Verse.

Here is D^^iss^m, I had given, put off with non desidera^, 2. Doctr.
non delectaris: thou desire not, thou art not delighted with: which teaches
us to apply our service to the desire of God, to his delight.

1 To the desire to that which he requires of us. 2 We must not stay there,
but affect to delight God; which makes this (...), a fuller sacrifice.
If God should say, he has no delight in us, where were we then?

As we must delight in the Lord, so we must compose our selves in such sort as
he may delight in us. The just are the jewels of the Lord, precious stones, and
they must be well set: that in the day when he makes up his jewels, we may be
called his. Then shall we be as the apple of his eye: as the signe^ on his
right hand.

If but two or three of these meet in the Name of God: God is in medio, in the
midst. If they offer him a sacrifice, he smells a sweet favor of rest.
These are Vines of his plantation: the wine which they yield does please God
and man.

Let his desire and delight be the rule of our service of him, that his delight
may be to be with the sons of men.

Observe how holily proud God was of Job, to Satan, Have thou not considered my
servant Job* and of David, (...) Davidem servum meum. I have ^ound David my
servant. And to Cornelius the Angel of the Lord said, Thy prayers, and thine
al^^s are come up for a (...) before ^cts 10 ^*
God. Come up before God: he takes notice of them, delights in them. Come up
for a memorial, God will not forget them to receive, to reward them.

Coming to Church for fashion without devotion: hearing without desire to
profit by it: entreating earnestly, and saying, good Master what shall I do,
etc. And when we know, and God has showed what is good, and what he
requires at our hands, and with what he is delighted; to go away sorrowing, as
the young rich man in the Gospel did, is the mark of an Hypocrite.

It is the Apostles argument of persuasion, To do good, and to distribute,
forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

Saint Paul speaking of their Fathers, says: They were all under the cloud,
they passed through the Sea, They were baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in
the Sea. They did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drank, etc. But with
many of them God was not well pleased. 1. Cor. 10. 1 etc.


What are all the benefits which we receive from God? or all the services that
we perform to God, if God be not pleased with them and us? his favors turn to
rods, and our services turn to injuries to him. O let us labor to please and
delight our God: for in his favor is life: If the light of his countenance
shine on us, we are well. Happy are we, that God will vouchsafe to receive us,
or to take delight in any thing that we say or think, or purpose, or desire, or
endeavor, or perform.

Such dead dogs as we are, so laden with iniquities, so weak by our
infirmities, so dark in our understandings, so cold in our zeal, and in all
goodthings so imperfect: only for our desire to give him delight acceptable to
him.

VERSE 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite
heart, o God, thou will not despise.
IN the affirmation, here David shows what kind of Sacrifices God would
rather have then burnt Offerings. This is such a sacrifice, as will never be
out of fashion: When he comes, of whom it is written in the volume of the
book, and when all the sacrifice^ of the Ceremoni^^ law cease* as shadows of
things to come, giving place to the true substance and body of them: then this
kind of sacrifice will last in season and fashion to the Worlds end. This is
the sacrifice which God accepte^^, in and for it self.

Such as the Apostle calls of* I beseeth you brethren by the (...) of God,
(...) your (...) a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your
reasonable service. Consider here,

1 The matter and substance of this Sacrifice, a broken spirit, a broken and
contrite heart. 2 The necessity of this sacrifice, enforced from hence: it is
the sacrifice of God. 3 The acceptance here of with God: O God, thou will not
despise.
1 Of the matter.

1 Here is a double subject.

1 The spirit. 2 The heart.
2 Here hear the work which must be wrought upon this subject.

1 Breaking: a broken spirit. 2 Con^^ition: a broken and contrite heart.
1 The Spirit.

1 By the spirit it sometimes is meant in Scripture, the holy Ghost in the
regenerate man, whereby he is sanctified in some measure.

This Spirit was in Christ, in plenitudine, in fullness: and herewith he
sanctified himself for our skes.

Of this Saint John speaks, when he says, God gives not the spirit by
measure unto him.

2 Sometimes the name of spirit, is given to the breath of man. So God breathed
into Adam the breath of life.

3 Sometime it is taken for the reasonable soul of man, which actuateth and
anima^eth the body: and man thereby is anima vivens, a living foul: spiritus
revertitur ad Deum qui dedit: The spirit returns to God that gave it.

4 Sometime ^^ is taken for the intellectual part of man, which we call the
mind. So the Apostle, For what ^^n 1. ^or. 2 11.
knows the things of man, save the spirit of ^^in that is ^n him?

So I take it here. This is the understanding and discu^s^ve power in man,
whereby he comprehends the knowledge of things.

This spirit of it self is not capable of divine knowledge: that is
supernatural: Animal is ho^^ non percipi^ qu^ sunt 1. Cor. 2. 1
Dei, n^que potest: the natural man understands no^ the things of God,
neither can ^e. For they are spiritually discerned, that ^^, by the help of a
noble^ and more excellent spirit then his is* even the Spirit of God.

These divine mysteries are foolishness to the spirit of man. For this spirit
judges by sense and natural reason, and is blind to behold things invisble,
which are the object of a regenerate man's spirit.

The eye of the natural spirit sees things present only: the eye of the
spirit regenerate, videt futura, sees things to come.

2* The heart*

The heart is the proper seat of our affections: there dwell our hope, and joy,
and love, and desire, our grief and fear, etc.

It is the saurus cordis: the treasure of the heart: if it do hold good things,
it is bonus the saurus, a good treasure: if it be the nest wherein Concupiscence
hatcheth he^ young, Then out of the heart come adulteries, murders, etc.

The name of heart is often in Scripture extended to both these: both
understanding and affections: here they be distinguished to make sure work
that both of them may be wrought upon in the oblation of this sacrifice. So the
name of spirit does include the whole inward man: yet it is here named single
in his more peculiar sense.

Examples we have of both.

1 Of the heart, God says:

The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Genesis 8. ^1.
Where he understands not only projections casting about: but desires
wishing, and purposes resolving this or tha^^ wherein the whole inward man is
contained.

2 For the spirit: so Malachie, Therefore take heed Chap. 2. ^. 15.
to your spirit: where the whole inward man is meant.

The subject then of this passion is the whole man: for the passions of the
spirit and heart do afflict the body, and make a sacrifice of that also to God.
So here is nothing of man left out: Sicut delictum, it ^ p^^iten^i^. As there
is a fault, so there must be repentance: where the fault stained, repentance
^^^st wash.

God loves not unrighteousness, neither shall any evil dwell with him, from
iniquit^^ cordis, the iniquity of the heart, to iniquit^^ calcan^i, the
iniquity of the heel.

2 How this subject must ^e wrought upon.

Here are two words used.

1 To the spirit, breaking. 2 To the heart, breaking and contrition.
1 Of breaking. The word signifies such a breaking as comes of smiting,
which lameth* and makes the body unable to perform the offices thereof. Or
such as threshing, which quasheth and breaks the straw.

2 Contrition. That is a word of more force, and betokens grinding.

These words are used to express the mortification of the inward man. David
spoke before of Gods breaking his bones, which is used to declare,

1 The inward vexation of the soul for sin, and fear of the indignation of
God due for it. 2 The outward afflictions which God does put upon sinners, to
bring them to repentance. Gods breaking of us thus is not enough to make us a
sacrifice to God. We must also thresh, and smite, and grind our own spirits
and hearts by a serious, and unfeined, and full repentance, and then our spirit
and our heart is a sacrifice acceptable to God.
1 For the breaking of the spirit, that is performed when we take away by
strong hand our intellectual powers, and faculties, from all impertinent and
vain speculations, and studies: when we bestow them all in the search of that
excellent knowledge of Christ crucified, who is our way to heaven. So the
Apostle esteemed to know nothing else.

1 Knowledge puffs up, it is windy and swelling in many. This bladder must be
pricked, and such as over-ween their knowledge, must be taught to know that they
yet know nothing, sicut op^rtet, as they ought.

Augustine amongst the heretics in his time notorious, Her. 6.
names the G^osti^i, who took upon them singular knowledge.

The wise son of I^k^h did not find this in himself, Prove. 30. ^^
for he said, Surely, I am more bru^ish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man. I neither (...) Verse ^.
wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. If we cannot be sensible of our
defect this way, but will needs over-esteeme our knowledge: the Prophet
thresheth and breaks such spirits with this universal elogie. Every I^r. 51.
17.
man is brutish by his knowledge: when God looked down from heaven; he found:
non est intelligent, there is none that understands.

Wisdom had much ado, she called for audience in the street, on house-tops,
much and loud, she cried for audience. Yet they that think they know some what
more then their neighbors, exalt themselves.

This spirit must be broken ^in us. The Devils in this kind of light, do
far out-^^^^e us: (...), knowing creatures: and live we never so long, we
shall never know so much as they do here. Socrates so famous in heathen story,
as Saint Augustine says, he was by the oracle declared the wisest of then
living: got his honorable estimation of wisdom from the sense and profession
of this, Hoc scio, quia nihil scio. I know this, that I know nothing. This
superba scientia, proud knowledge, is a disease in our spiritual, and
intellectual part which must be purged, and our spirits must be broken of it.
For it is a great hinderance to our endeavor, to purchase more, when we think
we have enough already.

2 Another disease of the spirit is, when we are overcurious in seeking to
know above that which is written, which the Apostle calls (...). For I say
through Romans 12 3.
the grace given unto me, to every one that is among you, not to think of
himself more highly, then he ought to think, but to think soberly, according
as God has dealt to every man the measure of says.

Quasi nos arceat. Apostolus a perscrutatione rerum magis subtilium quam
utilium. As if the Apostle restrained us from the search of things more subtle
then profitable. So Lyra^us: quia qui perscrutator est majestatis, opprimetur a
gloria, because the searcher out of majesty, shall be oppressed with glory.

This ambition of unrevealed knowledge has added so many fancies of men to the
written Word of God, and pieced out the story of the Bible with many unwritten
and legendary supplements, and traditions: and it has moved many unnecessary
cuestions in religion. This was the sin of Adam, and the fall of man in him,
the loss of Paradise then, and will be the loss of heaven for ever, if we
desire to be like God in omnisciency.

Some have intemperatly busied their brains to enquire what God did in that
immense eternity before the Creation of the World, before time was, and finding
no work for him have determined, that Mundus is aeternus, the World is
eternal: and so they evacuate the story of the Creation, and give Moses the
lie. Others dream of more Worlds, as those Lunaticks who think the Moon another
World, such as this in which we live, and our World to be a Moon to them, as
that is to us.

Many beyond sobriety are over-busie in searching after things to come, prying
into the secret closet of the Almighty, and desiring to be of his counsel for
future events. The Devil took a great advantage of this, and set up Oracles
for the nonce which abused many, and brought him much custom. From hence came
the auspicia q. av^spisia, Divinations by the flight of birds. Auguria ab avium
garritu, praedictions, from the chirping and chattring of birds. Aruspices:
such as divined by the inwards of beasts offered by their Priests upon their
altars, by the color of the entrails: the soundness of them, the motion, the
flame, the smoke of the burning. Of this ^ The King Ezech. 2^. ^^.
of Babel consulted with Idols, he looked upon the liver.

There were so many illusions in this kind to abuse the credulity, and to
satisfy the curiosity of men ambitious of knowledge beyond their bounds, as
that it grew into a kind of professed study and practice. The Augures in Rome
having privilege above all other Priests, for being convicted of never so
heinous a crime, they never lost their office for it. Necromancy, Geomancy,
Chiromancy, Hydromancy, Onomancy, grew hence. And all Magical conjurations
effected by compact and stipulation with the Devil. These were studies, and
books were written of them. Many that used curious arts brought Acts ^^. ^^.
their books. I^nius out of the Syriack reads, Multi magicam artem
exercentes: Many that were exercised in the Magic art. For the Ephesians were
very notorious this way* (...), grew into a Proverb, concerning the magical
inscriptions of amulets, (...), charms worn about the neck. Our times are not
free of this dotage, consulting wisemen and wise-women, for things lost, for
things to come: going to Ekro^, as if there were no God in Israel. The wise
son of Syrach advises us well. Seek not things that are too hard for thee,
neither search thou (...). 3. 21, 2^.
things that are above thy strength. But what is commanded thee, think thereon
with reverence, for it is not needful for thee to see the things that are in
secret. Be not curious in unnecessary matters, for more things are showed to
the^, (...) men understand. The spirit must be broken of these studies, they
are diabolical, and do but fasten us so much more to the familiarity of that
roaring lion, who plays the cunning Serpent with us to deceive.

3 Another disease of the spirit is vain knowledge, when we spend our time in a
frothy learning of hamane wit, neglecting the solid study of the way of our
salvation.

The reading of the books of time, the Chronicles and Annals of former ages:
the judicious survey of the Histories of our own or other Nations.

The industrious and ingenuous search into the excellent wisdom of the ancient
Poets and Mythologists is no loss of time, where a sober discretion has the
menage of them; and these studies as handmaids do look upon the hand of their
mistress: the doctrine of Godsfeare, and of the way of life. But when these take
up the whole man, and recreations do turn to our set work: this overdoing in
them; joined with neglect of that unum necessarium, one thing necessary, proves
a disease in the spirit, and benighteth us so that we shall hardly find the
way to Heaven.

Our times have exceeded the former ages in the innumerous spawn of idle
Pamphlets, and much of our little time is vainly cast away upon them. We must
redeem the time, a talent for which we shall be answerable to our God; and
break our spirits from these vanities also.

The way to reform this is to propound to our selves the knowledge of God, and
him whom God has sent Jesus Christ in chief, and to use all other studies and
arts, our own, and others wits to the advancing of this maine science.

And for that Iushious and sensual delight which looser and lighter studies do
bring, to fall out with it, and as the wiseman advises, to say to laughter,
thou art mad, and to pleasure, what meanest thou? There is a sweetness in the
Law of God, and in the holy study of his testimonies, which if our taste were
rectified as David's was, would surpass the relish of honey, and the honey comb.
But diseased tastes cannot relish this sweetness. When Saint Paul the chief
learned man of the thirteen Apostles did come to himself, he esteemed to know
nothing but Jesus 1. Cor. ^. 2. Philip. 3. 8.
Christ and him crucified. Again, I think all things but loss for the
excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, and dojudge them but dung,
that I might win Christ. It is no easy matter to break our spirits from these
plausible and delightful streins of wit: though we know, that it was the fall
and ruin of man: he sought many inventions. The taste that has bin long used
to the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, cannot like Manna the food of Angels a
long time.

But as Physicians for the body finding their intemperate patients disease, do
forbid them all kind of meats that fuel their disease, and limit them to a
diet, with which they thrive well and recover health; so must our souls for
cure of these diseases* be strongly kept from such studies and knowledge as do
but increase vanity, and restrained to the Manna of Gods holy Word, the most
wholesome bread, and sincere milk, and strong meat of the inward man. Custom
will wean us, and the sweet wholsomnesse of this better diet, and the
experienced vegetation and spiritual battening of the soul by it will in the
end approove vain studies to be no better then the husks of the swine in a
far Country. But the Word of God to be the bread of our own fathers house,
even the bread where with he feeds his own family sufficiently: the bread
that strengthens man's heart.

And when we have once fed of this heartily, that we desire some drink to it*
he will bring us to his house of C^^^. 2. 4. Prove. 9. 5.
wine: for whom he admits to eat of his bread, he inviteth also to drink of
the wine that he has mingled. Young stomachs affect raw and unripe fruits, and
do charge their bodies with diseases thereby. It is a breaking and extreme pain
to them to be restrained from them. So do young wits exercise themselves, and
consume time in the raw fruits of green heads, and feed the appetite of their
yet undiscerning spirit.

All this must be unlearnt and forgotten to make room for saving knowledge,
though we part with this, as Hannibal did from Italy, or Lots wife from
Sodom.

2 A broken heart.

The heart is the firstborn in us, Natures eldest son in the production of
man.

It is sovereign in the body, it rules and commands all the rest.

In the Creation of it, in Adam, it was Cormundum, cor perfectum: A clean
heart, a perfect heart: for all that he made was exceeding good. Since the
fall of man, it has gotten an ill name. The heart is deceitful above all
things, Jer. 17. 9.
and desperately wicked, who can know it? I the Lord search the heart. And you
shall see how he found it generally in men. God saw that the wickedness of man
was great in Genesis 6. 5.
the earth; and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart were only
evil continually: the margent of the Kings Bible renders the word in full
signification: Every desire and purpose of the heart.

1 God promises his people to take the stony heart out of E^^^b. 11. 19.
their flesh. Here i^ cor durum, an hard heart. Our hearts are hardened by the
custom of sin.

2 There is cor pravum, an evil heart. Take heed that Heb. ^. 1^.
there be not in any of you an evil heart of unbelief to depart away from the
living God. This is an heart infected with the corrupt love, either of falsehood
to forsake the truth of God, as Heretics; or of vanity to prefer the
pleasures of this life before the good old way. This is the sin of filii
sae^uli, the children of this world.

3 Cor perversum, a froward heart, he that has a froward Prove. 1^. 20.
heart, finds no good. This is a peevish and contradictory evil nature, that
cannot live under awe and rule, but resists the good motions of the Spirit.
You have always Acts 7. ^1.
resisted the Holy Ghost.

4 Cor laqu^us, the heart which is a snare, as the adulterous woman's, Solomon
says, Her heart is snares and nets. Eccles 7. 2^
Such hearts have all flatterers that gloze with us, and break our heads with
their oil. Such have all impostors and deceitful fair-spoken pretenders of
love, who secretly lie in wait to undermine us, and do us hurt. Such as face it
for show to be religious, and have seven abominations in their hearts.

5 There is also a plaguey heart. So Solomon, What 1. Rig 8. 38.
prayer or supplication shall be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel,
which shall know every man the plague of his own heart.

In the diseases of the body, the venom and malignity of the disease hastes
all it can to the heart to destroy that, and there it ends.

But in spiritual diseases, the heart hatcheth and spawneth sin, the issue of
concupisence, and seminateth it in the affections and desires. For out of the
heart come, adulteries, murders, etc. These be those painful swellings, and
ulcerous sores which sin breeds in the heart of man: a very plague in the
heart. Yet for all this, our God says to us, My son, give me thy heart:
being so bad as it is, it is not worth the giving or receiving. Therefore to
make it a sacrifice to God, we must break it. A broken and a contrite heart God
will not despise. We must thresh and break, and melt and grind our hearts to
make them a present for him. Two ways may the heart of man be thus broken.

1 By outward afflictions. 2 By inward compunction.
1 For outward afflictions. These are of great force to break an hard heart, to
melt an iron heart, to humble a proud heart, to tame a rebellious heart, to
recover a stray heart.

God often works upon the hearts of sinners this way. And David found this
physic very healthful to him. Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now
I keep thy Word. It was good for me, that I was afflicted. Saint Paul being to
part with his friends, and seeing them all tears, for the grief thereof, says,
What mean you to weep Acts 21. 13.
and to break my heart? The heart of man is easily broken with grief.

Elijah grew weary of his life. So did Jonah, both desire of God that they may
die. Job and Jeremy had their hearts so broken with sorrows that they abhorred
life, and never did any more earnestly desire to live, then they did to be cut
off from the land of the living. Many of these fits and sharp agonies come
upon us: we find the Roman stories full of examples of those whom the outward
crosses of life have so wearied, that they have preferred to die by their own
hand, rather then to live out the furious assault of temporal disgrace or
pain. We have losses in our goods, grief for our friends, heaviness for the
loss of children, or their unthriving courses in the world, manifold
sicknesses, molestation by suites, and such like grievances store.

God is pleased to use these as means to break our hearts, and they do work
with some: for in the day of their affliction they will seek God diligently.

And when the judgments of God are upon the earth, the inhabiters of the world
will learn righteousness.

But an heart thus broken only with outward tribulations, is not always a
sacrifice for sin. For murmurers, and malcontents, and envious persons,
because they cannot have their will, do not only sicken and disease all the
joys of life: but choke and strangle them, with immoderate vexation.

If hearts so broken were a sacrifice to God: Cain, and Lamech, and Esau, and
Ishmael, and Absolon, might plead for their acceptance with God: for in Cains
countenance, in Lamechs words, in Ishmaels looks, in Esaeus tears, In
Absolons flight, we may discern what hearts they had: no question, much
shaken, and broken with several vexations, because they could not have their
will.

2 Inward compunction.

St. Bernard puts us into the way of it.

1 Looking up unto God. 2 Looking down upon our selves.
1 Upon God if we look, we shall find*

1 What he has been, and is. 2 What he is, and shall be.
1 What he has been and is to us, 1 Factor a maker: for thy hands have made
me and fashioned me. He made us, not we our selves: we are wonderfully and
fearfully made.

Wonderfully, in respect of the privileges of man above all his other
creatures, and fearfully, in respect of the danger he was in, in case of
falling.

2 Benefactor: for notwithstanding our fall, to omit all other his favors,
Misit, dedit filium: non pepercit: he has sent he has give^ his Son, he has
not spared him, and by him he offers life and salvation. God is no debtor to
us, that he should have so immense a sum of favors to pay us.

Adam would have sought out him in the fresh of the morning, if it had been so.

Let us but cast up the account of the favors of God to us, that is enough to
break the heart, for full shame does not only put us out of countenance, but
out of heart also.

Ad omnia reus es, pla^ge per singula, thy guilt is universal, let thy sorrow
be universal. There is never a favor by us received from God, but it
deserves the thanks and obedience of our whole life.

Many sins are punished only with shame here, the law presumes that shame
will break the heart, and remove the offense. Quanam front attolle oculos ad
vultum patris t^^ boni, tam malus filius? With what f^ce do I so wicked a son
behold the countenance of so good a Father? Shame has this power of breaking
the heart, because in all ingenuous natures it is joined with grief, and grief
grindeth the heart to powder.

For how can we suffer it, to have our faces covered with confusion, and not
to have our souls rent and torn with sorrow, when we consider how
unthankfully we have requited God with evil for all the favors he has done
for us. When he pleads, What could I have done more for my Vineyard that I
have not done! and shall say, If this had been too little, I would have done
more: yet he looked for grapes, and lo, we have brought him forth wild grapes.

Can this do less then engrieve our souls, and charge them with heaviness,
even to the death? that for our corn and wine and oil, for the bread that
strengthens our hearts, for the oil that makes our countenance cheerful,
for the wine that comfort us, for rain and fruitful seasons, for peace and
prosperity; we should grieve the heart of God and pain him with our sins,
even to repentance that he has made us!

2 Consider what he is and shall be to us.

1 He is: the Lord Jehovah is his name, he protecteth us in our being, he
gives us laws to regulate our conversation: and he says to every one of us,
Hoc fac and vives. Do this, and live.

But we have set his laws light, and have cast his Commandments behind our
backs. We have hated to be reformed: God himself the Father of mercies, and God
of all consolation cannot find out a way for mercy. How shall I be merciful to
thee in this! God has risen early to send his prophets to us: and they have
stretched out their hands all the day long, in season, and out of season,
calling upon us to hear his words, for they are sweet.

The wise consideration and remembrance of this exceeding love and patience of
God in forbearing us, of his wisdom in guiding us, leading us like sheep by
the hand of Moses and Aaron, compared with our sinful aberrations, and wilful
oppositions to his Law may work upon us these two thoughts, which may break our
hearts.

1 Quid fe^i? What have I done? It was Jeremies complaint, that there was none
in the people, that so bethought himself and cried, Quid feci? What have I
done? Who audited his life, and called himself to account for his sins; but
every man ran on in his sin, as an horse rusheth into the battle. But
even-reckonings do make long friends.

If we see upon the account that we have not to pay, at least with the servant
in the Parable, let us ask mercy and crave a further day, and promise payment,
that he may forgive us all the debt.

2 With the auditors of Peter, Viri fratres, quid faciemus? Men and brethren,
what shall we do? When our hearts fail us, and we are at our wits end, and all
our cunning is gone, in this storm: Then Samuel the Lords Prophet will say; God
forbid, that I should ^inne against the 1. Sam. 12. 2^.
Lord, and cease praying for you: but I will teach you the good, and the right
way.

Yea, God himself shall be thy teacher: He has showed Mi^^^. 6. 8.
thee, o man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee.

May not our hearts melt within us, considering the time of light in which we
have lived, that our ways should yet be taxed with darkness? That ignorance
should now be charged upon us, after wisdom has uttered her voice so long in
our streets, and highways, and on our house-tops? Insomuch as God cries unto
us in complaint and grief. Why will you perish, o house of Israel?

2 Consider God as he shall be the judge of all our ways, of all our words,
of all our thoughts. Shall I not avenge me of such a Nation as this? We shall
all appear before the judgment seat of God: and every man shall give account
to God of himself. What heart thinks of this day, of this appearance, of
this account, of this judgment, but it breaks like a potters vessel, it
melts like the fat of Lambs?

For when God arises and awaketh as one out of sleep, as Noah awaked, and
knows what his sons have done to him: Will not he rain snares to take us,
that we may not escape his hail*stones, and coals of fire? The God whom we
provoke is a jealous and a terrible God: it is a fearful thing to fall into
his angry hands: when he arises to judge, the righteous shall hardly be saved.
As Saint Bernard says, Instaurat adversumme testes. He appoints witnesses
against me. These are of two sorts, it is a breaking of our hearts to hear
either of them give in evidence.

1 His benefits. Victum, vestitum, usum temporis hujus and ante omnia sanguinem
filii ejus. His food, apparel, the use of his time; above all, the blood of
his Son. Would these several seeds of grace yield him no harvest?

2 Our sins, our folly trespassing his wisdom: our vanity offending his
holiness, our falsehood his truth, our unrighteousness his justice, our
presumption his mercy, and our rebellion his power.

Saint Bernard in meditation of the account for this is all broken, heart and
all. Paveo gehennam, paveo judicis vultum ipsis angelicis potestatibus
tremendum, horreo verm^m rodentem, ignem torrentem, fumum, sulphur, tenebras
exteriores. Quis dabit capiti meo aquam, and oculis meis fontem la^hrymarum, ut
praeveniam fletibus meis, fletum and stridorem dentium, etc. Heu me, matter mea,
ut quid genuisti me filium doloris, amaritudinis, indignationis and plorationis
aeternae: natum in combustionem, and cibum ignis. I fear hell, I fear the
countenance of the judge, to be feared by angelical powers, I fear the worm
gnawing, the fire broyling, the smoke, the brimstone, the outer darkness. Who
will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my eyes, that I may
prevent by my weeping, the weeping and gnashing of teeth? O my mother, why have
thou begotten me, a son of sorrow, of bitterness, of wrath, of eternal
wayling, born to be burnt, and to be meat for the fire?

We are here convicted in two trials, and receive sentence of condemnation in
both.

1 In the judgment of the Law which we have broken. 2 Of our conscience which
pronounces us children of darkness, and heirs of condemnation. When the sad
consideration of these things has broken our hearts and ground them to dust,
then the nest of sin will be destroyed, and concupiscence shall not have
where to lay her young.
Observe the difference of true Religion from false. The gods of the Heathen
do never exact such breaking of hearts of their worshippers. Let them have
your eye, your tongue, your knee, your gifts, and keep your hearts to your
selves. For they know not whether you give them hearts or no. But our God will
have our hearts, and he will have them thus broken! and there is no delaying
or dallying with him* he searches us to the bottom, and tries hearts and
reins. We cannot deceive him with unreall semblances.

The way to heaven is not so easy as most men deem it: We must suffer with
Christ, if we will reign with him, his soul was heavy, and he was broken for
our sins, when the (...) of our peace lay upon him. And we must rent our hear^^
(...) not our garments, when we turn to the Lord* if we will have mercy and
forgiveness. There is nothing that flattereth sin more in us then an opinion
of the easiness of repentance.

But if we observe David in this Psalm, we shall discern that there is no such
tribulation as true repentance, it is a washing thoroughly, a rubbing and
scowring with hysop: it will cost hot and scalding water to purge the stains
and blemishes of our life. It will cost the breaking of our bones: strong cries
and supplications, that we may hear of joy and gladness.

It will cost us a breaking first, then a new making of our hearts to fill
them, a present for him who says: My son, give me thy heart. And now what
shall I say, and what shall I do unto thee, thou preserver of men? My heart is
not worth the giving to thee: If we should search Jerusalem with candles,
should we find such a heart! O that Deuteronomy. ^. 29.
there were such a heart (says our God) in them, that they would fear me and
keep my Commandments always! that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever. Our broken heart is such an heart: when our stubborn will
is corrected and made pliant, and obedient to the will of God, when our love is
taken away from the world and the things thereof, and fixed on the Lord. When
our vast desires are limited to the seeking of the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof.

When our flattering hopes are taken off from things temporal which profit
not, and reach out to the promises of God which concern better things. When our
^uscious delights are no longer grazed on the green pastures of vain pleasure
which saginate them to slaughter: but our delight is in the law of God, and in
that law we do exercise our selves day and night* When our strong endeavors and
labors are not for bread that perishes: but for that which feeds to
everlasting life. When our high flowne ambition cease to affect the false and
unconstant honors of the world, and reaches forth an hand to the
neverwithering crown of glory. When our fear is not of them that can kill the
body, and there an end, but of him who can deliver soul and body to death
eternal. When our grief is not for the punishments we suffer, but for the
sins that deserve them. These be broken and contrite hearts.

You see to what all that I have said drives: even to stir up my self and
you to a true repentance: which the Prophet calls, the breaking up of the
fallow ground of our hearts. Why should our hearts lie fallow and receive no
seed, and bring forth nothing but weeds? It asks culture, digging and
ploughing to make it capable of good seed.

No man casts away seed upon fallow ground. If we would bring forth fruit to
God, we must suffer the plow, the renting and tearing of the share: this is
repentance.

John began his preaching at repentance: So did Christ. And he sent forth his
Disciples, admonishing men every where to repent. If destruction were within
forty days of us: repentance would stand in the gap and keep it out. If the
Decree were ready for birth, repentance would make an aborcement. If we be
nailed to the cross of shame and pain, whereon we suffer justly: repentance
will open Paradise to us. If our sins were grained in crimson or scarlet,
repentance would wash us whiter then snow. If our iniquities had hid the face
of God from us: repentance would uneclipse it, and our eyes should see our
salvation. Our sins break the hearts of others. David weepeth for
transgressors, here is sanguis vulnerati cordis, the blood of a wounded heart.
O weep for your selves and your children!

2 Sacrifices of God. This title given to these Sacrifices called Sacrificia
Dei, the Sacrifices of God, does show 1 The necessity 2 The excellency
of them.

1 The necessity.

No Nation was ever so irreligious, but it acknowledged and worshipped some
God. Nemo simpliciter atheos. No man is simply an Atheist. And they thought him
that they worshipped worthy of some oblations and gifts. It is one of the
honors that inferiors do to their superiors, to present them with gifts.

It is recorded of Israel, that when God had set Saul over them for their King,
that the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And they despised
him, and 1. Sam. 10. 27.
brought him no presents. They are called men of Belial, i. sine jugo, without
a yoke.

But of Moab it is said, when David had subdued them 2 Samuel 8. 2*
and they came under his yoke: The Moabites became David's servants, an^ brought
gifts. In the short story of the old World little is recorded of the acts of
those persons who lived then.

Yet this is of the two first brethren, before any Law expressed for it. In
process of time it came to pass, that Gen 4. 3, 4.
Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering to the Lord. And Abel also
brought of the first-lings of his flock, and of the fat thereof.

No question instructed by Adam, and by him exampled to it, and seasoned with
that axiom of nature, that God must have gifts from us.

Aristotle that great Naturalist does maintain, that gifts are of good use for
conservation of friendship. Every good and perfect gift comes to us from God.
Thankful gifts returned from us to him, conserve his friendship.

The Athenians, who worshipped an unknown God, Acts 17. 23.
yet had an altar in the street, for oblations and sacrifices to be offered to
him.

Not David only says, Quid retribuam Domino* What shall I render unto the
Lord? But the people who had perverted their ways by many revolts from God, do
bethink themselves: Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, Micah 6. 6* 7.
and bow my self before the high God? Here is not care taken how to shift the
charge, and to do it as cheap as may be. Shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
Here are gratulatory, and propitiatory, and expiatory sacrifices studied to
remunerate and to reconcile God.

It is true that God has no need of us, or our gifts. If Psalm. 50. 12.
he were hungry, he would not make his moan to us. Yet these tenders of our
thankful duty to him do acknowledge our love and humble subjection to his
government, and confess him Lord of all that we possess, and stoop all that
we have to his power and will.

How glad are we when our Prince will receive graciously any such present as
we are able to bring him? More should it concern us in duty to present our God
with our gifts, and more cause have we of joy, if he do accept our persons in
them.

And seeing we cannot add any thing to him by any present that we can tender
to him, for our well-doing extends not to him, yet we may at second hand do
him honor in his house by adorning that: in his Saints, by feeding their
hunger, clothing their nakedness, healing their sickness. And with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

Now that we have seen in David's overture what is the most acceptable tender
we can make to God, and that a broken spirit and a contrite heart are called
the sacrifices of God: We behold the absolute necessity of these Sacrifices.
For God must have his due. And they be no better then sons of Belial, that
deny him his due herein. If we fall short herein, God will lay Felony to our
charge, You have robbed me. Will a man rob God? Mal. 3. 8.
but ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and offerings. Ye are
cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. God
requires of you broken spirits, and contrite hearts, and you withold them
from him. You will not endure the smart and pain of contrition. The loss of
your vain fancies and imaginations. The crossing of your sensual and carnal
delights and desires: the disquieting of the body of sin: your separation
from the World. The mortification of your earthly me^hers, the crucifying of
your old man. The bringing of your body into subjection. Caro and sanguis,
flesh and blood cry: Durus est hic sermo. It is an hard saying. And when God
demands all we have of us, as Benhadad of Aram did of Ahab King of Israel,
we put him off with this answer, This thing I may not do. ^. Reg. 20. 9.


But remember the necessity of this Sacrifice of a broken spirit and a contrite
heart: For these are Sacrifices to God, such as God exacteth of all, and
without which there is no appearing in his presence. Let no man appear before
me empty, is his Law: and we have no fullness but in this Sacrifice.

How unkindly do we take it at the hands of God when we cry unto him, and he
hears us not, at least as one that did not vouchsafe us the hearing, he does
not grant our requests? Yet he may say of every one of us, of some twenty, of
some forty, of others sixty years long and more have I been grieved with this
generation. That is the shame, and it threatens to be the sorrow of our
unthankful Land. God has not his due amongst us, though he give us rain and
fruitful seasons, Corn and Wine and Oil, all the necessaries of life. We
give him not the sacrifices of our broken spirits, and contrite hearts, which
are the sacrifices of God.

We come off liberally to men to purchase their favor and mediation in our
suits, and bribes given to men have robbed God of the Sacrifices due to him.
Let us lay it to heart.

I read of the Sybarites, a people effeminate and vain in their sensual
delights, that they had a prophecy, that their City should subsist till their
gods were in less estimation then men. It fell out that a slave obtaining no
mercy at the hands of his Master for the gods take, fled to the monument of his
Masters Ancestors, and for their sakes implored, and obtained pardon. When
Amyris a Philosopher living there heard of this, that men were more regarded
then their gods, he looked for a ruin to come upon the City, and fled away
from it. Shortly after, the Crotonians their adversaries subdued them and
fulfilled that Prophecy. We may take home this example to our times, and apply
it to those with whom God is neglected, and men regarded more then God. Their
voluptuous and Sybariticall life has opened a way to the indignation of God.

And they have no way to help it, but with a full Sacrifice of broken spirits
and contrite hearts. We need not with the fearful Philosopher quit our
Country, and forsake our habitations: let us remove our crying sins, by which
God is dishonored, and there will be peace within our walls, and prosperity
within our Palaces. And the eyes of them that desire to see us in the dust
shall fail, and the ruins of our hearts shall repair the ruins of our
temporal Felicity.

2 This title expresses the excellency of these Sacrifices, they be Sacrifices
of God: For there be Sacrificia stultorum, the Sacrifices of Fools. Be more
near to hear, then to offer the Sacrifice of fools: they know not that they
do evil.

Cains was not the Sacrifice of God, for his works were evil. The foolish
Israelites did offer their sons and Psalm. 1^6. ^^
daughters unto Devils.

Many of the Heathen were so transported with superstition and reverence of
their false gods, that they spared not to offer up their children in burnt
Sacrifices to them.

They have burned their sons and daughters with fire Deuteronomy. 1^. 31.
to their gods. Israel has warning, not to do so. Yet they took no warning:
For not onel^ the King of Moab did this: For he offered his son the heir of
his kingdom, for 2. Reg. 3. 27. 2. Reg. 16. 3. 2. Reg. 17. 17.
a burnt-offering upon the wall: But Ahaz King of Judah made his son to pass
through the fire. And we finds it one of the provocations, which incensed the
Lord against Israel* to give them into deportation.

Some think, that this evil custom grew out of the Commandment given to
Abraham, to offer his Son. From whence was concluded that the greatest
expressure of obedience put upon him, did teach it the exaltation and fullness
of zeal in them that could find in their hearts to offer up their beloved
children in sacrifice.

Therefore in the consultation before urged in Micah, for the means of
reconciliation to God this was one: Shall I give the fruit of my body, for the
sin of my soul? But Abraham did not kill his son, he would have done it by
virtue of Gods special Commandment, and God approved his willing obedience,
but held his hand from the act. For he will have mercy, and not sacrifice. I
den^ not but there is a strong demonstration of servent zeal in those that can
afford to God such Sacrifices. But that which he requires is more excellent,
and touches us much more near the quick, as S. Austine, In to habes quod
occidas, noli extra thura qu^rere. Thou have what thou may kill, in thy
self: seek not Frankincen^e without thy self.

This breaking of the heart and contrition of the spirit, is a sacrifice for
God.

Have we not heard of some whom the conscience of sin has so afflicted, as
they have not thought themselves worthy of any more life, but have died by
their own hand?

These courses are desperate and damnable, that is not it which God requires
of them: he does not desire our bodies, a dead sacrifice. I beseech you
brethren, that you give up your bodies a living Sacrifice. This is his will, Ut
per^ant crimina, non homines: that the faults perish, not the men. We shall
find that a work of more sorrow and af-fliction then to kill the body. We have
full examples in the books of time, of many that have made nothing of it to die
by their own hand.

But it is a Sacrifice only for God to destroy the body of sin in our selves,
and to preserve life for Gods better service. For our sins be deerer to us
then our children, then our life, then our good name, which should be valued
more then life: then our precious souls. Does not the drunkard prefer his
drunkenness before his health, who knows that drunkenness destroys
health? Does not the covetous man love his wedge, and heap more then Heaven?

Does not the Wanton undo his body, his posterity, his very soul, for the
fulfilling of his lust? Do not all sinners ^ell Heaven and eternal life for
the feeding, and fewelling of their darling sins? Of all the lessons that we
are taught in the house of God, none is so hard to learn, none so uneasy to
practice as the doctrine of Repentance. Men are either transported with
gluttony and drunkenness, and all they can get goes that way, their belly is
their God, and they make all these means Sacrifices to that devouring Idol.

If they feed the hungry and quench the thirst of their brethren, their meats
and drinks are sacrifices to God. Especially when we deny them to our selves
to relieve such, or we are transported with pride, and our back is our god, and
Fashion is our Idol, and we consume all in vain adornings of our houses of
clay, hanging them with the costly garish trappings of vanity. If we give one
of our co^^^ to cover the nakedness of our brethren, and spare our wool to
keep them warm, that their souls may bless us for it; this garment so bestowed
is a sacrifice to God.

Or we are transported with ambition, and all our study is how to rise higher,
our cares and desires, and our wealth are all sacrifices to that Idol of
Ambition: but if we raise the poor out of the dust, and take him up from the
ground, it is sacrificium Deo, a sacrifice to God.

Was Saul's a sacrifice to God, when against Gods Commandment 1. Sam. 15. 21.
he spared the best of the spoil of Amalek, to offer it to God? Is not
obedience better then sacrifice? Does the Church of Rome offer God a sacrifice,
when she presents the Shrines of the dead, and the Images of our Lady, and
the Saints with rich gifts? They did so who ^er. 18.
kneaded their dough, and made cakes to offer them to the Queen of Heaven, and
powered out drink offerings to other gods.

Be there not many that sacrifice to their not, and burn Heb. 1. 16.
incense to their drag, because by them their portion is fat, and their ^e^^
plenteous? These make themselves their own Idols, and kiss their own hands,
and thank their own wits for all the good that comes to them, they never
look up so high as God, to give him thanks for any thing.

But when all is done, this only is a sacrifice to God; when we break our
hearts and spirits, and grind them with sincere contrition for sin, destroying
the nest wherein lust teemeth her brood of iniquity. This puts away the
leaven which sowreth all our actions and devotions, and turns our very
prayers into sin. The excellency of this sacrifice will more clearly appear in
the following portion of my text.

These brokenhearted persons are such as God delights Isa 57. 15.
to dwell with, that he may revive the spirit of contrite ones. To such only
is the Gospel sent: He has sent me to bind Is^ ^^. 1.
up the brokenhearted.

These be mourners, they not only bewail their own sins, but their eyes do
run rivers of waters for those that ^^ep not the Law. They are grieved for
transgressors. One of these is health to a City, all fare the better for him,
Lo^s righteous* soul was vexed with the ungodliness of Sodom. God warned him
out: his Angel pulled him out, and he desiring a place to retire to, the
Angel hastened him thither, saying, Haste thee, escape thither, for I Ge^. 19.
^2. E^^b. 9. 4.
cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. These mourners are privileged
from the fury of Gods destroying Angel, his mark is upon them: they must be
spared in the day of Gods visitation. Come not near any man upon whom is the
mark.

They have eyes pickled in their tears: they have voices hoarse with crying
upon God for mercy: they have souls cloven to the pavement: they have souls
heavy unto death: their countenance is cast down. Their Harps are turned into
mourning, and their organs into the voice of them that weep. Their whole bodies
and minds and souls are living sacrifices, holy unto God, and therefore
acceptable: for so it follows, God will not despise them.

Here arises a Quaere.

Now we have seen the excellency and necessity of these sacrifices: What
hinders, that we do not offer them up to God continually?

We do bear about us a body of sin, and in it these hindrances Sol.
of this excellent and holy service.

1 An over-bold presumption of the favor and remissness of God in putting us
to this pain. 2 An over-delight in our works of darkness, and the forbidden
pleasures of life. 3 A natural slothfulness in doing such things as carry
with them painfulnesse in the doing of them. 4 A natural tenderness of our
selves whereby we do favor our own flesh, and cannot put it to grief. 5 The
cares of life.
I Presumption on the favor of God to us.

We think the word more severe, and the killing letter of it more cutting then
it need to be, and the minister of this word more harsh then is cause. We
confess, that for terror these things are set down, and the Ministers must
threaten us with heavy judgment, if our hearts be not broken.

But it is God who is veiled in the parable of that Master, to whom his servant
deep in his debt came and besought him for favor: and he forgave him all the
debt. So we confess, that this sacrifice of broken hearts is a due debt: but
our Master is so gracious and pitiful to forgive it all.

There be many fair spoken texts that seem to nourish this presumption in us.
As a father has compassion of his children, so has the Lord compassion: but
it is on them that fear him, not on them that presume on him. And the parable
of that father of the prodigal, who did not so much as chide his unthrifty
son, but met him afar off, fell on his neck, welcomed him with a kiss, and
feasted, and clothed him, does express a great tenderness. But let no man
presume upon that, for that son came home with a broken heart, Father I have
sinned against heaven and against thee. Non sumdignus vocari, and fac me unum
ex mercenariis tuis. I am not worthy to be called: and make me one of thy hired
servants. His father was sensible of his contrition, he was lost by his sin,
and found in his repentance: he was dead by the wound of his own conscience,
and made alive by his fathers favorable pardon, receiving him again to his
grace. And the servant to whom his master forgave all his debt, was put to his
miserere, have mercy: his master saw his heart broken with the grief of his
debt, and heard his willing protestation to pay all, and received his humble
supplication for mercy. God is a loving Father, but not indulgent; he loves
not so, but that he chasteneth and scourges every son whom he receives:
for ^ods are for the backs of fools. Judgment begins at the house of God,
and the righteous are hardly saved.

Saint Peter would put any man out of heart to presume too much upon the favor
of God: for by three great examples he declares the severe justice of God
against sin.

For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment: And
spared not the old world, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly,
^urning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an
overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly:
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve
the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. 2. Peter 2. 4.

Presumption does make an Idol of God; for it advances the mercy of God
against his holiness which hates sin; against his truth which threatens
sin; against his justice which punishes sin. Presumption crucifieth again
the Lord Jesus, and lays on more stripes upon him. Presumption resists,
grieveth, quenches the holy Ghost, by whom we are sealed to the day of
Redemption: and so boldly trespasseth the whole Trinity.

I need not urge any other evidence against presumption on the favor of God,
then his severity against his own Son, Misit, dedit, non pepercit, non fuit
dolor sicut. He sent, he gave, he spared him not, there was no sorrow like unto
his.

And was this to quite us from all passion? No: if we suffer with him, we
shall also reign with him: he did not drink of a sponge of vinegar and gall.
Transeat calix. Let this cup pass from me. He began the health of his Spouse
the Church: all the faithful must do him right, they owe him a pledge. Some
are put to it to suffer for him, none are exempt from suffering with him. This
is the least and easiest plunge we can be put to, to break our hearts with
contrition for our own sins o mihi tum quam molliter ossa quiescent! o then! my
bones shall take their sweet repose.

When I can tender to my God a broken heart; no laceration, no dissipation of
it can so unfashion it, but that he can put it together again; like the dry
bones in Ezech. Vision, and say unto it, live. In our mortification it dies a
natural heart, in our first resurrection, it rises again a spiritual heart.

I conclude with David's suite, O keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, that
they have no dominion over me: so shall I be innocent from the great offense.

2 A second impediment to the sacrifice of a broken heart is an over-delight
that we take in the vain pleasures of life. God was pleased to make a singular
trial of two men in two contrary ways, for example of others.

1 He made trial of his servant Job by afflictions, they came upon him
suddenly, and they came thick. In all the things wherein he had blessed Job
above most men, he afflicted him beyond example.

In his honor and authority he tried him with disgrace and contempt. In a fair
posterity he tried him with orbitie. In his abundance of riches he tried him
with poverty. In his friends with paucity; he had few left, and they proved
grievous to him. In his health he afflicted his body with painful and loathsome
diseases and sores. Yet you have heard of the patience of Job, says the
Apostle, he came off fair. In all this Job sinned not, neither did he charge
God foolishly.

2 His servant Solomon he tried with honor, riches, and power, with victory
over his enemies, and the cup of temporal pleasures, of life, he made to
overflow: never did any man on earth drink so deep of that cup. In this
trial Solomon miscarried, pleasures stole away his heart: Solomon lost his*
integrity, his wisdom wherein he excelled all that were before him was
benighted in him, the salt in him was infatuate. Such power have worldly
pleasures against wisdom.

See his Ecclesiastes, his recantation, you shall see how he declares himself
against them, pronouncing them all vanity and vexation of spirit.

It is an old Proverb, Fortis in bello, sapiens in ira, amicus in adversis.
Strong in war, wise in anger, a friend in adversity.

This is the Purgatory in which these are tried. If they comefairly off in
these probations, we esteem them approved.

I may add hereunto, that a true Christian is tried also in temptations of
pleasure. Joseph was not so put to it either in the pit wherinto his brethren
let him down, or in the hands of the stranger Merchants into which he was sold:
not in the prison where his feet were in the stocks, and the irons entered into
his soul; as in the hand of his Mistress, when she laid hold of him, and said,
lie with me.

Pleasures corrupt our understanding, and cast our reason and judgment into a
dead sleep. They steal away the heart. There is none that understands and
seeks after God. Non est Deus in viis little, God is not in their ways.

God sends Ezech. to Jerusalem on this errand. Son Ezech. 16. 2.
of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations. For as Eliphas says in Job,
Man believes not that he erreth in Job 15. 31.
vanity, therefore vanity shall be his change, His branch 32.
shall not be green, but shall be cut off before his day.

Epaminondas is recorded a rare example of stayednesse, that was able to walk
sadly and gravely, nothing moved with the vain delights of the people, whose
hearts were all set upon a merry pin, on their wanton holyday. It is a great
example of Israel, being in pursuit of the Philistines, when Saul had cursed
him with a curse, that should eat any food till night, that he might be
avenged on his enemies. The story says, The men of Israel were pressed 1.
S^^s. 14. ^5, 26. etc.
with hunger. And all they of the Land came to a wood where honey lay upon the
ground And the people came into the wood, and behold the honey dropped, and no
man moved his hand to his mouth: for the people feared the oath.

We are in pursuit of three dangerous enemies, the Flesh, the World, and the
Devil. We have taken an oath in our Baptism to fight strongly and constantly
against these. Fasting is one of our weapons, we shall not want the sweet
temptation of honey, that is of pleasure dropping before us, entisements to
break our fast. Let us remember our early oath sworn to God in our Baptism.
Let us keep a devout fast from all sinful delights: what though it cost us a
pinching and pressing bunger? This is the way to get victory of our enemies
before night: for when night comes, we can no longer work. Pleasant to the
eye, and delectable to the taste was the forbidden fruit. But nakedness and
the loss of Paradise; the sweat of the face, and the multiplied sorrows of
Childbirth followed eating: our first parents were no longer happy then
whilst they were fasting.

It will be a very hard matter to persuade a man in the vanity of his pleasure
to offer God a sacrifice of a broken heart. For in our full dishes and
overflowing cups we cannot remember Ioseph's affliction, we shall hardly then
arise from our banquet to visit him, and suffer with him. There is nothing in
the world that so dimmeth the sight to behold the course of Gods judgments in
the World: nothing so deafeth the ear against the Word that runs very
swiftly: nothing that fatteth the heart to slaughter; so much as pleasure does.
If Jobs ^onnes feast, Job fears and sacrifices: least they should offend God
in their mirth. It is a spiritual kind of martyrdom to abstain from
pleasures when they are in our power, as Bernard, Inter epulas esurire: To be
hungry amidst banquet^: as Israel did when the honey dropped, and lay on the
ground, to tread upon it, and pass over it. Natural death does not spare us
for our business, for our delights: and Jobs children were surprised with a
violent death, when they were feasting.

Mortification which i^ the breaking of our hearts, the thrashing and grinding
of our spirits should be so willing, so (...), so peremptory, as to do
execution even upon the body and soul at a short warning, not regarding the
present delights of the world: l^st another gi^d us and carry us whither we
would net, least like Haman we be harried from the Queens Banquet, to the
tree of execution.

A third impediment of this Sacrifice is a natural slothfulness in us to do
those things that have any painfulnesse in them. S. Paul's precept is. Not
slothful to do service. The slothful will not plough, because of Winter,
therefore he shall Romans 1^. 11. Prove. 20. ^.
beg in ^ummer, but have nothing. Ever since our first parents tasted the
forbidden fruit, that sweet meat had sowre-sawce: Man was made for travail;
and he that would not labor, might not eat. So when we pray, panem nostrum,
our bread, we mean not the bread of idleness: for there is no ^read ours, but
what we labor for: so they go together in the sentence, Insu^ore vultus tui
vesceris pane tuo. In the sweat of thy race, shall thou eat thy bread. And we
must labor for the bread that endures for ever. We must work out our
salvation. It is an idle pr^tense to cry out, Le^ est in vsae. There is a Lion
in the way.

We know, that our adversary the Devil, goes about like a roaring Lion: there
is no way out of his walk. He compasses the earth to and fro: we must resist
him. The Apostle has fitted a Panoply to arm us against him. We must fight a
good fight. Vincen^i dabitur. To him that overcommeth shall be given.

If we be so idle that we will not stir, or so faint-hearted that we dare not
see our own blood, or so pitiful that we cannot find in our hearts to
destroy such an enemy, our own idleness is our ruin. It is one of the
greatest tasks that ever thou undertookest by thy repentance to break thine
own heart. Thou have armies against thee within thy self to preserve it from
contrition and breaking.

1 All thy imaginations of thy thoughts, for they are only evil: these are an
innumerous army, the mi^^tia, warfare of the brain.

2 All thy affections and passions which proceed from the heart, these are all
Cardiacall.

3 All thy sins which Concupiscence has brooded in thy heart, the nest of them
all. These are the militia, warfare of the heart, Nate Deo, potes hoc sub casu
ducere somnos o born of God, in troubles deep and midst of anguish can thou
sleep? The man of God that fights these battles must not be idle. The true
cause of this spiritual idleness in us is the reluctation of our corrupt nature
to the work of our own salvation: for our progression of our nature is easy,
the way lies all down-hil, our sailing is with wind and tide, and he that
makes his voyage for Hell, may ship his oars, and never needs cut sail.
But to stem the tide of nature asks more, it comes to Hic labor, hoc opus
est: This is pains-taking with a witness; and requires, Multa tulit fecitque,
even to sudavit and alsit. He suffered much and sweat, endured cold and heat.

Me thinks, I hear the Master of the Vineyard say to us, Quid statis hic
otiosi? Why stand you here idle? How easily did God make man, and a paradise
for man? But for his Vineyard, we read of digging, and fencing, and building,
and weeding: (...), think on it.

A fourth impediment, our tenderness of our selves: Every man is his own
Satan, and says, parce tibi, spare thy self. No man ever hated his own flesh,
All the work of mortification which belongs to the breaking of the heart is
very grievous to flesh and blood, For behold this 2. Cor 7. 11.
thing, that ye have been godly sorry,

1 What carfulness it has wrought in you. 2 Yea, what clearing of your
selves. 3 Yea, what indignation. 4 Yea, what fear. 5 What vehement desire. 6
What zeal. 7 What revenge?
Here is a great burden to be born, and here is a cross, that flesh and blood
has no heart to take up.

1 (...), study: this word does comprehend,

1 Great inward carfulness to please God, in absteining from sin. 2 Earnest
endeavor to do that which may be acceptable in Gods sight. 3 Speed and
cheerful expedition to accomplish this. We need go no further in this duty,
then that care that we take for our temporali good: let our souls be as
precious in our sight as our bodies are, and let us do as much for God, as for
the World. So the Apostle: As you have given your members servants to
unrighteousness, etc.
2 (...) this signifies defense to plead our cause with God, not in the Court
of justice, for our merits will not justify us: but in the Court of mercy, for
our true Repentance will exonerate us.

3 (...), sorrow, of (...), valde, greatly, and (...), onus. We must groan
under the burden of sin, for Repentance does not satisfy of it self* and our
excuse and defense of our selves does not take away our just vexation of our
selves for our sins, Considering,

1 Who we are, 2 Against whom we sin. 3 How much, and long. 4 For how small
gain.
4 (...), fear: this extends both to

1 The judgment following, our sins committed, 2 The conscience of our frail
condition and propension to sin, which must make us fearful of Relapses, and
temptations to new sins.
5 (...), vehement desire: the indignation before mentioned, and the fear
serve to pluck us back: this desire is a spur to put us on. Lord, all my desire
is before Psalm. 38. 9.
thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.

Here sin begins at a vehement desire of evil: and this must be changed,
the same earnestness retained, only the object thereof better chosen.

6. (...), zeal: this is that fire from heaven, which consumes the light
crash of our vanities, and enflameth the desire before named: this carries up
our prayers, and alms, and all our good affections, and operations as high as
heaven. This breeds in us an holy emulation of our brethren, whereby we
strive to exceed one another in the duties of Religion.

The Apostle would have us servent in spirit.

7 (...), selfe-revenge: this is judging and punishing our selves, that we may
escape the hand of God. Cast^g^ corpus ^ncum, I chasten my body. This is done
by watching, fasting, and depriving our selves of the pleasures of sin. God
who cannot endure us to revenge our own quarrel against others, likes our
revenge taken against our selves. The true penitent does afflict his soul, and
is all bitterness of heart for sin: he takes up his cross and follows
Christ. This amounts to a great deal more then, Lord have mercy upon us. And
it is so much that when we come to examine whether our hearts be truly broken,
we shall very few of us find this work done: for fear of the grief and
pain that are in true repentance. For it is truth that there is no such
affliction in the world as a true breaking of the heart is.

5 Impediment, the cares of life. These break the heart the wrong way: for we
have many fears which much disquie^us.

1 From our selves, lest our own improvidence should undo us, if we should take
so much time from our necessary businesses, as the duties of Religion do
exact; this makes many keep home, when they should be at Church, and the world
will not give them leave to serve God.

2. From our brethren, for every man commonly is so much for himself, as
abateth the help we should have one from another. And so many lie in secret
await to mend their own heaps, by lessening and impairing their neighbors,
that a curious warmesse is necessary. And this it is that makes our life a
continual watch to save our own from the injury of men, of Christians.

There is a contentious sort of men that are ever vexing their brethren with
molestation of suits. There be base people that are prying what they may
pilfer. And there are cunning cheaters that practice upon their brethren by
frauds. The truth is: here is enough for us all: for the earth God has given
to the children of men. If they that have most of it would know that their full
cups should overflow to the use of their brethren, and would so dispose the
over-measure, there could be no want.

God is much displeased,

1. Because we generally do want the faith of his providence, not caring for
him only, and casting all our other cares upon him. 2. Because we walk
inordinately: for we should first seek the kingdom of God: and then all these
things. 3 Because we distract our hearts with immoderate care, as if God had
set us here to feed our selves: Christ disswadeth and forbids this. 4.
Because often enough does not content us: we do love to have to look upon. 5
Because in the use of these outward things, many take more then their share,
wasting and consuming more then needs.
There may be found for use enough, which waste will soon consume. Christ
chose a poor condition of life, such as required other men's charity to
relieve it. The bag that Judas bore, was not of rents, but of alms; he sent
to a fish in the sea for money to pay tribute. He fed many by his miraculous
power: he showed his power upon himself rather in fasting then in feasting
himself. Yet having nothing, his followers could confess they wanted nothing.

1 I confess that too much love of the world, and the iches thereof, 2 And too
many ways for expense; pride, gluttony, drunkenness, ambition, contention,
luxury, spend apace. 3 But the poor do harden the hearts of the rich against
them,
1 By their idleness. 2 By their dishonesty, and falsehood. 3 By their waste. 4
By their unthankfulness. To settle the heart against this distraction of
cares,
1 Think how these cares came first in ^ for God placed man in a Paradise, in
full possession of all things necessary for him: sin shut him out thence,
and lodged him where

Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia curae, Sorrow and care residents are. Let
us labor by repentance to remove sin, and cares will give way presently.

2 Let us see how far by the sentence of the Judge upon man our ^^re is
extended. We shall find that the tartness and acrimonie of the sentence is
sweetened with a blessing: for in judgment God remembers mercy. The sentence
is, In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, till thou return to the
ground. Here is, Genesis 3. 19.


1 In sudore, in sweat; this sweat that comes of labor and exercise is
wholesome, and preserves health: labor is now enjoined.

Qui non laborat, ne manducet. He that labors not, let him not eat. This is
no such great affliction: for we can be well content to sweat at our pleasures.

2 In sudore Faciei, in the sweat of thy face: he says not, In angore cordis,
in sorrow of thy heart. Omni custodia custodi cortuum: With all keeping, keep
thy heart: Mi fili praebe mih^ cor: My son give me thy heart. Christ: ne
turbetur cor vestrum, let not your heart be troubled.

3 Vesceris, thou shall be fed, if we go not further. A small matter may serve:
for food Nature is no great demander: here is no gluttonous waste allowed.

4 Pane, with bread: this is all we may ask of God. Panem nostrum, Our bread.
And no further should our care streine then the necessaries of life, and no
other way, then in the way of our calling.

5 Donec, until: for we shall not be always drudges to the flesh, we have our
donec, until, and then all the cares of life determine. They that will study
and labor for bread for posterity, may overdoe.

Fathers are allowed to lav up for their children; but let them take heed they
cast them more upon Gods providence then their own provisions for them, lest
God blow upon them. You may observe it, that commonly such as rise to wealth
from low beginnings, are commonly most careful to heap up for their children.
None trust God less then they, and no estates are sooner blasted then theirs.
God never intended when he placed us in the world, to make us for the world, he
set our face a better way. Many have found the cares of this world such
hindrances to repentance of sins, such encreasers rather of sin, such
remora's to godly life, that they have freely abandoned the world, and embraced
a necessitous poverty rather then they would tear themselves with these
thorns.

3 The acceptance of this sacrifice with God.

O God thou will not despise. There are none more despised in the world amongst
the braves and gallants of the earth, then those who go mourning all the day
long for their sins. But O God thou will not despise such. How many great
adulteries, murders, and soul sins have been committed by Kings and great
persons? But what say the books of time or what can our observation of our time
testify of broken and contrite hearts for them? Our comfort is, if grace do so
far prevail against corrupt nature to sanctify it to true repentance, God
will accept it: we shall do well to see some examples of broken hearts, and how
they have been accepted with God.

1 Of Solomon, who after his surfeit of all temporal pleasures, made a whole
book of recantation and repentance, wherein he calls all those pleasures of
life which had carried him away from God, Vanity and Vexation of spirit,
vanity of vanities; and concluded, that the end of all things is to fear God,
and keep his Commandments. How God accepted him we need no other proof, then
that book of the Preacher received into the Canon of holy Scripture.

2 Of Manasseh king of Judah: for his sins were high grown, and like an
harvest of corn, yellow for the sickle of divine vengeance. He did evil in
the sight of the Lord, like to the abominations of the heathen. What his
Father Hezechiah had done to remove idolatry he undid, and built up again the
abominations which he had ruined. He made his children pass through the fire:
he used witchcraft; erected an Idol in Gods house; wrought much evil in the
sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. A greater sinner I read not of the^
Manasseh was. And when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, 2.
Chron. 33. 12.
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto
him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him
again to Jerusalem, where he brought forth fruits worthy of Repentance. For he
fortified the City of God, he removed the Idols which he had set up, and he
repaired the Altar of the Lord, and offered peace offerings thereon.

3 Of Mary Magdaleno the sinner: whose broken and contrite heart had comfort in
the pardon of her sins, and Christ's first appearance to her.

4 Of the poor Publicane, who came his own accu^er into the Temple, and went
away justified more then the proud Pharisee.

5 Of Simon Peter, upon whom Christ looked, and that look sent him forth to
weep bitterly. And his Master forgave him, and employed him in his Church.
Such is the unlimited loving-kindnesse of God to broken Isa. 61. 1.
hearts. For Christ was sent of purpose to bind up the brokenhearted. The
Apostle says, that there is breadth, Ephesians. 3. 18.
and length, depth, and height in the love of God.

1 For breadth; The earth is full of the mercy of the Psalm. 33. 5.
Lord. 2 For length: His mercy is for them that fear him, Luke 1. 50.
from generation to generation. 3 For depth: Where sin abounds, grace
superaboundeth. Romans 5. 20.
4 For height: Thy mercies are exalted above the Psalm. 108. 4.
heavens.
1 In breadth, like the garment of Sem, and Japhet, which covered their Fathers
nakedness. 2 In length, like the ladder of Jacob, whose foot on earth, whose
top reached heaven. 3 In depth, like the Red Sea which swallowed Pharaoh and
his hosts. 4 In height, like the ascension of Christ into heaven, seen till a
cloud involved him. For our God is gentle, mild, and gracious, and passes by
offenses. Let Jacob repent, and he sees no iniquity in him. Gods pardon
heals broken hearts: for it removes sin. In those Isa. 50. 20.
days (says the Lord) the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there
shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will
pardon them whom I reserve. Sinners converted joy him: how welcome was the
Prodigal to his Father? he had not so much as a chiding for all his
looseness, and waste. There is joy in heaven over every convert. David has
done for himself, here he ends his suit for himself. By this shutting up of
David's penitential supplication in a broken and contrite heart, I conclude:
1 That in an arraignement for sin, there is no plea of good works: David
had the conscience within him, and the testimony without him of God and the
Church, that he had served the Lord, and had walked in all the ways of the
Lord with all his heart, save only in this matter. Yet this one matter cannot
be answered without the exact fullness of repentance. Here is no setting off of
any sin, for some singular good work before done. The sin that he has
committed does extinguish the light of all his former righteousness, as if it
had never been. But when the righteous turns away from Ezech. 18. 24.
his righteousness, and commits iniquity, all his righteousness, that he
has done, shall not be mentioned. The Luke 18. 10.
Pharis^e might have past with us for a devout and an holy man, if Christ had
not detested him.

1 He went up to the Temple to pray, which was an exercise of devotion. 2 I
here he prayed with himself: though in a public place, he had a private
prayer: here was no vain ostentation in sight. 3 He rejoiced in two things,
which have reference to the two duties of Repentance.
1 Cease to do evil: for he says, I am not as other men, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, nor as this Publicane: not like them in their sins: But I
thank thee for it.

2 Learn to do well: I fast twice, I give tithes, etc but we refer this also
to I thank thee. The Publicane had another bearing, which became humble
repentance well. But the Pharisee, for any thing I can discern, might have
past for an holy man, if Christ himself had not detected him. I tell you, this
man went down to his house. Yet observe the Text: He went justified more then
the other; the other not altogether unjustified.

2 This directs me in the deduction of a second conclusion, that a broken and
a contrite heart for sin is as safe rest for the soul, as the conscience of
a good life. This appears in the direction between the state of our innocent
creation, and our costly redemption. For our creation set us in a way of
happiness, rather in possession and fruition of happiness, but such as might
be lost; but our redemption bought us a never-withering crown of glory. Our
holiness of life may be corrupted as David's was, but our contrite and broken
spirit none can heal but God only; and because it is his sacrifice, he will
not despise it. In all the examples of repentance abovementioned, we see how
firmly the Penitents stood upon that ground, for that put away all their former
sins, and established them in the good favor of God. Therefore David having
this sacrifice ready, and now tendering the same to his God, does cease further
soliciting of God for himself, and begins as one fully reconciled to God,
to solicit him in the behalf of his Church as follows. From whence we draw
this exhortation: Let us all labor our repentance as the most needful work
of all. We must charge all our afflictions upon our sins, and we have but
this one way left to repair us, to redeem the favor of our God to us, even
our repentance. One joint sacrifice of broken hearts, and whole hecatombes of
contrite spirits would mend all that is amiss.

Let us therefore commence a just war against our own corruptions and
sins: it is not enough to conquer the weak Island, to destroy the vines, the
fuel of our drunkenness, to possess the towns and villages, the habitations
of sin in the outward members of the body. There is in every one of us a
strong Fort, an hard and stony heart, fortified against all piety and
holiness, where Satan as a strong armed man holds possession, this Fort and
strong hold, this propugnacle of sin, this heart must be broken. Let us bend
all our battery against that, and see to it, that the world, the flesh, the
devil may not supply it, and then the day is ours, and to him that overcomes
shall be given a crown of life. Nothing overcomes this Fort of sin in our
hearts, nothing breaks them so soon as,

1 A good watch kept, that they may take no rest. 2 Fasting, to sterve the body
of sin. 3 Weeping to open the sluices and drown it with our tears. 4
Praying: for our Amaleth within us cannot stand, if our souls like Moses hold
up their hands in prayer to the God of our lives. 5 An holy implacable fury
against it, never to give over the assault, till we have brought it to
subjection. This fort thus conquered, the Island is ours.
VERSE 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: build thou the walls of
Jerusalem.
HEre begins the second part of this Psalm, containing the prayer of David
for the Church. From the sequence of this prayer observe.

When we have by true repentance 1. Doctr.
made our peace with God for our selves, we have access with boldness to the
throne of grace, to put up petitions to God.

The Reason is: Our sins do separate our God and Reason.
us. So Isaiah* But your iniquities have separated between Isa. 59. 2.
you and your God: and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not
hear. David confesses: If I regard Psalm. ^6. 18.
wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. God treating with a
sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, Isa* ^.
shows them the way into his favor.

1 Wash you, make you clean. 2 Come now let us reason together, says the
Lord.
David confesses because of his iniquities which are an heavy burden to him,
I am troubled, I am bowed down Psalm. 38. ^.
greatly.

When we should lift up our heads, our eyes, our hands, to God: our sins
confound us with shame, we ^ile from the presence of God, they shake us with
fear, we are afraid of his judgments.

But true Repentance does wash us so clean, and reconcileth us so perfectly to
our God, that we dare come in fight, we dare present God with our requests: We
s^cke the face of God, when we ayle any thing; every grief of our persons, or
of the state in which we live, sends us presently to God for remedy. In
affliction we seeks God ^^^ ^. 1^.
early. We secke him, but we find him not always, we ask of him, but he
grants not our requests: we cry loud to him, but he hears us not: and we
take it ill to be denied, to be delayed.

Saint James gives us the reason; Ye ask and receive (...) 4 3.
not, because you ask amiss.

There is mors in olla, death in the pot, there is sin in the heart, our
fountain is impoysoned, the waters of it are corrupt.

Hose directs a speeding way, o Israel, return to the Chapter 1^. 1, 2.
Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thy iniquity. Take with you words, and
turn to the Lord, say unto him. Take away all inquity, and give good; so will
we render the calves of our lips. In this course of removing our sin first, we
shall make way into the favor of God. Gods people lost their costs and labor
in their Sacrifices and solemn worship of God, and naus^ated the soul of God
with them, because of their iniquities. These return our prayers empty handed
from God: yea, these do turn our prayers into sin.

When the Prodigal son returns penitent to his father, all is for given
and forgotten, and his father now rejoices more in him then he did before. He
was al rags, he needed not to ask raiment, his father called for it, stolam
prima^, the best robe: he came home hungry, he demanded not food, his ambition
was but bread: the fat Calf was killed for him: he was received with music
and dancing.

The bent of the Parable, and the other two of the lost sheep, and the lost
groat, is to show that repentance puts us into a better state of favor,
then we had before: For where sin abounds, grace does superabound. I may
give two reasons of it.

I Here God takes occasion to open the bowels of his tender compassion, and to
declare his mercy, which is over all his works.

2 True Repentance is an act of so much anguish and bitterness, it is for the
time a frying in the flames of hell: that no man would have the heart to
undergo the torments of it, if he did not by the clear eye of faith, look
beyond it to the joy and comfort of Gods recovered favor.

The point teaches its own use: for if we would have Use.
any audience with God for our selves or our brethren, we must first present
God with a Sacrifice of contrite and broken hearts: and then God will meet us
upon our way to him, and prevent us with his free favors, Surely goodness and
mercy shall follow us all the days of our life. Psalm. 23. 6.


There is no service to the service of the King. The Lord is our King of old,
let it be our glory and our fence, that we are the servants of the living God.
All Gods enemies will be daunted at the sight of us, and the fear of us will
be upon all the Nations of the World. And as all Nations feared the face of
Israel, because God had led them through the Red Sea, and given them victory
all the way, etc. So will they say; Let us fly from the face of this people.

Is not this the Nation that under the Rule of a Virgin Queen expelled
superstitious Religion out of their Land? That to a people that sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death a great light shined, even the clear
light of the holy Gospel?

Is not this the state against which so many damnable treasons were plotted
under a Woman's government, and all were by the singular favor of God happily
but wondrously defeated?

Is not this the Nation for whom God himself fought against Sisera and Iabin?
the winds and the Seas fought against the supposed invincible Armado of Spain,
nothing more verifying the prediction, Octog^simus octavus mirabilis annus,
1558, a year which wonder at we might.

Is not this the Nation whom God preserved from the powder treason, the
bloudiest, the closest stratageme, that ever was contrived, and ripened even to
the season of dismal execution? All these favors we have had; our many
crying sins have lost us this glory, this defense: our repentance may yet
recover our God to us* and restore us to his favor, and replant us in our
former strength. Nothing but repentance can call us again: the servants of the
living God, and that were our safety.

There is a certain Majesty and power in the faces of Gods servants to daunt
the courage of Gods enemies, when God pleases to have it so.

It was a bold resolution of Iaddus, but suggested by Almighty Joseph. Iud*
Antiq. 11. 8.
God in a dream. When Alexander set on toward Jerusalem to conquer it, and all
his people followed him with expectation of all that force and fury could work
against their City: Iaddus the high Priest, and all the Priests of the Lord
came forth to meet him in their Sacerdotall Vestments, followed by the people
in white garments. The chief Priest carrying the name of God on his Mitre.
Alexander durst not lift up his hand against that name, he fell down and
worshipped it. The reverence of the servants of the living God awed him, and
softened him to such good respect, as caused all hostility to cease, and
produced gracious favors from him. For God can make them that lea^ his
children captive to pity them.

This state we may gain by Repentance, and being the known servants of the
living God, the fear of us will be upon all the Nations of the earth. This
shall be a greater safety to us then our Arms, and Fortifications, then our
Walls of stone ashoare, of wood at Sea.

It is the voice of joy in the tabernacles of the righteous. The Lord of hosts
is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. We have a sure word for it: For the
eyes of the Lord are ^. P^^. 3. 12. 13
over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers: but the face of
God is against them that do evil. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be
followers of that that is good?

2 Observe his prayer here is for the Church, for we 2. Doct.
must enquire, why he addresseth his prayer next after his Repentance, for the
state of the Church? I conceive the reason this: David being an eminent person,
a mighty* King, and an holy Prophet had by his great sin done wrong to the
state of the Church of God, and therefore after his peace made with God by
repentance he pleads the cause of the Church, with God by petition. Sin
generally is of a contagious nature, the first sin brought a curse upon the
whole earth.

And Hagge has told us that the sin of the Jews in their neglect of
building Gods House, did bring upon their land barrenness, unfruitfulnesse
upon their trees, their wages did not prosper for the works of their hands,
nothing thrived with them. But especially the wickedness of their Kings did
ever bring great evil upon the Church and Commonwealth.

Rehoboams sin rent the Kingdom, and lost the Church ten Tribes at once, and
divided the State into two Kingdoms.

The Kings of Israel and of Judah were the ruin of their Kingdoms.

And David's sin crimsoned his house with blood. The pollution of Thamar, the
death of Amnon, the Rebellion of Absolon, as these were the great sorrows of
David, s they were the disquiet and vexation of the whole State, and these were
the effects and fruits of David's sin.

Therefore David does well to repair the ruins of Sion by his prayers, and to
solicit the peace of the Church: which his sin had so much endangered. In the
later end of his Reign, he displeased God in the numbering of his people, and
the whole Kingdom suffered for it, God sent ^ pestilence amongst the people,
which in three days consumed of that great number threescore and ten thousand,
plectuntur Achivi, great ones desert makes the poor smart* The Apostle bids
us pray for Kings, and for all that are 1. Tim. 2. ^.
in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. We shall all go more safely in our ways, if God guide the hearts and
ways of our Rulers aright. But if God give us Kings in his fury, our portion
will be sorrow; for their sins will set Jerusalem and Sion a mourning. Who then
shall pity thee, o Jerusalem, or who shall be sorry for thee? I speak not of
our Kings, God has blessed us graciously. I know where I am, and address this
point to the common use of the Church, as it may concern all Countries.

For as we are all members of the Church: and of the Use.
household of faith; so our iniquities which are offensive to God, and hurtful
to our selves may be also scandalous and hurtful to the Church. A wicked man
in a Congregation the Apostle calls leaven, Know ye not that a little leaven
sowreth the whole lump?

Sins like the disease of Leprosy infect, per contactum, by the touch.

The point is, when any of us come to make our peace with God for our sins, as
we have care of our selves, and our own reconciliation to God, so let us
remember to commend to God the care of his Church, which by our sins is wronged.

For can the toe stumble at a stone without the hazard of a fall to the whole
body, seeing we are members one of another?

Therefore the care of Gods Angels descends solow as the foot, Ne offendas ad
lapidem pedem tuum, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. He that desires
by true Repentance to set al to rights, let him look every way, where his sin
has done hurt, and labor to repair it.

Great is the example of Gods proceeding against his own people Israel in
judgment for the sin of Achan: The Lord says, Israel bath sinned, and they
have transgressed (...) 17. 11. ^
my covenant which I commanded them. Therefore they fled before their enemies.

And when this matter came to scrutinie, the fault was found to be in Achan
only. He had stolen a Babylonish garment, two hundred shekels of silver, and
a wedge of gold, etc.

All Israel fared the worse for his one sin, his one sin is charged upon the
whole Kingdom.

Lyran. quia factum unius de communitate in malis toti communitati attribuitur:
because the deed of one that communicates in evil, is ascribed to all them
that communicate with him.

We do not bear one another iniquity, the soul that sins shall die: but
such is the conjunction of the body of the Church, that we cannot commit
gross and eminent sins without the hurt and infection one of another.
Therefore to accomplish our Repentance and heal all, we have here a good
example to close our penitential prayers as David here does.

This remain of the Psalm has two parts.

1 David's petition, verse 18. 2 The success of his prevailing in his suite,
verse 19.
The petition has two parts:

1 Do good in thy good pleasure to Sion. 2 Build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
2 The success is double:

1 God shall be pleased. 2 His servants shall do their duty to him.
1 Of David's petition.

1 Of his first petition:

Do good in thy good pleasure to Jerusalem: wherein we must consider:

1 The petitioner, David. 2 For whom he petitioneth, for Sion, for Jerusalem. 3
The petition it self: Do good. 4 The limitation of the petition: in thy good
pleasure.
1 Of the petitioner, David: whom we again consider four ways:

1 As he was a private man, a member of the Church. 2 As he was an holy Prophet
of the Lord, 3 As he was the head of the Church, the King of Israel. 4 As he
was a penitent Convert now again, received into the favor of God.
1 As a private man. Doct.


It is the duty of every private man to pray for the welfare of the Church of
God. The Church is called a Communion of Saints, and we are knit together,
vinculo amoris, with the bond of love: there is unus amor, one love, but as it
has a double reflection,

1 Upon God, whose honor we prefer above all things. 2 Upon our neighbors,
whom we ought to love as ourselves. So we have two great arguments to induce
our devotion to this holy duty of prayer for the Church.
1 In respect of God*

The three petitions in the first Table of the Lords prayer do maintain this.
For,

1 Herein we solicit our God for the honoring of his own name, and the
sanctifying of it here amongst men: for his name is great in Israel. In his
Church every thing speaks of his glory.

The Church is the Congregation of them that call upon the name of the Lord. It
is the prayer of Jesus Christ, Father, glorify thy name. We have great reason
for it: because our help is in the name of the Lord.

It was the old petition of the Church, To beseech God for his Names sake.

2 We pray for the coming of Gods Kingdom. His Kingdom of power is over all
the World. But his Kingdom of grace is the holiness of his Church only, and
his Kingdom of glory is the Crown of the Church only.

Here God reigns, The Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel, he
has clothed himself with majesty and honor. His Kingdom is within us, his
wisdom our guide, his word our law, his mercy our hope, his judgments our
fear, his truth our faith, his will our obedience.

3 We pray that the will of God may be done on earth, sicut in coelo, as in
heaven: So if the Church thrive and prosper, here will be an heaven upon earth,
and we shall be like the Angels of God, who obey him by fulfilling his will.

For the Church is the Congregation of such as labor to walk with God in all
pleasing.

2 In respect of our neighbors.

We consider our selves as members one of another, and so the welfare of the
members depends on the welfare of the body. Every ones good ought to be as
precious to us, as much desired of us as our own. God is rich in mercy, and we
need not fear, that what is bestowed on our brethren will abate any thing of
his bounty to us, which in things temporal does often disquiet us. And herein
the weakest members of the Church may be helpful to the whole body of it; for
prayer and wel-wishing which proceed from zeal and love may come from the
poorest, the sickest member of the Church, no prison can shut it up.

2 Consider him as a Prophet of the Lord.

The prayers of all men have good access to the throne of grace, but Prophets
of the Lord beside the common obligation as members of the body of the Church,
have a special duty ex officio, by their office, and are as it were Masters of
Requests to put up the prayers of the Church to God.

Samuel: God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, 1. Sam. 12. 23.
in ceasing to pray for you. God to Abimelech. Now therefore restore the man
his wife: for he is a Prophet, and Genesis 20. 7.
he shall pray for thee. So when the Lord had reproved the unkind friends of
Job, who had not spoken of God the things that are right, he bids them to
prepare a sacrifice for themselves, and says: My servant Job shall Job 42. 8.
pray for you, for him I will accept. We must not conceive, that God is an
accepter of the persons of men, to regard one man more then another in regard
of his person, neither is one place for it self more esteemed then another.

But by special privilege there is difference put between persons and
places, in regard of the ordinance of God. The Priestand the Prophet has an
office imposed on him to pray for others. The Church is Domus oratio^is, the
House of Prayer, by special consecration: therefore both such men and such
places are a readier way to God.

3 Consider him as King. Kings under God are heads of the Churches under their
dominions, and God has committed the care of his Churches to them, David was
anointed by God to this supremacy, the chief Priest in those days did not
Lord it over Gods heritage, as the Bishop of Rome now does in all those Nations
over whom he claims the primacie. As by all other possible ways, so
especially by holy and devout prayers good Kings ought to seek and procure the
peace and welfare of the Church. The Commonwealth is the body, the Church is
the soul of the State. Kings that wish their Realms well, do discern that
there is a power above theirs: For the Lord is King, the earth may be glad
thereof* That King of kings before whose throne all the kings of the earth must
cast their crowns, he must be sued to, By him Princes reign. And God having
committed his Church to their government for him, how can they better acquit
themselves of that duty, and exonerate themselves of that great care, then by
devolving the same again upon Gods protection, by their holy and humble prayer?

David did commend his Church to the prayer of all the faithful. O pray for
the peace of Jerusalem. He propounded a form of blessing.

4 Consider David as a penitent newly converted to God after a great defection
from him, and Gods spiritual desertion of him. Now having offered to God a
sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, now his prayer is again in season.
For now God rejoices in him, he delights in God, and the prayers of such are
welcome to the throne of grace. God hears not sinners.

1 Such as continue in their sin without repentance. But if with all our
hearts we turn to him, he will turn to us; repentance has removed the sins
that separated between God and us. And what should a true penitent rather
desire of God then the welfare of his Church? for in the peace thereof he
shall have peace. This is a good remonstrance of our sincere conversion to God,
when we seek to do good to his Jerusalem.

Here is piety to God for the house of Gods sake, for Religion and the worship
of God. Here is charity to our neighbors, for our brethren and companions
sakes. And these be the fruits of repentance and newness of life: here is that
love which is the fulfilling of the Law of God; even the love of God, and the
love of our neighbor.

2 For whom he petitioneth.

1 For Sion. 2 For Jerusalem.
1 For Sion.

This was an high mountain then within Jerusalem, and here was that strong
peace which the lebusites did fortify against David. He reigned seven years
in Hebron before he could recover the Fort of Sion; and before he could expel
the Iebusites thence. They were so confident in the natural strength of this
place, and in their military fortification of it, that they ie^red David, when
he came against it, saying to him, Except thou take 2. Sam. 5. 6.
away the blind and lame, Non intrabis, thou shall not enter; Thinking, David
cannot come in hither. The meaning is, they were so confident in the strength
of Sion, that they thought their blind and lame able to de^^nd it against all
the force of David. But David took it and possessed it, and seated his own
royal house there, and it was after called the City of David. It was the
highest of those hills that compassed Jerusalem, of which David, As the
mountains are round about Jerusalem, so is the Psalm. 125. 2.
Lord round about his people. And this mountain semicircled Jerusalem on the
South part of the same. But not the natural or artificial strength of the
place did so much honor it, as the holiness thereof, for it was famous in the
Prophets that way. For out of Sion shall go Isa. 2. 3.
forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. This prophecy was
fulfilled in the Messiah: for the promulgation of the Gospel came thence. So
Christ himself said, that Repentance and remission of sins Luke 24. 4.
should be preached in his name, beginning at Jerusalem. Sion is first named,
as being the chief ornament and strength of the City, and the seat of the
Kings royal palace.

2 Jerusalem, called the City of the great King, of which many excellent
things are spoken: and especially it is honored with the right and just title
to be the mother Church, and all other Churches in the world are the daughters
of Sion. And it is named often in holy Scripture, and is to be here understood
as the representatorie body of the whole Church. And it is also a figure of the
full Church of the glorified Saints, which is called the new Jerusalem, the
mother of us all. So it is clear for whom David here prays, even for the
whole ^ody of the militant Church.

This example of David does teach, that we ought not to pray only for our
selves: charity begins at home, but it ends not, it ce^^e^h not there.
Christ in his form of prayer directs us to seek further then for our
selves: P^ter noster, ^a no^^^: di^^itte nobis: ^e nos in^^cas: libera nos. Our
Father, give us, forgive us, lead not us, deliver us.

Saint Ambrose: Si pro^e ^ol^, prote solu^ ^ra^is: Si pro ^^ nibus ^^g as,
(...) pro is ^^g ^^unt. If thou pray for thy self only, thou alone shall pray
for thy sefe: if thou pray for all, all shall pray for thee. In things
concerning this life we are loath to pray too earnestly for our brethren.

1 Out of a natural distrust that we have in God; we fear that he has not
enough for us all. 2 Out of a natural covetou^^esse that we have to have all.
3 Out of a pride which puts us into an ambition to exceed and outshine
others. 4 Out of natural envy* that we have at the well-being of others.
These ^e gross and sinful corruptions in us, and they do trespass both
piety and charity. Our Savior has directed us better, for he teaches us to
pray for this life no ^arther then pan^m quotidianum, our daily bread. And
there is enough to suffice nature in the world without any man's want. And our
sentence in Adam was, Ves^^r is pa^e, thou shall eat thy bread, etc. The son
of Iake^: Give me not riches: feed me with food convenient for m^. This
limitation may destroy in us all these corruptions of distrust, of
covetousness, of pride, of envy. For that fear which undoeth charity, lest
God should abate from us to supply the want of others, we have great examples
o^ his ^ulnesse.

The poor widow paid her debt with oil, she was relieved, and no body the
worse for it. Christ paid his tribute, and no body had the less; he sent to
sea to a fish, and had it. He improved a short provision ^o the suffisance of
many. We need not fear to pray one for another: God is rich to all that call
upon him.

2 Secondly, we are here taught to pray God for the Doct. ^^
state of his Church: she is our mother, let us seek her peace. Here we were
newborn of water and the holy Ghost. At her breasts we suck the sincere
milk of the Word of God: she feeds us with strong meat, and feasteth us with
the body and blood of our Redeemer. We have great cause to ply God with our
devoutest supplications, and to give him no rest for his Church: for his Lilly
is ever among thorns. And his Church complains, Circ^ndederunt me tanquam
apes* They have compassed me about like Bees. Strepitus, a noise, and stimulus,
a sting.

We see the bow of God bent against our brethren in other Lands, we see the
enemy prevail and insult. What are we, or how have we settled the favor of
God upon us, that we should be spared in the day of his wrath, or that a
Passover of mercy should skip our Cities, and towns, and houses? We may in
the inventorie of our sins read our danger better then we can discern an
issue out of it in the course that we run. Let our prayers comfort the
sorrows of the Church, and establish our comfort. And let our tears run
down like a river day L^^. ^. 19.
and night, and let not the apple of our eye cease. Let us pour forth our
hearts like water before the face of the Lord, and lift up our hands toward
him for his favor to his poor distressed Church.

God sees the corn yellow, and ready for the sickle, the day of the Lord is
at hand: it was hor a novissima, the last hour, in Saint John's time: now the
last minute of that hou^e approaches, he is coming to judge the world in
righteousness. And judgment begins at his own house. Turn thou us unto
thee, O Lord, and we shall be L^^. 5. 21.
turned, renew our days as of old.

3 The petition, Do good. Do good O Lord to the good, Psalm. 125. ^.
and to them that are upright in their hearts. Deal favourablie, or
bounteously. Benignefac, Do good* L^rgam benedictionem impende: Bestow a great
blessing. Which may be done*

1 Peccata di^^ttend^, by forgiving of sins. 2 Graciam conferendo, by giving
of grace.
And this is the sum of David's whole supplication for himself* he knows that
all the members of the Church have need of this favor. The petition in the
letter has respect to Sion and Jerusalem, and desires the bounty of God to
them. For God has promised to receive an house there builded to his name, and
to establish his holy Arc there, the visible Sacrament of his real presence.
This was also after performed, and not only the outward peace, and strength,
and plenty, and honor of Jerusalem is here desired, but the establishing also
of the holy worship of God, and the seats of justice, as after: This is good
for Jerusalem, for any state, when Religion and justice are cherished. But this
is not all, he looks prophetically into the state of the universal Church to
the worlds end, and prays for the welfare of it. That God would do it good,
that he would be favorable to it in his bounty.

It is a short prayer, Subita ejaculatio, a sudden ejaculation: but it is full
of content, for it may comprehend summam petendorum, the sum of thing to be
prayed for. It is the Lord prayer in little, for wherein may we desire, or God
show us favor, which may not be comprehended in this petition, Do good?

Every good and perfect gift comes from this Father of lights, to whom David
says, Thou art good, and thou Psalm. 119. 68.
do good. This request of David, Benefac, do good, does beg the favor of
God to Jerusalem. For it is not peace, nor strength, nor plenty, nor honor,
nor victory over enemies, that can make a state happy, except God be pleased to
turn all these in bonum, to good. Therefore they have fared better that have
fed on green herbs, then they that have had their share of a stalled ox.
Daniel thrived better of his pulse, then others ^ed from the Kings trencher.
Riches have been given to the owners of them for hurt. The prosperity of
fools destroys them. Many careful parents gather wealth for their children,
which proves their ruin: therefore our prayer in all things must be Benefac,
etc. Do good. For neither prosperity shall corrupt our faith; nor adversity
our patience. If God do us good, we shall find as David: Bonum est mihime
aff^igi: It is good for me to be afflicted.

4 The limitation of the petition, In thy good pleasure. We must take ^eed in
all ou^ suits to God, that we submit our selves to the holy will of God. And
that we confine our desires to his good pleasure. Not like unto Israel, who
turned back and tempted God, and limited the holy Psalm. 7^. 41.
One of Israel. God is many ways limited by us in our petitions.

1 If we ^^^^ his power by our infidelity, doubting whether he can perform to
us what we desire. As Israel, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? They
remembered Verse. 19.
^^^ his hand. Verse 42.


2 If we limit his goodness and mercy, doubting whether he will do us good:
which is a great wrong to him from us, after our full experience of his loving
kindness: to David was perplexed: Has God forgotten to be gracious* ^^ his
mercy clean gone for evermore? But he recovered and calls this his own
infirmity, and remembered the years of Gods right hand.

3 For the kind of favor, we may limit God: if we hold him to this special
favor, and leave him not to his own wisdom to do us good in what kind he
pleases. The Lord has copiosam redemptionem, plentiful redemption, and he
will either give quod petimus, what we ask: or quod novit utilius, what he
knows to be more profitable. Christ, Take this cup from me, but with
reservation of the liberty of his Father, Si vis, If thou will.

4 For the quantity of favor, we limit God, when we appoint him in what
measure he shall relieve u^, and how much good he shall do us.

Therefore David here in the beginning of this Psalm, desires to re^er himself
to Gods good pleasure, according to his mercy: so as God may magnify his mercy
in the grant of his petition. For weere member that our first request is the
foundation of all prayer:

Hallowed be thy name, For all our desires must respect the glory of God
chiefly, our own good at second hand.

5 We may limit our God in respect of time: if we set him a time wherein he
must show us favor, or not at all. So O^ias promised to yield Bethulia, ^f God
relieved Judith 7. 30. ^. ^5.
them not within five days. Which Judith after reproved. If he will not help
us within these five days, he has power to defend us, when he will every
day. Do not bind the counsels of the Lord our God; for God is not as man,
that he may be threatened: neither is he as the son of man that he should be
wavering. Therefore let us wait for salvation of him, and call upon him to help
us, and he will hear our voice, if it please him. We are commonly in haste,
either when we ayle any thing, and would be delivered out of our suffering.

Or when we want and would be supplied: or when we hope for any good, and
would come to the possession Isa^ 2^. ^6.
of it. This is for want of Faith: For Qui credit non festinat. He that
believes, makes not haste.

The best way then to prevent these evils which corrupt our prayers is to limit
our selves, and to refer all our requests to the good pleasure of God.

We have great reason to do so, for we are safest in that.

We may thank the good pleasure of God, for all we have, for all we hope
for. Here the foundation of our welfare was laid in our election. Having
predestined us Ephesians. 1. 4.
to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will.

And when we are capable of heavenly light: He makes Verse 9.
known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he
had purposed in himself So Christ, L^^^ 10. 21.
I thank thee Father: even so Father; Quiabene placuit tibi, because it was
thy pleasure. And the days of our life are here limited to his good pleasure,
we fulfill our time inconsilio Dei, according to Gods counsel. And at last,
Fear not little stock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom.

We have great reason to stoop all our desires to this good pleasure of God:
For it is a safe harbor against all storms. Let God be pleased, and nothing
can succeed improsperously to us. It was the rest of the Disciples, when they
saw no remedy but that Paul would go up Acts ^1. ^4*
to Jerusalem, we ceased saying: ^iat voluntas Domini, the will of the Lord be
done.

2 Petition* Build th^n the walls of Jerusalem.

In the letter Jerusalem was but newly come into David's possession, he won it
by war, and now he was to build and to fortify there.

He commends this good work to the blessing of I. Note.
God; For except the Lord build the house, they labor in Psalm. 127. 1.
vain that build it. The Heathen never built Cities, but they invocated some
one god or goddess, to whose tutelary protection they commended it.

David a King, full of power and riches and good will to employ these upon
Jerusalem, does prostrate all to Almighty God, and desires him to be the
builder. The Prophet teaches the use of this point, when he says, Commit
Psalm. 37. 5.
thy ways to the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass.
Whatsoever by Faith we commit to him, is both safe in his protection, and
wisely done by his direction: and without sin by his holiness: and fully by
his power working with us, working for us: and it is accomplished perfectly
against all opposition. If God prevent us with his gracious favor, and further
us with his continual help, all our works begun, continued and ended in him
prosper in our hands. Pray therefore, Prosper thou the w^rke of our hands upon
us, prosper thou our handywork.

2 David for all his trust in God, and assrance of his protection, yet
neglects not the outward means of safety. For though Jerusalem was
encompassed with Mountains, and naturelly defended against an enemy, yechee
would have the City walled: ^difi^ a ^^^^s, build walls.

For our Faith does not evacuate the use of good means: Treasure, Victual,
Armor, Walls, Fortifications, and men to manage these are the sinew^ of Cities
and Commonwealths. Moses on the top of the Hill praying* Aar^n and H^^
supporting his hands, and Josh^a beneath with an Army fighting against Amalek:
we must work, and God prosper it.

After David came to make Jerusalem the Chamber of the King, the seat of the
Kings Throne, he much enlarged and beautified and fortified it. Solomon did
^uch more, and succeeding Kings added both strength and beauty, and room to
it. Yet all we devise and do in this kind for safety, is nothing without the
hand of God. He must build us our walls, or else like the walls of Jericho,
these will fall down of a sudden.

Means must not be neglected, but means must not be trusted. Walls are no
fenc^^^inst God, but with his blessing they are impregna^^

What are our Armies, if God go not forth with them! what are the walls and
guard of our strong Cities, if God keep not the City? Therefore let Jerusalem
have walls, but let them be of his building, for outward means with his
blessing fail not of effect.

Jerusalem was more safe in Gods favor, then in their walls: For though it was
compassed with three walls, one without another a great distance, and streets
and houses between, and seemed an impregnable piece; yet when God withdrew his
protecting hand from it, Nebuchadnez^^ after it had flourished 477 years, came
upon it, and laid it waste for 70 years.

It was after the return of the people from Babylon rebuilt, yet was it
unwalled for 63 years after: then Nehemiah within 50 days walled it, and was
in flourish 562 years, till the Romans delivered it. There perished in it
110000 by Famine, Pestilence, and the Sword of the enemies, and intestine
sedition.

It was after in the possession of Christians: now in the hand of the great
Turk.

We ^^e in this example how sin destroys the most flourishing States, and
pours them from veslel to veslel.

It is not Walls nor Mountains, Men, nor Treasure that can preserve without God,
against God. Therefore when we have done all we can, pray for Jerusalem, Sit pax
in praem^ nitione tua. Peace be within thy walls. But the prayer of David has
a further extent then that City; he desires the building of the walls of Gods
universal Church, the defense and propugnation of the spouse of Christ. She
has need of strong walls, and of Gods own building, for she has many enemies*

God said to his son: Be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. So soon
as we have mention of a Church in Abel, we have Cain to murder him. Before
Isaak, we have Ishmael to scorn and persecute him. Jacob wrastleth with Esau
before he is borne in the womb, and Esau ever hated Jacob in their posterity.

When Israel was established a visible Church in Jacobs Family, a famine sent
them into Egypt, where after a few years their City of refuge proved their
house of bondage, God delivered them and sent them home to their own Land, they
had many enemies in the way, and when they came home, their sword cuttl em out
^oo^e for habitation, and under their Judges and King^, their Chronicles are
full of names. When the Christian Church began in the revelation of Christ. ^he
^nnocent infants were the first sacrifice offered by the sword of ^er^d.

Christ himself pursued to death, to the Cross. His Disciples, Apostles, and
Confessors suffered in the ten bloody Persecutions.

Then began rents in the Church, and Heresy grew as cumbersome and busy and
cruel as in fidelity: The Arian Persecution brake down the walls of Jerusalem.

And then in the Waine of the Empire; The Turk arose in the East, to the great
terror of Christ's little flock.

This Church of ours which has like the fleece of Gedeon been watered when all
the floor about it was dry, stands now like a Lily amongst thorns.

We have great cause to pray for good and strong walls for our Jerusalem, walls
of Gods own building, left the arrows of our enemies stick fast in our flesh,
and their swords drink our blood. Yet it is well for us that we know who can
build the walls of the Church strongly, and fortify it against the gates of
Hell.

For the gods of the Heathen are but Idols, there is no help in them, their
eyes see not, their ears hear not, their hands help not.

Let us but recover our God by repentance, and redeem his favor with a
sacrifice of broken and cont^ire spirits, and he will build up our walls, and
repair our ^uines, and fortify our desolate places.

Our Fathers in the darkness of Popery had this strong belief, that the
Church and State was more strengthened by zealous and devout prayers, then by
all other provisions for offense, and that was the motive that advanced so many
Religious Houses, and settled upon them so fair and plenteous revenues, that
they might have many at continual leisure to be always praying for them.

It was great pity that their holy zeal had not some equal proportion of
knowledge, for in their way they were devout, and before the pestilent
Incendiaries of the Church came up, who turned Religion into Policy, and Zeal
into Fury, I doubt not but God had many faithful and true souls in the Church
of Rome, full of his love and jeal^us of his honor, whose holy devotion kept
up the walls of Jerusalem, and prospered all the works of their hands.

2 Observe the petitions of David: Do good to Sion. 2. Nose.
Build up the walls of Jerusalem, he does pray for defense of his Church
against enemies: he does not pray that God would turn all their Sythes into
Swords, and strengthen them to an offensive war.

Though David were a Sword-man, and had la^ely recovered Sion by his sword, by
the Jebusite, he prays not for war, and strength to pluck down the walls of
other Cities: But that God would build up the walls of his own. God is called
the God of peace; and though he be daily provoked by the bold sins of men to
draw his sword, he is loath to strike, he would have us like himself, to be
very jealous how we undertake an offensive war: let Religion and Policy join
in advise before a Sword be drawn against any neighbor state, that we may
have God to Friend: that we may say, The Lord of h^asts is with us* For then
there are more with us then against us: still these two Judges of the quarrel
have determined the justice of war, let us hold our hands: For i^ Princes
engage their Subjects in unlawful wars, all the blood spilt on their sides
is put upon their account, but this petition of David is ever safe.

VERSE 19. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness,
with burnt-offering, and whole burnt-offering then shall they offer Bullocks
upon thine Altar.
HEre is the success of David, suit obtained: 2.
For if God will be pleased to declare himself the Patron and Protector of his
Church, to do it good and to sense it against the enemy:

Then follows a double event.

1 In David and the people; For they will apply themselves to the worship of
God. 2 In God, he will accept of their service.
1 For David, and the people, They do not set God a 1. Note.
price of their service, as if he must bay, it of them by doing them good, and
building their* walls. But he shows what good use the faithful servants of
God will make of his favors, they will use them as motives to his free service.

They shall enjoy peace and prosperity, and good leisure.

Nature teaches this retribution: the shepherd, Ille meos errare boves ut
cernis. My wandering oxen, as you see, etc. And how may this be considered?
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus: illius aram, etc. He is my God, his Altar
I Will frequent.

In time of peace and prosperity, and in the clear light of heavenly
knowledge, God declares himself most clearly, and deserves the worship of
his servants most apparently, and Deus nobis haec otia fecit: these times of
rest our God vouchsafes. There is the season for it. But we have God
complaining often of the contrary. For the prosperity of Fools destroys
them, and we are never more wanton and careless of Gods service, then when he
feeds us fattest, and does us most good.

But Ieshurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed Deuteronomy. 32 15.
fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatnes, then he forsook God
that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.

Too much compost does make the ground rank and full of weeds. This did God
foresee, and gave them great warning o^it.

In the former Chapter.

When I shall have brought them into the land which I Deuteronomy. 31. 20.
swear unto their Fathers, which flows with milk and honey, and they shall
have eaten, and filled themselves, and waxen fat, then will they turn unto
other Gods and serve them, and provoke me, and break my Covenant. And they did
so, and it cost them dear, a deportation for 70 years into Babylon.

After the return the Levites in their confession acknowledge so much to
justify Gods severe proceeding against them, and to cast all the blame upon
themselves. And they took strong Cities, and a fat Land, and possessed Neh. 9.
25.
housesfull of all goods, wels, Olives, Vineyards, fruit trees. 26.
So they did eat and were filled, and became fat. But they were disobedient and
rebelled against thee, and cast thy Laew behind their backs.

This comes generally of fullness, it is the sin of prosperity. So, They are
waxen fat, they shine: yea, they over-passe the deeds of the wicked. So, They
are enclosed in Jer. 5 28. Psalm. ^7. 1*
their own fat, with their mouth they do speak proudly.

Therefore this is a great promise, that David here makes for himself and his
people.

Generally, God is most sought, and best served in affliction.

Before I was afficted, I went astray, but now I keep thy word. In their
affliction they will seek me early. It is a provoking O^e. 5. 15.
unthankfulness to receive good, and to do evil in retribution. This spot is
not the spot of his children, i. a Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
sin of infirmity. Do you thus requite the Lord, o foolish Verse 6.
people, and unwise?

David says, Ne sis tanquam equu^ and mulus. Be not as the horse and mule. I
would in some things we could be like them: For the exe knows his owner, etc.
And bruit beasts are at the command of such as feed them, Bears and Lions
forget their natural fierceness to such.

When God does us good, and gives us peace and plenty, and pleasure, when our
souls are free from care, from fear, from grief:

What should hinder us, but that in this vacation we may attend the service of
the Lord? We have had many years of this favor: remember Job. O that I were
as in Job 29. 2, 3.
months past, as in the days when God preserved me, when his candle shined
upon my head!

2 Observe the matter of this speech, and you shall find 2 Note.
it to be a vow, whereby David does bind himself and his people to the
worship and service of God.

In Circumcision then, in our Baptism, now we and they are dedicated and
separated to the service of God; but to fortify that solemn vow, and the more
to oblige and necessitate us to that holy duty, we shall do well to reenforce
that vow, what new promises and protestations of our service. So David. I have
sworn, and I will perform Psalm. 119. 106.
it, to keep thy righteous judgments. Here he binds himself by an oath,
and binds his oath by a promise: I will perform it.

There is no such tie as the bond of a vow; we must Number. 30 2.
make conscience of it, For it is vinculum animae, the bond of the soul. It is
called a vow or binding oath to afflict the soul. Some understand that place
of the vows of Verse. 1^.
Fasting, Watching, or of Penance and Mortification which are called the
humbling and afflicting of the soul But it may be understood of all vows of
men: for all vows do afflict the soul being nuncupate to Gods glory.

1 Because they are restraints to us, we cannot do what we will, which our
unruly nature bears impatiently. For our video, see, is for meliora, better,
our sequor, follow, is for deteriora, worse.

2 Because the breaking of these vows is the affliction of the soul.

1 In the torment of the conscience, which cannot choose but be much charged
with such a sin: For our vows lie heavy there.

2 In regard of Gods just and severe punishment which follows the breach of
vows. For it is asnare to a man, after his vows to enquire. The vow of our
Baptism does oblige all our life, and we should ever call it to remembrance,
to keep us in constant obedience to our God. But we have many great examples
of the renewing that by new vows the more to restrain us: voluntary bindings of
our soul to the obedience of God. The people returned from captivity, sinned
in strange wives: Nehemiah was no: satisfied in their putting of the^ away,
Neh. 10. 1.
but caused a covenant to be drawn between God and them, that they should not
take them again, nor commit the like sin: and the people sealed the
covenant. Joshua a little before his death to settle the fear of God there,
did bring the people into a covenant, and set up a stone for a witness of the
Covenant, saying, Behold this Josh 24. 27.
stone shall be a witness unto us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord
which he spoke unto us: it shall be there for a witness unto you, lest you deny
your God. Christ: Loquentur lapides, the stones shall speak, to give evidence
against the breakers of a covenant and solemn vow.

So in the reign of Joash, when Religion had been corrupted: And ^ehoi^da
made a covenant between him, 2. Ch^^^. 23 16
and all the people, and the King, that they should be the Lords people. So in
the reign of Josiah, the King caused the book of the Law to be read to all the
Elders of the people, the Priests, and Levites. And the King stood in ^. C^r.
^4. 31*
his place, and made a covenant before the Lord to wa^ke after the Lord, and to
keep his Commandments, and his testimonies, with all his heart, and his
soul, to perform the words of the Covenant which were written in that book.

These examples do legitimate to us a voluntary obligation of our selves by
vow, either for duties to be done, or sins to be avoided, for they stick
close to the conscience.

So Job made a covenant with his eye to keep it from lustful sight: and if
swearers, drunkards, oppres^ors, etc. should for their better restraint make
such vows to God to relinquish these sins; there would be a double covenant
upon them: both of the sin, and their vow made to God against it. The Lord
has a controversic with the Land for these sins. The oath against them would
be the end of all strife.

Quer. But ^ am not able to perform this oath.

Sol. Not that we are able of our selves, to think any thing, as of our
selves: but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
These vows are not made in confidence of our own strength, but in faith of
Gods promise. I will put a new ^ze. 11 19. v^rse 20.
spirit within you. That they may walk in my statutes, and keep my
ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
We go forth here in the strength of the Lord, not in our own strength. We
declare our zeal best, when we not only take bonds, but do make bonds for our
selves to oblige to obedience. God fails not those that depend upon him. Thou
have also Isa. 16. 12.
wrought all thy works in us. Let no man discourage himself to decline this
service^, as unfeisible. This is opus Dei, Gods work: Gods grace is sufficient
for us: his strength is perfected in weakness. I am able to do all things
through him that strengthens me. Omnia possibilia credenti: all things are
possible to him that b^le^veth.

3 He mentions here the legal sacrifices of burntofferings, 3. Note.
etc. which were outward acts of holy worship: these God required as outward
testimonie^ of the good affection of his people: yet any hypocrite, any
profane person might serve God thus: God finds much Isa. 1.
abuse this way, and complains of it. Religion is in the heart, not in the
hand: yet seeing we have an hand too as well as an heart, let not that appear
before God empty. Honor God with thy riches. Before Christ was revealed in
our flesh, the service of God was full of typical resemolances and
representations, both of his meritorious sacrifice for us, and of our
spiritual sacrifices to God. The shedding of the blood of the beasts, etc. did
declare Christ's bleeding for us. The burning and consuming the sacrifice to
ashes, did declare the complete mortification Genesis 18. 27.
of the elect. I remember the speech of Abraham: I am but dust and ashes. Dust
we are in respect of the matter of our creation: For out of it were thou taken,
because thou art dust: But why ashes, which is a burnt dust? Because every
faithful servant of God is a burntoffering, his natural and unregenerate part
consumed to dust.

1 By his own zeal, My zeal has even consumed me. 2 By his voluntary
mortification. 3 By the manifold fiery trials of his holy patience. Abraham had
been an idolater, that Abraham was consumed to ashes: Ex cinere redivivus, to
revive from the ashes:
Our lesson is: that though these outward legal ceremonies be abolished which
declared their observers willing to be at any cost in the worship and service
of God; and punctual to do as they were bidden: Yet in our way, we must not
retire all Religion to the heart, but such outward acts of Religion as remain
in force and use, we may not omit: as coming to Church, reverent kneeling to
make confession of our sins, attentive hearing of the Word, making the voice
of Gods praise to be heard; humbling of our souls to God; and lifting up our
voices to pray; standing upright to make a public joint confession of our
faith, to show that we are all of one common faith, paying our due tithes and
offerings. These be holy farms and services: yet as the outward sacrifices of
old were rejected without the inward spiritual service of the heart; so all
external adoration without the sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart before
mentioned, is short o^ the duty that we owe to God. Our great Zelotes the
professors of Gods service in a purer way, whose pride is, that they are not
like other men; these do cry down all outward expressures of devotion, and say
your wisdoms claim is, My son give me thy heart. True, and the good
affection of the heart is soon seen in the command that it exercises over
all the body. Cor paratu^ est, My heart is ready: I will praise God with the
best member that I have* Levabo oculos, I will lift up mine eyes; Lavabo and
levabo manus, etc. I will wash, and lift up my hands.

4 He calls these, Sacrifices of righteousness. So before. 4. Note. Psalm. 4.
5.
Offer ye the sacrifices of righteousness. So called.

1 Because they are our debt to God: Justitia dat suum cuique, Justice gives
every one his own: his law requires them: our obedience owes them.

Let no man think that he meriteth any thing at the hands of God by these
duties of Religion: yet such is the favor and bounty of God, that he
rewards the service done to him. There is no man that shuts the door,
Mal. 1. 10.
or kindles a fire in Gods house for naught, he has his reward. Let not his
bounty overvalue our duty to him. Our obedience is our righteousness before
God.

1 We do God right in it: for he challenges it not of courtesy: he is not
beholding for it: it is his due.

2 Called Sacrifices of righteousness, because they left nothing due to God
u^offerod: as here the burnt-offering, and the whole burnt-offering. Ananias
and Sapphira suppressed a part of their offering. Totum Deo immolant* Greg.
omne quod habent, omne quod vivunt, omne quod sapiunt, totum Deo offerunt:
They ofter all to God which they have, all which they live, all wherein they
are wise.

3 Sacrificia justitiae, the sacrifices of righteousness, in respect of Gods
^ie, which was not so much upon the oblation, as upon the righteousness of the
offerer: for Respexit Abelem prim^: post, donum ^ius: First he had respect to
Abel, then to his offering. He finds it, Honor it me labiis, honors me with
their lips: Cor long, their heart is far off.

4 Sacrificia justitiae, the sacrifices of righteousness, for their
representation: for they are types of Christ our righteousness.

5 Sacrificia justitiae: the sacrifices of righteousness: because offered in
faith, and we are just by faith.

The King here promises for his people: so in former 5. No^^.
examples, good and religious Kings have drawn their people into covenant with
God. It is much, that a good King may do with his people. Regis ad exempl^^,
after the kings example: Let him guide them so as well as by laws.

No question but David's looseness had corrupted his Subjscts much: his
holiness may amend it. Princes by good laws, good counsel, good example may
prevail far, being gracious and gentle. They should in nothing more strain
their strength, then in the supportation of Gods worship. In that God will
join with them. The force of opposition cannot resist that work: for light
drives away darkness. With what joy do we look on such examples of Princes:
as that of Nehemiah, that of Joash, that of ^o^iah, we see good came of it then.

2 He promises for God, Accip^es, thou shall accept: This is vox fi^^i, the
voice of Faith: the faithful are assured, that God will receive their service
in this kind, when they bind themselves to it. We must bring all our
offerings to God, with this good p^r^wasion, that God will accept them. This
made Abels offering so acceptable to God, and preferred before Cains: he
offered by faith (...), a fuller sacrifice, and God testified of his gifts. Let
us therefore come boldly unto the Heb. 4. 16.
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need. For in Christ we have boldness Ephesians. 3. 12.
and access with confidence, by the faith of him.

FINIS.
December 24. 1635.
PErlegi haec tria volumina Commentariorum in Psalm. 51 ex concionibu^ Samuelis
Page, SS. Theol. Professoris, quae continent in toto pagi^as 895, aut circiter,
in quibus non reperio aliquid s^^^ doctrinae, aut bonis moribus repugnans, quo
m^nus cum publica utilitate imprimi queant, sub ea tamen condition, ut si non
intra biennium proxim^ sequens typis mandentur, haec ^icentia fit omnino irrita.

Guilielmus Haywood. R. P. D. Archiep. Cant. Capell. domest.


