THE BENEFIT that Christians receive by Jesus Christ Crucified.

Translated out of French into English, by A. G.

1573. IMPRINTED AT London for Lucas Harison and George Bishop.

To the English Reader.
THou have here delivered to thee good Reader, a little tretise first written in
the Italian tongue and printed at Venise, after that translated into the French
langage and printed at Lions, and now translated and printed for thee to read
in the English tongue. Enquire not of the Author, he is unknown, and to know
him would do thee but little good. Read the book deuowtly, regard the matter of
it attentyuely, it may do the much good in these evil days. This may be
counted among the greatest evils with which this age is infected, that they
which are called christians are miserably divided about Christ. And yet in
truth as the apostle says unto us, ^ Cor. 8.
there is but one God, which is the father of whom are all things, and we in
him, and our lord Jesus Christ by who^ are al things, and we by him. To
discourse on this division and the cause thereof would be to some pleasing, to
some it would be displeasing. For what one truth can please minds so diversely
divided? would God it could please all to become one in that one Christ whose
name we al do carry. In this little book is that benefit which co^mith by
Christ crucified to the Christians, truly and comfortably handeled: which
benefit if all christians did truly understand and faithfully embrace, this
division would vanish away, and in Christ the christians should become one. To
this end read this book and much good in Christ may it do to all them which
do read it. Amen.

The Translater sends greeting to all Christians that are under Heaven.
I Cannot marvel enough whereof it comes that all of us are more moved by
injuries than by benefyts: and that we take the one so much to heart, imprinting
them in our rememberance, and forget the other so suddenly. Truly we cannot
deny, but that among so many other imperfections vvherwith we are unhappily
defiled, we have also taken this, of the great corruption and maymednesse of
our earthly and transitory humane nature, vvherin there cannot be imagined any
thing more inconvenient nor more hurtful, than reprochefull unthankfulness,
which a man might ryghtly term the welspring of al vices. For by it our minds
are so drawn away and perverted, that the more we be beset rownd about and
laden with the benefits of GOD our souerein Father, so much the more become we
blookish and as it were distraught and out of our wits, ronning after our own
lusts and vanities, where through (as though we had drunk of the river
Lethe,) we fouget our selves and mispend our whole time, bwisying our heads
like little children that go seeking of pinnes in the sand, wherabout they are
so wholly occupied, that although a man call them, they here him not, or at
leastwise make as though they herd him not: from whence if we did now and the^
lift up our eyes unto heaven, and enforce our selves to remember the great
benefits that we daily receive of his right fatherly goodness and mercy: it
were not to be dowted but we should be more inclined to love him and to obei his
holy will, than we be: whereas (which worse is) we be not only careless to yeald
dew thanks unto him, but also at all times cease not to offend him: so
deeply is the vice of unthankfulness rooted in us. Ryghtly may he be blamed for
unthankfulness, which acknowledges not the good that has bin done to him, at
leastwyse by saying gramercie: Unthankful is he that forgets it: but toto
unthankful is he that re^dereth evil for good: Wherefore we ca^ find no
lawful excuse, because that which way soever we turn our selves, the
bountifulness of this great GOD shyneth throughot upon us. Let us a little
stir up our wits, and let us look about us as far and wide as this howge
frame of the world may extend, so deuynely set together, and garnished with
so great diversity of goodly creatures, so well compassed, and in such an
order so vvysely compacted, that there is nothing superfluouse, nothing
unprofitable, nothing whereof there may not be re^dred a rason. This howge Son
the fountain of all light and heat, and the cause of all earthly generation:
the Moon which marketh us out the years the months and the seasons: the Sky
so trimly azured and richely set with glistering stars: this howge Sea
which beats upon al sides of the earth, the weight whereof is born upon his
own round counterpeis: the great number of living creatures that are upon it,
whereof some fly in the air, euerywhere dispersed and othersome dwell in the
holow caves of it, which nature has fashioned of set purpose for them: what
shall I say more? So many high mountains within whose veins are found
innumerable tresures: And others, from whence issew many a fair spring
spowting out their thin and clear water. And othersome wheroutof do gush
violent streams and plesa^t rivers, nourishing infinite nombers and kinds of
fishes: So many trees and plants yelding most delicate fruits and sweet
savors: Such store of medicinable herbs and roots: So many plains and
vallyes, most fruitful: Such store of meadows beawtifyed with their lovely
flowers: And to be short, the full howgenesse of the whole, the power of the
Elements, and the natural beawtie of the creatures: what are they else but the
vtteraunce and open showing of gods love and great liberality toward us: of
which each one in his kind gives glory to the Lord? yea, ask even the
beasts, and they will inform thee: demand of the fowls of the air, and they
will tell thee: or else speak to the earth, and she will report unto thee: and
to the fisshes of the Sea, and they will answer thee: The Lord spoke the word,
Job. 12.
and we were made: he commanded, and we were created. For in his hand is the
life of every living thing. And by him have al of us our being, moving, and
continewance. Such is the speech of all creaturs. Only man, who is made after
the image and likeness of god, indewed with understanding, memory, and
reason, (showing himself in that beehalfe more unhappy than the brute
beasts,) passes over the abundance of so great benefyes with his eyes shet,
betrampling and beraying them with his feet, as a swyne does precious stones:
In so much that after he has once wholly buried remembrance, there insueth
ignorance and utter blyndnesse. O lamentable state of reasonable man, who can
hope for any change in thee, except it be from evil to worse, seeing thou have
no knowledge at all of God, and that, all his benefits are despised through
thine extreme unthankfulness in this behalf? If so many creatures wherewith
this whole howge world is garnished to thy use: and (to touch thee yet more
nearly) if the cunning compacting together of thine own body, which may well
be called a little world, as wherein a man may behold the souerein wisdom of
the workmaister: if thy soul wherein shines the invisible image of of the
everlasting God: if thine own life: if the consideration of so great abundance
of good things whereof he gives thee the use every day, are not sufficient
enough to move the affections of thy heart: at leastwise yet ought thou of
reason to be inflamed and provoked by the benefyte of all benefyts, and by that
most precious gift which he has made unto thee of his own propre and only
Son, who is the very image of his substance, and in whom dwells the whole
fullness of the Godhead, together with all the treasures of wisdom, and al
knowledge: Yea and so much ought it to move thee the more, because that without
having regard that thou wart his great enemy, he has laid all thine
infirmities upon his back and made him to dye upon the cross for thy sake,
punishing thy sins in him, for the which thou thy self had deserved
eternal damnation. Go now thou unthankful person, and devise all the excuses
that thou will: and they shall serve thee to no purpose, but to accuse thee and
to give sentence against thy self. The wonderful creation, order, and
government of this howge world, can give thee knowledge of his fatherly love,
wisdom, and infinite power, although not in all points to the full. But in
Jesus Christ crucified, all the bowels of gods mercy are opened unto thee at
large and perfectly. There is no more any veyle that can hinder thee from the
knowing of so great love. See thou not how that at his death the veyle was
rent asunder in the mids? And when he cried that all was finished, and bowed
down his holy head, he gave a toke^ that peace was made between God and man.
Let us therefore henceforth learn O my brethren to acknowledge the souerein
benefyte which we have received by Jesus Christ crucified Let us behold the
perfectness of his life, and his most holy Doctrine. Let us open our eyes at
the unmeasurable bryghtnesse of his everlasting truth, and let us withal our
force follow the way wherein he has gone before us. Let us with a cheerful and
glad heart embrace the cross which he has set before us: and discharging our
shoulders from all burdens and al sin wherein we are wrapped, let us run
with patience to the combat that is appointed for us, having an eye to the
beginner and acco^plisher of faith Jesus Christ, who instead of worldly glory
sustained the cross, and despyzed all the shame thereof. Let us put of the old
man with all his vvretched and combersom dooinges and grievous burdens: and
cloth our selves with the new man whose yoke is sweet and burden light. Let
us by true faith run between the arms of his mercy, and pray him too
voutsafe too lyghten us, and too make us capable of al his graces, and
specially of the great benefit that we have received of him by his cross.
Concerning the which, forasmuch as there is lighted into my hands a little
treatyze compiled in the Italian tongue, wherein he is maruelously well and
lively drawn with another manner of pensil than peinters use: I thought it
good to put it into French, to the end that my cou^trymen also might take
profit by it, and receive like comfort as I have received by it: And specially
the simple people and such as have no great depth of knowledge. For it feemeth,
that the Author (whosoever he was) was wholy minded to apply all things
unto them, without seeking or affecting any finenesse of speech, or great
darkness of sentences. But even as in So^mertyme we see the River Saon go
gently to join himself with the River of Rhone, without doing any damage to
any body: even so goes this man, slyding so smothely into the bosom of his
dear spouse Jesus Christ, without staying at any other thing: that
ouermaliciouse should he be, which would look awrye on him, or by any means
let him of his course. And thus my brethren fareye well in God, who inriche you
with his graciouse gifts from day to day. Amen.

Of the benefyt that christians receive by Jesus Christ crucified.
The first Chapter.
Of Original sin, and of man's vvretchednesse.
THe holy Scripture says, The stat^ of man before and after that he had (...).
that GOD created man after his own Image and likeness, making him, as in
respect of his body, impossible: and as touching his Soul, rightuouse, true,
good, merciful, and holy. But after that he being overcome with desire of
knowledge, had eaten of the Apple that God had forbidden him: he lost the said
image and likeness of God, and became like the brute beasts, and like the
devil who had abused him. For as touching his Soul, he became unrighteous,
untrue, cruel, pitilesse, and the enemy of God: and as touching his body, he
became passible and subject to a thousand inconveniences and diseases: and not
only like, but also inferior to brute beasts. And even as if our forefathers
had obeyed God, they should have left us their rightuousenes and holiness as an
heritage: even so by being disobedient unto God, they have left us the
inheritance of vnrightuousenesse, wickedness, and gods displeasure in such sort
as it is impossible for us (through our own strength) to love God, or to frame
our selves unto his holy will. Nay we be enemies unto him, as to one yt must
punish our sins because he is a just judge, and therefore can we not any more
trust wholly to his holy mercy. To be short, our whole nature was corrupted by
Adams sin. And like as erst it had superiority above all creatures, so became
it an underling to all, y^ bo^dslaue of satan, sin, and death, and condemned to
the miseries of hell. Also he lost his judgment altogether, and began to say
that good was evil, and evil good: esteeming falfe things to be true, and true
things to be false. Psalm. 114. Psalm. 14.
Which thing the prophet considering, says: that all men are liars, and that
there is not one that does good, because the devil like a stout man of arms
rules his own palace, that is to wit the world whereof he became the prince and
Lord. There is no tunge that can express the thousandth part of our misery,
in that we being created by gods own hand, have lost the said image of god,
and are become like the devil, and too like to him in nature and condition,
willing whatsoever he wills, and likewise refuzing whatsoever he mislyketh.
By reason whereof being given up for a prey to that wicked spirit, there is no
sin so greeuouse, which every one of us would not be ready to do, if the
grace of god stay us not. Original s^n.
And this our depriuacio^ of rightuousenes, and this foreward inclination to
all unrighteous and naughtines, is called origiall sin: the which we bring
with us from out of our mother^ womb, so as we be borne the children of wrath,
and it has had his first spring from our first fathers, and is the cause and
fountain of all the vices and iniq^ities that we commit: wherfrom if we will be
delivered and return again to our first innocence, to recover the image of
god: first of all it stands us on hand to know our own wretchedness. A very
good compa^ison.
For like as no man will ever seek to the Physician, except he know himself
to be diseased: or acknowledge the excellency of the Physician and how much he
is bownd unto him, except he know his own disease to be pestilent and deadly:
even so no man acknowledges Jesus Christ the only Physician of our souls,
except he first know his own soul to be diseased: neither can he perceive y^
excellency of him nor how much he is bound unto him, except he first enter in
to the knowledge of his own outrageouse sins, and of the incurable
infirmity, which we have received through y^ infection of our first fathers.

The second Chapter.
How the Law was given by God, to the end that we knowing our sin and
having not any hope of ability to make our selves righteouse by our own works,
should have recourse to gods mercy, and unto the ryghtuousenesse of faith.
OUR God therefore mynding of his infinite goodness and merc^e to send his only
Son to set free y^ wretched children of Adam: and knowing that first of all
it behooved him to make the^ understand their own misery: chose Abraham, (in
whose seed he promised to bliss al nations,) and accepted his offspring for his
peculiar people, unto who^, (after their departure out of Egypt and
deliverance from the bondage of Pharao,) he by the means of Moses, gave the
Law, which forbids all iusting, and commands us to love GOD with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength, in such wise as our whole
trust be reposed in him, and we ready to leave our life for his sake, to suffer
all torments in our members, and to be bere^t of all our goods, dignities, and
honors for the love of our god: choosing to dye, rather than to do any thing
that may mislike him, be it never so little: and doing al things in that
behalf with a merry heart, and with all forewardnes and cherefulnes. Moreover
the Law commands us to love our neighbor as our self, Who is our neybour
mening, hy the Neighbor, all manner of men as well friends as foes: and it
wills us to do to every man as we would be done unto, and to love other menns
caces as our own. And so by looking in this holy Law as in a clear
lookingglasse, man does out of hand espy his own great imperfection and
unableness to obey gods commau^dements, and to render him the honor and love
which he ought to yield to his maker. The (...) office or dewtie of the law.
The first office of the Law then, is to make sin known, as saint Paul
affirms. And in another place he says, I had not known what sin is, but
by the Law. Romans 3. and 7.
The second office of the Law, is to make sin increace, forasmuch as we
being quyte g^ne from the obeying of God, The second office of the law.
and become bo^dslaues to the devil, being full of wicked works and inordinate
affections, cannot abide that god should forbid us to lust, which increases so
much ye more, as it is the more prohibited: by reason whereof S. Paul says,
that sin was dead, but the Law came and raised it up again, and so it
became out of measure great. The third office of the Law, The third office of
the law.
is to show ye wrath and judgment of God, who threatens death and everlasting
punishment to such as keep not the Law throughout in all points. For the holy
Scripture says, Deu. 27.
Cursed is he y^ performs not thoroughly all the things that are written in the
book of the Law. And therefore saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 3.
y^ the Law is a ministry and that it brings forth wrath. The Law then
having discovered sin and increaced it, and showed forth the wrath and
indignation of God who threatens death, The forth office of the Low.
executes his fourth office, which is to put a man in fear, who there upon
falls into sorowfulnes, and would fair satisfy the Law: but forasmuch as he
sees clearly, that he is not able: he wexeth angry against God, and would with
all his heart, that there were no god, because he fears to be sore chastized and
punished by him, Romans 4
according as saint Paul says, that the wisdom of the flesh is the enemy
of God, because it neither is nor can be subject to the Law of God. The fifth
office of the law.
The fifth office of the Law, (which is the principal end and the most
excellent and necessary office of it) is to constrain a man to goo unto Jesus
Christ, in like wise as the Hebrews being dismayed, were constrained to appeal
unto Moses, saying: Exodus 20
Let not the Lord speak unto us, least we dye, but speak thou unto us and we
will obey thee in all things. And the Lord answered: verily they have spoken
exceeding well. Yea they were not praised for any other thing, than for the^yr
desyring of a Mediator betwixt GOD and them, which was Moses, who represented
Jesus Christ, that should be the advocate and Mediator between God and man. In
respect whereof God said unto Moses, I will raise up a Prophet among their
brethren like unto thee, and I will put my word in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all the things that I shall command him, and I will punish
all those that will not obey my word which he shall speak in my name.

The third Chapter.
How the forgiveness of our sins, our justification, and our salvation
depend upon Jesus Christ.
WHen as our God then had sent the said great Prophet which he had promised us,
(who is his only son,) to the end that he should set us free from the curse
of the Law, Coloss. 3
and recon^yle us unto our God: that he should make our will fit for good
works, healing our free will, and repayring in us the foresaid image of god
which we had lost through the fault of our first parents: Act. 4.
forasmuch as we know that under heaven there is non^ other name given unto
men whereby we may be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ: Let us run unto him
with the feet of lively faith, Mat. 11.
and cast our selves betwe^ his arms, since he allureth us so gracious^i,
crying: come unto me all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you: What comfort or what joy in this life can be comparable to this
his saying there, when as a man feling himself oppressed with the intolerable
wayght of his sins, vnders^andeth so sweet and amyable words of the Son of
God, who promises so graciously to refresh and rid him of his great peyns? But
all the matter lies in acknowledging our own weakness and misery in good
earnest. For he shall never know what is sweet, who has not tasted of ye
sour. And therefore Jesus Christ says: If any man thirst, John. 7.
let him come to me and drink: as if he had meant to say, if a man know not
himself to be a sinner, nor thirst after rightuousenesse, he cannot taste of
the sweetness of Jesus Christ, how sweet it is to talk of him, to think of
him, and to follow his most holy life. But when we once throughlye know our
own infirmity by mean of the Law: let us harken to saint John Baptist,
John. ^.
who poynteth us to ye souerein Physician with his fingar, saying: Behold y^
Lamb of God which takes away y^ sins of the world. For he it is that
delivers us from the heavy yoke of the law, Gal. 3.
abrogating and disanulling the curses and sharp threatenings of the same:
healing all our infirmities: reforming our free will, returning us to our
ancient innocence, and repayringe in us the image of our God: John. 8.
insomuch that (according to saint Paul's saying) like as by Adam we be all
dead: 1. Cor. 15.
so by Jesus Christ we are all quickened. And it is not to be believed y^ the
sin of Adam, which we have by inheritance from him, should be of more force
then the ryghtuousnes of Christ, the which also we inherit by faith. It
seems that m^n has great cause to complayn, that (without any reason why,)
he is conceived and borne in sin, Psalm. 50
and in the wickedness of his parents, by means of whom death reigns over
all men. But now is all our sorrow taken away, inasmuch as by a like mean
(without any occasion given on our behalf,) rightuousenesse and everlasting
life are come by Jesus Christ, and by him death is s^ayne, whereof saint Paul
makes a very goodly discourse, which I purpose to set down here following.
Romans 5
Wherefore (says he) like as by one man sin entered into the world, and death
by sin: even so death went over al me^, ^orasmuch as all men have sinned. For
until the Law, sin was in the world: but sin was not regarded as long as
there was no law. Neuerthelater, death reigned from Ada^ unto Moses, even over
the^ also y^ sinned not after y^ like manner of y^ tra^sgressio^ of Adam, who
was a figur of him y^ was to come. But yet the gift is not so as is the
offense: For if through the offense of one, many be dead: much more the grace
of God and the gift by grace which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto many. Neither is the gift so as that which entered in by one ye sinned. For
the fault came of one offense unto condemnation, but the gift is of many
offenses to justification. For if by the offense of one, death reigned through
one: much more shall they which receive ye abo^dance of grace and of the gift
of righteousness, reign in life through one, that is Jesus Christ. Likewise
then, as by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation, so
by y^ ryghtuousenes of one, ye benefyte abounded toward all men to the
justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many also be made righteous. Moreover the law
entered there upon, that the offense should abou^d: nevertheless where sin
abou^ded there grace abounded much more, that as sin had reigned unto death,
so might grace also reign by rightuousenes unto eternal life through Jesus
Christ our lord. By these words of saint Paul we manife^tlye perceive the
thing to be true which we have said heretofore: that is to wit, that the law
was given to make sin known: which sin we do also know, no to be of
greater force tha^ Chris^es rightuousenes, wherthrough we be justified before
God. For even as Jesus Christ is stronger than Adam was: so is his
ryghtuousenes more mighty than the sin of Adam. And if the sin of Adam was
sufficient enough to make al men sinners and children of wrath without any
misdeed of our own: much more shall Christ's ryghtuousnes be of greater force
to make us all rightuouse and the children of grace, without any of our own
good works: which cannot be good, unless that before we do them, we our
selves be made good, The greatne^^e of sin (...) not to cause despair.
as Awstin also affirms. Hereby a man may know in what an error they be,
who by reason of some great offense, despair of gods good will, imagining that
he is not willing to forgive, cover, and pardon all sin, having alredie
punished and chastized al our sins and iniquities in his own only begotten
and deerebeloued son, and consequently granted a general pardon to all
mankind, which every body inioyeth that believes the Gospel, that is to say,
which believes the happy tidings that the Apostles have published through the
whole world, ^. Cor. 5.
saying: We beseech you for Jesus Christ's sake, be ye recon^yled unto God:
for he that never knew sin, was made a sacrifyze for our sin, that we might
become rightuouse in him. The Prophet Esaias foreseeing this great goodness of
God, writes these heavenly words, which do so well peynt out the passion of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the cause there of: as it is not to be found better
descrybed, even in the writings of the Apostles. Who (says he) will believe our
report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord reveled. But he shall grow up
before him as a branch and as a root out of a dry gdound, he has neither
form nor beauty: when we shall see him, there shall be no form that we should
desire him: He is despized and rejected of men, he is a man full of sorrows,
and has experience of infirmities, we hidd as it were our faces from him: he
was despized and we esteemed him not. Surely he has borne our infirmities and
carried our sorrows, yet we did judge him as plaged and smitten of god, and
humbled: but he was wounded for our tra^sgressions: he was broken for our
iniquities. The chasisme^t of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. All we like sheep have gone astraie: we have turned every one to
his own way, and ye Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all: he was
oppressed and he was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth. He is brought as
a sheep to the slaughter and as a sheep before the shearer is dumme so he
opens not his mouth. O great unkindness. O thing abominable? that we which
profess our selves Christians, and here that the son of God has taken al
our sins upon him, and washed them out with his preciouse blud, suffering
himself to be fastened to the cross for our sakes: should nevertheless make
as though we would justify our selves and purchase forgiveness of our sins by
our our own works: as who would say, that the deserts, ryghtuousenes and
bludshed of Jesus Christ were not enough to do it, unless we came to put to
our works and ryghtuousnes which are altogether defiled and spotted with
selfeloue, seflyking, selfeprofit, and a thousand other vanities, for which we
have need to crave pardon at GODS hand, rather than reward. Neither do we
think of the threatenings which saint Paul uses to the Galathians: who having
bin deceived by falseprechers, believed not that the justification by faith was
sufficient of it self, but went about still to be made rightuous by the Law.
Unto whom S. Paul says: Gala ^
Jesus Christ shall nothing profyt you that justify your selves by the Law:
for you be fallen from grace, because that we thorough the spirit of faith wait
for the hope of righteousness. An excellent comparison of the ^^^bilitie of
our own woorks.
Now if the seeking of righteousness and forgiveness of sins by the keeping
of the law which God gave upon mount Sinai with so great glory and majesty,
be the denying of Christ and of his grace: what shall we say to those that will
needs justify themselves before God by their own laws and obserua^ces? I
would wish that such folks should a little compare the one with the other, and
afterward give judgment themselves. God myndeth not to do that honor, nor to
give that glory to his own law, and yet they will have him to give it to
men's laws and ordinances. But that honor is given only to his only
begotten son, who alone by y^ sacrifice of his death and passion, has made
full amends for all our sins, past, present, Hebr. 7.
and to come, as saint Paul and saint John declare. John. 12.
Wherefore as often as we apply this satisfaction of Jesus Christ's, unto our
souls by faith: out of all dout we obtain forgiveness of our sins, and
become good and rightuouse before God, through his ryghtuousnes. Phil. 3
And therefore after that saint Paul has said, that as touching the
ryghtuousenes of y^ law, he had lived unblameable: he adds, and yet
whatsoever I have gained by it I have accounted it in all respects to be but
loss, for the love of Christ. And specially I esteem al things to be loss,
for the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for whom I have counted
all things to be loss, and deem them but as dung, so I may win Christ, and
be found in him, not having mine own rightuousenesse which is of the law,
but the righteousness which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, which
righteousness is given of god, I mean the righteousness of faith, that I may come
to the knowledge of Jesus Christ. O most notable words, which all Christians
ought to have engraven in their hearts, praying God to make them to taste it
perfectly. Lo, how S. Paul shows plainly, that whosoever knows Christ
aright esteems all the works of the law to be hurtful, for so much as they
make us to swerve from our trust in Jesus Christ, to whom every man ought to
impute his salvation, and to trust only unto him alone. And to enforce this
sentence the more, he adds further, that he esteems all things but as dung,
so he may gain Christ and be found incorporated in him: declaring thereby that
whosoever trusts in his own works, and pretends to justify him self by
them, gets not Jesus Christ another is ingreffed into him* And forasmuch as
the whole mystery of our faith consists in the truth hereof: ^o the end we
might ye better understand what he meant to say: he adds and repeteth
oftentimes, y^ he had nothing to do with all ye outward justification and all the righteousness that is grounded upon ye keeping of ye law, but that he would
cloth him self with y^ righteousness which God gives by faith, to al the^ y^
believe that all our sins are fully chastized and punished in Jesus Christ: ^.
Cor. 1.
and that Jesus Christ (as S. Paul says) is made our wisdom, righteousness,
holiness, and redemption to ye end, (as it is written) y^ he which will glory
should glory in the lord and not in his own works. Uery true it is, that in
ye holy scriptures there are some texts to be found, which being misvnderstode,
seem to gaynsay this holy doctrine of S. Paul's, and to attribute
justification and remission of sins unto works, and to charity. But those
authorities have already bin well expounded by sum who have showed plainly, y^
such as have understood the^ in ye sense aforesaid, understood them not aright.
Wherefore my deerebeloued brethren, let us not follow ye fond opinion of y^
bewitched Galathia^s, but rather let us follow y^ truth which s. Paul teaches
us, and let us give ye whole glory of our justification unto Gods mercy and to
y^ merits of his son, who by his own bludshed has set us free from y^
souereintie of the law, and from y^ tyranny of sin and death: and has brought
us into y^ kingdom of god, to give us life and endless felicity. I say yet
further, y^ he has delivered us from y^ dominion of the law, insomuch as he
has given us his holy spirit, who teaches us all truth, and that he has
satisfied the law to the full, and given the same satisfaction unto al his
members, (that is to wit to all true Christians,) so as they may safely appear
at Gods throne, because they be clothed with ye righteousness of his Christ,
How man is delivered and set free from the curse of the law.
and by him delivered from the curse of the law. Then cannot y^ law any more
accuse us or condemn us, nor move our affections or appetites, nor increase
sin in us. And therefore Saint Paul says, that the Obligacion which was
against us is cancelled Gal. 3.
by Jesus Christ and discharged upon the tree of the cross, Romans 8.
insomuch as he has set us fr^e from the subjection of the law, Colost. 2
and consequently from the tyranny of sin and death, which can no more
hereafter hold us oppressed because it is overcome by Jesus christ in his
resurrection, and so consequently by us which are his members, in such manner y^
we may say with Saint Paul, and with the Prophet Osee, 1. Cor. 15
Death is quyt^ vanquished and destroyed. O Death, where is thy (...)? O Hell,
where is thy victory? The sting of Death is ^in, and the strength of sin is the
law. But God be praised who has granted us vic^orie by our Lord Jesus
Christ. Genesis 3
He is ye bles^ed seed that has crusshed the head of y^ ve^emous Serpent,
that is to wit of ye Devil, insomuch that all those which believe in Ie^us
Christ, reposing their whole trust in his grace, do overcome sin, death, the
Devil and Hell, as Christ has done. He is that blessed seed of Abraham, in
the which god has promised blissednesse to all Nations. It behooved every
particular person to fight with ye said horrible Serpent, and too deliver him
self from that curse. But that enterprise was so great, that all the force of
the whole world knitte together was not able too go through with it. Wherefore
our God y^ father of mercy, being moved with compassion of our miseries, has
given us his only begotten son, who has delivered us from y^ veni^ of the
Serpent, and is him self become our blissednesse and righteousness,
condicionally y^ we accept the same, renou^cing al our own otward
iustifications. Then my dear breethren let us embrace the righteousness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and let us make it ours by means of faith: let us
assure our selves that we be rightuouse, not for our own works, but through
the merits of Jesus Christ, and let us live merrily and assured that the
righteousness of Jesus Christ has utterly done away all our vnrightuosnes, and
made us good, rightuouse, and holy before God, who beholding us ingreffed into
his son by faith, esteems us not now any more as the children of Adam, but
as his own children, and has made us heirs of al his riches, with his own
begotten son.

The fourth Chapter.
Of the effects of lively faith, and of the union of man's Soul with Jesus
Christ.
THis holy faith works after such a sort in us, How we (...) the likeness
of God.
y^ he which believes y^ Jesus Christ has taken all his sins upon him,
becomes like unto Christ, and overcomes sin, the devil, death, and Hell.
And the reason thereof is this: namely that the church (that is to wit every
faithful Soul) is Christ's wife, A very good s^militude expressing the manner
how our (...) are taken away by Christ.
and Christ is her husband. For we know how the law of marriage is, that of
two, they become one selfsame thing, being two in one flesh, and that the
goods and substance of either of them become common to the^ both: by means
whereof the husband says, that the dowry of his wife is his, and likewise the
wife says that her husbands house and all his riches are hirs: and of a truth
so they are: for otherwise they should not be one flesh, as the scripture
says. After the same manner has God married his onlibegotte^ and deerbeloued
son to the faithful soul, which has not any other thing peculiar of her
own, save only sin, and yet the son of God has not disdeyned to take her for
his well-beloved spowse, together with her peculiar dowry, which is sin. And now
by reason of y^ union which is in this holy marriage, look what y^ on has, is
also y^ others. Jesus christ therefore says thus: The dowry of man's soul my
dear wife, (that is to wit her sins and transgressings of the law, Gods wrath
against her, the boldness of the diuill over her, the prison of Hell, and all
other her evils) are become mine and are in my power to do what I list with
the^. Wherefore it is at my choice to deal with them at my pleasure, and
therefore I will put out the hand writing which is against the soul ^y wife, I
will take it out of the way, I will fasten it too my cross in mine own
body, and in the same will I spoil principalities and powers and make a show
of the^ openly and triumph over them and consume the^ utterly unto nothing.

Now when GOD saw his son who knew no ^nne, neither had any sin in him,
thus wyllingly taking on him the fowlenes of our iniquity, he made him to be
sin for us even the very sacrifice for our sin: and did sharply punish our
sin in him, putting him to death, even the death of the cross. Howbeit
forasmuch as he was his well-beloved and obedient son, Math. 28
he would not leave him in death nor suffer his holy one to see corruption:
Phil. 2
but raised him up from death to life, giving him al power in heaven and earth,
and set him at his right hand in glory. Now then the wife likewise with
exceeding great joy does say: the Realms and Kingedomes of my most dear
husband and savior are mine, by him I am an heir of heaven, my husbands
riches, (that is to wit his holiness his innocence, his rightuousenes and his
godhead, together with al his virtue and might,) are mine and for me: and
therefore in him I am holy, innocent, ryghtuouse, and godly, and there is not
any spot in me. I am well favored and fair, inasmuch as my lawful husband
has not any blemishe in him, but is altogether goodly and fair. And since that
he is wholly mine, and so consequently all that he has is mine, and all that
he has is pure and holy: it follows that I also am pure and holy. Therefore
to begin at his most innocent birth^ he has thereby sanctified the birthe of
his spouse conceived in sin. The godly chyldhod and youth of the brydegroome,
has justified the childish and youthful life of his deerbeloued bryde. For the
love and union that is betwixt the soul of a true christian and the
bridegroom Jesus Christ, makes all the woorks of either of them, to be common
to the^ both. By reason whereof when a man says, Jesus Christ has fasted,
Jesus Christ has prayed, Jesus Christ was herd of the father, raised the dead,
drove devils out of men, healed the sick, dyed, rose again, and ascended into
heaven: Likewise a man may say, that a Christen man has done all the selfsame
works, forasmuch as the works of Christ are the works of the Christian,
because he has done them for him. Uerely a man may say y^ the Christian has
bin nailed too ye cross, buried, raised again, is gone up into heaven, become
the child of God, and made partaker of the Godhead. On the other side, all the
works y^ a Christian man does are Christ's works, because it is his will to
take them for his. And forasmuch as they be imperfect, and he thoroughly
perfect, and cannot away with any imperfect thing: he has made them perfect
with his virtues, to the end that his wife should be always joyful and well
co^tentid and not be afraid of any thing assuring hirself, that although there
be yet still some default in her works, yitnotwithstanding they be acceptable
to God in respect of his son, upon who^ he has his eyes alwais fastened. O
y^ unmeasurable goodness of god? how greatly is the christian bound unto god?
There is no love of man, be it never so great, that may be compared with y^ love
that god bears to the soul of every faithful christian, whereof Christ is y^
bridgrome. Whervppon s. Paul says, that Jesus Christ has so loved his wif
ye church which is builded of living stones (that is of the souls of y^
believing christians) that for to sanctify her, Ephe. 5.
^ he has offered himself to the death of ye cross, clenzing her with the
washing of water, by his word, to join her to himself a gloriouse church
without spot or wrincle or other like thing: but that she should be holy and
unblameable (that is to wit like unto him in holiness and innocence) and also
be the true and lawful daughter of god, who has loved the world so well, that
(as Jesus Christ himself says) he has given his onlibegotten son, John. 3.
to the end that every one which beleueh in him should not perish, but have
life everlasting. For God sent not his son into the world to condemn the
world: but to the end that the World might be saved by him, insomuch that
he which believes in him shall not be damned. How the faithful man's soul is
assu^ed of his being married unto Christ.
Some man might demand after what manner the union of this holy Marriage is
made, and how the Soul which is the Bryde, and her Bridegroom Jesus Christ
are knitte together. What assurance can I have, that my Soul is united unto
Jesus Christ, and become his Spowse? How can I assuredly glory that I am
Queen and Mistress of his great riches, as a wife may? I can easly believe
that otherfolkes shall receive this honor and glory: but I cannot persuade my
self that I am one of th^se same to whom GOD has given so great grace: For
I know mine own wretchedness and imperfection. My der^beloued brother, I
answer thee that thine assurance consists in true and lively faith, wherewith
(as Saint Peter says) God clenzeth men's hearts: Act. 5
And this fayeth is grownded in the be leuing of the Gospel that is to say,
in the believing of the glad tidings which has bin published on GODS behalf
throwgh the whole world: which tidings conteyneth in effect, that god has used
the rigorousenes of his justice against Jesus Christ, chastizing and punishing
all our sins in him. Mat. 2
And whosoever receives this good tidings and believes it steadfastly, has the
true faith and does inioye the forgiveness of his sins, and is also reconciled
unto GOD: and of the child of wrath, is become the child of grace: and
recovering the image of God, enters into the kingdom of God, and is made the
temple of God, 2. Cor. 3.
who maryeth man's soul to his only Son, by the mean of this faith, which
faith is a work of God and the gift of god, as saint Paul says oftentimes.
And God gives it unto those whom he calls to him, of purpose to justify
them and to glorify the^, and to give them everlasting life, according as our
Lord Jesus Christ witnesses saying: This is the will of him that sent me,
John. 6
even that every one which sees the son and believes in him, should have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up agein at the latter day. John. 3
And like as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness: so must the son
of man be lifted up, to the end that every one which believes in him might not
perish but have life everlasting. Also he says to Martha: John. 11.
He that believes in me shall live, although he were dead, and every one that
lives and believes in me shall not dye for ever. And to a company of the
Jews he says: John. 12.
I am come a light into the world, to the end that every man which believes in
me, should not abide in darkness. And saint John in his Epistle says: 1. John.
4
Herein appeered the love of god toward us, for that god is love and sent his
only begotten son into this world, that we might live through him. And here
in is love known, not in that we loved God, but in that he loved us and sent
his son to make atonement for our sins. And moreover, he sent him to
destroy our enemies. For the bringing whereof to pass, he made him parttaker of
our flesh, and of our blud, as says saint Paul, to the end that by his
death he might destroy him that had the dominion of death, Hebr. ^.
that is to wit the devil, and set al such at liberty, as were subject to
bondage al their life long, for fear of death. Seeing then that we have records
of the holy Scripture, concerning the promises, whereof we have spoken
heretofore, and concerning many other promyses that are dispersed in diverse
places of the same: we cannot dout of it. And for so much as the Scripture
speaks to all ingenerall, none of us ought to distrust in himself, that the
selfsame thing which the Scripture says, should not belong perticularly to
him self. And to the end that this point, wherein lies and consists the
whole mystery of our holy faith, may be understood the better: A very goodly
s^^ilitude and ^it for the expressing of the free for giuensse of si^^es for
Jesus Christ's sake.
Let us put the case that some good and holy King, cause proclamation to be
made through his whole Realm by the sound of a Trumpet, that all Rebels and
banished men shall safely return home to their howses, because that at the
sewt and desert of some dear friend of theirs, it has pleased him to pardon
them: certainly none of those Rebels ought to dout, of the obteyning of true
pardon of his rebellion, but rather ought assuredly to return home to his
house, to live under the shadow of that holy king. And if he will not
return, he shall bear the penalty of it, because that through his own
unbelief he dies in exyll and in the displeasure of his prince. But this good
king is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, who for the obedience and desert of our
good brother Jesus Christ, has pardoned us all our siunes, and (as we have
said before) has made open proclamaction through the whole world, that all of
us may safely return into his kingdom. Wherefore he that believes this
proclamacio^, does streytwayes return into Gods kingdom (whereoutof we were
driven by the offense of our first parents,) and is blissedly governed by gods
holy Spirit. And he that gives no credit to the said proclamacion, shall
never enjoy the said geuerall pardon: but for his vnbelefes sake shall abide in
banishment under the tyranny of the devil, and live and dye in extreme
misery, living and dying in the di^pleasure of the king of heaven and earth:
and that justly. For we cannot commit a greater offense against this good God,
that to account him as a liar and deceiuer: which verily we do, in not giving
credit to his promises. O how passing heavy is this deadly sin of unbelief?
which (so far forth as is possible (bereeueth God of his glory and
perfection: besides the great harm that it does to a man's self, which is
his own damnation and the endless torment of his soul, which the miserable
conscience feels even in this life. But on the contrary, he that comes
unto GOD with assuredness of this faith, believing him without any mistruste
or dowt of his promises, and warranting himself for a certeyntie, that God
will perform all that ever he has promised him: gives all the glory unto
God, and lives continually in rest and endless joy, evermore praising and
thanking the Lord God for choozing him to the glory of the eternal life. ^.
Cor. 1.
And hereof they have an assured earnestpeny and gage, that is to wit the son
of god, whom they take for their most loving Brydegrome, the blud of whom has
made their hearts so drunken: that through this passing holy belefe there is
in the christen heart engendered so lively a hope and so certain a trust of gods
^ercie toward us, and such an operation is wrought in us, as we rest our
selves wholly upon God, leaving the whole care of us unto him in such wise
that being thoroughly assured of Gods good will, we are not afraid, another of ye
devil, uor of his ministers, nor of death. Which holy and steadfast trust of
Gods mercy, inlargeth our heart, cheereth it up, and with certain marualouse
sweet affections dyrecteth it unto GOD, filling it and setting it on Fire with
an exceeding fervent love. Heb. 4
And therefore Paul incourageth us to go with all boldness to the throne of
grace: and he counsels us that we should not shake it of, nor make light of
our trust, which has great recompense and reward. But this so holy and divine
affiance is gendred in our hearts by the working of the holy ghost, who is
communicated unto us by faith, Heb. 10.
which never goes without ye love of God. And hereof it comes, that we be
provoked to do good works with a certain liuelines and effectual
cherefulnes: whereby we gather such a strength and inclinacion to do the^, as
we be thoroughly ready and foreward to do and suffer all intolerable things
for the love and glory of our most graciouse and merciful father, who has
inryched us with so abundaunt grace through Jesus Christ, and of his enemies
made us his most dear children. This treue faith is no sooner given a man,
but he is by and by indewed and imprinted with a certain violent love of good
works, to yield right sweet and amiable fruits both unto God and likewise to
his Neybour, as a very good and fruitful tree. And it is no more possible
that he should be otherwise, than it is possible that a faggot should be set on
fire and not cast light immediately. Heb. 8
This is the holy faith without the which it is impossible that any man
should please God, and whereby all the holy men (as well of the old Testament
as of the new) have bin saved, according as Saint Paul witnesses of Abraham:
Romans 4.
concerning whom the Scripture says, Genesis 1^.
that Abraham bel^^ued GOD, and it was reckened too him for rightuousenesse.
And therefore he says a little before: We believe that a man is justified by
faith without the deeds of the Law. Rom 2.
And in another place he says: Sothen in that time shall the remnant be saved,
according to the election of grace: and if they be saved by grace, then is it
not by works, for then were grace no grace. And to the Galathians he says,
Gala. 3.
it is a manifest matter that no man becomes rightuouse before God by the
Law, Abac. 2.
because the rightuouse lives by faith. And the law consists not in
belief, but he that performs the things that the Law commands, Gal. 3.
shall live by that performance. And further he says that a man cannot
become rightuouse by the deeds of the law, but only by believing in Jesus
Christ. Agein, a little after he says, that if a man can become rightuouse by
the Law, Jesus Christ dyed in vain. Moreover, Romans 10.
to the Romans, making comparison between the righteousness of the Law, and
the righteousness of the Gospel, he says that the one consis^eth in the
doing of works, and the other in believing. For if thou confess our Lord
Jesus Christ with thy mouth, and believe in thy heart that God has raised him up
from death: thou shall be saved. For the belief of the heart makes a man
rightuouse, and the confession of the mouth makes him safe. Lo how this good
teacher Saint Paul shows evidently, that faith makes a man rightuouse
without any works. And not only Saint Paul, but also the holy Doctors that
came after him have confirmed and allowed this most holy truth of
Justification by faith: among whom Saint Augustine is the chief, S. Augustine
who in his book of faith and works, and in his book of the Spirit and the
Letter, and in his book of fourscore and three questions, and in his book
which he did write to Boniface, and in his treatise upon the xxxj. Psalm, and
in many other places, defends this article, showing that we become rightuous
by faith without any help of good works: howbeit that good works are the
effects of righteousness, and not the cause of it. And he shows that y^
words of S. ^ames being soundly understood, are nothing contrary to this
article. Origin
Whith thing Origin does also affirm in his fourth book upon the Epistle to
the Romans, saying y^ S. Paul's meaning is, that faith only is sufficient to
make men rightuouse, insomuch that a man becomes rightuouse, only by
believing, although he have not done any good work at all. For so it is, yt
the thief became rightuouse without the works of the law, forasmuch as the
Lord sought not what good works he had done in time past, nor waited until he
had done any after he had believed, but having accepted him for rightuouse upon
his only confession, took him for his companion even when he should enter into
Paradyse. Likewise, that so renowned Marie magdalen.
woman in the gospel of Saint Luke, Luke. 6.
while she was yet at the feet of Jesus Christ, herd it said unto her, thy
sins are forgiven thee. And a little after he says unto her, thy faith has
saved thee, goo thy way in peace. Afterward Origin says. In many places of the
Gospel a man may see how our Lord Jesus Christ has spoken in such wise, as he
shows that faith is the cause of the salvation of the beleuers. The^ is a man
made rightuouse by faith, Faith is the mark of those that are justified
and the works of the law further him nothing at all. On the contrary, where
faith is not, (which faith makes ye believer rightuouse,) although a man do
the works which the law commands: yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as they be
not builded upon the foundation of faith, albeit y^ to outward appearance they
seem good, yet can they not justify him that does them, because he wants
faith, which is the mark of the^ that are become rightuouse before God. And
who is he that ca^ boast himself to be rightuouse, when he hereth God say by
his Prophet ^say, Esai. 64.
that all our righteousness is as a defiled cloth of a menstruouse woman? Then
can we not justly glory in our selves but in y^ only faith of the cross of
Jesus Christ. S. Basil in his Homily of humility, S. Basil.
says y^ the Christian ought to hold himself for rightuouse through belief
in Jesus Christ, and his words are these. The Apostle says that he which
glories should glory in the Lord, in that God has made Jesus Christ to be
our wisdom, rightuousenes, holiness, and redemption, to the end y^ he which
would glory should glory in the Lord, because that the perfect and sound
glorying is to glory in the Lord. For in so doing, a man presumes not upon
his own rightuousenes, but acknowledges his want of the true rightuousenes,
and that he is made rightuouse, only by beleeuyng in Jesus Christ. And Saint
Paul gloryeth of the despyzyng of his own rightuousenesse, and of his seeking
of Christ's righteousness, by faith which comes of GOD. Saint Hilary in his
ninth Canon upon the exposition of Saint Matthew says these words: S. Hilary
The Scribes considering Jesus Christ but only as man, were troubled, that a
man should forgive sins, and pardon that thing which the Law could not do,
because that only faith justifies. S. Ambrose.
Saint Ambrose in expounding these words of Saint Paul (unto him that
believes in him which justifies the ungodly, Romans 4
his fay the is accounted for righteousness, according to the purpose of Gods
grace: like as David also says, that the man is blissed whom God accompteth
rightuouse without works) writes thus. Saint Paul says, that unto him
which believes in Jesus Christ (that is to wit to the Gentile) his faith is
imputed for rightuonsnes, as it was unto Abraham. In what wise then think the
Jews to become rightuous by the works of the Law: and yet to be rightuous
as Abraham was, seeing that Abraham became not rightuouse by the deeds of the
Law, but only by faith? Then is not the Law needful, forasmuch as the
sinner becomes rightuouse before God through only faith, according to gods
graciouse purpose, as David says. The Apostle coufirmeth that which he has
said, by the Prophets example, Psalm. 31
saying: Blissed is the man whom God accepts for rightuouse without works:
whereby David meeneth, that those men are very happy, whom GOD has determined
to accept for rightuouse before him, by only faith without any pains taking
or observation of the Law on their behalf. Thus shows he the blissednesse of
the time wherein Christ was borne, in so much as the Lord himself says: Many
rightuouse men and Prophets have coueted to see the things that you see, and
to hear the things that you hear, and have not heard them. The selfsame
thing says Saint Ambrose in expounding the first chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, affirming openly that whosoever believes in Jesus
Christ, is become rightuous without works and without any desert, and
receives forgiveness of his sins by faith alone. Also he affirms the same
thing in an epistle which he writes to Ireneus saying: let no man boast of his
own works, for no man becomes rightuous by his own works: but he y^ has
righteousness, has it of free gift^ for so much as he is made rightuouse by Jesus
Christ. Then is it faith that delivers by Christ's blud: for happy is he
whose sin is forgiven and pardoned. S. Bernard.
And S. Bernard in his threescore and seventeenth Sermon upon the Ballet of
Ballets, confirms y^ same, saying that our own merits bear no sway at all
in making us rightuouse, which thing m^st be attributed wholly unto grace which
makes us rightuouse freely, and likewise discharges us from the bondage of
sin. And he adds, that Jesus Christ marieth y^ soul and cupleth it unto
himself by faith, without that any desert of our works ought or can come
between. But because I will not be to long, I will make an end of mine
allegations, when I have uttered one very notable and good saying of Saint
Ambrosis in his book entitled of Jacob concerning the blessid life. Genesis 17.
The said holy man says, y^ like as Jacob having not on his own behalf
deserved the birth right, A very good comparion how we be clothed with the
rightuousenesse of Jesus Christ.
shrouded himself under the apparel of his brother, and clothed himself with
his garment which yielded a very sweet sent, and in that wise presented
himself to his father to receive y^ blissing under another man's person to his
own behoof: even so is it requisite for us to clothe our selves with the
rightuousenesse of Jesus Christ by faith and to shroud our selves under the
divine pureness of our eldest brother, if we will be received for rightuouse
before God. And certainly this is true. For if we appear before God unclothed
of the rightuousenes of Jesus Christ: but of all dout we shall be judged worthy
of everlasting damnation. But contrariwise, if God see us appareled with the
rightuousenes of his son Christ: then will he surely take us for rightuouse,
and holy, and worthy of eternal life. And verily it is a great rashness in
such as pretend to attein to rightuousenes by the keeping of gods
commaundeme^ts, which are al comprehended in loving God with all our heart,
with all our soul, and with al our strength, and our Neybour as our self. But
who is so arroga^t or so mad, No man (...) boast of the performance of gods
law.
as to presume y^ he is able to perform those commandments to the full? Or
who sees not that gods law requires perfect love, and condemns all
imperfectness? Let every man consider well his own works, which partly shall
seem good unto him: and he shall find that they ought rather to be called
transgressions of that most holy Law, according also as they be altogether
unclean and imperfect, so that he must be feign to utter this saying of David's,
Psalm. 102.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for no man living shall be
found ryghtuouse in thy sight. And Salomo^ says who is he that may say, Pro.
20.
my heart is clean? And Job cries out, Job. 1^.
that man is he that can be undefiled, and what man borne of woman can show
himself rightuouse? Behold he found no stedfastnes among his saints, yea the
heavens are not clean in his sight. How much more abominable and filthy is
man, who drinks iniquity as it were water? And saint, John says, ^^ohn. 2.
if we say we be without sin, we deceive our selves. Math. 6.
And specially our savior Jesus Christ teaches us to say, as often as we
pray, Forgive us all our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us* And hereby may well be gathered the folly of those y^ make mercha^dyse of
their works, presuming to save by them, not only themselves, but also their
neighbors, as though our Lord Jesus Christ had not said unto them. When ye have
done all y^ ever is commanded you, Luke. 17
say ye, we be unprofitable servants: we have done but as we ought to do. Ye
see y^ although we had performed gods law to y^ full, yet nevertheless we should
esteem and call our selves unprofitable servants, Now then, seeing that men are
so far of from this full performance: who is he that dares be so bold as to
glorify himself that he has added so great an overplus of deseruings above
y^ full measure, as he may have to deal abroad unto others? But to return to
our purpose, I would that the proud sinner which bears himself in hand that
he makes himself rightuouse before God by doing some works which are allowable
to y^ world, would consider that al y^ works which proceed out of an unclean
and soul heart, are also unclean and filthy, and consequently cannot be
acceptable unto God, nor have any power to make the party rightuouse. Therefore
we must first of all clenze y^ ^art, if we mind that our works should please
God. The clenzing of the heart proceeds of faith, as the holy ghost affirms
by the mouth of S. Peter? Then must we not say that the vnrightuouse person and
the sinner becomes rightuouse, Acts. 1^.
good, and acceptable unto god by his own works: but we must of necessity
conclude, that faith clenzeth our hearts, and makes us good, ryghtuouse and
acceptable before GOD, and furthermore cawseth our works to please him,
notwithstanding that they be altogether unprofitable and imperfect. For inasmuch
as we be become y^ children of god through faith: he considers our works,
not as a severe and rigorouse judge, but as a most merciful Father, having
pity of our fraylenes, and regarding us as y^ members of his eldest son,
whose perfection and rightuousenes does supply all our uncleanness and
imperfection, which are not laid to our charge for so much as they be covered
under the pur^nes and innoce^cie of Jesus Christ, and come not to judgment
before God. And hereuppon it comes to pass, How the works of y^ faithful,
though they be imperfect, please GOD.
that all our works which proceed of true faith, (notwithstanding that they be
wholly sinful and corrupt of themselves,) shall nevertheless be praised and
allowed by Jesus Christ in the general judgment, because they be the fruits
and testimonies of our faith whereby we be saved. For insomuch as we have loved
y^ brethren of Jesus Christ, we shall show evidently, y^ we have also bin
faithful, and brethren of Christ, and therefore by faith we shall be put in full
possession of the everlasting kingdom, which our souerein Lord god has
prepared for us before the creating of the world: Math. 2^
not for our merits sakes, but through his mercy, whereby he has chozen us,
and called us to the grace of his gospel, and made us ryghtuouse, to the intent
to glorify us everlastingly with his only begotten son Jesus Christ, who is
the holiness and rightuousenes of us, but not of them which will not confess
that faith is sufficient of it self to make a man rightuouse and acceptable to
y^ Lord God, who through his fatherly goodness and louingkindnes offers and
gives us Jesus Christ with his rightuousenes, without any desert of our own
works. What thing can work or cause a man to deserne so great a gift and
treasure as Jesus Christ is? This treasure is given only through the grace,
favor, In wha^ manner faith iustify^th.
and mercifulnes of god: and only faith is the thing that receives such a
gift, as to make us enjoy the forgiveness of our sins. And therefore when S.
Paul and other doctors say, that only ^ayth makes men ryghtuouse, without
works: they mean that it makes us to enjoy the general forgiveness of our
sins, and to^ receive Jesus Christ, Ephe. 3.
who (as says saint Paul) dwells in our hearts by faith, and ouercomming
and pacifying the trubbles of our consci^^ces, satisfies gods justice for our
sins. Furthermor it appeaseth gods wrath iustlimoued against us, quenches
the fire of hell wherein? our natural corruption did throw us headlong, and
cheerfully destroieth and overthrows y^ Devil, together with al his power and
tyranny: Which things, all the works that all the men in y^ world can lay
together, are not able to deserve nor to bring to pass. That glory and that
prerogative is reserved alonly to the son of God, that is to wit to the
blissed Jesus Christ, who has power above all the powers that are in Heaven,
in Earth, and in Hell, and gives himself and his merits, to al such as
distrusting in themselves do set their whole hope of being saved, in him and in
his merits. And therefore let no man begwyle himself when he hereth it said,
that only faith justifies without works: and think as fal^e christians do,
(who draw al things to live fleshly) that the true faith consists in
believing the bare story of Jesus Christ, after the same manner as men believe y^
story of Caesar or of Alexander. Such manner of belief is but an historical
belief, grounded merely upon the report of men, and upon their writings, and
lighly imprinted in our conceyt by a certeint custom, and is like to the faith
of the Turks, who for the like reasons believe y^ fables of their Alcorane. And
such a faith is but an imagination of man, which never renews the heart of
ma^nor warmeth it with the love of God, neither do any good works insew or any
change of life which faith should bring forth. And therefore they fal^^y hold
opinion, against the holy scripture and against the holy Doctors of the church,
that only faith makes not me^ rightuouse, but y^ they must also have works
Unto whom I answer, that this historical and fond belief, and all the works
that insew thereof, are not only unable to make a man rightuouse: Mat. 12.
but also do cast the parties headlong to the bottom of hell, like unto those
that have none oil in their Lamps, y^ is to say, no lively faith in their
hearts. The faith that makes men rightuouse, Romans 6.
is a work of God in us whereby our old man is crucified, and we being
transformed in Jesus Christ, become new creatures, and the derebeloued children
of God. This heavenly faith is it that graffeth us into the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, and consequently mortifieth our flesh with the
effects and lusts thereof. For when we by the operation of faith do know our
selves to be dead with Jesus Christ: we are at a full point with our selves and
with the world, and are thoroughly resolved how it is meet that they which are
dead with Jesus Christ, should mortify their earthly^ members, that is to wit
the sinful affections of their mind, and the lusts of the flesh: and
forasmuch as we know we be raised again which Christ, we bend our selves to the
leading of a spiritual and holy life, like unto that which we shall live in
heaven, after the last resurrection. This holy faith making us to inoy the
general pardon that is published by the gospel, brings us into the kingdom
of our good god, and pacifyeth our consciences, mainteyning us in continewal
joy and holy and spiritual sweetness. This self same faith knitteth us unto
god, and makes him to dwell in our hearts, and clotheth our soul with himself,
so as thenseforth the holy Ghost moves us to do the same things whereunto he
moved Jesus Christ while he was in this world and was conversant among men:
that is to wit, unto lowlines, mekenes, obedientnes unto God, louingnes, and
other perfections, wherthrough we recover the image of god. For this selfsame
causes Jesus Christ did rightly attribute blissednes unto this inspyred faith:
which blissednes cannot be without good works and holiness of life. And how can
it be that a christian should not become holy, seeing y^ Jesus Christ is become
his holiness through faith? Therefore by faith we be justified and saved, Saint
Paul calls them Saints whom we call Christians.
and therefore S. Paul does in a manner always call those Saints, whom we call
now christians: who, if they have not Christ's spirit, are none of Christ's,
and consequently no christians at all. But if they have the spirit of Jesus
Christ to rule and govern them: we must not dowt, He that believes cannot be
with out good works.
but that although they know well y^ they be made rightuouse thorough faith
only: yet for all that they will become never the more slothful to do good
works. For Christ's spirit is the spirit of love: and love cannot be idle, nor
cease from the doing of good works. But if we will say the truth, a man can
do no good works, except he first know himself to be become ryghtuouse by
faith: for before he knows that, his doing of good works is rather to make
himself ryghtuouse than for the love and glory of God: and so he defyleth al
his works with selfeloue for the love of himself and for his own profit. But
he that knows himself to be become ryghtuouse by the merits and
rightuousenesse of Christ, (which he makes his own by faith) laboreth
happily, and does good works alonly for ye love and glory of Christ, and not
for love of himself, nor to make himself rightuouse. And theruppon it
comes, that y^ true christian, (that is to wit, he that accounts himself
rightuouse by reason of Christ's rightuousenesse) asks not whither good works
be commanded or not: but being wholly moved and provoked with a certain
violence of Godly love, he offers himself willingly to do all the works
that are holy and christianlyke, and never cease to do well. He therefore
which feels not the marvelous (...) by his faith which we have heretofore
^eclared that the inspired faith works in the heart of the christian. Let him
assure himself, that he has not the christian faith, and let him pray
earnestly unto God to give it him, saying: Lord, Mark^ 9.
help mine unbelief. And when he herereth it said y^ only faith makes men
rightuonse: let him not deceive himself and say, what need I to weary my self in
doing good works, faith is enough to send me to Paradyse? to such a one I
answer, y^ only faith sends us to Paradise: but yet let him take good head
for y^ devils do also believe and tr^ble, as says saint James. James. 2.
O miserable man will thou go with them to Paradise? By this false conclusion
t^ou may know, (my brother,) in what an error thou art, for thou weenest to
have the faith that makes men rightuouse, and thou haste it not. Apoc. 3.
Thou say thou art rich and have no need of any thing:: and thou see not
how thou art pore, wretched, blind, and naked. I counsel thee to bwy gold of
GOD, that is thoroughly fired with fire, (that is to say, true faith set on fire
with good works,) to the intent thou may become rich: and to clothe thy
self with white rame^t, (that is to wit with Christ's innocence,) to the end
that the shame of thy nakedness, (which is the great filthiness of thy
sins) be not seen to the whole world. Then is the justifying faith as it
were a flame of fire, which cannot but cast forth brightness. A lively comparison
And like as the flame burns the wood without the help of the light, and yet
the flame cannot be with out the light: so is it assuredly true, y^ faith alone
consumes and burns away sin with out the help of works, and yet that the
same faith cannot be without good works. Wherefore, like as if we see a flame of
fire that gives no light, we know biandby y^ it is but vain and painted:
even so when we see not some light of good works in a man, Wh^t S. James meant
concerning works.
it is a toke^ y^ he has not y^ true inspired faith, which god gives to his
chozen, to justify and glorify them withal. And hold it for certain, that
Saint James meant so when he said, James. 2.
show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works.
For his mening was, y^ he which is plundged in ambitionsenes, and worldly
pleasures, believes not, though he say he believe) forasmuch as he shows not
in himself the effects of faith. ^ heavenly (...).
Also we may like^ this holy faith to the godhead which is in Jesus Christ: who
being very man (but without sin) did wonderful things, healing the sick,
giving sight to the blind, walking upon the water, and raising up the dead,
unto lift agein: and yet these maruelouse works were not the cause that he
was GOD. For before he did any of those things, he was God and the lawful and
onlibegotten son of God, and he neded not to work those miracles to make
himself god by them, but forasmuch as he was god, therefore he did the^. And so,
the miracles that Christ wrought made him not to be god, but showed openly that
he was God. In likewise, true faith is as it were a godhead in the soul of a
christian, which does wonderouse works and is never weary of well doing: and
yet those works are not y^ cause y^ a christian is a christian, (y^ is to wit,
that he is rightuouse good, holy, and acceptable unto God, neither needs he
to work all those good works to become such a one. But forasmuch as he is a
Christian by faith, like as Jesus Christ being a man was also God by his
Godhead: he does all those good works, which make not the christian to be
rightuouse and good, but show him to be good rightuouse and holy. So then,
like as Christ's Godhead was y^ cause that he wrought miracls: even so faith
working through love, is y^ cause of y^ good works that a chzisten man does.
And like as a man may say of Jesus Christ, y^ he has done this miracle or
that, and that those miracles, besides y^ they glorified God, were also a great
honor unto Jesus Christ as he was man, who for his obedience even unto death,
was recompensed at gods hand in his resurrection, and had given unto him all
power but in heaven and earth, which he had not before as in respect of his
manhod, but deserved it by the union which is betwixt the word of God and the
manhod of Christ: So does faith in a christian, which faith by reason of the
union that it has with y^ soul, attributes y^ thing to the one which is
proper to y^ other: whervppon it comes, that y^ holy scripture promises the
christian everlasting life for his good works because good works are y^ fruits
and testimonies of lively faith, and proceed of it as light proceeds from a
flame of fire, according as I have said heretofore. And by this holy faith
which imbraseth Jesus christ it comes to pass that our soul is joined with
Christ and is so united and knit to him, that whatsoever Christ has merited
and deserved, the same is imputed unto the soul as though it had merited and
deserved it. And therefore S. Austin says that God crowns his own gifts in
us. John. 17.
Of this union of the soul with Jesus Christ, Christ himself bears good
record where he prays to his Father for his Apostles, and for such as should
believe in him by their preaching. I pray not (says he) for the^ only: but
also for all those that shall believe in me through their word, to the end they
may be al one thing, that like as thou my Father art in me and I in thee, so
they also may be one in us, and that the world may believe that thou have sent
me, and that I have given the^ the glory which thou haste given me, so as
they should be one selfsame thing like as thou and I are one. Whereby it
appears evidently, that if we believe y^ word of the Apostles, Romans 4.
(who preached that Jesus Christ died for our sins and rose agein for our
justification) we become all one thing with him: and forasmuch as he is all one
with Go^. we also become all one with God by the mean of Jesus Christ. 2. Cor.
6.
O wonderful glory of the christian, to whom it is granted through faith, to
possess the unspeakable benefits which the Angels long to behold. By this
present discourse a man may plainly perceive the difference, that is betwixt us
and them that defend y^ justification by faith and work^s together Herein we
agree with them, that we stablish works, affirming that the faith which
justifies cannot be without good works, and that those which are become
rightuouse are they that do the good works that may rightly be called good
works. 1. Peter. 2
But we differ from the^ in this, that we say, that faith makes men rightuouse
without the help of works. And the reason is ready: namely bycawse that by
faith we put on Christ, Gala. 3.
and make his holiness and rightuousenesse to be ours. And seeing the case so
stands, that Christ's rightuousenesse is given us by faith: We cannot be so
thanklesse, blind, and unhappy as not to believe that he is of suffycient
ability, to make us (acceptable and ryghtuouse before GOD. Let us say with
the Apostle, Hebr. 9.
if the blud of Oxen and Gotes and the ashes of a Cow sprincled, clenzeth the
unclean, as touching y^ clenzing of y^ flesh: how much more shall the blud of
Jesus Christ who by the everlasting spirit offered himself undefiled unto God,
clenze our consciences from dead works to serve the living God? I prey thee
now, thou good and devout christian, consider well which of these two opinions
is the trewest, holiest, and worthiest to be preached: Ours, which aduaunceth
the benefyte of Jesus Christ, and pulls down the pride of man which would
exalt his own works against Christ's glory: or the other which by affirming
that faith of it self iusti^ieth not, defaceth the glory and benefyte of Jesus
Christ and puffs up the pride of man, who cannot abide to be justified freely
by our Lord Jesus Christ, without some merit of his own. But (say they) it
is a great quickening up to good works, to say that a man makes himself
rightuouse before good by means of them. I answer, that we also confess that
good works are acceptable to god, and that he of his mere grace and free
liberality recompenseth them in Paradise. But we say moreover, that no works
are good, saving those y^ as (S. Austin says) are done by the^ that are
become rightuouse through faith, because that if the tree be not good, it
cannot yield good fruit. And furthermore we say that such as are become
ryghtuouse through faith, forasmuch as they know themselves to be ryghtuouse
through Gods righteousness purchased by Christ: make no bargayning with GOD
for their works, as though they would bwy their manner of justification such
as it is, with them: but being inflamed with the love (...) GOD, and desirouse
to glorify Jesus christ who has made them rightuouse by giving them his
merits and riches, they bestow (...) their whole study and labor to do gods
will, fighting manfully against the love of themselves, and against the world
and the Devil. And when they fall through frayltie of the flesh, they recover
themselves by and by, and are so much the more desirous to do good, and so
much the more in love with their God, considering that he lays not their
sinn^^ to their charge, because they be ingraffed (...) Jesus Christ, who has
made full (...) for all his members upon the tree of his cross, and makes
continual interce^^^ for them to the eternal Father, who for the love of his
only begotten son, beholds them always with a gentle countenance,
governing and defending them as his most dear children, and in the end giving
them the h^ritage of the world, making them like fashioned to the glorious
Image of Christ. These loving motions are the spurs that prick forward y^ true
christians to do good works: who considering y^ they are become the children of
god through faith, and made partakers of his divine nature, are sturred up by
the holy ghost dwelling in the^, to live as it becomes y^ children of so
great a lord, and are greatly ashamed y^ they maintein not the beauty of their
heaue^li noblesse: and therefore they employ their whole indeuer to the following
of their firstborn brother Jesus christ, living in great low lines and
meekness, in all things seeking y^ glory of God, giving their lives for their
brethren, doing good to their enemies, glorying in y^ sufferance of reproaches,
Gala. 6.
and in the cross of our Lord Jesus christ, Luke. 2.
and saying with Zachary: We be delivered out of the hand of our enemies, to
serve god without fear, in holiness and rightuousenesse all the days of our
life. They say with Saint Paul: The grace of the Lord is appeared to abolishe
all wickedness and all worldly desires in us, Tit. 2.
to the end we should live a sobre, holy and honest life in this world, waiting
for the blissed hope, and for the gloriouse appearing of the great God and
Savior. There and such other like thoughts, desires and affections are
wrought by inspired faith in the souls of them that are become right^^use. And
as for him that either wholly or partly feels not these godly affections and
operations in his heart, but is given over to the flesh and the world: let him
assure himself that he has not yet the justifying faith, nor is the member
of Christ, because he has not Christ's spirit, Romans 8.
and consequently is none of his, and he that is none of Christ's, is no
christian. Then let man's wisdom cease henceforth to fight against the
rightuousenesse of the most holy faith, and let us give all the glory of our
justification, to the merits of JESUS Christ, Gala. 3.
with whom we be clothed thorough faith.

The fyfth Chapter.
In what wise the Christian is clothed with Jesus Christ.
ALthough that by the things aforesaid, a man may easily and plainly enough
perceive, how a Christian may cloth himself with Jesus Christ: yet
nevertheless, I mind to speak a little of it, assuring myself, that unto
the good and faythefull Christian, it can seem nether grenouse nor troublesome
to speak thereof, although the thing were repeted a thousand times. Therefore I
say that the Christian knows that Jesus Christ together with all his
righteousness, holiness and innocence, is his own through faith. And like
as when a man purposes to present himself before some great Lord or Prince,
he laboreth to array himself in some fair and costly apparel: even so, when
the christian is decked and arrayed with the innocence of Christ, and with all
his perfection, he presents himself boldly before God the Lord of all,
assuring him self, that through christ's merits, he is in as good case as if
he had purchaced all that which Jesus Christ has purchaced and deserved. And
truly, faith makes every of us to possess Christ and all that is his, as we
possess our own garment. And therefore to be clothed with Jesus christ, is
nothing else but to believe for a certainty, that Christ is wholly ours: and
so is he in very deed, if we believe so, and hold our selves assured, that by
the same heavenly garment we be received into favor before god. For it is most
certain that he as a most dear father has given us his son: meaning that al
his righteousness, and all that ever he is, can, or has done, should be in our
power and inrisdictio^, in such wise as it should be lawful for us to make our
boast of the^, as if we had done, purchaced and des^rued them by our own
strength. And whosoever believes this, shall find that his belief is good and
true, as we have showed heretofore. The^ must the christian have a steadfast
faith and belief that all the goods, all the graces, and all the riches of
Jesus christ, are his: for since y^ God has given us Jesus christ himself, how
should it be possible that he has not given us all things with him? Romans 8.
Now if this be true, as true it is in deed: the christian may rightly say, I am
y^ child of god, and Jesus christ is my brother. I am Lord of heaven and earth,
and of hell and of death, and of the law, in so much as the law cannot accuse
me nor lay any curse upon me, because the righteousness of god is become mine. And
this faith is it alone y^ makes a man to be called a christian, and which
clotheth him with Jesus christ as we have said before. And boldly may this be
called a great mystery, whervnder are contained marvelous things, and things
not herd of concerning the great God, which cannot enter into man's heart, except
god do first softe^ it with his holy grace, as he has promised to do by his
holy prophet saying, I will give you a new heart, and I will put a new mind
into you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your body, and I will
give you a heart of flesh. Now then, he that believes not after the said
manner, that Jesus Christ with all the goods that he possesses, is his: cannot
call himself a true christian, nor ever have a quiet and joyful conscience,
nor a good and fervent courage to do good: but shall easly faint in doing of
good works, yea and moreover he shall never be able to do works that are truly
good. This only belief and trust that we have in the merits of Jesus Christ,
makes men true christians, stowt, cherful, merry, lovers of God, ready to
do good works, possessers of gods kingdom and of god himself, and his right
derebeloued children, in whom the holy Ghost does truly dwell. What heart is
so cowardly, cold, and vile, which considering the inestimable greatness of the
gift that god has bestowed upon him in giving him his Jesus Christ y^ true
example of chri^^^ans.
own so well-beloved son with all his perfectnes: is not inflamed with an
exceeding carnest desire, to become like unto him in good works? specially
seeing that the Father has given him unto us for an example whereon we must
continewally look, framing our life after such a sort, as it may be a true
counterpaine of the life of Jesus Christ, 1. Peter. 2
forasmuch as Christ (as says Saint Peter) has fuffered for us, leaving
us an insample, to the end that we should follow his footesteppes. Out of
this consideracion iss^weth another kind of clothing of a manes self with
Christ, which we may term An example clothinge, for so much as the christian
must frame his whole life after the example of Christ, fashyoning himself like
unto him in all his deeds words and thowghtes, leaving his former wicked life,
and decking himself with the new life, that is to wit with the life of Christ.
Ephe. 4.
By reason whereof saint Paul says: Romans 15.
Let us cast away the works of darkness, and put on the a^mour of light, not
in feasting, nor in drunkenness, nor in chambering and wantonness, nor in
strife: but put upon you the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no preparation for
the flesh, nor for the lusts thereof. Heeruppon the true Christian being in
love with Jesus Christ, says in himself. Since that Jesus Christ, not having
any need of me, has redeemed me with his own blud, and is become poor to
enrich me: I will likewise give my g^^ds y^^ and my very life for the love and
welfare of my neighbor. And like as I am clothed with Jesus christ for the
love he has borne to me: so will I have my neighbor in Christ to cloth himself
with me and with my goods likewise, for the love that I bear him for christ's
sake. He y^ does not so, is no true christian, for he cannot say that he loves
Jesus christ, if he love not the members and brothers of him: and if we love
not our neighbor for whose sake christ has shed his blud, we cannot truly
say that we love Jesus christ: who being equal with God, was obedient to his
father, even to y^ death of the cross, Phil. 2.
and has loved and redeemed us, giving himself unto us, with all that ever he
has. After the same manner, we being rich and having abundance of good things
at Christ's hand, must also be obedient unto god, to offer and give our works
and all that we have, yea and even our selves to our neighbors and brethren in
Jesus Christ, serving them and helping them at their need, and being to the^ as
another Christ. And like as Jesus Christ was lowly and gentle, and far from all
debate and strife: Math. 1^.
so must we set our whole mind upon lowelinesse and meekness, eschewing all
strife and impatie^ce, as well which consist in words and reasoning, as in
deeds. And as in Jesus Christ has endured all the persecutions and spytes of
the world for the glory of God: so must we with all patientnesse cheerfully
bear the persecutions and reproaches that are done by false christians 2. Tim.
2
too all such as will live faithfully in Jesus Christ: who gave his life for
his enemies, and prayed for them upon the cross: and so must we also pray
always for our enemies, and willingly spend our life for their welfare. And
this is too follow Christ's steps, according as saint Peter says. For when
we know Jesus Christ with all his riches to be our own good, (which thing, is
to be clothed with Christ, and to become pure and clean without spot): there
remains nothing more for us to do, but to glorifye God by following the life
of Jesus Christ, and to do to our brethren as Christ has done to us: and
specially for so much as we be warranted by his word, that whatsoever we do to
his brethren and ours, he accepts it as a benefyte done to himself. And
dowtlesse seeing that the true christians are the members of Christ: we cannot
do either good or evil too the true Christians, but we d^^ it likewise unto
Christ, in so much that he rejoices or suffers in his members.
Th^reTherefore like as Jesus Christ is our clothing by faith: so also must we
through love become the clothing of our brethren, and have as good care of them
as of our own bodies: for they be members of our body, whereof Christ is the
head. And this is the godly love and charity which springs and proceeds
of the true unfeigned faith, which god has breathed into his elect: which
faith (as says Saint Paul) works by love. Howbeit, Romans 12.
for as much as the life of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherewithal we must be
clothed, 1. Tim 1
was a continual cross, full of troubles, Gala. 5
reproaches, and persecutions: if we will fashion our selves like unto his
life, we must continually bear the cross, as he him self says: Luke. 9.
If any man will come after me, let him forsake him self and take up his
cross and follow me. But the chief cause of this cross is, for that our GOD
purposes to mortify the affections of our mind and the luftes of our flesh
by that exercise: to the end we may conceive in our selves the great
perfection wherein we be comprised by our Lord JESUS Christ, by being graffed
into him. Also his will is, John. 15.
that our faith being fined like gold in the furnace of troubles, Phil. 3.
should shine bright to his glory. Moreover, his intent is, that we by our
infirmities should set out his great power, which the world in dispite of it,
beholds in us, in as much as our frayeltie becomes strong by troubles and
persecutions, and the more that it is beaten down and oppressed, so much the
more is it strong and steadfast. Whereof the Apostle Saint Paul says, 2.
Cor. 12
we carry this treasure in earthen vessels, 2. Cor. 4.
that the excellency of the power might be Gods and not ours. On all sides
we suffer tribulation, but we are not ouercomme: we be poor, but not
ouercomme of poverty: we suffer persecution, but yet are we not forsaken: we
be despised, but yet we perish not: and so we daily bear about us the dying of
our Lord Jesus Christ in our body, that the life of Jesus Christ may also be
openly showed in us. And seeing the case is so, that our Lord Jesus christ and
all his dear Disciples glorified God by tribulations: let us also embrace them
ioyefully, and say with the Apostle Saint Paul, Gala. 6.
GOD forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ:
and let us so deal, as the world may (whither it will or no) perceive and see
with his eyes, ye wonderful effects yt god works in such as sincerely embrace
the grace of his gospel. Let us so deal I say, as the worldlings may see with
how great quietness of mind the true christians endure the loss of their goods,
y^ death of their children, flaunders, the diseases of y^ body, and the
persecutions of false christians: and also that they may see how the only true
christians do worship God in spirit and truth, taking in good worth at his hand
whatsoever happens, and holding all that he does to be good rightful and
holy, praising him always for the same, whither it be in prosperity or
adversity, tha^king him as a most graciouse and loving father, and
acknowledging it for a right great gift of gods goodness, to suffer any
adversity, Romans 5.
and che^^y for the gospel and for following the steps of Christ: specially
forasmuch as we know, After what sort patience ingendereth trial
that tribulation ingendreth patience, and patience trial, and trial hope, and
hope makes us not ashamed. I say that patience ingendreth trial, because that
whereas God has promised help in truble to such as trust in him, we find it by
experience, in that we continue strong and steadfast all the while, and are
vpholden by the hand of God, which thing we could not do with all the powers
that we have of our own. So then by patience we find that our Lord gives us
the help that he has promised us at our need, whereby our hope is confirmed.
And it were an ouergreat unthankfulness not to trust to such an aid and favor
for the time to come, as we have found by experience to be so certain and
steadfast heretofore. But what need we so many words? It ought to suffyze us
to know, Romans ^.
that the true christians are through tribulation clothed with the image of our
lord Jesus christ crucified: which if we bear willingly and with a good heart,
we shall in the end be clothed with the image of Jesus Christ glorified. 2.
Cor. 2.
For as the passions of Jesus Christ do abound: so through him shall the
consolations ouerabound: and if we suffer with him here bylowe for a time, we
shall also reign with him there above for ever.

The sixth Chapter.
Certain remedies against distrust.
BUt forasmuch as the devil and man's wisdom labor continually to
dispossess us of this most holy faith, wherthrough we believe that all our
sins are chastized and punished in Jesus christ, and that (...) preciouse
bludshed we be reconcyled to the majesty of god: it is very needful for a
christian to have his weapons always in a redines, to defend himself from y^
said most mischeuouse temptation, Mark. 9.
which seeks to bereeue the soul of her life. Among the said weapons (in my
judgment) y^ mightiest and best are, Four remedies against the te^ptacio^s of
distrust
Prayer the often use of the holy Communion, the rememberinge of holy Baptim,
and the minding of predestination. In our Prayer, Prayer.
we may well say with the father of the poor Lunatik person of whom mention
is made in the Gospel of Saynct Mark: Lord Jesus, Math. 9.
help mine unbelief. Or else we may say with the Apostles, Lord increace our
faith. And if there reign in us a continewall desire to grow in faith, 1.
These. 5
hope, and Love: we will continewally pray, as saint Paul instructs us. True
prayer.
For Prayer is nothing else but a fervent mind settled upon God. By the
remembering of Baptim, we shall assure our selves that we are at peace with
God. Baptism.
And for so much as ^. Peter says that y^ Ark of Noe was a figure of Baptim:
therefore, 1. Pet. 3.
like as Noe was saved from the flud by the Arc, because he believed the
promises of GOD: so also are we by faith saved in baptym from Gods wrath. Which
faith is greunded upon the word of our Lord Jesus Christ, who says that he
which believes and is baptized, Mark. 16
shall be saved. And good right it is: for in baptism we put on Jesus Christ as
the Apostle Saint Paul affirms, Gala. 3.
and consequently we be made partakers of his rightuousenesse, and of all his
goods: and under this preciouse robe, the sins that our frayelty commits,
lie hieden and covered, and are not imputed unto us. And so, according as Saint
Paul says, Romans 4.
the blissednesse which the Psalmist speaks of, apperteineth to us: namely,
Psalm. 36.
Blissed are they whose misdooinges are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blissed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. But it stands a
christian in hand, to take good heed, that upon these words he take not
liberty to sin: for this doctrine belongs to none such as honor them
selves with the name of Christians confessing Christ with their mouth, and yet
deny him in their deeds. But it concerns the true Christians, who though
they fight manfully against the flesh, the world, and the diuill: do
notwithstanding fall darly, and are constreyned to say, Lord forgive us our
offenses. These are they to whom we speak to comfort them and to hold them up,
that they fall not into despair as though the blud of christ washed us not
from all sin, and that he were not our advocate, and the attonementmaker for
his members. And therefore when we be provoked to dowt of the forgiveness of
our sins, and that our own conscience begins to trubble us: The supper of
the Lord.
Then must we furnish our selves with true faith, and out of hand have recourse
to y^ preciowse blud of Jesus Christ shed for us upon the alter of the Cross,
and distributed to his Apostles at his last supper, under the veyle of a most
holy Sacrament, which was ordained by Christ to the end y^ we should celebrate
the remembrance of his death, and that by the same visible Sacrament our
trubbled consciences might be assured of our atonement with God. The blissed
Jesus christ made his last will when he said, This is my body which is given
for you, Luke. 22
and this is my blud of the new Testament which is shed for many to the
forgiveness of their sins. Mark. 16
We know that a Testament (says Saint Paul) although it be but a man's
Testament, Gala. 3.
yet nevertheless if it be allowed, no man despyzeth it or adds any thing to
it: and that no testament is of force till the testator be dead, but has full
pour after the parties decease. Then did Jesus Christ make his Testament,
wherein he promisethe forgiveness of sins, and the grace and good favor of
himself and his father, together with mercy and everlasting life. And to the
intent that the said Testamente should be of full force, he has confirmed it
with his own preciowse blud and with his own death. Hebr. 9.
By reason whereof, saint Paul says, that Jesus Christ is the mediator of
the new Testament that by his dying for the redemption of those transgressions
which were in the former testament, they that are called might receive the
promis of the eternal inheritance. For whersoeuer is a Testament, there must
also be the death of the Testator, for the Testament is confirmed by the death
of the party, insomuch as it is of no valu so long as the maker of it is
alive. Wherefore we be very certain and assured by the death of Jesus Christ,
that his Testament is auaylable, whereby all our misdeeds are pardoned, Ireneus
Lib. 1.
and we made heirs of eternal life. And for a token and faithful pledge
hereof, in sted of a Seal, he has left us this divine Sacrament, which not
only gives our sowles assured hope of their everlasting Salvation, but also
warrant^th unto us ye immortality of our flesh, forasmuch as it is even now
quickened by that immortal flesh of his, and in a certain manner becomes
parttaker of the immortality thereof, and he that is parttaker of that divine
flesh by faith, shall not perish for ever. John. 6.
But unto him that receives it withowt the said faith, it turns to a
daungerouse poison, becawse that like as when bodily sustenance fyndeth the
stomach encumbered with evil humors, it corrupts likewise and woorketh
great anoyance: even so if this spiritual feed light into a sinful soul
that is full of malice and misbelef, it casts it headlong into some greater
ruin, not through it own default, but because that to the unclean and
unbeliever al things are unclean: notwithstanding that the things be sanctified
by the Lords blissing. For (as says Saint Paul (he that eats of that
bread and drinks of that cup unworthily, 1 Cor. 11.
is guilty of the body and blud of the Lord, What is meant by not making a
difference of the lords body.
and he eats and drinks his own damnation, because he makes no difference
of the Lords body. For he makes no difference of the Lords body, which
presumes to the Lords supper without faith and charity. And forasmuch as he
believes not that body to be his life and the clenzer of al his sins: He y^
receives this Sacrament protests himself to trust in none other thing than
the blud of Christ.
he makes Jesus Christ a liar, and treads the son of God under foot, and
estemeth the blud of the Testament whereby he was fa^ctified but as a common or
worldly thing, and does great wrong to the spirit of grace, and he shall be
punished very sore at Gods hand for this his vnbeelef and wicked hypocrisy.
For whereas he reposeth not y^ trust of his justification in the passion of our
lord and savior Jesus christ: yet nevertheless he receives this most holy
Sacrament, and makes protestation that he puts not his trust in any other
thing. Whereby he accuses himself, and is a witness of his own iniquity, and
condemns himself to everlasting death, by refuzing the life which god
promises him in that holy Sacrament. Uery comfortable counsel.
And in this point, when the Christian feels that his enemies are like to
overcome him: ye is to wit, when he begins to dout whether he have received
forgiveness of his sins by Jesus Christ: and that he shall not be able to
withstand the devil and his te^ptatio^s: and that the accusation of his own
dowtfull conscience comes to press him, so as he begins to fear least
helfyre should swallow him up, and death hold him in his everlasting bands by
reason of Gods wrath: I say, when the good christian feels himself in such
agony: Let him get him to this holy Sacrament with a good heart and stowt
courage, and receive it devoutly, saying in his heart and answering his enemies
thus: I confess I have deserved a thousand hells, and everlasting death by
reason of the great sins which I have committed. But this heavenly sacrament
which I receive at this present, assures me of the forguiuenes of all my
misdoings, and of mine atonement with God. For if I have an eye to my works:
there is no dowt but I acknowledge my self a sinner, and condemn mine own
self in such wise, as my conscience should never be quiet, if I should think
that my sins are pardoned me for my works sake. But when I look to the
promises and couenantes of God, who promises me forgiveness of my sins by the
blud of Jesus Christ, I am as sure that I have obtained it, and that I have his
favor, as I am sure that he which has made the promises and covenants, cannot
lie nor deceive: and through this steadfast faith I become ryghtuouse by
Christ's rightuousenes, Romans 4.
where through I am saved and my conscience quieted. Has he not given his most
innocent body into the hands of sinners for our sins? Has he not shed his
blud to wash away my iniquities? Why the^ do thou vex thy self O my soul?
put thy trust in the Lord, who bears thee so great love, that to deliver thee
from eternal death, it has pleased him that his only son should suffer death
and passion, who has taken upon himself our poverty, to give us his riches:
laid our weakness upon himself, to stablish us in his strength: become
mortal, to make us immortal: come down unto the earth to advance us up to
heaven: and become the son of man with us, to make us the children of God
with himself. Who is he then that shall accuse us? God is he that justifies us,
Romans 8.
and who shall condemn us? Jesus Christ is dead for us, yea and rizen agein
for us, and he sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for us.
Let us then O my Soul leave of these tears and sighs.

THE. C. III. PSALM.
1 MY soul, praise thou the LORD, and all that is within me, praise his holy
Name.
2 My soul, praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits.
3 Which forgiueth al thine iniquity, and heals all thine infirmities.
4 Which redemeth thy life from ye grave, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassion.
5 Which satisfies thy mouth with good things: and thy youth is renewed like y^
Egles.
6 The Lord executes righteousenes and judgment to all that are oppressed.
7 He made his ways known unto Moses, and his works unto the children of
Israel.
8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger and of great kindness.
9 He will not always chide, nether keep his anger for ever.
10 He has not dealt with us after our sinz, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities.
11 For as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him.
12 As far as the East is from the West: so far has he removed our sins
from us.
13 As a father has co^passio^ on his children, so has y^ Lord compassion on
the^ y^ fear him.
14 For he knows whereof we be made: he remembers that we are but dust.
15 The days of man are as grass: as a flower of the field, so florisheth he.
16 For the wind goes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know
it no more.
17 But y^ loving kindenes of y^ Lord endures for ever and ever upon the^ that
fear him, and his righteousenes upon childrens children.
18 Unto the^ that keep his ceuena^t, and think upon his commandments to do
them.
19 The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, and his kingdom rules over
all.
20 Praise the Lord, ye his Angels, that exrel in strength, that do his
commandment in obeying the voice of his word.
21 Praise the Lord, all ye his hosts, ye his servants that do his pleasure.
22 Praise the Lord, all ye his works, in all places of his dominion: my soul
praise thou the Lord.
So has he had mercy on us, in giving us his only son. With this faith,
with these thanksgiuings, with these or such other like thoughts must we
receive ye sacrament of the body and blud of our Lord Jesus Christ. After this
manner is al fearfulnes driven out of the soul of y^ christian: and charity is
incresed, faith stre^gthened, y^ conscience quieted, and the tung never
ceasseth to praise God and to yield him infinite thanks for so great a
benefyte. This is the virtue efficacy, and only trust of our soul. This is
the Rock where upon if the conscience be bwilded, it fears another tempest,
nor the gates of hell, nor gods wrath, nor the Law, nor sin, nor death, nor
the devils, nor any other thing. And forasmuch as the substance of the Lords
Supper and table consists in this divine Sacrament: When ye christian is at
it, he must hold his eyes fastened continewally upon the passion of our
graciouse Savior, beholding him on the one side upon the cross laden with
all our sins: and GOD on the othersyde punishing, chastizing, and whipping
his own only begotten and derbeloued son instead of us. O happy is that
man that shetteth his eyes from all other syghts, and will another here nor see
any other thing than Jesus Christ crucified, in whom are laid up and bestowed
all the treasures of Gods wisdom and divine knowledge. Blessed (say I) is he
that fedeth his mind with so heavenly a food, and makes himself drunken in
the love of God with so sweet and singular a liquor. But before I make an end
of this matter, I will first advertise the christian, that Saint Austin has
ordinarily bin wont to term this holy sacrament the bond of charity, and the
mystery of unity. And he says, that whosoever receives ye mystery of
unity and regards not the bond of peace, receives not the Sacrament to his
own behoof, but as a witness against himself. Therefore we must understand,
Why the holy Sacrament of thankesgiu^ng was ordey^ed.
that the Lord has ordained this holy Sacrament, not only to make us sure of
the forgiveness of our sins: but also to inflame us to peace, unity, and
brotherly charity. For in this Sacrament the lord does after such a manner make
us partakers of his body, as he becomes al one thing with us, and we with
him. By reason where of forasmuch as he has but one body whereof he makes us
partakers: Christen peace and vnyo^ are betokened by the bread and Wine.
it is meet that we also should by such partaking become all one body together
among our selves. And this union is represented by the bread of the Sacrament:
which as it is made of many grayns mingled and kneaded together in such wise as
one of them cannot be discerned from another: So also must we be joined
together after such a sort, and so united together into one agreement of mind,
as no division may creep in. And this does saint Paul show us when he
says: Is not the cup of blissing which we bliss, the communion of the blud
of Jesus Christ? is not ye bread y^ we break, the communion of the body of
Jesus christ? whereas we be many, yet are we but one bread and one body,
for so much as we be all parttakers of one bread. ^e that offends one of his
Christen brethren, offends Christ himself.
By these things we understand, that when we receive this most holy communion,
we must consider that we are all of us ingreffed into Christ, and are all
becomme members of one selfsame body, y^ is to wit of Jesus Christ, in such
wise as we cannot offend, defame or d^spyse any of our brethren, but we must
therwithall offend, defame and despise our said head Jesus Christ: neither can
we be at variance with any of our brethren, but in likewise we must be at odds
with him. Also we cannot love him, except we love him in our brethren. Look
how much care we have of our own body, so much must we have of our christen
brethren, who are the members of our body. And like as no part of our body
feels any grief, which spreddeth not it self into all the other parts: so
ought we to determine with our selves, that our brother feels not any
inconvenience, which should not move us to compassion. With such manner of
thoughts must we prepare our selves to this holy Sacrament, quickening up our
sprites with a fervent love to our neibour ward. For what greater spur can we
have to prick us to love one another, A preparation to y^ receiving of y^ holy
Sacrament.
tha^ to see y^ Jesus christ, by giving himself unto us, not only allureth us
to give our selves one to another, but also by making himself common to us all,
makes us also to be all one selfsame thing in him? In respect whereof, we
ought to covet and procure, that in all of us there may be but one mind, one
heart, and one tung, accorded and united together in thoughts, words and
deeds. And we must mark well, that as often as we receive this holy and worthy
Sacrament, He that receives y^ Sacrament byndeth himself to al y^ dewlies of
charity
we bind our selves to all the deuties of charity: as not to offend any of our
brethren, nor to leave anything undone, that may be profitable and helpful in
their necessity. But if there come any to this heavenly table of the Lord,
that are divided at variance with their brethren, the same must assure
themselves that they eat unworthily, and are gilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, and that they eat and drink their own damnation: for that there
wanted nothing on their behalf, but that the body of Jesus christ was rent and
plucked in pieces again, whilst they by hatred are divided from their
brethren, that is to wit, from the members of Jesus Christ, and have not any
part with him: and yet nevertheless in receiving this holy communion, pretended
to believe that their whole salvation consists in the participation and union
with Jesus Christ. Then let us go my brethren, The true and for which the holy
Sacrament is ordained.
to the receiving of this heavenly bread, to celebrate the remembrance of our
Lords passion, and to strengthen and fortify the belief and assurance of the
forgiveness of our sins, with the remembrance thereof, and to quicken up our
minds and tungs to praise and exalt the infinite goodness of our God, and
finally to cherish brotherly love, and to witness the same one to another by the
straight union which all of us have in the body of our lord Jesus christ. The
fourth remedy against distrust.
Besides prayer, and the remembering of Baptim, and the often resorting to the
most holy communion: there is one other very good remedy against distrust and
fearfulnes, which is no less freende to christian charity: namely the
remembrance of our predestination and election to eternal life, grounded upon
the word of God, which is the sword of the holy Ghost wherewith we may beat
back our enemies. Ephe. 5.
Rejoice ye in this (says the Lord) that your names are written in heaven.
Luke. 10
There is no greater joy in this life, nor any thing that more comfort the
christian that is afficted, tempted, or fallen into any sin, than the
rememberance of predestination, and the assuring of our selves that we be of y^
number whose names are written in the book of life, and which are chosen to be
fashioned like unto ye image of Jesus Christ. O how unspeakable is the comfort
of him that has this faith, and museth continually in his heart upon this
exceeding sweet predestination whereby he knows that although he fall often:
yet notwithstanding, god his father who has foreordeined him to everlasting
life, holds him up and reaches out his hand unto him continually. Psalm. 36.
And he says continually in himself, if god have chozen me and predestined
me to the glory of his children, who can hinder me? If God be with us (says
saint Paul) who can be against us? Nay rather, Romans 8.
to the end that the predestination may be accomplished in us, He y^ re^eyueth
y^ Gospel is sure y^ he is predestined. ^ he effect y^ precede of y^ knowleg
for predestination.
he has sent his dear beloved son, who is a most sure earnest penny and
pledge unto us, that we which have received the grace of the Gospel, are gods
Children, chozen to eternal life. This holy predestination maynteyneth the
true Christian in a continual spiritual joy, increaceth in him ye indeuer of
good works, and inflameth him with the love of god, and makes him enemy to ye
world and to sin. Who is so fearce and hardharted, which knowing y^ god of
his mercy has made him his child from everlasting, will not by and by be
inflamed to love GOD? Who is of so vile and ba^e courage, that he will not
esteem all the pleasures, all the honors, and all the riches of the world as
filthy mire, when he knows y^ god has made him a citizen of heaven? yea these
are they y^ worship god rightly in spirit and truth, receiving all things (as
well in prosperity as in adversity) at the hand of God their Father, and
evermore praising and tha^king him for all, as their good father, who is
rightuouse and holy in all his works. These being inflamed with the love of
God, and armed with the knowledge of their predestination, fear neither death,
nor sin, nor the Diuill, nor hell: neither know they what the wrath of god is:
for they see none other thing in god, but love and fatherly kindness toward
them. And if they fall into any troubles, they accept them as tokens of gods
favor, Romans 8.
trying out with S. Paul, who is it that shall separate us from Gods love?
shall tribulations, shall anguish, shall persecution, or hunger, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword? as it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day
long, and counted as sheep appointed to the slaughter. But in all these things
we get the upper hand thorough him that has loved us. Wherefore, it is not for
naught that saint John says, how the true christians know right well, 1.
John. 3.
that they must be saved and glorified, and that by reason of the same
affiance, they make themselves holy as Jesus Christ is holy. And when Saint
Paul exhorts his Disciples to a good and holy life: ^phe. 1.
he is wont to put them in remembrance of their election and predestination, as
of a thing of very great force to stir up the mynds of the true Christians to
the loving of God, and to the performance of good works. And for the same cause
our good lord Jesus christ speaks openly of this holy predestination, as one
that knew of how great importance the knowledge thereof is to the edifying of
his elect. But perchance thou will say to me, I know well that they whose names
are written in heaven, have cause to live in continual joy, and to glorify
GOD but in word and deed: but I know not whither I am of that number or no, and
therefore I live in continual fear: specially because I know my self to be
an exceedinge weak and frail sinner, from the violence whereof I am not able
to defend my self, but that I am overcome of it daily. And furthermore for
as much as I se my self co^tineually afflicted and troubled with diverse
temptations, methinks I do as it were behold with mine eyes, the wrath of God
squorging me. Too answer to these dowtes of thine, I say my right dear
brother, that thou must assure thy self, that al these are but temptations of
the devil, who by all means seeks to rob us of that faith and confidence
that springs of faith and assurethe us of Gods good will toward us. He
laboreth to strip our soul out of this preciouse garment: for he knows that
none is a true Christian, except he believe Gods word which promises
forgiveness of all sins, and peace to all them which accept the grace of the
Gospel. Uerely I say, that he which upon these promises of God, persuades not
himself assuredly, that god is a merciful and loving father unto him, nor
with steadfast confidence looks to receive the inheritance of the heavenly
kingdom at his hand: is not faithful in deed, and makes himself utterly
unworthy of gods grace. In respect whereof saint Paul says that we be the
temple of God, Hebr. 3.
so farforthe as we firmly maintain the confidence and glory of our hope,
unto the end. And in another place he exhorts us that we should not give over
our trust, Hebr. 10
which has great reward of recompense. And therefore my brethren, let us give
our whole indeuer to do the will of God, as it becomes good children, and
beware that we sin not, as near as we can. And although we fall oftentimes
into sin through our own frayeltie: yet let us not by and by surmise, that we
be vessels of wrath, or that we be utterly forsaken of the holy Ghost: for
we have our Advocate Jesus Christ before God the father, and he is the
atonement maker for our sins. Let us bethink us of the opinion of Saint
Austin, who fayeth, that none of the Saints is rightuouse and without sin:
and yet notwithstanding that, he ceasseth not to be rightuous and holy, so
farforth as he retain his holiness with affection. Afflictions at no signs
of reprobation
And therefore if we have afflictions and tribulations: let us not think that
God sends them because he is our enemy, but because he is our most loving
father. The Lord (says Solomon) chastises him whom he loves, and scourges
every child of his whom he receives. Wherefore, Pro 5.
if we have received the grace of the Gospel, whereby man is received of GOD
for his child, we must not doubt of Gods grace and good will toward us.
(...) true (...) to know ^ ^ods children by.
And when we perceive our selves to delight in GODS word, and to have a
desire to follow the life of Jesus Christ: we must steadfastly believe, that
we be the children of GOD and the temple of the holy Ghost. For those things
cannot be done by the power of man's wisdom, but are the gifts of the holy
Ghost who dwells in us by faith, and is as it were a seal of authority
which seals up Gods promises in our hearts, the certeinty whereof is printed
aforehand in our minds, and is given us as a pledge to stablish and confirm
the same. ^phe. 2.
As soon as you believe (says the Apostle Saint Paul) ye be sealed by the
holy Spirit of promise, Wherefore y^ Apostle calls y^ holy Ghost y^ s^irit of
(...).
who is the earnestpenny of our inheritance. Behold how he shows us hereby,
that the hearts of the faithful are marked with the holy Ghost as it were with
a seal^: in respect whereof he calls the holy ghost the spirit of promis, for
so much as he confirms the promis of the Gospel, the which (as I have
oftentimes told you) is a happy tidings that promises forgiveness of sins
and everlasting life, to all such as believe that all their misdooinges are
blotted out in Jesus Christ. All we that believe in JESUS Christ (says Saint
Paul) are becomme Gala. 3.
the children of GOD: and because we be his children, he has sent the
Spirit of his Son into our heart, which cries, Father, father. And to the
Romans, those (says he) that are guided by the spirit of GOD, Romans 8.
are the children of God: for ye have not received again the spirit of bondage
in fear: but the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry father, father. For
certainly the sam^ spirit bears our spirit record, that we be the children
of GOD. Now then, if we be children, we be also heirs. And we must mark
well, that in these two places the Apostle Saint Paul speaks plainly, not
of any special revelation, but of a certain record which the holy Ghost does
commonly yield to all such as receive the grace of the Gospel. Then if the
holy Ghost assure us that we be Gods children and heirs: why should we doubt
of our predestination? The same man says in the same Epistle, Romans 8.
whom he has predestined, them has he also called: and who^ he has
called, them has he also made rightuouse: and whom he has made rightuouse
the^ also has he glorified. What shall we the^ say to al these things? if god
be on our side, A true mark of predestis nation.
who can be against us? And therefore if I plainly perceive, that God has
called me by giving me faith and the fruiets of faith, that is to wit, Peace of
conscience, mortification of the flesh, and quickening of the spirit, whether
it be in whole or in part: why should I doubt that I am not predestined? And
moreover we say with Saint Paul, that all true christians (that is to wit,
all such as believe the Gospel) receive not the spirit of this world, 1. Cor.
2.
but the spirit that comes from god: by the inspiration where of they discern
the things that God has given them. What marvel then is it, if we know that
god has certainly given us everlasting life? But there are some which say,
that no man ought to presume so far, as to boast himself to have the spirit
of GOD. They speak in such wise, as if the christian should glory of the
having of it for his own deserts, and not by the only and mere mercy of
God: and as though it were a presumptuousnesse to profess him self a
christian: or as though a man could be a Christian without ye having of
Christ's spirit: or as though we could without flat hypocrisy say that Jesus
Christ is our Lord, Romans 8.
or call God our Father, if the holy ghost moved not our hearts and tungs to
utter so sweet words. 1. Cor. 12
And yet notwithstanding, even they that count us presumptuouse for saying that
God has given us his holy spirit, with faith, forbid us not to say every day
Our Father, but rather command us. But I would have them too tell me, how it
is possible to separate faith and the holy ghost asunder, seeing that faith is
the peculiar work of the holy ghost? If it be presumption to believe that the
holy ghost is in us, He that glories not y^ he has y^ holy ghost, is no true
Christian.
why does saint Paul bid the Corinthians try them selves whither they have
faith or no, affirming them to be reprobats if they know not that Jesus Christ
is in them? But in very deed, it is a great blindness to accuse the
christians of presumptuousnesse for taking upon them to glory of the presence
of the holy ghost, without which glorying, there cannot be any Christianity at
all. But Jesus Christ (who cannot lie) says, that his spirit is unknown to
the world, and that they only do know him, John. 14.
within whom he dwells. Then let them begin to become good christians, and
put away their Jewish minds, and embrace the grace of the holy gospel in good
earnest: and then shall they know that the good and true christians both have
the holy Ghost, and also acknowledge themselves to have him. But some one may
say to me, that the christian can not by any means know that he is in gods
favor, without some special revelation: and so consequently that he cannot
know whither he be predestined or no. Eccle. 6.
And he may specially allege these words of Solomon, A man knows not
whither he be worthy of hatred or of love: and also these words of the Apostle
Saint Paul to the Corinthians: I feel not my self gilty of any thing, 1.
Cor. 4.
and yet feel I not my self justified for all that. A Man may know y^ he is
in Gods fa^or.
It seems to be sufficiently declared by the textes of holy Scripture, that
the said opinion is false: and now remains only to be showed briefly, that
these two textes whereupon the same opinion is chiefly grounded, ought not to
be taken in that sense. As touching Salomons sentence, although it be scarce
well and faythefully translated in the common translation: yet is there not any
man so dull, who in reading Salomons whole discourse, may not plainly perceive,
by saying so he meant that if any man will By the chances
take upon him to judge by the casualties* that happen in this life, Of this
life no man ca^ judge whther a man be in Gods favor or displeasure.
who is loved or hated of GOD: he laboreth in vain, considering that the
selfsame chances which light upon the rightuouse, light also upon the
vnrightuouse: upon him that Sacri^^zeth, as well as upon him that sacrifizeth
not: and as soon upon the good man as upon y^ sinner. Where of it may be
gathered, y^ god does not always show his love toward those who^ he indueth with
outward prosperities: and contrariewyse, that he shows not his displeasure
toward those whom he punishes. Then my right dear brethren in Christ Jesus
our Lord, do you think it reason to conclude, that a man cannot be sure of
Gods favor, because the same surenesse cannot be perceived by the sundry
chances that happen every day in these transitory and temporal things? A little
before, Salomo^ says y^ a man can not discern any difference between y^ soul
of a man, and the life of a beast: for it is seen that both man and beast die
after one manner. Shall we then conclude by this outward accident, y^ the
persua^io^ which we have conceived of the immortality of the soul is grounded
but only upon conjecture? No surely, and it were a great follye to stand
upon a thing so notablye known. And as for Saint Paul's words, I say, that
for as much as he was sp^aking of the administration of the gospel, he meant
that his heart misgiues him not of any misdealing therein, and yet for all that,
that he is not sure he has done his whole duty to the full, and therein
obtained the praise of rightuousenes to Godward, as if he had done all that
pertained and was convenient to be done by a faithful Steward: and therefore in
speaking of his office, like a just and discrete person, he durst not justify
himself, nor auow that he had discharged his deutie to the uttermost, and
satisfied his lords will, but ^eferred all things to the only judgment of his
Lord. And verily, who soever reads these words of the Apostle Saint Paul,
and considers the words going before them with some judgment, and likewise the
words that follow: will not doubt, but this is the true sense of them. I know
well, that some men in expounding these words of the Apostle saint Paul, say,
that although he knew himself to be without sin, yet he knew not whether he
were rightuouse to Godward or no, according as David affirms, that no man
can perfectly know his own sins. But these me^ perceive not that Saint
Paul Romans 3. 5
groundeth not rightuousenes upon woorks but upon faith, and that he utterly
refuses his own rightuousenesse to embrace only the righteousness which God
has given us thorough our Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 3.
Also they consider not, that he was most certain to be accepted for
rightuous, in maynteining the soundness and pureness of the christian faith,
and that he knew well how the crown of 2. Tim. 4
that righteousness was laid up for him in heaven: and also, that he was fully
assured, that no creature in heaven, Romans 8.
earth, nor hell was able to separate him from the love of God, Phil. 1.
and that he longed to dye because he knew for a truth, y^ after his death, he
should be with Jesus Christ. All which things should be false, if he had not
bin well assured that he was rightuouse, (I mean) by faith and not by works.
Therefore, my deerbeloued brethren, let us cease to speak that thing of the
Apostle Saint Paul, which he never once thought of himself, but feersly
fought against it continually, in answering such as measured rightuousenes by
woorks, and not by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. But besides these two
auctorities of Solomon and saint Paul, a man might allege some other places
of holy scripture, which whereas they warn and incorage men to fear God, seem
to be contrary to the assurance of this our predestination. And if I would
declare them all particularly: I should be over long. The two ^ort^s of fear,
child y^ and (...)
But I say generally, Romans 8.
that y^ fear of punishment was proper to the old Testament, and childly love
to the new Testament: according as S. Paul witnesses when he says to the
Romans, ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear: but ye have
received y^ spirit of adoption whereby we ^rye father, father. And likewise unto
Timothy he says, 2. Tim. ^.
y^ god has not given us y^ spirit of fearfulnes, but rather of power and
love: which spirit Jesus Christ has given us according to the promis made by
the mouth of the holy Prophets, and brought to pass that we being delivered
out of our enemies hands, may serve him without fear before his holy
presence, in all holiness and rightuousenesse all the days of our life. By
these and many other places of the holy Scripture, a man may plainly gather,
that y^ peynfull and slavish fearfulness agrees not with a Christian: and
this is alredie confirmed by this, that such manner of fearfulness is utterly
contrary to the spiritual cherefulnes and joy which is peculiar to the
christian, as the Apostle Saint Paul shows openly to the Romans, Romans 14
saying that the kingdom of God is rightuousenesse and peace and joy in the
holy ghost: that is to say, y^ every man which enters into the kingdom of
the grace of the gospel, is become rightuouse through faith: and afterward
adds peace of conscience, Ephe. 6.
which consequently breeds such a spiritual and holy rest and gladness,
Phil. 4.
in respect whereof the same Saint Paul does oftentimes incorage the
christians to live merrily. 1. Peter. 1
And saint Peter says, that all they which believe in Jesus Christ, do
continually rejoice with an unspeakable and gloriouse joy, notwithstanding that
they be afflicted with diverse temptations. The sla^ish fear threateneth the
wicked, and the childly fear (...) y^ chozen.
And therefore when the holy scripture threateneth and frayeth the christians:
they must understand, that it speaks to such as are so licenciouse, that
forsomuche as they keep not the thankfulness and honesty that belong to GODS
children, they must b^e handled as serua^^^^^, and hild in awe until they come
to taste and feel how sweet and pleasant the Lord is, and until such time as
faith work his effects in them, and that they have so much childly love, as
may suffize to keep and maintain the^ in honesty of christian conversation,
and in following the example of our lord Jesus Christ. And when ye selfsame
scripture exhorts y^ christians to y^ true fear: it means not that they
should fear the judgment and wrath of god, as though it were presently ready
to condemn them: for (as I have said already) by the record which the holy
ghost gives to their spirit, they know that God has chosen them and called
them, of his own mere mercy, and not for their deserts. By reason whereof
they doubt not at al, but that by the selfsame goodness and mercy, he will
maintain the^ in the happy state wherein he has placed them. And after such
manner the scripture exhorts them, The effects of childly fear. Ephesians 4.
not too flauish fear but to childly fear: that is too wit, that like good
children they should be loath to offend against the christen Religion, or to
commit any thing against the deutie and honesty of Gods true children, and
likewise to grieve the holy ghost that dwells in the^: to the end that
knowing the corruptednesse of our nature, we shou^^ always be heedfull and
diligent, and never have any t^ust in our selves: for in our flesh and in our
mynds do the appetites and affections continually dwell: which, as deadly
enemies of y^ soul, lay a thousand snares and baytes for us incessantly,
laboring to make us proud, ambitiouse, lecherous, and couetouse. This is the
fear whereunto the whole scripture exhorts the Christians that have once
fasted how sweet the Lord is, and which bestow all their indeuer in
followinge Christ's footesteps, who cast not from the^ this holy fear, because
they labor to put off the old man. And the good christians must never beree^^
themselves quyte and clean of this childlie fear, which is the singular
friend of christian charity, like as the slavish fear is such an enemy unto
it, as they can by no means dwell together. The christian may warrant him self
y^ forgiveness of his slunes.
And by the foresaid things, a man may plainly perceive, that the good
Christian ought never to doubt of the forgiveness of his sins, nor of Gods
favor. Nevertheless, for the better satisfying of the Reader, I purpose to
set down here under, certain authorities of y^ holy Doctors, which confirm
this foresaid truth. Saint Hilary in his fifth Canon upon Matthewe says, it
is Gods will, that we should hope without any douting of his unknown will.
For if the belief be doubtful, there can be no rightuousenesse obtained by
beleeuinge. And thus we see, S Hilary
that according to Saint Hilarie, a man obteyneth not forgiveness of his
sins at Gods hand, except he believe undoubtedly to obtain it. And good
right it is, James. 1.
that it should be so. For he that douteth, is like a wave of the Sea, which is
tossed and turmoyled with the wynd. And therefore let not such a one think to
obtain any thing at gods hand. But let us here saint Austin, S. Augustine.
who in his Manuel counsele^h us to drive away the said foolish imagination,
which intends to dispossess us of the foresaid good and sage assurednes. Let
such foolish imagination (says he) murmur as much as it lists, saying: who
art thou? how great is that glory? by what deserts hopest thou to obtain it?
I answer assuredly: I know in whom I have believed, and I know that he (of his
great love) has made me his son: I know he is true of his promis, and able
to perform his word: for he can do what he will. And when I think upon the
Lords death, the multitude of my sins cannot dismay me: for in his death do
I put all my trust. His death is my whole desert, it is my refuge, it is my
salvation, my life and resurrection, and the mercy of ye Lord is my desert. I
am not poor of desert, so long as the lord of mercy fails me not. And since
the mercies of the Lord are many: many also are my deseruings. The more y^ he
is of power to save, the more am I sure to be saved. The same saint Austin
talking with GOD in another place, says that he had despayred by reason of
his great sins and infinite negligences, if the word of god had not
becommne flesh. And anon after he says these words: All my hope, all the
assurance of my trust is settled in his preciouse blud, which was shed for us
and for our salvation. In him my poor heart takes breath: and putting my whole
trust in him, I long to come unto thee O father, not having mine own
ryghtuousenes, but y^ ryghtuousenes of thy son Jesus Christ. In these two
places saint Austin shows plainly, that the christian must not be afraid,
but assure himself of ryghtuousenes, by grownding himself, not upon his own
works, but upon the preciouse blud of Jesus Christ, which clenzeth us from all
our sins, and makes our peace with god. Saint Barnard in his first sermon
upon the Annunciation says most evidently, S. Bernard.
that it is not enough to believe that a man can have forgiveness of his sins,
Each one must believe particularly that hie sins are released and forgiven him
freely.
but by gods mercy: nor any one good desire or ability to do so much as one
good work, except God give it him: no nor that a man cannot deserve eternal
life by his works, but if GOD give him the gift so to believe: But besides all
these things (says Saint Bernard) which ought rather to be counted a
certain entrance and foundation of our faith), it is needful that thou
believe also, Each one must believe particularly that his sins are released
and forgiven him freely.
that thy sins are forgiven thee for the love of Jesus christ. See how this
holy man confesses that it is not enough to believe generally the forgiveness
of sins: but he must also believe particularly that his own sins are
forgiven him by Jesus Christ, and the reason is ready at hand, namely, that
forasmuch as God has promised thee to accept thee for rightuouse through the
merits of Jesus Christ, if thou believe not that thou art become rightuouse
through him, thou make GOD a liar, and consequently thou make thy self
unworthy of his grace and liberality. But thou will say to me, I believe well
the forgiveness of sins, and I know that GOD. is true: but I am afraid that
I am not worshie to have so great a gift. I answer, that the forgiveness of
thy sins shall not be a gift or free grace, but a wages, if God should give
it thee for the worthiness of thy works. But I reply upon thee, that God
accepts thee for rightuouse, and lays not thy sin too thy charge, because
of Christ's merits, which are given unto thee and become thine by faith.
Therefore, following the council of Saint Bernard, believe thou, not only the
forgiveness of sins in general, but also apply the same belief to thine
own particular person, by believing without any dout, y^ all thy misdoinges are
pardoned thee through Jesus Christ. And in so doing thou shall give y^ glory
unto God, by confessing him to be merciful and true and shall become
rightuouse and holy before God, for so much as by the same confession y^ holiness
and righteousness of Jesus Christ, shall be communicated unto thee. But to
return to our purpose of predestination: I say, that by the things above
mentioned, a man may evidently perceive, that the assurance of predestination
does not hurt, but rather greatly profit the true Christians. And I think not
that it can hurt the false Christians and reprobates. For albeit that such
manner of folk would bear them selves in hand and pretend to the worldward to
be of the number of ye predestinate: yet can they never persuade their own
consciences, which will ever be gnawing and crying out to the contrary. But
yet it seems greatly, that the doctrine of predestination may hurt them. For
they be wont to say: If I be of the number of y^ reprobates, what shall it
avail me to do good works? And if I be of y^ number of the predestinate, I
shall be saved without any laboring of mine to do good works. I answer thee at
few words, that by such devilish arguments they increace gods wrath against
themselves, who has disclozed the knowledge of predestination to the
Christians, to make them whot, and not c^ld in the love of God: and to set them
foreward and not backward unto good works. And therefore the true Christian, on
the one side holds himself assuredly predestined unto everlasting life and
to be saved, not at all by his own merits, but by Gods election, who has
predestined us, not for our own works lakes but to show the greatness of
his mercy: And on y^ other side indeuereth himself to do good works after
the example of Jesus Christ, as much as if his salvation depended upon his own
policy and paynestaking. As for him that ceasseth to do good because of the
Doctrine of predestination, saying, if I be predestined, I shall be saved
without streyning of my self to do good works: he shows evidently, that his
traueling is not for the love of God, but for ye love of himself. By reason
whereof, the works that he does may perhaps be good and holy to the sight of
men but they be wicked and abominable before the Lord God, who has an eye to
the intent. And hereuppon it may be gathered, that the doctrine of
predestination works rather good than harm to the false christians. For it
discovers their hypocrisy which can not cure it self so long as it lies
hidden under the mantel of outward works. But I would have them that say, I
will not streyne my self to do well, for if I be predestined, I shall be saved
without tyring of my self so much: I say I would have them tell me, how it
happens, that when they be diseased, they say not also, I will have neither
Physician nor physic: for look what God had determined upon me, cannot but
come to pass? why eat they? why drink they? why till they the ground? why
plant they Uines? and why be they so diligent in doing all things convenient
for too sustain the body? why say they not also, that all these turmoylynges,
pollices, and travels of ours are superfluouse, forasmuch as it is not
possible, but that what soever God has foreseen and determined concerning our
life and death, must needs come to pass? And therefore if Gods providence
make them not negligent and idle in things perteining to the body. Why should
it make them more slothful and negligent in that which concerns the Christen
perfection, which without all comparison is far nobler than the body? But
for as much as we see that neither Jesus Christ nor Saint Paul, for any
doubt of offending the reprobates, have forborne to preach the truth, which
is necessary to the edifying of the chosen, for the love of whom the
everlasting Son of GOD became man, and was put to death upon the cross: we
also in like wise ought not to forbear the preaching of predestination to the
true Christians, for as much as we have seen, that it imports great
edification. Now are we come to the end of our purpose, wherein our chief
intent has bin (according to our small power) to magnify the wonderful
benefit which the Christen man has received by JESUS Christ crucified, and to
show that faith, of her self alone justifies, that is to wit, that God
receives and holds them for rightuouse, which believe steadfastly that
Christ has made full amends for their sins: how beit that as light cannot
be separated from Fire which of it self burns and deuoureth all things: even
so good woorks can not be separated from faith, which alone by i^selfe
justifies. And this holy doctrine (which exalts Jesus Christ and represseth
and abateth the pride of man) has and always shall be rejected and fought
against by such Christians as have Jewish minds. But happy is he, who
following the example of Saint Paul, spoileth himself of his own
rightuousenesse, and would have none other rightuousenesse, than that which is
of Jesus Christ, wherewith if he be clothed and apparelled, he may most
assuredly appear before God, and shall receive his blissing and the heritage
of heaven and earth: with his only Son Jesus Christ our lord, to whom be all
honor, praise and glory from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

Christ is the end of Law.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East, for Lucas Harison, and George Bishop.


