A SERMON, Preached at the Funeral of that most Honorable and worthy Knight
S. Richard Leueson, Vice Admiral of England:

Who dyed at London the 2. of August, and was interred at VVooluer Hampton in
the County of Stafford, the 2. day of September following Anno Domi. 1605.

By SAMVEL PAGE, Batchelour in Divinity, and Vicar of Deptforde in Kent.

LONDON, Printed by William White, dwelling in Cow-lane near Holborne Conduit.
1605.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS especial good Lord, the Earl of Nottingham, the
Lord high Admiral of England. etc. SAMVEL PAGE wishes all increase of Honor.
MY especial good Lord, the Love which that Honorable Knight Sir Richard
Leueson did deserve from me; has made my ear so impatient of any imputation
by which he may be traduced to the world, that passing amongst the throng of
variable sensures, and observing how Emulation and Envy of his Worth, strives
to bury his Honor in the same dust with his life-lesse body: I could not but
wonder, that so many fair parts of virtue and goodness in him, could be so
slightly skipt over, and that so cursory eyes as beheld them, could so dwell
upon the errors and mis-heedings of his youth. It concerns me (whom he
chose out of all his acquaintance, to breath his last words in my ears, and to
make me the eye, and the tongue witness of his end,) to do him this right,
to satisfy with my testimony such, who being better acquainted with his
course of life then my self was, might find in it more to dislike, and might
therefore suspect his death: to those, and for discharge of my duty to my
honorable friend, though departed, I have caused these Papers to speak more
publicly that, which in a full hearing I delivered to those which were
present at his Funerals* and I protest herein my sincerity; for as al my
service done to him, had beginning in my love of his virtue; So neither my
labor was mercenary with him* nor my pen hired: for it is sufficiently
known, that I never received from him more then the rich reward of his thanks*
and acknowledgment of that comfort which he received from me; which I hold so
dear a recompense, that I could sow daily, to reap but such an Harvest.

What I have herein delivered, I present unto your Honor, beseeching you, who
have vouchsafed to be the Patron of my Studies, to receive this; and
herewithall my most humble duty.

Debtford this 8. December. 1605. Your Honors Chaplain in all duty and
service, Samuel Page*

2. Sam 3. verse. 38. And the King said to his Servants, Know ye not that a
Prince and a great Man is fallen this day in Israel?
ABNER is dead, DAVID the King is become a mourner; he followed the Bear of
Abner to the Grave: When he came to the Sepulcher, he lift up his voice and
wept: He bemoned his death to the people* he refused his meat till the Sun
was down. And in this Verse he pleads the cause of his grief to his
Servants, and makes them sensible of his loss: Know ye not that there is etc.

See how artificial sorrow is, in telling of her own tale: here is not a
word in this speech of the Kings, but it has the taste and the relish of the
greiued heart where it grew.

1 It is not a fear, or danger, or some infirmity of his friend, that moves
him, but a fall; a fall as low as the Earth, and as deep as the Grave.

2 It is not the fall of any artificial structare or composition, but of a
man; a Man is fallen. Here is the dissolution of a little World, a pile of the
curiousest Architecture, and the master piece of the most skillful builder.

Consult not herein the practice of humane inhumanitie, which holds the life
of man cheap, and vnderualueth so rare a creature with low-priz'd estimation,
but consult Nature: Hoc natura prescribit, vt homo homini quicunque fit ob eam
ipsam Causam tantum quod homo sit consultam velit: This (says Cicero) is the
document of Nature, that a man should seek the good of a man, even for this
alone, because he is a man.

3 This man for whom David makes this moan, is none of them that are weary of
the light because God does humble them; and being vile, and sitting with the
Dogs of the flock, hunt after death: But, a great man is fallen: great in
the proof of his virtue in the adventure of his person, in his advancement to
be the favorite of a King; in his employment to be one of the supporters of a
mighty Kingdom, a Prince and a great man, that is, a principal great man in
Israel.

4 He is fallen in Israel, and it is so much blood let out of Isreal's veins,
some of that lock cut off wherein Sampsons strength lay: and Israel being the
envy of all the Kingdoms of the world, the Archers shooting at it, and
greeuing it, as old Iaacob said of Joseph: If it had been sown with the seed
of valiant men, it could have set them all on work to keep violent intruders
from invasion and assault. Therefore Israel had a great loss in the death of
Abner.

5 All this not a grief of ancient times, as Hecuba said of Troy, Troia i am
vetus est malum: Troy is an old grief, but it is a fresh woe instantly
pressing, and oppressing the sense: for he is fallen To day.

6 Do you not kn(...) this? says David: had you an hope of his person, and
have you no grief for his death? Could your glad ears receive the tydinges of
his joining with our forces, and do you with dry eyes see him, by death,
disioyned from us again?

Thus does David keep a scoare of his own losses. Behold, here is Abner a
Prince; yet he is fallen: a Great man, yet a man, fallen in Israel: for Death
has left no place privileged, no person free.

I will confine my present Discourse to these three particular points.

1 I observe a difference between man and man, in this title ginen to Abner: a
great man. 2 I find the greatest, subject to mortality: is fallen. 3 I note
in David a desire, that notise be taken of this loss: Do you not know?
1. Of the difference between man and man.

This is not in respect of the maker: for God has not made some men himfelfe,
and deuolued the rest to inferior iournimen under him: but we are all alike
beholding to him for our creation: not in respect of the matter; for we were
all, dug out of the same Pit.

But the difference is in the use, and service of men, and that is directed in
all well menaged States, by their manners and merits. Tullies rule of a man's
Fortune; that is, of his condition of life, is this: Suis ea cuique fingitur
moribus: It is such as his behavior and carriage makes it. The best men seek
Honor; and they seek it best, even in the merrite of their own worth; not in
the groundless opinion of an undiscerning multitude, and therefore they make
their lives presidents of living to others, and their whole comportsment
exemplary, deserving well: Some for advice, others for execution: Some for
Arts, some for the Tongues, some for the Sword, some for the Compass, some in
the Chambers of Princes, some in the Field making merit still, the true luster
of their greatness.

Paulum sepaltae distat inertiae celata virtus: Virtue that comes not
abroad, is little better then vnseen^ unskillfulness: which the Poet sp^ke not
to encourage men to put all their Virtue upon the Stage, and to set it always
in the common eye, with base prostitution; for this is an ambitious begging of
popular air: But he admonishes to keep Virtue in breath with exercise, to
give it life in action, and not suffer it to keep house too much, or to rust
with rest and idleness.

Thus shall not a man trust to hereditary Dignity, and spend upon that stock
of Honor which his noble ancestors have left him: neither shall he basely
purchase precedence and priority with the Penny, nor diue by cunning
insinuation into the favor of Princes by flattering their amisses: All these
are the Balls of Fortune, racketed upon high; but not abiding there, but
falling down again: These spring tides have their neapes* these are very
Meteors, making a portentose show of light awhile, but soon put out: For when
this Curtayne of Greatness drawn between them and the deceived eyes of men,
shall be withdrawn; when this ouer-guilding with false Honor shall begin to
wear off, and their unworthiness look like it self, stripped and naked: When
they shall unlearn the art of Seeming, shall it not then be said unto them.
What fruit have you now of these things where of you are ashamed?

Ler Honor then follow Virtue: and let Virtue be content with it self. S.
Augustines rule is, Gloria nostra est testimonium Conscientiae nosirae: Our
glory is in the testimony of our own Conscience.

The first Adam sought Honor, and it fled from him: The second Adam fled
from Honor, and it ouertoke him.

The use of this instruction is this, to provoke every of you (according to the
measure of Gods endowment of Grace) to stir up in your selves those fair
parts of Virtue and goodness, by which your God may be most glorified in his
creature, your Country may have the benefit of your service, your King the
use of your Virtue, and all men the example of it.

Seneca says, Recie facii fecisse merces est: To have done well, is the reward
of well doing: therefore if Riches buy away, or Favor give away from you your
wel-deserued Honors; yet God has promised to be your portion, and exceeding
great reward.

It will be a great evidence against you, that you never loved Virtue and
goodness truly, if you do neglect them when you see your selves neglected: for
Honorable actions are not to be undertaken in regard of the honor which we
gain by them, but that God may be honored by us in them.

Our Savior has informed us, that they which seek the praise of men, have
their reward here. I will conclude this first point with the saying of S.
Chrysostom, Hon^^ verus est in virtute animi: True honor is in the virtue of
the mind: and for all other that go for honors here, let us say with the
same learned father Honores non sunt im^ ministeria: They are not Honors, but
mere services.

2 Though I have found as much difference between man and man, as between
high and low, rich and poor, great and small; yet I have set mine eye in the
second place, upon the mortaliue of Great Men, because my Text says, A great
man is fallen. It has cost the lives of the greatest to exemplify this to us
from Adam, the Father of us all; by whose disobedience Sin came into the
world, and by Sin, Death, even to this moment of time wherein thousands are
breathing their last in sundry places, and by sundry sorts of death.

Where be those great ones, even the greatest of the Sons of men, which have
ouerrunne Kingdoms and people* with an inundation of power, and taught the
Earth to groan, and tremble under the burden of their Arms?

Did not God blow upon them, and they withered? And did not the whire wind take
them away as stuble. Esa. 40. 24.

When Job was out of taste with his life, he wished that he had gone immediately
from the womb to the Grave: for says he, I should have slept then, and been
at rest, with the Kings and Counsay lours of the Earth, which have builded
them selves desolate places: or with the Princes that had gold, and have filled
their houses with silver. Job 3. 13.

Dignity, friends, followers, wealth, plenty, the best supporters that ever
the world could find (of temporal happiness) give way when Death comes. The
Centution says to his servant Go, and he goes: Death says to the Centurion
Come, and he comes. Deaths Nets are not Cobwebbes to take none but small
Flies, nor Snares for none but small Birds: If great Men should not die, small
men should not live. Vnrestrayned geatnes grows saluage: but the thought of
Death, makes it come to hand, and become tame.

All the life of some, is a rize from one advancement to another, till they
have lost themselves in their own greatness: but they shall fall even from the
greatest. It was so decreed in Paradise, when we were all yet in the loins of
our first Parents, before there was any such difference between us in
dignity: For out of it were thou taken, because thou art Dust, and to Dust
shall thou return. Genesis 3. 19. Dust is our first and last. The most neat, and
the most cutious amongst us, shall not brush off this dust, till we rise
again, even till our mortal do put on immortality.

Reu. 6. 8. S. John looked, and behold, a pale Horse, and his name that sat
upon him is Death. Death is an Horseman (you see) to show his speed: and his
Horse is pale, which is the complexion of departing and dying men. This ryder
has overtaken Abner, a Great man in Israel. This filles the eyes of David full
of tears, till they run over.

1 The use of this observation is to understand, that Princes have their
sorrows. Luctus (says Tully) est agritudo ex eius qui charus est acerbo
interitu: Mourning is a sorrow conceived at the death of a dear Friend. In
this, grief is impartial, the friends of Kings are as mortal, as the
friends of Subjects. It is not in the Cotages of the poor, or under the
roof of the Widow only, in the Hospitals of the diseased only* or in the
dark Dungeons of the imprisoned: but in the Palaces of Princes, in the
Bed-chambers of Kings; nay in their bosoms, and the inmost conclaues of their
breasts: Luctus et vltrices posuere cubilia curae: Sorrow and sad unrest have
taken up their lodging.

Abner dies in the nonage of King Dauides sovereignty; a limb of strength
untimely lopt from the body of his greatness. And I am this day vveake (says
he) and newly anointed King.

David is exercised in these sorrows: for in the next Chapter, he mourns for
Ishbosheth the Son of Saul, whom some, presuming to please the King, did
murder in his bed: but he calls the executioners wicked men: he charge
them with murder, murder of a right ous Person, and that done upon him in
his own House, which should have been to him a Sanctuary of peace: and upon
his own Bed, where he promises himself rest.

The B^^^ should indeed represent the Grave, and sleep Death: but to make a
Slaughter house of his Chamber, and a Bear of his Bed, was the work of men
of blood: and David could do no less out of his grief for Ishbosbeth, and
his justice upon them, but require his blood at their hands, and take them
from the earth.

David's Child be gotten of Bathsheba, and Absolon hi^ Son dying, were to much
cut out of his own flesh: and (if Mors take name a Morsu, Death from biting)
they were two morsels bitten cut of David's own loins.

This David a King may do: he may love his Friends whilst they live, and
advance them to honor: he may hugg them in the bosom of his best favors,
and engirde them in the cincture of his royal embracements: He may beweepe
them when they are dead, and shed his sorrows in tears upon the earth for
them: But to adiourne Death, or prolong Life* to fill the empty Veins of his
friends with lively blood, or their dried Boanes with marrow: to open the
ears which Death has shut, or to light again the Candles which Death has
put out, or to redeem their life from the power of the Grave; In all these
things, Diuid is no King. 2. Reg. 5. 7.

When the King of Israel received Letters containing a request that he would
heal the Leprosy of Naaman, he answered them with the rending of his
clothes, saying: Am I God, to kill and to give I fo, that he does send to me,
that I should heal a man from (...) Leprosy?

In a less matter in the next Chapter, when a Woman in the Famine of Samaria,
cried, Help my Lord, O king. The King of Israel said: Seeing the Lord does not
succoure thee, how should I help thee with the Barn or the VVinepresse?

Kings then have their wings clipped: God will have them known to be but men:
the Wind blows on them, the Sun heates them, the rain does wet them:
grief and care is as ordinary a guest with them, as with their meanest
Subjects: their great Friends fall also like other men: Mors aequo pulsat
pede, it goes with an even foot, and carries an indifferent hand, and leaves
Kings that only remedy, to sit to wne and weep over their dead, as David
here does over Abner.

It is not long since our eyes saw the fall of Majesty, the death of the great
Lady of these Realms, the Sovereign of all the honest hearts under these her
dotninions, the wonder of her sex, deserving better of her people, then we
have words to express; as much above my praise, as I was beneath her greatness,
the holy Anointed seru(...) of God, has not she read us a lecture of
Mortality, and showed us our of what Pit Princes are dug?

I would my words could go so near the hearts of the greatest in this
assembly, as to persuade them to lay thus much to heart, and to make it their
Philosophy and best learning, to learn to die.

This meditation were enough to kill the Moath in their Garments, and to scour
off the Rust from their Gold, and to set their imprisoned Money at liberty: it
were enough to cloth the naked, to feed the hungry, to comfort the oppressed,
to make Rich men live to God, and not to themselves, or to regard themselves
chiefly for a common good.

It were enough to distaste to men that auxious and solicitous impropriation of
all their respects unto themselves, and to enlarge their hoartes to the
pursuit of the good of their brethren.

This meditation were enough to rear up Temples to God, Colleges for Arts
and Learning. Hospitals for the poor and diseased: for there is nothing that
killes Charity and Good*workes sooner, then hope of long life.

I beseech you, if your ear be open, to entertain this needful instruction,
let it be tenible in your remembrance also, that whilst you live, you may do
good to all: and that when you die, your works may follow you: not the merit
of your works; for, your well doing extends not to God.

This were condignitie on your part: but the reward of your works: for God
rewards abundantly those that do well: this is gratuitie on Gods part. It is
said of them that die, thus, (...), Their own works follow them, that they
might not depend hopefully on the works of other men, much less upon their
multiplied reiterations of prayers for them. It is also said, (...) which
signifies immediately following, and therefore no stay by the way, (...) even
with themselves.

It is the reproach of Protestants, and the shame of our Professors at this
day: It is spoken of in Gath, and it is proclaimed in the streets of Ask^lon;
the Church of Room does justly charge us with it: Good works live in exile
from us: encroachments upon our Church-reuenewes, and bequeathments of Dying
men to holy uses, even for the maintenance of good Arts and learning:

The reentries of the Lay upon the rentes of God, are frequent: the Church
has not the ouerflowings now of the fullest Cup: it is honor enough to
them, that invade not these consecrate and hallowed Beneuolences, that make a
conscience of this gripple seasure, and unrighteous intrusion, though they give
nothing themselves.

But let me speak it to the ear of Greatness; and let the heart that keeps
house there, tremble at it. Hinc colligendum est qua paena mulctandus sit qui
aliena diripit si inferni damnatione percu^itur qui propria non largitur* Hence
we may conceive, how they shall smart for their direptions, who invade the
goods of other men, when he shall be punished with infernal damnation, who
gave not that which was his own: It is the speech of S Gregory writing upon
the Parable of the Rich man.

I beseech you, as you tender the happiness of your beloved souls, let the
remembrance of the end, kindle in you an holy ambition, which may mount your
eyes and hoapes to a more lofty apprehention of that wealth which wastes not,
of that honor which comes not into dust, of that happiness which never can
be vnhappied again: and for these things, facite de damno lucrum of that
which idly oftentimes leawdly is misspent, make friends: Ventres pauperum
horrea diuitum, Lay up, if not your Harvest, yet at least the Gleanings, in
these Barnes: And if you give charge for them, as Boaz did for Ruth, that they
may gleane among the Sheaues, the bowels of the poor will bless you, and they
that are ready to perish, will pray for your increase.

2 David teaches us a second use of this Doctrine of Princes mortality. Psalm.
146. Trust no in Princes etc.

A King is called (...) quase (...) Let Let them go to him for Judgment, and
in his rest and peace let them seek rest* but to fasten dependence upon Great
men, is to forget the Lord of Hoastes: they that sow their hope upon this
ground, reap no better Harvest then that upon the house top.

I will conclude this point, with that Isay. 31. 1. VVoe be to them that go
down into Egypt for help. etc. The Egyptians are men, not God: their Horses
flesh, and not spirit; and when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, their
helpers shall fail, etc.

3 I note in this fall of so Great a man the loss which the State where he
lives, has of him: the King he loofeth Abners service. I am newly anointed
King, and the sons of Zeruiah. etc.

The people generally shall want his direction and oversight. It is one of the
Rods; rather it is one of the Scorpions wherewith God did use to scourge the
disobedient; He calls it The breaking of the pride of their power. Leuit.
26. 19.

Ier^mie in his Lament. bringes in Jerusalem thus, complaining. 1. Lament. 15.
The Lord has trodden under foot all my valiant men in the midst of me^: For
those things I weep: mine eye, even mine eye, easteth out water. Lamen 4.
2. The noble men of Zion comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as
earthen Pi^chers, even the work of the hands of the Potter?

What are the Walls about our strongest Towns, but heaps of Stone and
congestions of Earth? Theopompus in Plutarch to one that showed him the Walls
of his City, asking him if they were not goodly and strong? answered well,
(...) no, if your City hold none but Women. Our Ships are but walls of
Wood; our Ordinance but the messengers of Death: and there must be some to
send these messengers abroad.

Indeed all our defense, our strongest Bulwarks and Propugnacles of our land,
what are they without the ministry and service of Men, but as Shaftes and
Arrows hunge up against the wall? And what are Men, without order and
Discipline, but as droues of wild Beasts? So did disordered Confusion fashion
the vnschoold minority of the world, even then when the Roman Empire like a
young budd of greatness, was first Inoculate in the ranckstocke of
vndisciplin'd times: So says a learned Roman.

Disciplina militaris acriter retenta, etc.

Millitarie Discipline severely retained, made Rome spread over Town and
Country, Land and Sea, and bredd the Empire of all the Earth, in the poor
Cottage of Romulus.

And was not all this performed by the virtue of men of action, and
undertaking, such as are called Great men?

Philip of Macedon had wont to call the Athenians an happy people, because
they had such store of Great Men of worth, as yearly to choose ten fit to
be Leaders; whereas he had in all his time, found none but Parmenio, worthy to
take charge under him. But now I begin to see how I do idle thetime, to show
you how great a miss a State may have of Worthy men, and to endeare to you men
of action.

For we have put off our Armor, and our Swords and Sheildes hang up rather as
Monuments of old, then Instruments of new Warre^tour Ships are double moored,
our Men of War have wasted over welcome peace into our borders; Abner has
leave to die, and men of action could never have been better spared: Smooth and
even is the face and outside of all things amongst us. Let not our eyes, o
Lord, nor the eyes of our unborn Children and Nephews, ever see it wrinckled
any more: Let us all join in prayer always for the peace of our Jerusalem,
and let them prosper that love it.

Yet by the fair leave of a gentle Peace, let us consider that the Sons of
Zeruiah may be too hard for us, and therefore let not Abner die without sense
of a public loss, even without an universal condolement of the State
wherein he lives, and of which he has deserved well.

But this is my third, and last Observation: For David desires that notice be
taken of Abners death: Kovv ye not.

Surely the righteous perishes, and no man considers it in his heart. Isay.
57. 1. It is not possible but the common eye does see it, and the understanding
does apprehende such sadd accidents: but men keep such things as much as they
may, from the heart, loath to entertain so unwelcome a guest as Grief is.

David does not put them in mind of it as of some sadd betiding to Abner: for
the advantage of the death of the Righteous is manifold.

1 Rest from labors: For it is most true which S. Bern. says: Qui in labor
hominum non sunt, in labor profecto Doemonum erunt: They that labor not here
amongst men, shall labor hereafter amongst Devils.

2 They are taken away from the evil to come, as choice stuff removed when
Fire is feared; So does God defend his chosen, from the conflagration of the
unrighteous.

3 They are translated from death to life. S. Gregory says, Curramus et
sequamur Christum, non sunt hic vera solatia, sed ibi ponuntur vbi vera vita:
Let us run and follow Christ: here are no true comfortes, they are laid up
there where it true life.

But David's end in this bemoaning of Abner is, to teach them to depend upon
God, not on man; and to encourage every bold heart, and able hand amongst them,
to avenge the workers of that death to Abner, that grief to the King, that
weakness to the Church, and that common lost to all Israel.

It is our great fault that when God gives any such blow to our State, the
smart of it in too soon past, and their memory buried in the same Grave with
them. This is a great disheartning of Worthy men, from great vnderrakinges: For
this Land has buried, in our memory, of Worthres that are all dead, their
acts, their name and all; such an honorable breed, as huing eyes cannot find
paragons too, and our present hopes (which yet are our franckest promises)
cannot apprehend: Let them all go with this honor done them in heaven, In
memoria aeteina erit iustus.

And let Learning, which bath the best eye to sec Virtue, and the Honourablest
affection to love it and the longest lived means to immortalize it, keep her
own course upon the earth: Vignum laud virum Musa vstat mori: And let their
own good deeds praise them in the gates.

They that trust a curious pile of Stone Piramids, Colosses high-reard
Monumentes over, their low laid bodies in the losome of the Earth, with their
memories, do bue deceive themselves. A good Name is a precious Ointment powered
forth, the perfume of it fills all the house.

Thus much of the words of my Text.
COncerning this occasion of meeting, let me also borrow your parience and
attention.

Though I know you have saved me a labor in the application: and your
understandings in their clear light, have seen that this honorable Knight, of
whom there is now but thus much left, even a morsel fit for the Worms, and
atenant for the house, and a guest for the bed in the dark, of which Job
speaks, He has been my Teate, the Abner, the Great and Worthy man whom I
have personated all this while: and our Scene lies in our Israel, and that
this fight is the Catastiophe of our Tragedy.

Yet I beseech you, let me pay the debt which I owe to his love of me, and
the duty which I acknowledge tributarie to his memory, at least to say to you
of him as David did of his Abner: Know ye not that a great. etc.

A man great in his birth and descent, as you all know, linked by marriage in a
most Honorable Family, of a goodly and a lovely personage, of an casie and
affable nature where his discretion found it fit to be so: of a daring and
hardy spirit. of a stern and sower aspect against the enemies of his
Sovereign, magnanimously valiant in his vndertakinges, wise in his counsels,
speedy and resolute in his executions; valuing his worthy life less, then the
common good of his Country: Witness that aduentueous expedition of his, Irish
service; where he wrote his volour in the blood of the opposites, and filled
the care of this Kingdom with the welcome tydinges of his victories.

He was judicious in the finding out of Virtue, magnificent and bounteous in
the reward of it (...) spare in speech; but when occasion prompted him, rather
performing, then promising his favor and love, where he saw desert.

Great in the favor of the late Majesty of this Land, and succeeding in his
love, who succeeded in her greatness: great in his employment and office of
trust and charge: and (for which he forgate not his duty to God in all humble
thanks giving amongst his dying meditations) very fortunate and succesfull:
great in the love of the common man that went under his charge; for the eye
that saw him, blessed him; and every tongue of theirs, bear witness of his
righteous dealing.

Great in his estate and means of maintenance; for like a Tree planted by the
Rivers of waters, so he grew, and so did God give him a plentiful increase:
But that which makes all this greatness a great deal greater, he had an
understanding to know God, and an affection to love him.

I must not flatter the remembrance of flesh and blood so far, as to exempt
him from offending (with other men) I know that humanity and infirmity are
individual: But I am his witness, that he looked upon his life past, with a
censorious eye: he charged himself with his defaultinges without excuse or
mittigation of his sins, even with detestation of his unthriftiness of good
hours, and sorrow for the loss of so precious minutes, that should hane been
better spent, and with most serious deprecation of Gods wrath.

It pleased him in my attendaunce upon his honorable Father in Law into
Spain, wherein this worthy Knight had a great place of Command and Charge: it
pleased him in this expedition, to take knowledge of me, and often to
vouchsafe me his conference: and being desirous to sing the song of the Lord
in a strange Land, he received at my hands the Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ, accompanied with many worthy Knights, and Gentlemen of quality, in
one of the Harboroughs of that Land; where there was peace for our persons, but
not for our religion: Yea, many ways he testified to me, his love of God, and
of our Religion: He looked iudicially into the difference between us and the
Church of Rome, touched with commiseration of the darkness wherein they lived,
and wishing increase of zeal amongst us, and knowledge with them.

After his return, it pleased Almighty God by his last Sickness, to put him in
mind that he must set his House in order: For he must die. This he maturely
regarded; and after the settling of his Estate, he reserved the remain of his
time, as a vacation from all temporal thoughts, and consecrated it to his
preparation for his remove of the body, that he might dwell with the Lord.

It pleased him then, to remember his acquaintance, with me; and when he had
dispatched a Messenger with his Letters to me, to entreat my resort to him, I
prevented expectation: for the unwelcome news of his dangerous Sickness, was
to me messenger enough to call upon me to do so Honorable a Friend my last
service.

He received my free and voluntary visitation, with more then thanks: and
desirous to be private with me, to this purpose he bespake me.

First, he told me of his present weakness, and appeared to me sensible of his
danger of death, and therefore protested an earnest desire to spend that short
time of life limited then to him, in a religious preparation for that end.

He began at the acousing of his former leawd life (so he was pleased to call
it, with a sorrowful detestation of it) and complaining to me of his present
infirmity, which had so weakened his memory and understanding, that he could
not lay him self so open before God as he desired, nor comprehend in fit
words his suite to God for pardon of his sins, and the assistance of his
holy Grace to the last gasp, as he wished: He earnestly desired me to
conceive a form of confession of his sins to God, and a Prayer for those
mercies which I might leave with him when I should depare from him.

This I soon satisfied him in, for I had more use herein of my memory of that
which he had delivered to me, then of my invention for that which I was to
deliver to him: His sorrows had the true face of woe; and his feeling of his
own grief for finne, was so sensible, his zeal so fervent, his humiliation
made him so dejected, that I saw in him a true mirror and president of
repenting in good earnest.

O let me hear the tongue speak which is prompted by a soul truly humbled
before God. He used this form of Prayer, with an affection sanctified, and a
Spirit wayned from this world: And this done, he desired me now to supply the
weakness of his memory, by calling into his remembrance those things which
are most fit to be the last thoughts of a dying man.

I spared not my best endeavor herein, and entertained him with all the
comfortes which I could.

He heard me attentively, understandingly, consentfully, and beleeuingly: And
confessed this doctrine of Peace, which passes all understanding, to be the
best Physic; and that only which now he desired.

Thus commending him to my earnest Prayers to God, he dismissed me, pro
testing that he had much cheared and refreshed his ouercharged spirit with
these holy exercises; he desired me to repair to him the morning following
betimes: this I did gladly, and full of hope that the Lord would have mercy on
us, that he might live.

When I came, he gave me a loving and cheerful welcome, and then desired
me not to depart from him, till I had seen the last of him. He told me of
the sorrows which he had sustained the night past, and that he saw no
possibility of life beyond the morning following, he found such decay in
himself: then I understood how in the night past, he had called upon God, and
what good watch he kept, that if at midnight, or at the dawning, God had sent
for him hence, he might not be unprovided.

He then in the hearing of us all present, made his confession of sins, and
prayers to God so earnestly and effectually, that when he requested us all to
pray to God for him, he taught us to be importunate, and that it past not good
manners to take no nay of our God. I never sowed my comfort in a better ground;
for I began to reap, ere I had done sowing. He heard our prayers for him,
with great content and comfort.

This whole day was spent in prayers, and reading of those things to him which
might best endeare to him the joys of Heaven: and when he felt his decay more
sensible, he desired our prayers to God for him again, as loath to loose the
advantage of any minute of that short time of his life: and after us, he said
the Lords Prayer, to our great rejoicing in his zeal, who grieved so much for
his weakness; and he testified to us witnesses, the Religion and Faith
wherein he died.

I desired him to be plain and true to me in one demand: I showed him how
those that are in misery (as Job speaks) seek after death, and rejoice when
they can find the Grave; but their misery and wearines of suffering, brings
forth in them these defires: But for him who had plenty of all that his heart
could wish for his means of maintenance, greatness in his place, honor
(...)s employments (...)ce with his Sovereign, love with the (...)tude, and
the common language of all men to applaude his noble deserts of the state in
which he lived: I enquired therefore if he who bad so many prouocations to
desire to live, could be content to forsake this life, and all these things?
He smiled cheerfully, and protested that he dyed as willingly, as that poor
man mentioned in Job, that had nothing but misery to forsake; for Heaven was
his hope, and GOD his exceeding great reward.

Shortly after, he began to decay more and more, and slumbring out a little
time, after some pange and strong Conuulsions, he fell into this last sleep,
leaving tears in every beholders eye, and dividing amongst us his friends and
followers, a well witnest sorrow: and leaving this body of clay to these our
last obsequies.

Thus leaving him with God; and to God commending our selves, I conclude. I
have but planted and watered, the Lord give the increase.

FINIS.

