AN ESSAY OF the Means how to make our Travails, into foreign Countries,
the more profitable and honorable.

VERITAS TVA ET VSQVE AD NVBES
printer's or publisher's device

At London Imprinted, by H. L. for Matthew Lownes. 1606.

To the Reader.
Having framed this discourse long since for mine own advertisement, what
might and ought to be done by Travail; and now considering the manifould
errors and misprisions, that the greater sort of such as travail into foreign
Countries, have heretofore committed (because these days wherein we now live
are no less disordered, then when pilgrimages were on foot) and how few have
arrived unto that perfection which was requirable, for the want of a Guide or
Counselor, to advise and advertise them of the fairer and more ready way, to
make their travails somewhat more profitable and honorable: I have been
encouraged (worthy Reader) upon the virtue of the younger sort of such noble
gentlemen as intend so reco^mendable a course, to prepare and address the
same, by way of Essay; the rather also for that, in other languages, I have
suruayed some of like project, for other Nations, who I am sure stand not more
in need then we in this State do. Protesting (as in the inferiornesse of the
style may well appear, that neither vanity of glory, nor self presumption
(being of many the most unworthy to have enterprised this task) nor other
private respect then duty to my good friends (that have requested this at my
hands) and Zeal to my loving Countriemen, has made me publish it. For,
considering of all voluntary Commendable actions, that of travailing into
foreign States (undertaken and performed Regularly) is the most behoueable and
to be regarded in this Commonweal, both for the public and private good
thereof, singularly also for that the same is not undergone with ordinary
charge, care, hazard, or taking of pains, but of most uncertain issue and
commodity to Trauailers: It seems unto me (virtuous Reader) a fair duty
(where other worthy men have been so long silent, in giving a perfect rule
for Travailing, as it is in use at this day) to begin the hewing out of one,
that by some master workman, it may hereafter be better planted, formed, and
tried.

Moreover, I thought good, for the informatio^ of some Readers, to uncover my
intent in sundry points therein contained. And first, that whereas diverse other
sorts of Trauailers are mentioned the^ those General Voluntaries, (for whom
this discourse was framed) they are honoris gratia, and obiter Salutati; and
rather by way of order, then worthy to receive direction, mentioned. Secondly,
that whereas by the found of some words, some people and Nations may think
they be taxed in certain points, notwithstanding therein I may say, Nihil iam
quod non prius ab omnibus dictum fuit: yet I trust, the honest Reader will
perceive may meaning to bend rather to the rectifying, then preiudicing of any.
Thirdly, where any point is observed by way of secreat or policy, that no
other Construction be made thereof, then the literal, to ensample and advance
knowledge. Fourthly, that considering for the private respect of the most
inexpert, more Minute Subdiuisions and points are contained, then per adventure
will relish with the taste of some; that such will take for their better
stomach the benefit of those Marginall notes, which for their sakes I have set
down. Lastly, seeing not only we here in England may, as all other Nations in
the world do, account it a shame that there should be so many and such
fugitives (unworthy of the honorable name of Trauailers) as this Land has
affourde hertofore, who have not afterward made conscience of their own ways
nor of others, but like the most pernicious have communicated with all evil
and mischief in their travails, to subject their own Country, Princes,
State, Parents, friends and all that is held dear in this life; let me
discover so much of my secretest affections unto thee (discreet Reader) that
the preventing hereof, was one of the first motives to undertake this work.
And so I heartily pray to God to make thee happy in all virtue and godliness,
and to set to thy helping hand, as much as in thee lies, to encounter that
imputation to our Country: leaving unto thy discreet judgment, moreover,
these Tables which are here abstracted for the ease and aid of men's memories.
And so I bid thee farewell. From Wingham, the first of Iulie. 1606.

Tho. Pal.

TO THE MOST Excellent, Illustrious, and virtuous Prince, HENRY, eldest Son
to our Sovereign Lord the King, and Heir apparent to the Kingdoms of Great
Britain, etc. (*)
COnsidering with what liberty and Applause, Princes, in times past, undertook
voluntary travail and adventures into foreign parts: and how of latter days
those Illustrious Stemmes of nobleness ( I know not now by what custom
restrained of that recreation and renown) have notwithstanding improued their
precious times at home unto no less rent of commodity and commendablenes, by
suffering themselves to be trained up and delighted in the faculties and
knowledge of divine and humane things: I have presumed (most excellent and
gracious Prince) humbly to prefer, unto your rare protection and view, this
Essay, of the means how to make the travails of other men (who for the good of
this kingdom wherein they live so happily, their better service to his
Majesty, and making of themselves more Complete in all things, have fair
liberty and desire to adventure travail) somewhat more profitable and
honorable, not only before travail, but in the interim of travail, and after
their returns. First, because your highness is (in all happy possibility)
to be a most noble Judge of all men's deserts in this point, rather then to make
experience your self therein, unless in Martial causes: wherein I know not
whether I may account your royal Ancestors (Princes of this State) to be
more happy always in their good success, or in the faithfulness of their
voluntary great trains. Secondly, for that the people of great Britain (of
all other famous and glorious Nations separated from the maine Continent of the
world) are by so much the more interessed to become Trauailers, by how much the
necessity of every several estate of men does require that, for their better
advancement. Lastly, in regard this subject has not worn an English habit
hertofore, (from the custom dew to Princes in the Novelty of things) I thought
it my duty (under the compass of my obligation and service unto your
Highness) to make a present hereof (although but meanly apparelled and suited)
and in most humble wise to beseech the greatness of your Excellency, to
favor and patronize the same. Which gratiousnes I must ever acknowledge (sir)
to proceed from the clear fountain of your generous, ingenuous, and princely
disposition unto all bounty, goodness and virtue: and the world already
knows, that your singular towardlines, to every good and perfect thing, is
such, that neither can it or is likely to be paralleled of any in the world (so
long as your Highness continews in these religious virtuous and studious
paths, which God grant) nor circumscribed within the Kings most Ample
kingdoms, and States, but is known, feared, or admired in foreign parts. The
which as it is a most Sovereign and inexpressible blessing unto all, of these
his Majesty's Dominions: So, unto me, it shall be the only study and care to
make expressio^ of all dutiful allegiance: And in the mean seafo^ to pray
unto God continually for your highness, to continue for ever in health,
felicity and everlasting glory, And rest during life

Your HIGHNESS most humble and devoted Servant, THOMAS PALMER.

Travailing is either 1, Regular: Of Regular Trauailers some be 1.
Nonuoluntaries, Sent out by the prince, and employed in matters of 1. Peace, 1.
Honorable 1. Ambassadors 2. Commissioners 3. Messengers 1, To know well 1. From
whom they are sent. 2. To whom they are sent. 3. To be perfect in their
business. 4. Themselves that are sent. 5. The Countries from whom, and to whom.
2. To practice 1. Eloquence to obtain. 2. Prudence in accusing, excusing,
demanding, denying, propounding, answering etc. 3. Liberality. 4. Honesty 5.
Humanity, and Civility. 6. Faithfulness, Care, and 7. Observation.


2. not Honorable: 1. Posts are recommendable for speed and faithfulness. 2.
Intelligencers 1. Base, 2. Honest: 1. To be expert in the Tongues. 2. To
resemble all gestures and behauiours. 3. To be well furnished of all
necessaries. 4. To be secret above ordinary. 5. To be able to endure all
things. 6. To keep themselves from being known for Intelligencers.



2. War. 1. Chieftaines and Co^manders, 1. To be always provident and
faithful. 2. Never to exceed Commission. 3. To make diligent and true
relation.
2. Common Soldiers, 1. To be obseruant to the discipline. 2. To make account
of his Arms. 3. Never to mutiny.


2. Inuoluntaries, 1. Banished persons 1. By the course of the Law. 2. By the
displeasure of the King: 1. Not to murmr for their banishment. 2. To depart
the land within the time limited. 3. Not to travail into the country that is
enemy to their Prince, or to God. 4. Always to discover fruits of allegiance
to their Prince and Country.

2, Persecuted for a good conscience, must observe these things: 1. Before
travail, 1. To be sure that no licencious affect move them. 2. To be assured
that they fly for the trueths sake, and that they embrace the right religion
3. To know that they cannot get a toleration of that right Religion, nor to
have liberty of conscience. 4. To sue for license of the Magistrate. 5. To
resolve to go into that Country where the word of God is preached: or into a
free estate and neuter.
2, In Travail, 1. To serve God sincerely. 2. To obey the laws of that
Country. 3. Not contending for this or that discipline. 4. Not to live idly
or in excess. 5. Not to intermeddle with the politic government or State. 6.
Never treacherous to their own Prince or State.
3, Being returned from Travail, 1. No Busy bodies, Schismatickes, or mouers
of Sedition. 2. To live a quiet, peaceable and godly life.


3, Voluntaries.
2, Irregular. *

Page I. B. The rest of the first Part, abstracted.
Voluntary Regular Trauailers are considered, 1, As they are moved
accide^tally: 1, Principally, that afterward they may lead a more quiet and
contented life, to the glory of God. 2, Secondarily, regarding ends, 1,
Public: which do consider 1, What persons are inhibited travail: 1, Such as
Nature, 1, Infants. 2, Decrepite persons.
2, Such as Imperfection, 1, Fools. 2, Madmen. 3, Lunaticke.
3, Such as the Sex, Women.

2, What times to travail in are 1, Not fit: When 1, Our Country, is
engaged with Civil wars: or, 2, The same expects foreign wars.
2, Fit: 1, When one may reap most profit in shortest time, for that he
aims at. 2, When the Country, into which we would travail, holds not
ours in jealousy.

3, What age is most meet to travail in: 1, Not the Nonage. 2, Not Old age.
3, But the Middle age.

2, Private.

2, As they consist Essentially: 1. Nobles, 1, General: of whom, look in the
second Part. * 2, Special: 1, Divines, 1, In what Cases they may not travail.
1. If there be preaching of the Gospel in their Country. 2, If License can
not be obtained of the State. 3, If godly and learned Professors live in the
State.
2, For what pretenses they may travail, having obtained License. 1. To a
general Council approved by the State. 2, To a famous Library. 3, To have
conference with such and such famous Learned men. 4, To have conference with
such and such Linguists, that are famous for the Hebrew, and Greek Tongues.

2, Ciuilians, 1, To be well grounded in Religion, and steadfast in the same. 2,
To be studious in their observations. 3, To take Degrees.
3, Soldiers, 1, Contemplative, 2, Active are to note these things, 1, Before
travail, 1, To be expert in the Mathematickes. 2, To remove disco^tentednes.
3, To be assured that they may be spared. 4. To accustom themselves to
hardness. 5, To serve where the Prince most favors. 6, To serve in those
wars, where a man may soonest prove a good Soldier.
2, In Travail, 1, To make diligent observation of all things. 2, To be
studious in observing the discipline. 3, Rather to put up injuries, than to
offer any. 4, Neither to serve under Infidels, nor against professors of the
Gospel, or in an unjust war. 5, To use the war as no profession, but to live
in peace the better afterward.


4, Physicians, 1. To make diligent observation of all Common and Accidental
things. 2, To be as well expert as learned. 3, To be careful to transplant what
may profit their Country.


2, Commons, 1, Merchants, 1, Venturers, 2, Of Companies, 1, To know by what
Commodities their Country may be benefited. 2, Not to transport things
prohibited, or to bring in vain and hurtful matters. 3, To conceal the
secrets of their Princes State, and to observe of other nations what is meet.
3, Men of War, 1, Not to transgress their Commission. 2, To observe
diligently for Navigations. 3, To make faithful relation of things needful.

2, Machanickes. *



The first Part.
Travailing is equiuocable, Regular or Irregular. Of Irregular traveling,
Trauayling duple.
most men find by experience what it is. Regular travailing.
The Regular is an honorable or honest action of men (and in special cases of
women) into foreign Countries and States, chiefly for a public good to that
Country of which such are, and also for a private benefit and necessity in
cases necessary and of commendablenesse. In like sort there are derived, Two
orders of Trauaylers. Regular Trauailers triple. Four things of Trauailers
observed.
from this action of traveling, two orders of Travelers, Regular, and
Irregular. The Regular are threefould; Non voluntary, Inuoluntarie, or
Voluntary. Of whom four things may be considered. First what ought to be
the moving causes of men's travel. Secondly, what courses such as are justly
moved must undertake before travel, if they will benefit their Country, or
themselves. Thirdly, how they ought to spend their times in the interim of
travel. Lastly, what commendable carriages and behavior such are to express
at their returns, to the further honor of themselves, good of the State, and
glory of God.

The first of these according to the ancient division of Causes has four head
mouers; but it may be impertinent to entreat of above two, Two moving causes:
efficie^t and final.
at this present, namely of the efficient and final. For, the formal esteemed
causes (which are pedestriall, equestriall, or nauticall) stand either at the
disposition of the efficient; or pretend perfection and use from the final. In
like manner the material causes which pertain either to the body or the
mind, though in subject they differ not always, yet in consideration of the
places and the things in them contained, being objects to be respected, may
either depend upon the pleasure of the efficient, or from the final draw
their motion and contentation.

There are only three just efficients (next under God, Three efficie^ts
secondary of Trauailers.
which is the efficient of all good things in a secret manner) that ought to
stir up men to travel from their Country (which as a parent tyeth all in
duty to respect it before sorteine parts: and wherein every one ought to
lead his life godly and soberly, to advance the Commonweal thereof.) Those
are first the pleasure of the prince, The princes pleasure.
or State, or Law under which men live. The second in number, though in order
preferable above all things in the world, is the maintenance and exercise of
true Religion and Godliness. The maintenance of Religion.
The third is a godly thought to do good in the Church and Commonweal, The
hope to do good in the Church and Commonweal.
grounded either upon probable reason, or undertaken for private necessity and
respect. Seeing the two former belong either to Non voluntary or Inuoluntarie
travelers, it shall be the more sparingly discoursed of them; in regard the
Voluntary are the the true subjects of our point in hand.

The Persons, Non Voluntaries duple.
first occasioned to travel by the Princes or States favor, are either men of
peace, or men of war. Those of peace are either honorable or not, according
to the circumstances of places, persons and times to whom and in what times
they are sent. The honorable be either Ambassadors, Honorable Non Voluntaries.
Non Voluntaries not honorable.
Commissioners, or Messengers with or without credence. The not honorable be
Posts and such like Currers necessary in States to advertise Princes speedily
concerning their minds, or such as go under the name of Intelligencers.

As concerning the honorable, though the providence of every Prince State
make election of meet personages to undergo such charge as is committed unto
them; and are ever well instructed concerning principal matters and momentall:
yet for other men's observations, Five circumstances required of the honorable
Non Voluntaries.
there are five circumstances required of these principal Travelers, to be
considered. First, from whom such are sent. Secondly, to whom and to what
government. Thirdly, what is their Embassage in special. Fourthly, what they
themselves are, so chosen to undergo the office of Ambassadors, of
Commissioners or Messengers. And fifthly, that the States of those Countries and
fashion of the people, as welfrom whence as unto which they are sent, be
pondered at the time of their legation: which shall enable the^ the more to be
answerable in all points of co^sequencie; that the Prince sending may be
co^pleatly served and honored; that the State or Prince, to whom, may
accordingly admire and have the Embassage and them in recommendation, that the
Embassage may take best effect. And lastly, that no reproach chance unto them
either concerning their trains or themselves, but contrariwise commendation
and reward. Moreover it is required of such that they be eloquent, Virtues and
faculties, required in Ambassadors.
to obtain and efect that which they plead for in negotiations: prudent in
accusing, excusing, demanding, denying, and such like politic affairs:
liberal, honest, humane, popular, but with respect, civil in words and
ceremonies, faithful above all, careful to dispatch affairs, and painful
to ripen and prepare them, and lastly obseruant in foreign affairs to get
intelligence. These may be sufficient at this present.

As touching the not honorable, though we might be also silent and pass the^
over for the reason aforesaid, yet let these things be remembered. Posts.
First, that Posts, whether mediatly, or immediately, be speedy and faithful to
put in execution things committed to their charge. Secondly, Intelligencers.
as concerning Intelligencers and Referendaries, being persons of notable
esteem to support the policy of the Estate by the knowledge of the secrets of
foreign powers and daily occurrences that chance in them. Whereby Princes may
show all offices unto their friends and confederates, and be sufficiently armed
with knowledge to resist the malice of their enemies or encounter such as are
held in jealousy.

These are sent out by the mediation of the Council in most States, or by some
of the principal. Of these Intelligencers it is required, Points required in
Intelligencers.
first before their undergoing so dangerous an actio^, To speak singularly the
tongues, that may stand them in stead in that Country out of which they must
gather intelligence, and to imitate the common gestures and behavior of those
nations, to cloak their purposes the more artificially. Also to be well
acco^modated of things needful for their enterprises: the which being
variable and changeable according to the alteration of States and times have no
certain rules. Only this, that such may safest travel under the shows of
those people which that State wherein such must travel to get intelligence has
the least jealousy of, and are in good friendship. Lastly, to keep the order
and manner of their enterprise so secret, as that those which send out such
shall not know the plot of all things if so be the same be devised by the
Intelligencers themselves, which is ever least dangerous. Moreover it is
required of such to enure themselves to endure the accidents of Sea or Land;
as storms, heat, cold, excess of meats and drinks, sickness, much
riotte of speech, simplicity and such like. And in a word whether abroad, or
at home, let such be careful they be not discovered for Intelligencers or had
in overmuch jealousy, but so warily demean themselves that they may as well
secure their own persons as benefit the State by their intelligence.

There is an other kind of Intelligencers, Base Intelligencers.
(but base in respect of the former, by reason they assume a liberty to say
what they list) who are inquisitors or diverse into the behauiours and
affections of men belonging to a State, the carriages of whom are very
insupportable; oftentimes exercising any liberty and licentiousness to pry
into the hearts of men to know how such stand affected. But being also
necessary evils in a State, I would counsel such as unhappily shall have to
deal with this pack of Muches not so favorably to suffer them to rail upon
the Nobility of this Land and discover faults in the State, to blaspheme and
dishonor the Majesty of God and of their Prince but rather to conjure such so,
as never afterward they shall delight in that humorous-carnall-tempting and
devilish profession.

The other sort, Men of war.
which likewise by the Princes or States favor are made Travelers, are men of
war or soldiers, serving on the Land or Sea; whether these be sent to serve
under other Princes or have authority committed unto them to make war
themselves. Now considering these are either Commanders or common Soldiers,
there ought to be a distinct consideration. As touching the first, though we
might considerately enough leave them out here, being men of action and
experience, Three general offices of men of war. To be provident and
faithful.
yet we observe three general offices of these: First, ere they undertake their
journey, to be acco^modated with every thing necessary, both for men,
munitio^, victuals and money, which being the sinews of every enterprise
shall prevail greatly. And in case that any be sent to serve under other
Princes, it is a thing most requirable, for the honor of their Prince and
Country and of themselves, to be much curious that every soldier be seemly
apparelled, Not to exceed Commission.
and orderly sorted with men and arms, and other things necessary, and to be
faithful unto their Sovereign. Secondly, let every one take heed he go not
beyond his Commission, but rather in case of his absolute authority streighten
his own power, never presuming upon the favor of the Prince or State that
sends such an one forth. For though the same sometimes may sort to a happy
end, yet the encroching on the prerogative royal is reprouable, and without
reward, though so aduantagious for ones Prince, and Country. And as it is the
cheifest point of a Commander to observe good discipline to advance every
enterprise and design* so especially in case of serving under foreign Princes
and powers, let such be blameless and irreproueable: accomplishing moreover
with resolution and discretion whatsoever is committed to the charge of such,
nothing attempting upon discretion without commandment of the Prince himself
under whom such serve. And that such be not lavish in rewarding with honor, or
too severe in punishing offenders beyond the discipline then exercised. The
third and last consists in the making true and diligent relation of every
accident, To make true and diligent relation.
unto the Prince to whom such belong. We shall not need to dilate on these,
they are so common. Now as concerning the common soldier in this place of Non
Voluntary travelers, let it only be exacted of him, To be obedient to the
discipline prescribed unto him, to esteem of his arms as the cognizance of a
soldier; and never to be tainted with mutiny or murmuring: For such do
debar themselves evermore afterward of bearing arms, or of the reputation
of Soldiers, though such may pretend great cause. Of other things let it be
sought for in the voluntary Travelers.

It now remains we touch upon those that Inuoluntarily are made Trauailers,
Inuoluntaries upon displeasure!
by the displeasure conceived by the Prince, and by offense committed against
the law. Those that have trespassed against the law, although in other States
in times past they were great personages, as others that lay open to such
punishments, yet here in England are men of no account or reckening: such as
being incorrigible persons, good for nothing, evil members, are for ever made
proscripts, and turned from the tuition of their natural friends and Country,
to live as runnagates in the wide world. Banished persons of two sorts.
But as concerning such as stand banished by displeasure and prerogative royal
of the Prince, they are of two sorts. The first of such are only for breach of
Laws in Court banished from the Court, and confined to approach no nearer than
so many miles, for a certain space: these are not to our purpose. The other is
of such as the Prince upon just indignation banisheth the Land for a time
certain or not; whereby such are forced to travel, and are of the Gentry or
Nobility always, of whom the Prince has a greater respect, then of the
Commons that sustain all punishments in their times according to the Laws. Of
whom these Offices are exacted; First, Their offices in travail.
not to make show of discontentednesse other then sorrow for the offense done.
Secondly, to depart the Land, within the time limited. Thirdly, not to travail
into their Princes enemies Countries, or into the Countries of miscreants and
Infidels, there to make their aboade; (for the one is a breach of Religion, the
other of allegeaunce and duty to their Prince, Sovereign and Country: which
yet remain to such so, during life) either for that they may obtain favor to
be recalled, or by decease of the Prince that banished them in special cases
of displeasure be freed to return from banishment: the benefit whereof they
may peradventure lose if such shall be observed to spend their times in the
enemies Country or keep much familiarity with them. So is it to those that
travail to Pagans and Infidels, who although they may be friends with their
Prince, yet the office of banished travelers carrying the badge of Gods
displeasure also upon them may not do every thing that the policy of an
Estate shall permit: but in particular let them carry themselves so, as God
their high Prince, who has a more special hand over such then ordinary may
be served also and appeased by obeisance to his word, which restrains all
from voluntary fellowshippe with unbelievers and ungodly persons; much more to
have such a community with them as being left to their choice they seek
rather after such then the godly, and as it were indenizen themselves into
their life, Religion and conversation. Lastly, that wheresoever these shall
remain, let them carry themselves so discreetly during their perigrination,
that they may procure themselves to regaine their Princes favor to restore
them. And also when such shall so fortunately be recalled, to behave themselves
like new creatures and subjects, abandoning all reprouable actions that draw
down suddenly GODS displeasure, and consequently the like or greater
judgments. Thus briefly may we conclude the first rank of Regular and lawful
Trauailers. The second follows.

2 Which are also of the Crew of Inuoluntaries: Such as travail for Religion
and conscience sake.
being moved to traueil for the maintenance only and preservation of their
Religion, which upon assured grounds they know to be the true and only saving
profession whereby they serve God aright according to his word, and prepare
themselves for a more divine and excellent mansion then can be found or
conceipted here on earth: the which thing may, of all other things in the
world held in estimation, prescribe against and free them from the opposition
of laws humane, and their allegiance; in such sort that whether men travel
without commission or license of the Prince and State to whom they belong, or
whether contrary to the express commandment of the State, In what cases
their travail is warrantable.
their callings are justifiable and honorable without the titles of fugitives
or rebels; so such demean themselves, in sort according to godliness, and as
good subjects, before they put themselves to travel, and during their
perigrination. For if it be generally held that faith is to be persuaded not
compelled; and that no man has power of Religion, seeing that it proceeds
from the mind and will, the liberty whereof rests in the hands of God only,
to dispose of: then of all men those are most free that ground their Religion
upon the word of God, which only is able to enfranchise and give an assured
hope of standing, unto the sincere professors thereof; making men's actions holy
and warrantable every where. Hence, the subjects of a nation that persecuteth
the Gospel of Christ, and establishes laws derogatorie from the true worship
of God commanded only in the holy scriptures, have their Supersedeas
authentical. For which cause has God, least his servants should make
shipwreck of their faith and conscience, whom he has not fitted to be
Martyrs, made a way in the hearts of Princes that they may travel into other
Nations peaceably, and there abide till the Lord shall remove the rod of
persecution from his Church. Of which we have singular testimonies both in the
days of Queen Marie; and contrariewise in the blessed reign of Queen
ELIZABETH: Who granted to several Nations within her Dominions freely to
exercise their Religion, and that in distinct forms, in their several
tongues, for the better entertainment of their consciences. Now to avoid the
inconveniences of this liberty, that many upon blind zeal and offended
consciences may pretend; such Trauailers must observe these Rules following, or
the like. First, Their duties before travel.
that all subjects before they enterprise travail in this kind are to consider
with themselves, whether there be not some other licentious affectes that
spur them forward. For, No licentious humor may press these forth.
though men upon other grounds of affectes have liberty to travail by license
or flight, yet is their iournying altogether displeasing to God and
disparageable with men: much more in the case of religion. For it is made
changeable and turns soon into hypocrisy. Secondly, Right Religion*
such are to ponder well whether the Religion, which they profess and would
gladly exercise, be that which by Christ was instituted and by his Prophets and
Apostles; contained in the Canonical scriptures: wherein all ceremonial and
old blind sacrificing worship, all humane traditions that consent not with
the faith and to edification; all idolatry and political government that
derogateth from GODS glory, is forbiden, as things damnable. From hence are
all perigrinations and pilgrimages to any place for the performance of vows,
or sacrificings for sins, impious and vain. Thirdly, howbeit, for the
nourishment of that true and right Religion, men may be justly moved to
travail, yet it is the office of all so travailing to weighe and consider with
themselves, first, whether the same be not professed already in their
Country, Toleration of Religion.
or liberty permitted for such to exercise the same.

For, if there be an exercise thereof there, or a toleratio^ though in a
private sort, a subject only for this ought not to travel nor forsake his own
Land, Country, parents, brethren, and that Church whereof he is a member, for
any other vain persuasion or fancy* Fourthly, if so be there be neither
public exercise not private toleration; and in case there be Laws prohibitiue
for traveling, To sue for license of the Magistrate.
it is the duty of every subject to move the Prince or Magistrare, to whom
authority is committed, to grant license: the which if it can not be obtained
it is better to venture flight and shun persecution then to abide it; unless
such an one can find in his heart the motions of strength and courage to suffer
persecution for the truth of the Gospel, without wavering. Yet of the two it
is better to fly from persecution, then being come into it, to saint, and so
leave their hope and faith in ieopardie. Lastly, let not such stand indifferent
whether they go, so they may be provided for: for if there be any choice, the
best is evermore to be elected. And therefore considering in outward show that
is best where the Gospel is flourishing, What Countries are best for these to
travail in. Of three, one free from danger.
yet in other cases dangerous; I presuppose three kind of places to travail
into for this kind of people, and only one free from danger. The first, a
State which is enemy to their Country. The second, a State nearly linked in
many respects to their Country. The third, a State, which is indifferent: I
mean such a State as is neither fast friend, nor apparent enemy. To piece out
our discouse about these it is needelesse, being apparent unto all men, that
the newter or free state is least dangerous to be travailed into for this kind
of people. Their offices now in travail offer themselves. First, Their offices
in travail.
considering they are now become separates from the world, their courses must
be so much the more spiritual, that the provident hand of God may not be
removed from them, and that he may receive them as members of his Church into
favor again. To serve God sincerely.
Wherefore let them serve God truly in those places wherein they shall be
dispersed; that they may cause every nation fearing God to tender their
estates and to relieve their necessities. Secondly, let them demean themselves
every one according to his estate and ability answerable to the Laws and
customs of those places wherein they shall happily abide, To obey the laws
and discipline.
that no hatred or mislike befall on such. And in case the number of those
shall be so great as to make a congregation by themselves, having humbly
obtained the same of the Prince or Magistrate in a place convenient, it
behooves such a Congregation to institute that Order of discipline which may
best sort with the Magistrates pleasure: that no iarres or dissension arise
therein: or other policy be established then that which consents with other
godly Churches, unless it shall be left unto their own election to sample
their discipline after the most reformed and esteemed Churches: Not to change
the discipline, being once Regular.
about which if controversy arise, let the appointment thereof be referred to
the Magistrate or Prince of the State. And in case the same be thus once
considerately established, wherein no just offense to any may arise (though in
every politic body there are some weak members that are scandaled at
things indifferent) the same ought to be continued without alteration; least
dissension and displeasure creep in, a thing most displeasing in the church of
God; and to strangers, in a strange Nation most dangerous. But in case the
numbers of such be so small, and the place will not permit a distinct Church,
then ought such to be conformable unto the discipline of that place, avoiding
also all public and private mislike of the discipline, or government there
used. And though that State retain in their policy many things, In discipline
the doctrine not the policy is to be sought after.
which were better left out, then commanded, yet strangers are to follow the
doctrine and not external things, as Ceremonies and orders. For, the
intermeddling therewith sauoureth not of Christianity and knowledge.

Thirdly, in case such be deprived of maintenance, Not to refuse any honest
trad to live by.
or if the custom of that place wherein they live do account it requisite,
let every one in his calling bend himself to some honest Science or
mechanical trade, that they may not only get their livings honestly, but may
be also reputed good members of that Common Weal. Moreover, No excess to be
discovered.
if wealth abound, let not such spend that lauishly,wantonly, or carelessly. For
that benefiteth not any; much less strangers, in a strange Nation, especial
the religious, the same being a scandal to their profession.

So in matters and affairs of the civil State, No Diverse into the politic
government or secrets.
let them not entermeddle nor be curious searchers into the secrets thereof.
For, being placed in a State only for zeal of Religion, they must give
continual show of virtue, and shun every thing that may breed jealousy;
least that State into which they are received hold them rather for Spies, then
for Religious professors. Neither let such be noted for fayneants and idle
persons: for such corrupt an Estate. Never to be noted for idle persons.
And let them be ever kind and respective to the people with whom they are
suffered to live amongst; rather sufferers of injuries then offerers of any
wrong to them; never accepting Duello, but by the permission of the Magistrate
for capital wrong. Lastly, that thorough no persuasion of their friends at
home, Not treacherous to their own Prince or Country.
or of enemies abroad, or of their own tempting affections, they go about
treacherously, or rebelliously, to practice or rise against their native
Sovereign, in any sort, how unjust or ungodly soever their Prince be: but
rather seek unto God to turn his heart, and to give a peaceable return home
unto them.

The last point we will briefly handle concerning their offices when they
happily shall be recalled, Their offices when they return.
or permitted to return, in two observations. First, that howsoever the State
stands affected, it being permitted to them to have liberty of conscience and
private exercise of Religion, Noe busy bodies or moouers of sedition.
Not to attempt or consent unto any commotion, insurrection, or any such
treasonable action, but to carry loyal hearts toward the Prince and State,
not once publicly speaking or writing against the Ecclesiastical policy, nor
be strict and ouer-precise in things external and indifferent: but carry
respect unto the times, and late standing of things; using all things to the
glory of God without offense or breach of conscience. And considering that
there is of most things a civil and superfluous use, let such retain the
Civil, and construe every thing rather to the best and to edification, then
to prejudice the conscience of one another, leaving the superstitious vseage to
those that upon good knowledge do use the^. That other is the sociable and
peaceable carriage of every one to his neighbor, To use a godly and quiet
conversation.
seeking al occasions to increase love and mutu^l society. As concerning other
things required in Travelers, Of Volu^taries*
let it be sough for in the Voluntary travelers which now offer themselves to
be discoursed on, being the proper subject of our point in hand.

3 Before we enter into the listes of this matter, The moouers of Voluntaries.
The pleasure of parents.
there are some things considerable: for there be some that go under the name
of voluntary travelers moved out of their parents pleasure and will. The
callings of which may seem equally lawful no doubt, so their parents
perform their offices and have them well guided and instructed, in the interim
of their iourny (for travel to some bodies are as new birthes; that bear
them, of dull minds and sour, good quick and sweet conuersing spirits and
inclinations: yea amendeth many imperfections of nature); so as the lawfulness
of the parents end and purpose have a lawful pretense also. Thus may the
efficient and final causes come foul one of another: The final and efficient
moving causes considered.
for the clearing of which confusion, I judge it needful to consider a few
words of the ends in general; that when the particular kinds of trauailers
shall be mentioned, their ends by implication may appear. Of ends lawful,
Two lawful final moouers.
there are two heads: one Prime and principal; the other Congruent and
Secondarie.

The prime is divine and spiritual, The prime.
That afterward we may lead a more quiet, contented and peaceable life, to
the honor and glory of God, with knowledge and understanding. And this no
doubt ought to be the first mark, for every man to shoot at in this life,
that by doing the revealed will of God, every one may seek unto himself the
assurance of heavenly happiness, which is incomprehensible and eternal. That
other, Congruent and Secondarie, is agreeable also and fitting the calling of
every particular; The secondarie is duple.
being of two sorts: Public or Private. The Public is most honorable, and
should stir up every man with delight to undertake travail for the good of
ones Country. Neither is the Private discommendable, considering it gives
satisfaction or at the least sufficiency to live well and happily according to
the humor of the world, whereby it may be apparent that the motives and ends of
some are all one.

Moreover, seeing it may be doubted whether all persons may be included under
the third rank of Regular Travelers: and also whether all times be fitting
for these to undertake Travail: And lastly, whether every age be congruent
with these: let us in order clear these three points. To the first, I observe
three Opposers: to wit Nature, which prohibiteth Infants and decrepit persons,
whose defect of understanding and doting age pleads insufficiency.
Imperfection, others as fools, mad men and furious persons whose
disabilities of mind are such as no hope can be expected for the one or other.
Lastly, the Sex in most Countries prohibiteth women, who are rather for the
house then the field; and to remain at home, then travail into other
Nations, but in special cases. As touching the second, What times are fit to
travail in.
what times are fittest for the voluntary travelers to go in, we must
observe a duple season, either of their own Country or of those whereinto
they would travail. Touching the first, let none travail at those times when
their Country is engaged with Civil, or expects wars. For, to leave the
same in time of necessity, were unnatural and dangerous: in the one case it
being disparageable, to leave the Country when enemies invade the same; in the
other case it may prove perilous to such, many sundry ways. And therefore that
time is best, when ones Country is in peace and tranquillity.

Touching the second, that the seasons also of such Countries where into such
travail ought to be regarded, it belongs to every particular to make
observance, When he may reap most profit thereby in the shortest time: namely
the soldier when there are wars: the Ciuilian or Lawyer, when great matters
are debated in Parliaments, Universities or disputations, concerning points of
equity, prerogative, jurisdiction and such like: The Divine, when any General
or National Council is heald touching their profession: The Mechanicke, when
such and such Arts and trades do singularly flourish etc. Yet every man so
travailing must take heed, how he go into a Country that is jealous of his
Prince, and subjects; which chances evermore when Princes are enemies or when
they have intestine wars and factions that use any policy to advantage their
party.

Now the third and last is, What age is meetest to travail in.
whether any age be congruent for these voluntaries. This is a hard thing to
resolve upon; for there may be reasons on both sides, that commend youth, and
other reasons that prefer the middle age. But seeing the reasons for youth
profit but in special cases and but few persons: I rather insist upon the
middle age. For, the nonage of men is incapable either to apprehend or
comprehend things important, for the State of which they are, or for
themselves: Or else transported with many turbulent affections that hinder
their quiet ingenious understandings, and rather gather corruption the^
commendablenesse, which ouerwaigh such good parts as they happily in long time
with pains have collected. Wherefore the Divine Plato by implication forbade
men to travel in this kind till they came to forty years of age. But our age
and climate now perfecteth sooner: and therefore we will take the meaning of
his words, which implies thus much; That age to be fittest for travail in
which a man in shortest time may make most profitte, and be in least danger
to be corrupted, by his own swaying affections, or by the stie persuasions of
others: The which cha^ceth in our Climate after twenty five years in most
bodies; and therefore the Philosopher adds, Such might travel till 50
years. By which words I collect two things: one, that men should not make too
short a return, and so be little bettred by their travail. The other that
when men grow aged and declining, travailing should be left off (considering
that age is laboursom enough without travail, and it argues inco^sideratnes)
but in special cases. So as the middle age from thirty or therabouts unto
forty is the most gathering, for such as will be public members of a
Commonweal, to learn observe and collect so many things as are requireable
in all worthy and complete Trauailers. Now to our point in hand: the persons
thus voluntarily pressed out are either of the Nobility or of the Commons. These
voluntaries are Nobles or Commons. The nobles either make profession or not.
The Nobility are either general or special. The Nobility general are such
as have no profession singular: The special are such as before travel make
some profession whereof I conceive four distinct kinds: Divines, Soldiers,
Four notable professions.
Civil Lawers, Physitia^s; of which we will consider after we have grated upon
the Commons: who are either Mechanics or Merchants.

The Merchants are of two sorts here meant, Two ranks of Merchants.
such as are known to the State, and such as go under the name of war,
unknown to the State otherwise then by letters of mark and permission: who are
chiefly to take heed they transgress not the bounds of their Commission. And
therefore before they travail by Sea, Men of war and their offices.
let them learn well, who may be made prises* and what; east the State be
troubled for the abuse of such, and they themselves shent and lose their
voyage. Moreover, let them be careful to set down in their several Sea
Charts, every thing of special note; as Countries, Havens, Creekes, Isles,
Rocks, Gulfes, Shooles, Sands, Shelues and such like: whereby others after
them may make use thereof, to the profit of the Commonweal. And when these
shall return, to make a true relation (if they be demanded) of every
accident during their voyage, and of such aduertisements as may stand the Sat
in use, of which they are.

But those other known Merchants, for that their Travails are known to be
profitable, and of honest esteem, they have special privileges which to no
other voluntary Trauailer chances; namely to pass and repasse with safe
conduct, themselves and their substances, unless in times of war, etc. In
regard whereof they are tied unto these duties; First, The duties of merchants.
First, by a prudent, deligent, and faithful care to observe by what things
the State may be most benefited; and to have perseverance where such
Merchandise that the State most uses and desires may be had with greatest
ease, To accommodate their country with good and most needful things.
least charge, and without inconvenience to his Country: Where there may be a
likelihoode of continuance without mislike of their Princes, whose affairs are
much managed by Merchants. And though the disposition of these things belongs
to the Prince, yet the disquisition appertains to the calling of Merchants;
who, when they have excogitated a thing to the benefit of the State by
Merchandise or new trades, refer the discussion to the Counsel of the
Prince whether the same be aduantagious or no. Secondly, let them in any case
not transport any thing prohibited; Never to transport things prohibited.
or unto their Countries enemies, nor suffer their Factors to send over such as
may be displeasing or unprofitable to their Prince, Laws, or Country.
Thirdly, To conceal the secrets of their Princes states.
let all of this kind conceal the secrets and outward state of their Country
with faithfulness and respect: and be very circumspect to pry into the
secrets of other Countries where they come, least they be held for spies and no
Merchants; a thing most dangerous to those people.

Lastly, forasmuch as most of this kind of Trauailers are of singular
judgment and understanding, to make prudent observation of things beneficial
to the State: Let the^ if so they be demanded relate how things stand abroad,
and in case they know any thing of moment the concealment whereof may
incommodate the State, it is their duty to discover the same when they
return, with the greatest secrecy and speed unto such as are known to be
privy Councellers, and to none other. For, oftentimes passing thorough many
mouths, the importances of good news and intelligence are much impaired.

The other sort of the Commons, Mechanicke trauailers.
to wit, Mechanickes (whose travail may also accommodate an Estate with many
things to set the poorer sort to work and as it were plant in their Country
the commodities and peculiar trades of other nations) now rests to beha^dled.
The chief trades whereof are by Marcha^ts brought for the most part into
States, and by them ordered till long use disperse the^ throughout, to the
benefit general. Now, in regard with us there are many Arts, not in that
perfection as in other Countries, or such as the rarer sort of those be, which
are set up and vpheld by strangers to the prejudice of the Realm (yet not so
much as in case there were none at all) it is a thing very requisite for these
kind of Travelers and for the State, in case they cannot be attained unto at
home. Moreover we see in other Countries few, apprentises, above three years
for one trade; which gives much encouragement to such as covet the same. And
there is nothing more beneficial for a State to uphold the same then the using
of these Occupations and trades which set many hands to work and have many
dependants. Wherefore in times past there were reckoned but vii. Mechanicke
Arts, because a State could not want either, and in regard they are the
general heads upon which all other depend. Hence in our State husbandry and
Clothing are the nerves of the weal public, the failing whereof must needs
turn the cote of the State. Insomuch as it is a hard matter to discern
whether Woll or Corn acco^modate this State more: though expressly Tillage
carry the greater sway then breeding of Sheep and grasing. But to our purpose.

Let such trauailers first, having liberty to travail, The offices of
Mechanickes in iourneying.
survey the best places, where those Arts are to be learned; as in Germany all
manner of Formers, Potters or figulists are to be found in perfection. In Italy
Architecture, Limming, Painting, Engrauing, Imagerie, Textorie, and weauing,
and Arts ingenious may be learned. So according to every Countries several
commodities several and peculiar Arts do flourish. Lastly, let them spend
their times so diligently as commodity and estimation be their reward.

The Nobility as was said were general or special. The consideration of the
four notable professions in noble trauelers
The special were of four sorts, Divines, Soldiers, Civil Lawyers, and
Physicia^s: which are so called special Trauailers not in regard such be more
excellent or honorable the^ others, but for that such prescribe unto the^ a
special thing to be attaind unto as well for perfection as satisfaction. Of
these in order. First, the Divines be such as make profession of Divinity
outwardly in the State, whereby they may be employed in the Ministry and
service of God. And although all men must account it a chief honor unto them
contemplatiuely to make profession thereof: Divines, inhibited travail but in
special cases.
yet such may not travail but in special cases as before has been alleged,
on the pretense of knowledge; the same being to be attained unto within their
own Country: whereas the outward professors, that have the calling of
Ministers, have in some cases better warrant.

Howbeit, by our pofitiue law Clearkes are forbid to travail, for this
pretense. For in case such may be satisfied and endoctrined in the points they
doubt of within their own Princes Dominions, of godly and learned professors,
I see not how their Travails can be lawful. But in case where the Gospel and
truth is not preached, I judge it a most happy thing for any whosoever to search
the word in other nations: The person of a subject belongs cheifely to the
Princes disposition.
but not without license of the State. For no man ought to dispose of himself
so, as his Prince should lose the benefit of his person, the which is
dispensable in the case of God only and in case of persecution, wherein God is
interessed. Moreover, it is from the office of Ministers that have the cure of
souls, to go into voluntary Travail, for any ordinary pretense, and leave
the same without a right good shepherd; and in many cases not then, though he
leave in his room a careful pastor. For, this function and vocation is more
to be respected then others, it being singularly dedicated to the service of
God. Four lawful pretenses of Divines to travail.
Then of such Divines as may travail we observe four pretenses: two general,
and two special. The general are either of a general Council or National:
The general Counsel.
or of some famous Library. But in case such Councels be not compounded of
worthy and known men, of learning and judgment and approved by the State
whereof men are, the profit will be so little as the pretense must cease. So is
it of the other general pretense, A famous Library.
namely the view of some famous Library, which contains such famous printed
books or manuscripts as faithfully discuss of points not yet concluded, nor
to be had and procured other where. For, in case by transscripts or any
assured collections men may attain unto the pith of those points, this
pretense should also cease. The two pretenses are either to have conference
with such famous men, whose learning may satisfy and endoctrine; or else with
those natural Jews and Grecians whose learning may for the furthera^ce of
those divine tongues give much help to the understanding of the Scriptures.
Yet if so the Gospel flourish already, in their own Country, and that there
be learned men to be reverenced, in all things to be doubted of; if such
choose rather to travail then to confer, and ask to be resolved of those
their Countriemen, the pretense of them must also cease. For, it is a contempt
to the Church whereof they are members, to travail for instruction, when men
may be well instructed at home without inconvenience, especially where there
are Universities, and public professors of the^. It is needless to prescribe
rules for these in travailing: for the most are sage and prudent men; and
therefore we will pass to the second sort: to weet Ciuilians.

Civil Lawyers have a lawful pretense, Ciuilians.
so be it the Civil Law be in request in the State whereof such are, and
cannot be attained in so singular a manner, as in those Universities that
wholly consist thereof, and where that law flowrisheth most. And although the
Law may in some sort, by reading and conference in the Universities, be for
Theorie and judgment sufficiently gotten in ones own Country, yet the lively
expression and Elocution thereof I judge in other Nations for the common use
may adorn counsel in the best manner. Wherefore as it is the office of
Divines above all things to take heed in their travail they be not corrupted
with false doctrine, The offices of Divines and Ciuilians.
wherewith other people of other Nations strive to tempt Scholars at this day:
so let it be the first office of these Ciuilians (men for the most part endued
with great understanding and faculties) to be well grounded in their Religion
before, and consequently faithful, To be settled and stable in Religion.
secret and honest to their Country, having a vigdant eye, that they be not
misseled by the subtilties of other Nations, and many of their unsound
positio^s in their law Canon, from the sincerity of their Religion and the
Gospel: the which shall adorn them when they return, more then all their
learning and observations. For, by how much men of wit and understanding stand
firm in the truth, and purity of Religion, by so much shall their learnings
and honesties be had in recommendation, with whom they converse afterward; the
same in Trauailers voluntary being a rare matter. Moreover, To be studious
let them be careful to make observance for the rights, customs, statutes,
ordinances, proclamations, decrees, particular laws and privileges, liberties
and prerogatives of places and persons where happily they shall come. Lastly,
whenever they travail into foreign States where there are Universities and
where there are degrees to be taken, To take degrees,
let them labor to attain to the same. For, to men of desert it is reputed a
dishonor, to return without them, in case they freely may be attained unto.
For, otherwise the pretense of their travail will in the minds of men cease,
the degree being the Crown of their vocation, which to professors is most
necessary. For other things we refer them to such observations as to the
general Voluntaries are prescribed, afterward. The Soldiers follow.

The profession of these voluntary Trauailers is arms and warrefare,
Soldiers.
athing much approved of every Common weal. And although none should so bind
himself to that vocation, as all his life time to live by the same, but rather
in peace and tranquillity afterward, yet the pretense of young men and of
able bodies, to endure hardness for the advancement of their Countries weal
and discipline, is honorable, carrying a more sensible le liking of the State
the^ the former two. And although, by reading, conference and such like
consideratio^s upon other men's experiences, many are made good Theoristes and
Counselors in war to direct orderly and warily before battle or skirmish,
yet no man can be a complete soldier without (...)tion, and almost continual
exercise in arms. For w(...) encounters chance, self-eye-seeing experience
shall be a readier preuentresse of accide^ts and infinite occurrences that
chance, to assure the victory. Two sorts of good Soldiers.
Yet are there thus two complete kinds of Soldiers in their several kinds;
Such as be experienced themselves and men of action: and those whose singular
contemplation on the experiences of others, are able in meet time to give good
direction and counsel. For, as there are some whose experience only have made
them learned to encounter actions and accide^ts, and in the incountring are
right circumspect and valorous, yet can not such in Counsel give the best
direction, for the general encountering of inconveniences: so there are others
on the contrary, whose prudent care to provide for every occurrence; that to
the understanding at first and before action is represented, is such as if
every thing should fall out according to their deliberation, no doubt would
assure victory:but, coming to join, fail on the sudden what to resolve of.
But when the spectacles of the one are joined with the eyes of the other, in
that soldier doubtless compleatnesse and perfection dwells. For,as glasses
artificial, A Compleat^ Soldier.
concording with the nature of each sight, aid and preserve much the sight of
every eye; so Art joined with experience, in war especially, gives an
assurance of perfection, as well to prevent the worst, as to provide for the
best, and that upon an instant; which bears great swaie in battles.
Wherefore, in the first place as for those that are minded to be Trauailers in
this kind, The first point of learning in a Soldier.
they had need to learn the grounds of the Art of war before hand, that such
may make the best use of their times; namely, Arithmeticke, Geometry and other
Mathematicke sciences, that may happily train them up to more judgment in one
year (if so they also pass some time in history) then others in five.
Secondly, being thus prepared, let them consider with themselves that no one
coffeehouse wage them forward, The second point of consideration.
but to enable themselves for to do their Country good, and Prince service,
when occasion shall be proffered. For, such as go otherwise cannot be assured
of Gods protection, blessing or favor: for want whereof we see how vainly the
greater part of these Travelers spend their times. Thirdly, The third,
they are to ponder whether at such time as they would travail, their Prince
and Country shall not need to employ their service either at home or abroad:
For, in such cases it cannot but argue vanity to travail, when as their
Prince or Country shall have special use of them. Fourthly, to accustom
themselves to endure extreamities, The fourth.
of heat and cold, of pains of body and mind, of bodily travail in swift
and slow motions, and to be able to manage every sort of arms offensive or
defensive used on horseback or on foot:that, when such shall come to serve in
the wars of any Prince, estimation attend on them. For, none can be justly
reputed for his particular a co^pleat soldier in action, but he that is able to
serve in all attempts in any kind of service with judgment and resolution. The
fifth.
Fifthly, let such bend their travels into those Countries, either where their
Prince makes war or favors; or go under the conduct of such Princes, as are
nearest friends unto their Prince and Country. For, it is unseemly that any
should choose to serve rather under strangers then friends. Lastly, to this
must be annexed, that such travail for their greater benefit into those
Countries where best service and discipline is to be learned: What makes a
good soldier.
for that makes a Soldier to be under good discipline and to see good service;
which is in duple respect, either of the enemy against whom, or in the
Country wherein such serve. The enemy against who^ men serve, does advance
the service if he be stirring, and always plotting of some matter against his
enemies, whether he keep the field or lie in Garrison: In li^e sort may the
service be bettered by those under whom men serve. A triple kind of service, to
perfect soldiers.
The consideration of the Country is triple, that makes the service good,
which in the end shall perfect a Soldier: the first is, where the Country is
champaine, and that either of Mou^tains or of Valleys: the service wherein
makes men always to stand upon their guard, and to be well accompanied in
every design. The second in covert Countries, marishie and boggie; which are
the aptest for stratagemes and surprises, making men watchful and provident
evermore to suspect the worst, wheresoever they come. The third and last, are
the fortifications of Countries, or those Countries that stand most upon them,
which employ the spirits and ingenious parts of Soldiers, after an
extraordinary manner.

The first Navarre and Sauoy are apt for, and the Low Countries that be
wasted: The second, Ireland will furnish men with: And, in the world for the
third, a man cannot have better experience then in the Low Countries. So as
when such Trauailers have gotten experience in one, if they desire perfection,
let them travail for the other: For in few Countries and wars shall men find
all.

Then, Their duties in service.
being arrived into the Army or Garrison and entered into the service, first,
with great diligence every thing of special make contained either in
discipline of service ought to be observed: and for every man's better
understanding, let them discourse thereof and question.

Moreover, let such take heed, they never offer to accept of Combat, Note.
for the honor of another Nation, if any of the same serve in the same place:
for that is an injury their Country or Enemies; so are all to be careful to
serve, where the right is most apparent, and where the Gospel is preached in
the army, that God may give the^ best success So in case there be no wars in
Christe^dom, let such travail to other nations (after license obtained of
their Prince) and seek service of such Princes that neither war against
Christians, nor have an ill quarrel in hand. For, as it is a shame for any to
take part with enemies or with infidels against ones own Country: so it is
requisite on the other side that they serve in those wars amongst infidels,
whose cause and quarrel is just and good in the sight of men. Lastly, let all
those who will make

By the word Physician, is meant first such as have the lawful calling;
Physicians.
and either have already or intend to take degrees, that they may give
countenance to their knowledge. Moreover, by the name I conceit such as have
the faculty, and natural knowledge of every thing, concerning diseases or
wounds in the body or mind of man.

For, Two knowledges requireable in Physicians.
the remedying of all which, there are two things requirable; namely, the
simple knowledge of every living and inanimate thing, whether of Mineralls,
Vegetables, sensible Animalles, or of man and the experience how each of these
in several Countries and bodies have their certain operations. And seeing
without doubt God has planted, in the world, means (either of simples or of
Compounds) to remedy any sickness or cure any wound, although the knowledge
or means be not always blessed; we may collect the lawfulness of Physicia^s
travail also. And though God have fitted every Climate and Country with
means to relieve the common distresses and grieueances of men, yet we see for
want of knowledge in Physicians either how to use the simples in their own
Countries or how to compound them aright according to the Dose of every body
natural, they are enforced to search into other Countries for aid.

For, though we have, as other Countries, many singular things to remedy the
decay or disquiets of nature: yet seeing the simples of other Countries, for
some particular bodies and griefs, are more natural then many compounds of
our own, and the skill is less to apply them, why should not necessity make
Physicians travel for knowledge as the old wife for need. We see the
artificial Bezar stone to be less profitable for some bodies then the
natural; the fained Sanguis Draconis the^ the right which is brought from
Africa: and so of such like adulterous resembla^ces, which necessity, and men's
gains have labored and arted. In the Universities of learned men, that
science, and store of books of all things in the world for simples and
compoundes according to their natures, and virtues are better described then
any one by his own travail can amend: (For in Travail there must necessarily
be much time spent, and little practice had at home: and practice is no doubt
the best thing that makes a good Physician) nevertheless for some diseases a
man shall happily learn more by travail, then by all these at home.

For, The study of Physicians.
there are many of our capital diseases easily cured in other Countries. Now
then, he that will make good of his pretense, must labor into the grounds of
Astronomy and Astrology, as of proportion. For, without these, such wander
without a guide in the wilderness of nature. Moreover, during their travail
(after license obtained) let them make use of every thing they shall see;
as well of things known as of the unknown. For the difference of Climates and
soyles, alter much the nature of every thing.

In like sort must such observe the persons in every Country, Common and
accidental diseases,
so particularly as they can, and mark their common and accidental diseases,
and to take knowledge of their cures. So if there be any special Bathes,
Waters, Pooles, Spawes, or Springs, the operation whereof may cure any malady,
to learn their virtues.

And lastly to frequent the most famous places and companies of learned men,
whereby such may better their knowledge, and increase their discourse: which is
no small thing, in a Physician, to be well mannered, civil, witty, and
pleasant, and of able disposition to delight his patie^ts by discourse.
Moreover, if such light upon simples, which are either of a strange nature or
that excel ours, let them be careful to transplant them; having a care to
the soil, climate, and growing of such, that Art here may repair the
natural defect of the Country. But considering many, when they return home,
are tainted with the humor of most trauailers, namely self conceit, The
virtue of Physicians.
and better thinking of themselves then is convenient, let them be as
respective to relieve the poor and the needy as the rich. For many Physicians
will not go out of the doors to save a poor man's life. Moreover, let them be
careful to administer noe desperate or unknown thing unto any: for such, as
in the former case, are no less then murderers before God, if their patients
prove not well under them. Neither let covetousness overrule them, as those
Physicians and Surgeons that dally with men's bodies to get much money: but let
every one accoumpt it his duty to do good to any. And in so doing they shall
find God their Physician not only of their bodies but of their souls: whereas
otherwise the saying of our Nation may be applied fitly unto them, Physicians
cure your selves. Thus far of the special Voluntary Trauailers.

The end of the first part.
Page 35. A. The second part, in part, abstracted.
We have described volu^tary regular Trauailers to be Nobles and Commons: and
the Nobles to be 1, General: of whom it is to be considered what they are to
undergo, 1, Before travail, 1, To put on the pretense of benefiting the
Common weal, and to shun 1, Ambition. 2, Sensuality. 3, Vainglory. 4,
Covetousness. 5, Vanity of knowledge.
2, To suruay their Abilities in Judgment and Knowledge. 3, To be
sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of 1, Matters belonging to themselves,
1, Qualities, 1, Necessary, 1, To Speak, or 2, Understand the language of that
Country, into which men travail.
2, For ornation, 1, Skill in managing of Arms. 2, Skill in Music. 3, Skill
in Dancing. 4, Skill in Portraying.

2, Virtues Moral and Divine. 3, Sciences, 1, Astronomy. 2, Astrology. 3,
Cosmographie. 4, Geographie. 5, Geometry. 6, Hydrography. 7, Arithmeticke. 8,
Architectury.

2, Matters belonging to the Country into which they travail.
4, To be well accommodated for travail with things needful. 5, To resolve to
travail into such Countries, as may afford least offense and most profit. 6,
To demand license of God, of Prince, and Parents.
2, In travail. Look the next Table. * ^, Being Returned: 1, To manifest the
soundnes of their Religion by 1, Diligent and orderly serving of God. 2, Wise
and faithful Conversation: which is discovered by 1, Silence. 2, Incuriositie.
3, Sprightfulnes. 4, Prudence. 5, Bounty. 6, Faithfulness.

2, To prefer Honesty before Policy. 3, To be known by virtuous Endeavors.
4, To be stored of a worthy friend. 5, To be Constant to his Honorable friend
without ambition. 6, To be studious for foreign aduertisements: but not
ignorant of home-matters.

2, Special: Of whom before we have abbridged. *

Page 35. B. The rest of the second part, abstracted.
We have abstracted Voluntary Trauailers general, to consider points before and
after travel: let us now here abbreuiate what is meet in the interim of
travail: namely, 1, To attempt nothing without a good conscience, and to make
supplications to God daly. 2, To provide for the health of their bodies, 1, By
Diet, 2, By travail, 1, To have faithful guides and compainons. 2, To choose
the least dangerous way. 3, To be otherwise well accommodated. 4, To be defeded
against th'intemperatnesse of the air. 5, To be Armed against accidences on
the way. 6, To arrive timely in the Inn, etc.
3, By moderationi of passions,
3, To be Humane and courteous toward all. 4, To apply themselves unto the
Customs and manners of the country that are not per se Mala. 5, To put in
practice the qualities for ornation, which are, 1, Arms. 2, Music. 3,
Poetry. 4, Dancing. 5, Portraying. 6, Vaulting. 7, Running. ^, Dexterity.
6, Singularly to gain the knowledge of 1. The Tongue: which consists 1, In
right vnderstandig the same. 2, I proper speaking and reading it. 3, In true
writing, etc.
2, The Nature of the people to be discovered, 1, In Civility, or
Barbarousnesse. 2, In freedom, or Seruilenesse. 3, In Religiousnesse, or
Profaneness. 4, In Warlike, or Esseminatenesse. 5, In Constitution of body and
mind.
3, The Country to be suruayed, 1, In the name. 2, In the populousness, or
scarcity of the people. 3, In the situation. 4, In the quatititie. 5, In the
Common dities which are 1, Natural: 1, The temperatnesse of the air. 2, The
fruitfulness of the foil. 3, The plenty of Rituers and Ports. 4, Baths, and
medicinable things.
2, Artisiciall: 1, Buildings, ad fortitfications, etc. 2, Trades, or Sciences
Mechanicke.

6, In the discommodities that do consist of 1, Impersections. 2. Wants.

4, The Law: and Customs may be discerned, 1, Generally etc. 2, Particularly
etc. 1, In Matters Ecclesicasticall, 2, In matters Temporal. 3, In matters
Regal, or of Prerogative.

5, The Governments, 1, Interior. * 2, Exterior, descrying 1, The persons
governing: 1, The Monarke. 2, The Nobles. 3, The Popularitie.
2, The people governed do consist 1, Of Husbandmen. 2, Of Handi-crafts men
and Laborers. 3, Of Merchants. 4, Of the Nobility and Gentry. 5, Of
stipendary Soldiers. 6, Of Ecclesiastical persons.
3, The Instruments whereby men govern, and be governed, are looked into, 1,
By their goodness or euilnesse. 2, By the timely precuenting or neglecting of
matters. 3, B the execution, or not, of laws in force.


6, The secress, 1, Common, regards 1, Intelligence of foreign Friends,
Neuters, or Enemies: 1, In Populousness. 2, In Scarcity of people. 3, In well
disciplining them. 4, In permitting a liberty from Martial discipline. 5,
Whether Religious or Profane. 6, Whether Warlike or Esteminate. 7, Whether Free
or Servile.
2, Kowledge of the ordinary strength of the State. 1, For sufficiency of
people: 2, For store of Commodities: 3, For plenty of Munition. 4, For the
Treasure 2, How increased 1, By Revenues. 2, By Conquests. 3, By Gifts. 4, By
Tributes. 5, By Traficke. 6, By Merchandise. 7, By Taxations.
2, How dispended 1, On Almes-houses. 2, On Housekeeping. 3, On Building. 4, On
Payments. 5, On Gifts to strangers. 6, On Donatiues politic.



2, Accidental, are to be sought out 1, In the persons governing by 1,
Election. 2, Inheritance general or special. 3, Any other hope.
2, In persons governed: 1, Addicted to overmuch liberty. 2, How standing
affected to the Prince or government. 3, Whether wiser then their generation
requires. 4, How affected in rumors. 5, Who be popular beyond Custom.
3, In the instruments, etc.


7, To advertise some of the Council, of things important and needful. 8, To
dee all the honor he may unto the Ambassadors of his Prince, in cafe there be
any in that travail.

The second part.
THese General Voluntary Trauailers are of the temporal Nobility of the
Land, These Voluntaries are to undergo six po^nts before travail. The first
point.
whether superior or inferior: and before they undertake Travail, if they will
be bettered thereby, are to undergo six duties. The first is to counsel
and deliberate with themselves, whether they be moved with the just pretense
of doing good to the Common weal, whereof they are, and for the enabling of
themselves, with such knowledges as appertain to their several callings; or
whether their own lusts and affections prick them not forward. For often men
are deceived for want of due consideration thereof, which turns the plots of
men topsieturuie. And though it be hard to res^lue on this with humane strength
and reason, (for that reason, which by nature is in man, is feeble and
differs little from that of brute beasts) yet there is another reason in man,
or the same at the least enlightened and sanctified by God, the which through
faith and knowledge of his revealed will, teaches man to do that which is good
and pleasing in his sight. Wherefore, as this reason is pure and of an holy
understanding nature, so must the resolutio^s of men (if they would be approved
and crowned with blessing) be shaped accordingly. And therefore all particular
affects, rising from the disordinate appetite of man corrupt and unsavory (as
Ambition, Sensuality, Five principal evil mouers of men to travail to be
shunned.
vain glory, covetousness, vanity of knowledge, and such like) must die in
these honorable kind of Trauailers; and in lieu of them the roots of all
virtuous affections must be planted, to the glory of God, the good of
themselves, their Prince and Country. For, considering these are principally
the select members ordained to travail, by the appointing hand of God, to
help the motion and government of the helm in temporal and civil causes
oftentimes, let such take heed those vain and gadding humors pluck not down
the judgment of God, to press such to travail for punishment of their ways;
whereby none can seal unto themselves the assurance of life, or prosperity,
during their travail or afterward.

Now, The second point,
in the second place it is required that such examine themselves before
travail, whether they have capable parts answerable to the callings of these
Trauailers. The capable parts of Trauailers consist in knowledge and judgment
of those things that may best profit them in travail, Knowledge and Judgment
the enhablers of trauailers.
and furnish them of things needeful, by which men are fitted to accomplish so
honorable an enterprise.

By Judgment is meant the understanding age, seeing into the affairs of their
native Country: Knowledge, it is of the wants which are naturally in us; the
which are to be supplied and repaired, by learning and experience.

For, as without judgment men cannot gather the best things in travail,
Without learning or experience, no knowledge.
that may fit iumpest with the State of their Country and themselves: so
without knowledge things cannot be performed well. Judgment the collector of
profitable things.
And therefore it behooves every one, so intending to travail, to be endued
with learning and discretion: for by learning knowledge is achieved, and
discretion enableth the judgment to discern what things and Policies are to
be received what rejected. And unless men put on before travail these
Armours, they cannot win the forte of their desires. For, he that trauaileth
to see experiences in other Nations, and has not power to discern, The defect
of learning or judgment what it breeds.
what are needful to be gathered, comes home as a body to the grave
without a soul. In which plight we see daily experience in this Land: for many
travail young that want both: others of more understanding that want judgment
and others whose judgments are active, yet fail in learning. So as many when
they come home prove too subtle, and without conscience, in their resolutions,
and consequently dangerous to be conuersed with; others new fangled hobby
horses, and of small understanding, or little the better to be conuersed with.

From hence the third duty springs, The third point
namely Instruction in knowledge fit for trauailers: the which is either of
things appertaining to the Country where such travel, or to themselves. Three
things appertain to themselves.
First, as concerning things belonging to themselves, they are three;
qualities, virtues and sciences. The qualities are duple; either for
necessity, Qualities duple. The necessary.
or for Ornation. The necessary is the speaking or the understanding of the
tongues of those Countries into which such travail: for these are the
instruments of knowledge and experience; without which men shall consume great
time unprofitably in other Countries, whiles they are learning the tongue. And
therefore let such practice the tongues before they travail, that they make
not a shadow of their knowledge as many do: who travailing into other
Countries attain to nothing, save the speaking of their languages. For
Ornation.
The qualities for Ornation, are practice in managing of Arms and weapons,
skill in Music and daunsing and drawing the counterfeites of any thing: The
estimation of all which are so approved that they need no confirmation; For
every man living in the Courts of Princes shall be honored by them. The
second point of knowledge are virtues, Their virtues.
which must be the Counselors of such in every Action, to make them esteemed,
and make them right Courtiers at the first entrance, in every foreign State.
And therefore let them inhabit every divine and moral virtue, that traineth
men up to humanity and civil conversation: without which it is a vain thing
to travail and expect any good end.

The last and third point of knowledge is Science or the knowledge in natural
and mathematical Arts: that is to say, an insight in the grounds of
Astronomy, Astrology, Cosmographie, Geographie, Hydrographie, Geometry,
Arithmeticke and Architecture: all which whosoever trauaileth shall employ, and
without which many things of note shall be foreslowen, and left imperfectly
known. For, the better men are grounded in these, the more profit shall they
make of their times. In so much as if a skillful fortifier or Architectist do
but lay his eyes upon the model of any Town or fortification, he will deliver
the true plot, strength or weakness natural or artificial that it contains,
or guess very near; the which an ignorant person can never do, but by
chance. So it is of those which excel in Corography or Geographie; who but
riding post through a Country will make a particular description of every
thing seated on the earth, in proportion or near, as well of Towns, Fortes,
Houses, as of Rivers, Hills, Dales, Woddes, Plains and Ways, or any thing
else that lies within the kenning of their eyes, or by necessary collection.
And therefore we find recorded that in times of war messengers of the enemy
were wont to be blinded, when they approached near the fortifications or
Camps, and so carried back till they were out of kenning. The which may be
said of the rest: For these Arts are instruments to settle and fix in the
memory objects that fall to the senses, The rules of Art are as faith full
helpers of men's memories.
but especially to the eye: even as we see the practicke Musicians will
instantly play whatsoever chances in harmonies sound to their ear. I
consideratly left out Music among the Mathematical Arts, though it be an
excellent Science: yet in a Trauailer or Gentleman let it be rather a quality,
as we have said to grace him in convenient times, Music rather a quality
then a Science in trauailers of this kind.
and places to be sociable, then a Science whereof men make profession. For, a
Gentleman may have the quality to play well upon gentlemanlike instruments,
without the Science or Art of any grounds of music; even as there may be
excellent Musicians that can not strike one true stroke of any instrument, and
yet both concluded under one name. For the theorie and practicke in Music are
two; and the one seemly for gentlemen of other means, namely the practicke:
although it cannot be but a singular commendation for any that excel in both,
so that hinder not other more necessary sciences. As touching the knowledge of
the Country wherein men travail, we have in other places prescribed
sufficient rules to make provision, and to remove inconveniences, so as for
brevity the same may be omitted here.

The fourth duty is of Charity. For, The fourth point.
having gotten license of their Prince, and friends to whom such owe subjection
(otherwise their pretense will seem Irregular) they must accommodate
themselves of all things needful for their travail; To be well accomodated of
all things needful.
the chief whereof is only provision of money: which by bills of exchange, is
the safest and most profitable way, the course also being common. Only this,
let such take order they may have sufficient of Merchants wheresoever they
shall come: for want breeds many inconveniences. And therefore let such
proportion their estate with the largest before travail: the which must be
according to every ones course, estate and retinewe. For, some Countries are
very chargeable generally; where either dearth, much riotte, or troubles
reign. Moreover, of what State soever a man be, it is not good to travail
with a greater train, To travel in a private fashion most gainefull.
then need requires. For, it is impossible that such an one shall attain unto
the light of many things and secrets: which more private men may. Neither can
it quit cost, since the voluntary action of any subject (unless in some
public service of their Prince and Country) ought to be contented with mean
pomp. For, such in a strange Country are subject to scoffs; and in an
Enemies or a Neuters Country, Jealousy and public eyes will be looking on
such.

In the fifth place it is required, The fifth point.
that they resolve to go into such Countries, the state of which may best like
the State of which they are, and which may afford them best gain of knowledge
and experience; either to reform in them defects of nature, What Countries men
must resolve to travel in.
or to benefit most their Common weal. And though the enemies policy
avails most unto the State of ones Country, yet when such that have made
their abode there, shall return, it is doubtful, how acceptable that may be.
For commonly, great suspicion tends on such long after, unless in the
interim of their travails they carry themselves with risentiment and respect.
The Enemies of every State are two, Two enemies of an estate upon cause.
such as stand out in Religion, and contrary opinion, in the service of God:
and such as injustice, either of not due reverence exhibited, or of defamation,
or of prejudice, in goods or persons really, or collaterally, daily works
amongst Princes. A twofold consideration of Countries friends.
But of Countries to be travailed into, there is a double consideration, whose
friendships are available to the Common weal: to weet, Those that
neighborhood, Religion, aliance, perpetual unity, and such like natural and
civil bonds, have conjoined in love, league, and confederacy: and, Those
which merchandise, mutual commerce, and such like foraine policy to benefit
each others Land, have linked in amity: Which also are by so much the more
fast tied, What Countries afford most gain to travel in.
by how much one stands in need of another, how far soever they be
distant off. In these, Trauailers shall reap most profit and contentation for
their Common weal. For as he that would learn any faculty, had need to
study the best books that write thereof; so a Trauailer that laboreth for the
good of his Country, must frequent those places, that afford most points of
needful knowledge and experience. And though a wise man may collect, out of
every Country he abides in, some profitable observations, yet the neighbor
countries of this Island yield more requisite considerations than others. Hereof
it comes, that by the motions of France, Spain, Germany, the Low Countries,
Burgundy, and Denmark, this Realm is in action, and made sensible, either of
trouble, detriment, or quiet; whereas the troubles of Muscouie, the free
Towns, high Germany, Italy, Barbary, the dominions of the Turk and Persian,
incommodate this nation little, but by diuerting of the trade of merchants
another way. But as touching those Countries, which afford particular gain of
knowledge and information of manners and civil carriage, these Trauailers shall
find in every good and orderly government through Christendom, but singularly
here at home, and in the Courts of France, and Universities of Germany, Spain,
and Burgundy. And though Italy have the common praise for these, yet the
inconveniences and corruptions, that are mixed with the civility of that
Country, may other ways persuade men of judgment. And since I seem to
contrary the opinions of many worthy Gentlemen, let it not be impertinent here
to consider some special things concerning that State. For, Why men travail
into Italy.
Italy moves most of our Trauailers to go and visit, of any other State in the
world: And not without cause, it being an ancient nurcerie and shop of
liberty, the which to the affects of men is precious and estimable. Moreover,
I find amongst an infinite number of licencious mouers, five seemly halers of
men thither, Five specialties in the comme^dation of Italy.
hardly found otherwhere all together. The first is the temperatnesse England
the best Court.
Yet considering the Court of England at this day is the most complete in all
things and unto all people of other nations and Courts in the world, and that
which can make men (if they be as studious therein, as abroad, to inform
themselves) perfect in ciuility and good manners, and obseruant enough; both for
that the purity of Religion (which is the best Ciuilian) and the long
continuance thereof with us, has framed our Nobility in fashion, and our
Prince in State, to recommend the Court of England above any that I could ever
hear of, in all points that are honorable and commendable: This is but in show
a Rome, of Venice, of Naples, of Florence, of Millane, of Genoa, of Mantoa, of
Ferrara, of Placentia and Parma, of Vrbine, and others. But these being
different governments from ours, and better described already, than any one
Trauailer is able to pen down: though this be of the five the principal, yet
how little it booteth our Sat, I leave to Politicians Italy a corrupter of men.
all these together are available, were it not for the infinite corruptions,
almost inevitable, that inuest Trauailers after small abode there; as it is
reported, I know not upon what ground, of the Realm of Ireland. Wherefore, let
these honorable Trauailers frequuent the best places: and if so be they must
needs go thither, let them beware of Rome, Rome the Forge of evil.
the Forge of every policy, that sets Princes at odds, or that continues
them in debates, little or much: the tempter of Subjects to civil dissensions,
and the seller of all wickedness and heathenish impieties, or the machediuell of
evil policies and practices, that are unmeet subjects for these worthy
Trauailers to spend their time about. As for any good thing, which that State
can benefit a Trauailer by, I have not heard of, otherwise than the loathing of
the same afterward: for which pretense no man has warrant to travail
thither, or other-where.

Now in the last and sixth place it is required of all Trauailers, The sixth
point.
that they demand license and favor at the hands of God, upon these grounds
to protect and bless them in their journey; and not without the good leave of
their Prince and parents. For if it be a commendable point and duty for a man
to ask his Parents, Tutor, Master, and Prince leave to travail, then is it
the office of a man, to desire the same at the hands of God, Without the
blessing of God men travail in vain.
who is the Sovereign of all those. For without his pleasure and consent
alas where are our motions to any good act, or the means by which they are
advanced or preserved? So that though this be the last considered of us, yet is
it the first and best of all things to be respected and performed. For since
knowledge, learning, experience, honor, health, prosperity, and all other
blessings, be the mediate or immediate gifts of God, it is a foolishnes for any
to persuade, and bless their own actions without consulting with God the
eternal reason, that guides all things to their proper ends; yea, the
dereigled Trauailers to labor in vain, and for a punishment to return home
no better, than when they went forth; and peradventure in many things worse.
For, as the observance of his revealed will encourages man to go forward in
all godliness, and commendable actions; so the neglect thereof makes him
taste of his secret judgments, prepared for the careless and wilful breakers
of his command and will. Hitherto concerning the general duties before
travail.

In the interim of travail, In the interim of travail six things are to be
observed.
there likewise rests six general observations of these Trauailers for the
advancement of their peregrination: Whereof the first is to attempt nothing
without consulting with their conscience, The first.
and imploring the favor of God, that every action may have a promise of
blessing, and acceptance as well among those with whom such shall live, as of
their own Prince and Country, when happily they shall return. The neglect
whereof opens the gate to infinite dangers and evils. For, the fear of God,
which is an adiunct to this duty, serves for a curb to restrain all
improuident and violent courses, that carry men into inconveniences, and for a
guide to advise them of all things warrantable, honorable and pleasing in the
sight of God and men: and therefore it is requirable, that these diligently
every day privately confer and consult with God in their spirits and prayers
made unto him. The first thus regarding the stay of the soul; The se^ond.
so the second office respects the good health of the body, whereof
Trauailers are not to be careless and improuident: for he that depends on
fortune, exposes himself to many deceits, perils, and loss of time. I
therefore observe three preuenters of mischiefs, Three preuenters of mischiefs
in travailing.
and inconveniences to the safety and health of Trauailers, namely, Diet,
Travailing or Exercise, and moderation of Passions.

First, Diet.
let the diet of every man be so moderate, as neither the air wherein such
live afflict them, either with exceeding heat or cold, the which in some
countries Trauailers shall meet with, but by little and little accustom their
bodies to endure the hardness of the Country clime, which to contrary bodies is
very dangerous suddenly. For which cause, Auicen the notable naturalist
avouched, that if a Scythian should violently, and in a very short space be
tra^sported into India, either he would suddenly fall sick or die: the which
he would not necessarily be, so be it he took time in travail by land or
sea. Neither let any continue long in those places, where the air is
pestiferous, unless their bodies can away therewith. For which cause the
Cynicke Diogenes rejoiced after his banishment, that he made a good change to
be exiled from Sinope (a most piercing and sharp air about the confines of
the Euxine sea) to live afterward in Greece. And lastly, let the diet of all
men, for eating, drinking, sleeping, clothing, and such like, be answerable to
every ones nature, that such may always keep themselves in one temper, if
possibly, Winter and Summer; the which is the greatest preservative of man's
health.

The second preuenter of inconvenience of health is travailing from place to
place, and daily exercise, Exercise.
when such are abiding in any place, with moderation and respect. For,
overmuch labor distill the vital and animal spirits, which is most
dangerous. For the travailing from place to place, Six things in iourneying to
be regarded.
six things are to be regarded. First, to have in iourneying (if need
require) faithful and honest guides and Gut vneg vnih vnar nie krumb: and we
have a Proverb not much unlike, The farther Arabia, Tartarie, Persia, Scythia,
and the Carouans of Swecia and Muscouie, make large provisions: and for some
passages, as in the sea of Sand in Africa, and other places, men are guided by
the Compass, standing in need of Pilots for the passage. Swecia, and Muscouie
on sleddes, unless he shall rub his nosthrils with the snow and ye, to
recall and settle his motive spirits, he shall be in extreme danger to lose
them through the excess of cold. And in the year 1498, of seventy thousand
Turks that made an inrode into Muscouie, forty thousand suddenly were frozen
to death. Whereupon the Turks verily believe, that the Polonians and
Muscouites are defenced by the celestial powers. No person is able to travel
out of doors in the Troglodites land, without shoes, the ground is so
scalding hot: insomuch that they roste their meat, by putting the same into a
brass vessel, and setting it in the Sun. And in the kingdom of Naples and
Champain, the heat is so great, and air so pestiferous, during June, July, and
August, till the first rain of September, that the better sort will not
travail, though the King command them, from home. Let these suffice for
Trauailers to beware thereof, unless upon urgent necessity, and rage of wild
beasts, and of robbers, the which by good company is the safest way always.
Lastly, to

The third and last preuenter of sickness, Moderation of Passion.
and censurer of health is passion, which is quadruplex (according to the four
complexions general of men) namely, Mirth, Sorrow, Anger, and Patience: the
which remedy or continue every distemperature of the mind. And as, per
antiperistasin, bodily discords are tuned and appeased, so it is of the mind.
For Mirth is a cordial to sorrowful and melancholicke bodies; whereas sorrow so
much continues that humor, as desperatnesse, or frenzy, or both is to be
feared. Sorrow, in mean, makes sanguine bodies, and merrily disposed, wise,
and full of respect. But of these two, mirth is evermore to be commended, so it
be not ouer-light and uncivil. So chollerick bodies, seeing they are fretting
and angry at light occasions, let them cure their imperfectio^s of nature by
patience: for such are otherwise unsociable and dangerous to be co^uersed with,
as endangering themselves. For I never saw so choleric a man, but he has
met with his match: and this of strangers is reproueable. So those of
flegmaticke spirits that patience has enfeebled, that such want the hearts of
men, as ordained to suffer all things, though this be a civil and singular
virtue in Trauailers, yet let none be in extremity so patient, as it make
himself a sot and a fool, to hear his God, and his Prince and Country, and
his honor wronged, when as honestly and fitly he may, and ought to make
resistance or apprehension. Finally, as the tyrannizing of these, subject many
to incurable evils, The Law of God the best Counsailer and Physician of the
soul.
bringing to consumption the vital and animal spirits: so ought every worthy
Trauailer to prevent these inward mischiefs by godly and timely counsel, that
those sly passions frustrate not his enterprise.

Now in the third place, The third.
let every Trauailer be of such honest and seemly carriage, toward all with
whom they converse, for civility and humanity, as neither contempt, derision,
irrision, pertinacitie in discourse, bitterness, or no respect be used. For
these be dissoluers of friendship, and dangerous perturbations for any
stranger, in the Country of an other.

Fourthly, The fourth.
it is the duty of all men to fit and apply themselves, not only to their
manners and customs with whom they live; but singularly to have an eye of
diligent watch to their particular affairs as well for knowledge and increase
of experience, as for the retention of a sound and holy conscience. As touching
the first branch, let no man loose the raigns of his own lust and fancy
amongst strangers, so that he expose himself to reproach and scandal. And
considering many nations are apt to deceive, a man must live warily with them,
taking heed he give no offense. And though the customs of other nations, where
a man lives, are to be followed, yet in the case of God, or of a man's own
conscience, there ought to be a scruple. For as it becomes none to leave the
truth, or to exercise any wicked actio^ there; so neither let any follow the
beastly guises, or wicked customs of the country, whereby honesty and good
manners may be corrupted: What customs are to be followed in other countries.
but in every State to observe the^, as Diet, Apparel, Gesture, Courtesy, and
such like, which in some places are precisely to be observed. But as concerning
that other branch, let men avoid to sacrifice or do reverence to any Idol or
Hobgoblin. For though many have so large a conscience, that they persuade
themselves, so they keep their hearts to God, they may bend their knee, and
bow themselves before such trash without hurt at all, yet God will not forget
the hypocrisy of such. For whosoever uses any outward reverence to any Idol or
devil, incurreth the wrath of God, and is thereby made subject to all
imperfections and evils. And if in civil matters many be wonderful respective,
that they will not come in presence, when they know for certainty, that they
shall see or hear their M^stris, Prince, or friend dishonored, how much more
ought al men in the case of God to be precise; not only to shun the sight and
hearing of their God blasphemed, and dishonored by their Masses, and estimation
of relics and images, but to seek to right the same if it lay in their
powers?

But considering no stranger has warrant, at this day, No Customs in foreign
States, how wicked soever, are to be publicly withstood.
to oppose himself against them in their own country, let him rather abjure
so heathenish a place, where he cannot live freely, than endure the sight
thereof: yea, though some think themselves dischargeable, if they travail,
and not both see and hear them. If there be any such, let them imitate that
worthy Themistocles: who having, in the vain years of his youth, accustomed
himself to learn an endure the sight of many things, which in nature he
abhorred, which gave him the smacke of an excellent memory, yet in the better
time of his years he did spend more time, to learn to forget things
unnecessary and evil; than in learning that which was honorable; and found it
more difficult and hard for him. For, the knowledge of much evil tempts man
full often, and withdraws the heart more out of the way, than the strength of
natural reason can set him aright again long after.

Fifthly, The fifth.
let every one, in his calling, exercise such ornate and seemly qualities of
the body, that both may enable them for civil conversation, as also for avail
in things requireable in Nobility and Gentlemen. And of the nobler sort it is
required always, that they discover spirited bodies, and more active minds
than other Gentlemen, laboring to perfect them by much industry. What things
are chiefly to be exercised.
The things to be exercised, are, horsemanship, managing of all sorts of
weapons, music, dancing, Poetry, limming and portraiting, vaulting, running,
and practicing the five strengths of the arm, namely, griping, lifting,
thrusting and holding out at the arms end, pulling and drawing, and throwing
or darting. These by practice will give vigor to the defect of nature: for by
nature it is impossible to be strong in all, the one being contrary to the
other: the benefit whereof is so great, that little men shall have no
disadvantage, by the greatest persons in the world, in exercising, or single
encountering, so the one practice and the other never. But these, being
recreations, may not hinder more necessary studies, though to excel in them be
honorable, and right excellent.

The sixth and last general duty, The sixth.
which is the very point which every Trauailer ought to lay his wits about, To
get knowledge for the bettering of himself and his Country: This, being the
object of their Countries defects and the subject of Trauailers, Six
principal heads of knowledge which are to be learned in traveling.
in a word contains Six general heads, to be learned and understood: namely,
the tongue, the Nature of the people, the Country, the Customs; the
Government of the State; and the secrets of the same: the which are to be
sought out wheresoever these shall come. And though some one of these inuest
many with the honorable title of Trauailers, The means whereon all policy is
grownded.
yet in how much any shall be found defective in any of these, by so far is
he short of the compleatnesse and true estimation that apprertaineth to
Trauailers Regular and honorable. These things are the vtensils, and materials
of States men, concerning foreign matters: the which many active minds though
sitting at home are well read in: and except it be for the secrets and other
occurrences, alteratio^s and changes, the difference is not much between the
home States man, not having spent some time in travail, and the complete
Trauailer, for foreign matters. Yet, herein has a Trauailer the start of a
home States man, which is fed by aduertisements only, and is led by other
men's eyes: Even as a Soldier in Action may presume of better eue^t, then the
Theorist, whose book rules, in accidental things, fail many times as in
particular motions. For, the eye has a more perfect sense in judgment then
the ear, if the same be rightly considered by judgment.

Of these six the tongue is the first by right to be discoursed of: The Tongue
the first point to be learned.
the right knowledge whereof is somewhat more then we required such to learn
before they undertook travail. For, now in the interim of travail it is
requisite, that Trauailers grow in perfection: otherwise such as stay at home
may rank with them, which is reproachful. The perfection whereof consists in
three things, Three perfections in Languages.
namely, in understanding, speaking, and writing the same.

To understand a tongue perfectly, What the understanding is of a tongue.
is not barely to understand what is read or heard pronounced, but to observe
the peculiar phrase, idiom and constructio^ of words, and singularly to note
whereof the tongue has his special deriuation if it be a deriuatiue, or his
composition: wherein Trauailers cannot be too good Gra^marians. For, in these
days there is the true confusion of Babell and languages, The State of all
Languages at this day.
through the world either deriuatiuely, or compositiuely, or both. And though
at all times the like might be avouched, howsoever there was generally held
many ancient Tongues, as the Hebrew, the Chaldean or Assyrian, the Arabian, and
the Egyptian; yet by their characters and composition it is evident that they
were all confounded, or perished, saving the Hebrew, which was the most
ancient of all the rest; and the spring from which the rest deriuatiuely or
compositiuely are descended; necessity and imitation, being the parent of
these and succeeding languages. For, Adam the good Grammarian of the Hebrew
tongue, appropriated words, not ad placitum, but according to the nature of
things; and framed a certain idiome of speech which in his days was generally
spoken till the confusion of Languages.

So, since, other Monarchs of the world have excogitated words according to
the light of nature, and operation of things unknown, to perfect their derived
languages by composition and mere invention.

Now, The Hebrew tongue the Phoenician, or Sarmatian Character.
as we see the simple and vncorrupt Hebrew Tongue was the original, to other
Languages, and singularly to the Phoenician, Chaldean, and Assyrian, (these two
only differing in that the Assyrian had the purer dialect and relish of the
Hebrew) so every Monarchy have arrogated the deriuation and composition of
the Tongues subjected unto them. Hereof it comes, that the four Monarchiall
tongues are accounted originals, by vsurpatio^, and not of propriety: namely,
the Chaldean or Assyrian, which in the first Monarchy was famous, and to
particular States subjected gave words and manners of speech: Howbeit, the
Armenian, and Arabian languages held their own though in some words and
phrases they might be by commerce confounded, as we see other neighbor
Countries through the world borrowe and search from others to appropriate their
tongues. Under the second.
So was it of the second Monarchy, the Persian, when not only the Chaldean
beca^e corrupted, but that Language also was driven to search after the phrases
and words of the Persian, till the third Monarchy came up by Alexander,
namely, Under the third,
the Grecian: the singularity of which tongue for propriety of words has
derived it self into the veins of all Civil Countries, but singularly of
States tributary; making the fourth Monarchy glorious, namely the Roman. And
this Monarchy stretched it self far and near. Under the fourth.
We see the general esteem of the Latin tongue, through Europe; giving as it
were deriuation, unto the Italian and Spanish tongues, with many proper and apt
words; making also France, Germany, England and other Isles and Countries
fertile by the proper idiom of that tongue, as tributary States to the same,
especially where Colonies or gouernme^ts be established. Hereof it coms to pass
that our English tongue has a smacke of the Britanish (which is a deriuatiue
from the Grecian or Natolian tongue) of the Latin, The deriuation and
Composition of English tongue.
of the Scottish, and Pictish, of the Danish, Gothish, Vandalish and Norwegian,
of the Norman and French tongues; and also of the Flemish and Wallonish: which
though not by conquest, yet since the reign of Henry the first, by permissio^
have inhabited this Land whereof our tongue rellisheth also: as in these days
(through commerce and affairs) of the Italian and Spanish and Irish tongues,
howbeit we hold that the British tongue is one of the Eleven mother tongues in
Europe. In like sort sta^ds the French tongue, the Italian, Spanish, Scottish,
and Dutch (though of others the most pure) being fallats and good gallimaufries
of others tongues according either as they have been conquered and governed by
strangers, or through comemerce stand in need of one another words and
phrases.

Whereof it may be concluded, that every language in his own Country is most
honorable, and equally ancient, though it be a a deriuatiue, quoad tempus, but
not quoad perfectionem. Nevertheless, we see some Languages more general then
other, and more esteemed here in Europe, The reason why one tongue is esteemed
above another.
and that for two causes. One through situatio^ of the Country, which makes
other neighbor Nations of necessity acquaint themselves with one another
Language (the which chances to few Islands) that they may traffic and have
commerce. Hence the French, the high Duch, and the Sclavonian tongues are
general tongues, passing through many kingdoms and States. The like may also
be alleged for some other States within the Continent that have been at any
time great, and enforced others to seek to them. The other cause is through the
perfection of the tongue, as of copiousnes and learning contained therein, the
which also make the same generally to be regarded for necessity of knowledge,
or for perfecting their own barbarism. Hence the Greek and Latin tongues
are so generally taught and learned, through the greatest parts of the whole
world: the words and phrases whereof are so well known, that the Princes of
Europe negotiate and contract in writing in the Latin, Why men treat in the
Latin tongue for the most part.
as the Turk with Christian Princes in the Greek, as also for that princes
Sovereign will not yield at this day the honor to other Kings than to those
that are indifferent, and cannot be challenged of any people. And hence have
the French and Italians gotten the starte of us, in that their tongue was
sooner refined, and cast into books of many arts and histories and points of
knowledge: though at this day the English tongue draws near to the glory of
the best of them. Lastly, hence it comes, The cause why we esteem the Italian
tongue so much.
that the young Gentlemen of England affect so much the Italian tongue; For that
contains spirit of invention good phrase, utterance, and delightful matter
to their appetites.

But to return to our point, let Trauailers (having made observance of these
things, What the speaking of a tongue is.
concerning the state of the tongue of that country wherein they travail)
moreover take pains in the speaking, according to the natural accent and tune
of the country. And as, by much reading and labor, a man shall attain to the
understanding, and consequently, by a diligent observation, to the writing; so
by conference and much parley the speaking of the tongue will be soon attained
unto. And in speaking of the Tongues, every Countries accent, time and tune is
best without affectation: Hence we see those that speak the high Dutch, do
strive to utter their words highly, and with spirit, not hudling as the French,
but distinctly, as the Italian and Spaniard, yet not with that chaunting
manner. Likewise in speaking the Latin there is a more civil elocution and
carriage of the mouth, than in speaking the high Dutch, or Sclauonish, and with
greater te^perance, What the writing of a tongue is.
yet with some affectation like the Italian and Spaniard: even so in writing
elegantly, every tongue in effect having peculiar Characters, men must follow
the most esteemed fashion both in framing the letters and sentences, according
to the Orthography of the country. I mean, having occasion to write letters,
let such use that kind of hand most common and commendable, and those phrases
which in letters almost every nation has peculiar, as in sub. and
superscriptio^s. For, the least error in these, may either offer wrong to the
party written unto, or discover weakness and imperfection reproueable in
Trauailers. Lastly, as the understanding of a tongue is gotten by good Authors,
principles, and common conference with men: so to speak the tongue well it
behooves a Trauailer to frequent those places and persons, where and amongst
who^ the tongue best flourishes. And as the Court and City excel in the
dialect, and fine phrase; so the Country phrase and words are of no less
esteem and regard: in so much as no man can be accounted worthily excellent in
any tongue, that wants discretion to speak Court-like and Country-like, when,
and where it is requisite. Moreover, considering the manifold Countries that
Trauailers may come into, it may be demanded here (although we have long
plodded upon the tongue already) Whether every tongue be of equal importance
for trauailers.
whether every tongue be of equal importance, to be perfectly understood and
spoken of these Trauailers? For answer whereof, I presuppose two rules: first,
it is impossible for any man to be an obseruer of things required in these
Trauailers, and an excellent linguist in all tongues, considering the infinite
time such an one must spend in the gaining of the^. Secondly, there is no such
necessity for a Trauailer to learn them all; wherefore let him busy himself
about such only as may stand his State and Country in best avail, Those toungs
are best, that profit most.
if so be he shall happily come to preferme^t. This rests in the judgment of
Trauailers chiefly, To make election: for sometimes the state of things alter,
that necessitate a State to have in reco^mendation the general speakers of such
and such tongues. But for this Country, no one rule of certainty can
perpetually hold to all men, considering many Trauailers prescribe unto the^
diverse ends: as some the knowledge only of the tongues; others travail for
knowledge conte^platiue, to who^ the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Chaldie, and
Syriack tongues are most precious, wherein all ancient monuments of things past
to be known, are treasured up; which ravish more the mind, then the knowledge
of things present, by how much they prognosticate future events. But for these
honorable Trauailers (in regard of their pretense) the Latin, Tongues most
needful for this State.
the French, and the Spanish tongues are most necessary, and like to hold. So
the alteration of things causes a necessity for a season to travail in the
Italian, as at this time the Germane and the Low Country language, that of
Denmark, Muscouie, and such like confrontire tongues: The which let Trauailers
busy themselves about, more then other tongues, that for illustration and
contemplative knowledge, and learning, are to be respected, whenever it is
requisite. Let these things suffice for the first point to be respected of
Trauailers Voluntary.

2 The second is the nature of the people of that Nation, The nature of the
people; the second point.
in which they travail; which is the general inclination, sway, manners, and
fashion of the^ in every common motion, or action, whereby may be discovered
imperfection in things evil, or apprehension of that which is good: by the
ensample whereof other Nations may generally reform things amiss, and
establish their policy, even as Trauailers in particular may fashion
themselves for all seasons, places and persons to be complete, in civil
conversation in the judgment of the world. Now that Trauailers may discover
this amongst the people of a Nation or State, Five discouerers of the nature of
people.
let them consider five things: First, whether the people be civil or
barbarous. Secondly, whether they be free or servile. Thirdly, whether
religious or profane. Fourthly, whether warlike or effeminate. And fifthly, of
what condition of body, and disposition of mind. These contain the manners,
nature, and inclination of all people in a generality; of which we will
discourse in order. The first discouerer of the peoples nature.
And first, therefore, let Trauailers consider, whether the people in general
be civil or barbarous; and that whether by discipline (the best Ciuilian
Master) Two causes of ciuility or barbarousnesse.
or by natural temperature of bodies. Such are the Grecians, and those of the
Isles of Iapan and Chios: as on the contrary side, the people of Africa,
America, Magellanica, and those of Northeast Europe and Asia, by nature
barbarists. The use of which observation, for the Commonweal, may appear by
these two rules; First that civil Rules of policy touching the nature of
people.
nations, governed by laws divine and humane written, may either be feared for
enemies, or trusted for friends in case they be neighbors, and of the same
Religion and of good ability. Secondly, that barbarous people are never good
faithful friends, but for their profit, being ever wavering and treacherous,
nor if enemies other than mortal; yet if their power be not ouer-great, are
easily vanquished.

But the private use that Trauailers must make to themselves hereby, The
private use that Trauailers are to make.
is to chase away such barbarousnesse and rudeness as possesses them, to
establish a more humane and sociable carriage. For better discovery of these,
let Trauailers mark the gesture, apparel, Means to interpret the nature of
people.
decency, conversation, diet, feeding, giving of honor, and all other actions
of the people of a country, one toward another; regarding. or contemning all
moral vices, with better judgment than those fantastickes, which bring home
with them some apish ceremonies of courtesy, and strange fashions of apparel,
but nothing else, to give them commendations at their returns. It may not be
unknown moreover, that there is no nation in the world but may be reduced to
civility, and forced in time to put off barbarousnesse, seeing in all people
God has sown the seeds of that which is good, The difference of natures.
within the furrows and fields of every ones heart: which grows more or
less according to the pleasure of the seedeman, manifested in the
proportioning of nature, whereof every climate has a several stroke, as being
an instrument whereby God frames capabilitie more or less to comprehend the
same. Hence we see, those that inhabit under the intemperate Zones hot or cold
be more brutish, simple, and savage than others between the Tropicks, and in
the temperate. So also it is to be understood, that no nation in the world, how
Courtlike soever, but has the dregs and lees of barbarous inciuility; and that
many heathen people, by the light of nature merely inscribed in their hearts,
rest for ensamples and reproves to many civil nations governed by a diuiner
knowledge, in points of civil actions and conversation. For proof whereof, No
nation but may be tainted with barbarous fashions.
behold how the English, Scottish, French, Italians, and Spanish which are the
most reformed and courtlike people, are tainted with some blemish of
barbarousnesse, the which of other heathen nations they might learn to
reform. The consideration thereof.
And though of all civil nations we here may justly challenge preeminence, yet
how barbarous are we in many things? namely, the Commons of this land, in the
entertainment of strangers, pursuing them with the uncharitableness of hatred
and despite, like the Lithuanians, that use neither faith nor ciuility to
them. Neither are we alone: for the Commons of France and Spain carry as hard
a hand toward strangers; whereas the African heathen Negros, are so charitable
to strangers, that nothing shall be denied them, if it rest in their powers to
relieve their distress and wants. In like sort are the people of the East
India, so respective of strangers, that the State deputeth certain persons to
supply them with all things requisite: and in case a stranger chance to die,
the merchants of their country shall have delivered unto them their goods. And
verily of al reformed States, there is none, I judge, more humane toward
strangers at this day, than are the Nobility of England, and of Polonia. What
vnciuisitie of manners and policy does the Pope in most of his regiments use,
forbidding marriage to Priests? that which the Ethiopians, upon the same
inconvenience politic, permitted notwithstanding; rather hazarding the
inconvenience of remisnes and covetousness, than the mischief of many more
horrible sins. How unseemly is the custom of the Frenchmen toward their King,
and ancients in nobility and years? Short of that the Arabians attributed to
every ancient in years. Behold what great respect the Turks, Tartarians, and
Persians give to their Princes: in which point the French come shortest. All
men know how savage the Italians are toward their wives by imprisoning, cooping
up, and locking up al, through the heat of their ielous hearts, though themselves
are the most Libertines through the world: And yet the Parthian heathen are so
courteous, civil and kind to their wives, as without manifest proofs, they
will not be over ielous or suspicious. From whom I suppose the French have
learned not a little renown in that point, not travailing to press down that,
which like ye Palm tree, the more it increases. Be not the Dutchmen most
sloue^ly and sluttish in their apparel, and feeding? whereas the Africans
detest the same, accounting bodily cleanliness and honesty a point of duty.
And though the Turks and Indians, and other Barbarians of Africa, and the
savage out-lawes of many nations, eat their meat on the ground, yet are they
more neat and cleanly, than those Dutchmen or our Irish. So the barbarousnesse
which of all other Nations possesses those Dutchmen except the Tartarians or
Hell Hounds, which equally account it an honor to be drunk) to eat, to
drink, and become more uncivil than beasts.

It is not reprehended in the Scythians, that cruel nation: none daring to
drink any wine, but such as the King shall drink unto, and give unto; which is
commonly to those only, that in times of watre have killed most of their
enemies, and shed most blood. For amongst them none are reputed valiant, but
such as have caroused the blood of men. Do not the Egyptians refrain to eat
or drink more than suffices nature? and that for good cause, seeing
superfluity of meat breeds all diseases, and many incurable. The reparation
of which abuse nature teaches in the School of brute beasts. Has not that
enemy of reason of those Dutchmen and Tartars infected the greater number of
our gallants, and those of civil nations, since their converse in the Low
Countries? In so much that at ordinary assemblies some strive to be first and
most drunk: others are compelled to the like, against nature and manners,
whereof many bitter incouueniences have grown: insomuch as I see not why it
should be a less matter for any that compels another to drink against his
will, and thereby mscarieth in health, than in forcing any to eat or drink
poison. And it is known, that under the reign of heathen Monarchs it was a
law, at feasts not to be compelled to drink more than every man pleased.

The Italian, although in conversation he be not offensive, but obedient and
humble to his superior, to his equal obseruant, to his inferior gentill and
courteous, amiable to strangers and swimming in complements and loving terms,
yet the least occasion dissolueth ancient bonds of love; so vnsteadie and
inconstant are they in civil offices noe less important then the other. As it
fares with those that frequent our Ordinaries, such as be gamesters, the least
crossing of whom, though great friends and companions other ways, loses the
simmond of friendship compounded in many places, and many years, at an instant.
For, such would have the world know, the civility that is in them cannot
brook vnciuilitie proffered, without risentiment in the highest nature. And, as
in picking of quarrels so in managing them, I think no nation has been so
rude in general: For, whether cause be proffered or no, or whether it stands
men upon to make just risentiment and seek reparation for injury, or
indignity, or whether such be in the right or wrong, every man according to
his fancy proceeds, or as the stare stands humorous. What Gothishe
barbarousnesse possesses the Italians, in the pursuit of their lust? What
vnciuilitie and alluringnesse to lust, do their Curtizans in gesture and
apparel use? And, though the Tarnassaria^s (a people in habiting the Cost of
Bengala) never marry women, before some white Christian or Mawhometan have
cropped their Virginities, yet afterward do they carry themselves so
ciuilly that the least inconstancy brings death on such; not unlike to an
old custom that the Nobility of Scotland used in times past to levy the
Virginity of all such Maids as held of their Manors: and in case such were
married before homage Virgineall done, to their Lords they were subject to
great fines. So by the like barbarous custom the chief sacrificing Priest of
Calecut, before the King would marry his Lady, was enjoined to take the
Assaie of the Queen, and try her Virginity: for which act the king always
rewarded him with an hundred Crowns. Yet we see how detestable that
barbarousnesse is amongst other heathen people, that death is thought to good
for any Adulterer, or fornicator, or deflowrer of Virgins. Moreover, what
inconstant luxuriousness and superfluity of vnciuilitie, in fashions and
apparel, touches the French; The which, except of us English, is reproved of
most Nations in the world.

And amongst many barbarousnesses of manners, how strange is that of the French
men's dissimulation to their very friends? The which is left also hereditarie
from the Lumbards to the Italians that have any education.

I fear me, other Nations travailing thither will say that we begin to smell
of that disease. Lastly, what fencerlike and gladiatorious behavior bemaddeth
the Germans? What corruption of manne^s generaly reign in the Italians?
Insomuch that other less accort Countries then ours have this common proverb,
whereof it shall suffice to touch that of the Germans; Multi Germani rustici
In Italiam proficiscuntur angeli;
Redeunt diaboli vrbani.
What inconstant countenance, do these Italians savor of? What arrogancy and
insolency discovers the Spaniard to his superior and equal; what
insupporrablenesse to his inferior and subject? What falsehoods may men find
in the Gelderlanders? whereas Turks being Heathens are keepers of promise.
What cruelty and tyranny do the Spaniards and Irish discover to their
enemies? What pride of the French? What pertinacitie generally do Scholars,
Courtiers, and Soldiers discover? What inhospitalitie do the Germans keep?
What anger and hastiness of the Irish? yea of the poorest kerne.

Thus, by these examples, may a Trauailer survey the civility and
barbarousnesse of Nations, in every virtue active or moral; The place of
Civility and Barbarousnes.
chiefly in the Court and Cities. For the Country people relish of rudeness
evermore; though in some points they may serve for samplers of great civility,
and true carriages, of the which a trauailer must in particular make
observance. But considering, that which is Civility in one Nation is
unaccustomed and rejected in other State; it may be doubted how a Trauailer
shall demean himself to be complete, Touching the variety of manners what
trauailers are to observe and follow.
and know which to retain. The answer is easy: for it is ever presupposed,
that it is no breach of office or of civility being in another Nation to
observe the fashions, guises and customs, of the same, in things indifferent
and ceremonial, although they grate on barbarism; as superfluity of
complements and words, such as the French and Italians use, the manner of
eating and drinking, whether upon the ground lying along, as in Turkey and
Afric, or standing: The manner of saluting with the hatte on without bending
of the knee, without bowing of the body, without embracing, without profering
of the hand, without conioyning, without kissing and such like external
customs of indifferency, becoming well enough the bounds of every
Country. For, though it be a rule with us that those ceremonies, and civil
uses come nearest to the point of true carriage, and consequently most
commendable, that express humility, and courtesy, and increase affection of
most kindness and humanity (hence comes our salutations bareheaded, and hand
kissing, bowed bodies and knees, embracings, conioyning and shaking of the
hand, peculiar to great personages; hence the Italians and French have gotten
probatum of their humilious phrases and kind complements of kissing their
hands; the Spaniardes of humbly kissing the hands of those they respect and
converse with, men as women, the Dutch in their carrowsing in like sort as we
use, in contracts by imposition of hands and afterward by kissing them) yet we
see the nature of the Italians cannot brook kissing openly of women, nor the
French being long bareheaded; and in like expressions other Nations are as
precise. Notwithstanding, in the expressions of moral virtues and vices, a
Trauailer must be so curious and grave, that he not only beware to commit
sin and do as the people do, but cleave wholly to the virtue and mean of
things, abhorring blaspheming, swearing, railing, malreporting, and such like
vices of the tongue, as of all other actions and customs of wickedness which
are evil in their own nature, without circumstances. And these Trauailers
have prerogative of other Nations to prescribe against many though indifferent
and against all evil customs, that swerve from the rule of Nature and
humanity. Thus having long stayed upon this haunt of the first discouerer of
the nature of people, The second discouerer of the peoples nature.
the second offers it self, for the Trauailer to know; Whether the people be
Free or Servile. For all people considered as Subjects are one of these two.
Freedom or seruilenesse political.
And though by nature largely considered, one man is equally so free as
another; none more servile (for servitude is politic) yet we see some people
politickly servile as free, some more, some less, according to the alteration
of times and things. By the words servile and free then are meant, not the
natural (since all by nature are servile to sin and unrighteousness, and
are equally free from misery and subjection) but the political, which makes
some people free, in regard of misery and servitude, and other servile to
slavery, misery, and subjection. Now seeing all people of a State are under
subjection in generality, in this place the nature of a people must be sought
out of such as are free from slavery and misery, Freedom from slavery and
misery.
and of those that are seruiled unto them. Of people free in this sense, there
be some by prescription enfranchised, By prescriptio^.
the government of whose States by good laws have made them free from long
misery or slavery: Such are the Commons and Nobility of this land, whose
freedom is such, as they enjoy their own things so freely as the Prince. The
like may be said of the States of France and Germany, and of other well
ordered Common wealths. Moreover, such freedom generally reigns in France,
as with us here in Kent, that what slave or bondsman shall but land in France, is
immediately made free: and whosoever abides one year in Kent, shall be ever
after enfranchised. Moreover, there be others free by arrogation, By arrogation*
who according to the state of times and things licentiously use their
liberty. Such in times past were the people of Denmark: whose force was their
law, in so much that their Prince held his royalty at their placitum. For, if
at any time they misliked any of his actions he was instantly deposed, and an
other set in his place. Such at this day is the freedom of the Venetians, that
they seem to bear a hard hand over their Dukes. And such is the common nature
of every Democracie and Aristocracie. Lastly, By policy.
there be some whose policy and state have continued them in much freedom
from misery and slavery, as ever striving against servitude. Such were the
Sclauonians, the Switzers, and the Lumbards, the Neapolitanes, in the Roman
government: in so much as these people being ever confederates with that
mighty Empire, yet durst they give succor to the banished from Rome. Such
were the Hungarians against the Turk.

Such generally are the Nobility of most Christian States, who as Libertines
are ever out of tyranny, before the Commons. Such are the Spaniards that choose
rather to die than to be made slaves. And such is the natural affect of those
that either have enjoyed long freedom, or feel sensibly the hard yoke of
bondage. In a word, Civility the means to obedience.
such are the people of Ireland, who not being accustomed to ciuility and
obeisance, spurn so much against the same: For, the Nobility spurn against
subjection; and the Commons follow their Lords and Leaders, through want of
ciuility and Christian knowledge that keeps every man in officio. The marks
of liberty and freedom of people are riches and ease; both peculiar to the
Grecians and English; the Germans abound in ease: the Venetians procure their
liberty by their riches.

These things concerning the freeness of people. The like in effect be
considered of those people which are servile; namely, Servitude, two fold.
whether they be seruiled through tyranny and oppression, or through depression
and keeping under violently; both sorts being subjects of misery and calamity.
Of the first sort, 1. By oppression.
we hear of the Tartaria^s under their Came; for the whole State of all they
have stands at his fancy to dispose of: the word of whose mouth serves for
a sword to revenge him of rebels, and yet they rejoice thereat; neither dare
any man say, This is mine, or another: neither can any man dwell other-where
than his Lord assigns him. The Liuonians under the Duke of Muscouie are so
servile, that they dare not but call him Tzar, or King; where none other
nations do the same. Moreover, so servile are the Muscouites, that they call
themselves the slaves of the Duke: neither dare they sell anything, before the
Dukes officers have surueyed the same. Alike servile are the people of
Lithuania, in so much as the officers of the Country may enter into any man's
house, and take their pleasure of any thing; where no farmer dare come in the
presence of this Lord, without gifts or bribes. So the Commons of Sweuia in
times past were in great misery vpheld by their Princes and Nobility: For, all
commodities passed and repassed through their fingers. Lastly, such are those
people, whose ouer-rulers are Tyrants, as the Turk generally through his
Dominions; the Pope over the Clergy, and many temporal States. Now of the
second sort of Servile, By depression,
we find the husbandmen and tenants of Italy, who live hardly and poorly to
uphold the Gentlemen their Landlords. So live the Boores under the Germane
Nobility, in greater misery and subjection, than the poorest person in this
land. Such are moreover the Commons of a Nation where either civil wars, or
omission of good and wholesome laws reign. Such of late time were the Boores
of the Low Countries, and Pesants of France: so finally are al those Commons
whose Nobility like Solons great flies break through the net of the Law, and
where the Prince is remiss in government.

Now the marks of servile people are hereby gathered, The marks of servitude.
namely, Poverty and Want, and excessive paines-taking and moyling to gain
their living. Such were the Irish: such are the Moors.

It now remains to show what use a Trauailer shall make hereby. First, Rules
of policy touching the same,
by these, the loyalty and unsteadiness of Subjects are discovered: then
their constancy and reuolting humor upon occasions proffered. And lastly, who
are to be trusted for friends, and who feared for enemies: These being
instruments for the Politician to plot upon; and therefore I will be sparing in
the discourse.

The third thing that discovers the nature of the people is for our Trauailer
to consider, The third discouerer of the peoples nature
whether the people of a Nation or State be Religious, Religiousnesse or
Profaneness.
or Profane. These words must be restrained; considering Religiousnesse is
properly taken for the godly exercise of that profession, without Idolatry or
superstition, the which is true Religion. All other shows are shadows
irreligious, and not substantial professions. In like sort may it be said of
Profaneness: which is of those people who leaving the pathe of man's duty
toward God wander in the field or wilderness of error, either through
ignorance, presumption, or imperfection. Wherefore, that our Trauailer may not
be put to plunge, the words in this place implie a larger understanding. For,
by religious people is meant, What is meant by these words
such as are passing devout and zealous in religion, be they Christian,
Heathen, or Antichistian. So likewise by profane people I conceive Libertines,
Atheistes, and politic religious people, who oppose themselves against the
superstitious and devout practice of godliness: as temporizers and epicureall
worldlings. In this first sense most Nations in the world at this day are and
have been ever devout and religious: some in the truth, as the true people of
Israel, and all such Christian people as of the certainty of the Scriptures
and word of God do serve the Lord as he commands, rejecting humane
traditions and superstitiousnesse, as profaneness politic and damnable.
Hereupon rose that worthy custom of the Nobility of Poland, whenever the
Gospel was a reading in their Churches, To draw out their swords, signifying,
that they were ready to defend the truth thereof, if any durst oppugn the
same.

And hence no doubt at the first sprang our custom here in England, of
standing on our feet and rising up, when the Articles of our faith either are
a reading, or during the reading of the Gospel; thereby expressing that by
this we will stand and abide against the world and other like ceremonies,
which superstition I fear has corrupted. Hereupon, are the Saxons noted to
be very devout, but withal opinionatiue. So are the Bohemians devout and
zealous withal.

Moreover, Religious in Idolatry and superstition.
some are religious in idolatry: as were the Egyptians, the Assyrians,
Philistines, and those uncircumcised people that worshipped strange GODS. Such
are at this day the barbarous people of the East and West Indies, that worship
the ugly shapes of Devils, of the Sun, Moon, Stars, of the Elements and of
other Creatures. Others there are devout in superstition: as the Turks and
Persians, who with much devotion are trained up under the policy of their
Prophets Mahomet and Haly. Lastly, there are some blinded wonderfully in
Idolatry and superstition: such are the Popelings and those that go under the
name of Catholics, but abusiuely. The which religious proceeding is so
hateful to those that follow the Greek Church, but singularly to the
Muscouites, that if any of their Nation be but reputed to have spoken with a
Latin or Roman, it behooves him to be purged, before he shall be
entertained and received to partake of the Communion: for they account such
polluted.

The very like may a Trauailer consider of the people, which be profane: such
as the Epicures and Temporizers are that flourish singularly in Italy. And
according as it has been reported of the Normans in times past, that they
cared little for any of Gods service: So, the Romans profaneness, and
contempt of virtue every Nation is full of; Like as it has been spoken of
the Cicilians, that they regard no man whilst they themselves are in
prosperity.

Thus a Trauailer may refer unto his proper head the nature of the people
concerning religiousnesse or profaneness, the which may in generality and in
particular stand him in much stead. Moreover, I suppose it also very needful
for a Trauailer, A consideration.
to consider whether the people Religious or Profane so stand, by the omission
or want of laws, or by the severity of Laws or customs. For, though
religion cannot be constrained, yet it may be restrained by ordinances, so as
a Trauailer shall hardly discern it. Hence we see the Nobility of France
passing devout of Custom, the Gascoignes religious without superstition, our
Commons in times past very superstitious: as generally are all that be newly
weaned from popery. Thus much as concerning the religiousnesse or profaneness
of people. The fourth discouerer of the peoples nature. A triple consideration
of warlike or effeminatenes.
The fourth rests to be considered: whether the people of a Nation be
Warlike or Effeminate: Whereof let a Trauailer ground his observation under
these three heads: namely, whether the people be effeminate or warlike through
natural complexion. Hence we divine all phlegmatickes and sanguinistes
effeminate by nature; as all melancholickes and cholerickes warlike. Secondly,
whether the people be effeminate for want of good discipline, as commonly those
are where either vices, or great excess abound; these being great withdrawers
of men's courages, weakening and poisoning the powers of soul and body, so as
without discipline such men are unapt for the wars altogether. Lastly,
whether the people be warlike through the fear of Tyranny, or by good
discipline. For as discipline makes some that naturally are cowardes and
phlegmatickes good soldiers in time: so want of discipline we see gives the
reigns of exces to breed vices and corruption of hearts, and enfeebling of
minds otherwise of good temper for the wars: such are the sanguinistes. And
as the excess of commodities in a land make men idle, so the barrenness
enforces others to be industrious, which is one of the best discouerers of a
warlike people. Hereof it came to pass, that the Sicilians have been noted for
cowards and effeminate; whereas the inhabitants of the mountain^s and Alps,
have ever carried the name of hardy and warlike. The like some have observed
in the Low Country people, till discipline and fear of tyranny procured
them some choler. We read of the Lithuanians for want of good discipline to
be so effeminate and cowardly, that they never go to the wars willingly: and
oftentimes being pressed give great sums of money to be released from the
service. So in times past (as Eusebius recites) were the people of Afric so
effeminate and faineants that the women did every thing abroad for merchandise
and husbandry: as it has been reported of the men of Holland that were wont
to carry their fardels on their heads, whereas the women did carry their
burdens under their Arms. Yet so warlike were, by the same ground, the
Denmarks, that going to the wars the soldiers would never abandon their
leaders, but die in the field rather then fly so long as their Leaders lived:
it being moreover an infamy reputed for soldiers to die in their beds, or
of other sickenesses then that which comes by wars. Herby also we find the
valiancie of the Switzers according to their discipline: whereas the Arabians
and Asiaticques are tainted with cowardice. The English likewise are feared of
all men for their valiancie, even as the Hungarians are reputed hardy and
stout. In so much that they have been branded for grayhoundes and wolves in
regard of other Nations but Hares and Foxes; Whereas the people of little
Britain have been esteemed timorous, especially where they be opposed by the
English: in like sort were those of Picardie.

Lastly, do not all men see here in England, in Scotland, in France, in
Italy, Spain, and Germany, that these things do alter the people from
warlikenesse to effeminatenes: and contrariwise good and long discipline are
means to recover their ancient glory? whereby a Trauailer shall not only
discover the present estate of things, but be able with the politician to
divine into what chances such people may fall.

The fifth and last discouerer of the nature now remains, The fifth discouerer
of the peoples nature,
for a Trauailer to make observation, namely: of what Condition of body and
Disposition of mind the people be of.

As touching the condition of body, The peoples condition discernable in three
things.
Three things are to be respected: First, the Stature; whether tall, low, or
of mean size of person, Secondly, The peoples inclination discovered in four
points.
four things are to be considered. First, whether the people be given to
idleness or pains taking; then, to what occupations and trades they are
accustomed. Thirdly, whether they be addicted to letters, or otherwise
incurious of learning: Lastly, what vices and virtues the people are most given
unto; and that whether by defect or administration of laws, or by their own
temperatures. The least of these are of moment to be understood. For besides
the particular profit that every Trauailer shall reap thereby, there is a
public and multiplex of stuff for such (if so they happily afterward step to
the helm and be called to aid the motion thereof) to work upon, either to
reform evils in their own Commonweal, or to move commotion or pacification
twixt foreign Powers and nations. Which, for that these are the materials of
politicians, I omit to explane how and in what sort. And forasmuch as the
nature of people in this point may be the better discovered in particular, I
propounde four Censures, which open the very affects of the heart, unto such
as covet to know in particular the secrets of every ones mind, Four
bewrayers of men's affections to vice or virtue.
in common actions expressing virtue or vice; They are the exercises, the diet,
the apparel, and the conversation of men: of which, if we may not offend, we
will consider a little, how and in what manner they may stand a Trauailer in
stead either to establish peace, or to entertain war, in case of employment.
First then, of exercises some be honorable, Exercises trip^e
others for pastime and recreation. Such as follow the honorable, whether
warlike or of learning, discover good instruments of peace or war. For, as by
the exercises of war men show courageous and high minds, spirited and strong
bodies: so by exercising points of learning and knowledge, honest and settled
minds are bewraied; and consequently meet persons, the one for peace the
other for wars. Those, that exercise for pastime and delight only, are marked
for corrupt, and weak members in a State, eithe for peace or war: yet rather
affecting peace then war.

The second Censure is the diet of men. Diet, Diet triple.
it is either of meat, of drink, or of sleep. Those that be Epicures in any
of these three, are to be taxed for the most part for slothful, vicious and
effeminate bodies. Those that be temperate in these three, and accustom their
bodies to endure hardness, may be observed for men of action and employment:
and as these may prove good instruments for war, so the other are scarce
good for either.

The apparel reuealeth like affections; which consists either in the
fashion, A triple consideration of apparel.
or stuff, or color. Those that keep the fashion which is approved in the
Court, if they be Courtiers, show discretion and constancy. Where, on the
other side, they bewraie lightness and fickleness, unless in special cases.
So do all those that affect uneasy and unhandsome fashions. Those moreover
are not ever the wisest that are first in the new fashion, but such rather
that come in the tail; if they do it in this respect, to see first whether
the same be better and more necessary then the old. But seeing few Nations
in the World be variable in fashions but we and the French, I will shut up
this point, that there is a meet fashion for Courtiers, for soldiers, and for
other people, necessarily distinct. For, the Courtier respects comeliness,
the soldier ease and warmth, the rest are variable; according as they stand in
years, or humors, or necessity. As concerning the state of apparel:
Whosoever wears not good apparel, being a Courtier, and in Court, beseeming
this Estate and being young, discouers his coffeehouse or want of means: so
they that go more costly then the guise of the place or their ability can
bear withal, or not respecting times, places and persons, reuealeth vanity
and hautie Ambition. The like affections are bewraied by the third, to weet the
Color; it being for the most part generally through the world respected for a
Concordance according to the fitness of years, of persons, of times, and
places; the which are circumstances revealing the affections or imperfections
of men in the colors of their apparel.

The last Censurer is the Conversation of men, Conversation.
with the virtuous or vicious; whereby the secret carriages of the mind be
discovered. For, as those that keep evil company bewray imperfect minds: so
such as converse with the virtuous may be observed for honest and trusty men
to be employed in the affairs of their commonwealth, either for peace or
war, if other things concur withal. In which conversation an eye must be
had of such to discern, what wisdom, valor, temperancie, liberality,
uprightness, couragiousnesse of mind every one of the nobler sort in his
actions discouers: and contrariwise of the vices and capital evils that reign
in them. But of these we have opened enough: and also concerning the nature of
the people: The third point of knowledge. The suruay of the Country.
it now remains to speak of the third point of knowledge about which a
Trauailer must busy himself, in the interim of his Travail: namely, in the
survey of the Country wherein he shall travail. But seeing the consideration
hereof is multiplex, it would be to many very tedious to handle every species
and subdiuision largely. Wherefore we will but make a discovery, and touch
only the most necessary things to be understood.

Of the Country there is a sixefold consideration: In six points principally.
as first of the name, to weet; whereof the Countries or Co^mon-weales name has
his deriuation; 1. Name.
how many sundry names it has had since the first habitation thereof; and
finally how long it has continued in each name, and what were the causes of
alteration. The which things forasmuch as from records they may be collected,
we will not insist upon them: adding only by way of implicatio^ one use hereof,
That such Co^mon-weales as never have altered their names, will hardly be
subdued, or brought under the yoke of an absolute Conqueror: whereas those that
have been accustomed to change their names, may easily by Conquerers be
persuaded to suffer a change. The second consideration is of the populousness
or scarcity of people; 2. Populousnes
the knowledge whereof is so available, as a Politician cannot well plot,
without good certificate thereof from time to time: for a multitude of people
cannot well endure without much traffic, without many friends; and in case of
penury, death, and want, not well without disorder. Neither are a few people
to be feared for great enemies, or to be trusted for constant friends, 3.
Situation.
and such like. Thirdly, of the situation of the Country, in regard of the
earth and seas, as of the heavens; namely, under what Climate it lies, and
what sign does patronize the same. But these things, being they may be
attained unto by reading and perusing of Mappes and sea Charts, let it be
sufficient to us to have remembered them. 4. Q^antity.
Fourthly, the quantity (which is either of the length, breadth, circuit, or
figure of the Country) is to be considered. The which also we omit to
enlarge by discourse, considering by the rules of Geometry and Cosmographie,
any may easily attain to the same. Only let this not be impertinent to be
superadded, how the marches of the country (if it be part of the Continent) is
confronted with natural defense or artificial; how it borders on other
Countries, and what quarter there is kept ordinarily, whereof in the sixth and
last general point of knowledge, namely, in the secrets of the State we shall
have cause to treat. 5. Commodities,
The fifth consideration is to be made of the commodities to be found in the
Country: And the sixth likewise of the discommodities. Of these two last we
will dilate a little. First, a Trauailer shall observe the commodities of a
Country, either as they stand naturally or artificially.

The natural commodities are four: namely, Natural commodities four
the goodness or temperatenesse of the Air, the Fruitfulness of the soil,
the plenty of Rivers and Ports (if the same coast the sea): And lastly, the
Springs, Lakes, Baths, Spawes, or Pooles, that have any singular virtue in them.

Touching the first, ^. Temperate air.
let not a Trauailer weigh the goodness or temperatenesse of the air by his
own constitution of body, that peradventure can away well with the same, (as
we see some of our English bodies can away well enough in cold Moscouia,
others in hot Morea) but by the general well-faring of the inhabitants without
pestiferous diseases and accidents, that seldom chance to that Land and
people, but extraordinarily. For, by the secret work of God, there is no
Nation so temperate, but is subject to corruption of Air, when his secret will
shall be displeased therewith, and that by the revolution of the heavens, and
of things engendered and contained in them.

Touching the second, 2 Fruitfulness of the soil.
which is the Fruitfulness of the soil, there is a triple consideration;
either of such as move and grow upon the superficies of the Land (as
Vegetables, and living sensible things) or of such things as are hid in the
womb and veins of the earth, or of the molde it self. Touching the first of
these, let Trauailers observe what store there is found of irrational Animals,
either wild or domesticke, serving for the use of man; and especially whether
the Country do yield a superfluity; and whereof. As in generality, Africa
yields the best Mules; Europe the best Lions, as Herodotus and Pliny make
report, only to be found between the rivers Nestus and Achelous; the one
coasting Abdera, a City of Thrace; the other, being a flood of Epyrus,
separateth Acarnania from Aetolia. So in particular, we find England yields
the greatest store of good Sheep and Wool: Muscouia the best Bees; yielding
Honey and Wake in plenty; and the best Furs. Moreover, let a Trauailer
observe what store of Vegetables, either of Woods, Trees for fruit, or plants
the Country yields. For, every Country has his several Commodities, and
singularity of them, fitted by the providence of God: as we read of, in Asia,
singular Cedars and Pine trees: so we have experience, that for Fur trees
and shipmasts, Denmark and the New found land is notorious; for Vines, France;
for Apples and such ordinary fruit England; for Orenges, Limons, Pomegranates
and such like, Spain and other hot Countries; for oil and Olives, Candia,
etc. As concerning the second, which is of things hid in the veins and womb
of the earth (for what shall we need to enlarge the discourse with the huge
woods to be found in Germany and Bohemia, or with the notorious Vegetables of
other Nations) namely, the Mines of metals and Fossiles whereof there are such
sundry species, as it may seem impertinent of us to be further touched,
considering so soon as they are discovered, they be committed to writing. Now
the last of those three is the fruitfulness of the molde, yielding unto the
industry of such people as Till and manure the same, abundance of all things:
the which also we will refer to the artificial consideration of the Countries
commodities.

The third natural commodities of a country are the plenty of Rivers and
Ports: 3. Plenty of Rivers,
whereof these things fall to the observation of a Trauailer; From whence they
have their springs and thorowfare if they be rivers nauigable, whether they be
replenished with fish, of what kinds, and whether potable and commodious for
the use of man, how these do accommodate the Country; and lastly where they
have bridges, foords, ferries, or may be waded over. But if the Country be
maretine, and joining to the sea, what, and what store of fish the coast
abounds with; how the sea ebbeth and flows in every Port and Creek, where
there is good riding for ships or boats; what shallowes, sands and flattes;
and lastly, what good and dangerous landing; whereof in the secrets and last
part of the Trauailers knowledge we shall have occasion to enlarge. But a
Trauailer must be so prudent in searching out these things, that he have not a
malicious or suspicious eye cast on him; for it is one of the conuictors of
Spies. 4. Springs and Baths.
Now the last of the natural commodities, as we have said, are Springs,
Baths, Spawes, Lakes, Pooles, or other things of goodness and medicineable
virtue and commodity: the which are to be sought out in seven things, namely,
in their heat, as Baths and Spawes: in their tastes and savors, as Pliny
reports of a certain Lake amongst the Troglodites, which thrice a day and
thrice a night, for a season, was ever bitter and salt, and at other times
sweet. Thirdly, in their color, as Diodorus reports, in Egypt there was a
Poole, the color of whose water was vermilion, which being drunk would make
men bewray secrets. Fourthly, in their odor or smell, as that fountain in the
City Leuca, of a most horrible smell, spoken of by Strabo. Fifthly, in the
motion, at what time they are rising: as that fountain besides Haslea which
never rises but early in the morning, at high noone, and at the shutting in of
the evening: And if therein any evil thing be cast that may corrupt the same,
Theodorus Zuingerus mentions, that for certain days after it will not rise
at all. Sixthly, in their effects, as that fountain of Salmac in the country
of Caria; which, as Strabo writes, makes men effeminate and lither. That of
Aphrodisium in Pyrrhea, that causes barrenness, as Pliny notes, and such
like. And lastly, what commodity either of them yield unto the Country, the
which chiefly is to be considered, of those nauigable Lakes that lie in the
heart of the Land.

Hitherto concerning the natural: Artificial commodities* two,
the Artificial commodities now offer themselves; which a Trauailer shall find
chiefly in two things, namely, in Buildings or in Trades and Sciences
Mechanic. And though the liberal Arts may seem to be of the number; yet
properly they are not the commodities of a Land or State. Because by the word
Commodities is meant, things that may be transported from State to State, and
carried out of one country into another: which the liberal Sciences well cannot
save in books: For the operation of the liberal Sciences seem to be Spiritual
or Mathematical; whereas that of Mechanical arts shows to be corporal. But to
our point, 1. Buildings triply considered.
of Buildings there may be a triple consideration: First, what are the most
common buildings and houses of the country wherein the common people inhabit,
and of what stuff they are made. For almost every country differ therein. But
whersoeuer great defects are of these, as in Ireland, Muscouie and other
places, it is a note of poverty and barbarousnes. Secondly, what manner of
buildings are those of Towns and Cities, and of the nobler sort of people: for
these evermore draw nearest to ciuility, and be freest from poverty. Lastly,
what is the Architecturie of Forts, Towns, Sconces, Cittadels, Castles,
Towers, and of places fortified in the land, about the discovery whereof a
trauailer shall find much use of his Mathematickes, learned before travail.
But before we make discovery of places fortified, let it not be impertinent
to consider seven points briefly in Cities or Towns: as first of the
Quantities, Seven observations in Cities and Towns.
Figures and Circuits as well of the Cities themselves, as of their suburbs.
Secondly, of their situation and strength, and how they stand commodated by sea
or land, or discommodated. Thirdly, of the manner and matter of their
buildings. Fourthly, of their places and things of special note, as Gates,
Fountains Bridges, Churches, Streets, Religous houses, palaces Arsenals, Store
houses Market places, Rialtos, public Ambulatories, Schools, Libraries,
Colleges, Universities, and such like. Moreover, of Universities it must be
considered, whether they be of Physic, of the Law, or of any other special
study and profession, or mixed of all liberal Sciences together, what number
of Students, what companies of strangers, their orders, privileges, and such
like: lastly, what famous men in learning flourish in them. Fifthly, the number
of the people of the Cities and Towns are to be learned so near as may be.
Sixthly, the policy of them is to be regarded: which rests either in the
Ecclesiastical, Scholastical, Oeconomical, or political government: whereof
the political is most behooueful, and therefore we will insist only upon the
same; and that in one word to discern the manner and disposition of the peoples
living, whether in idleness and pleasure, as the Nobility of this Land, and
of France, or in trades and merchandise, as the Nobility of the Venetian and
Genoa States. Moreover, with whom they vent that which is superfluous in their
Town, from what other places they ordinarily bring such things as they want
and stand in need of: and whether they be driven to carry out their own
commodities, or are sought unto by foreign parts; Let these things suffice,
till the government of the State in general shall offer it self to be
handled in the fifth part, to which we do refer Trauailers that make doubt of
any thing considerable in Towns or Cities. The seventh and last consideration
then of Cities is of the privileges, immunities, liberties, and freedoms of
them: whether Colonies, Municipials, Prefectures, Cities confederate,
assemblies, and such like. Now the other part of Artificial buildings rests
to our Trauailer, How the secret of places fortified may be discovered.
namely, of fortifications. Of which, forasmuch as the true survey of them is
in many States very dangerous, we have observed, for the better ease and
security of Trauailers, three safe ways to pry into the secrets of them if
access be inhibited: First, to learn what are fortified holds within the
land, and what front and coast the sea, and where seated. Moreover, within the
land, whether they stand upon rivers, or waters, or were built for other
purposes than for the wars, and natural defense of the land: whereof in most
States there have been diuerserected, as by the Nobility of England and
Ireland for their private uses, and for civil wars fortified, and singularly
in France, where the Noblesses for their private safeguard, have many strong
holds: as other Nations that a long season have either feared enemies, A
consideration of the natural and of the artificial strengths of fortifications.
or sought freedom from subjection. Whereof we have of late time experience,
by the fortifications of the Low Country people. The second considers the
natural and artificial strength of them: The natural attribute defense unto
a place in regard of situation: which may be considered in hills, rocks, or
waters that make the same inaccessable or defenceable, whereof we have a
wonderful example in the Isle of Sarke in our Brutish sea, which is by nature
so fortified, as one man may defend the same Isle against the greatest Army
that is able to come against it. Of like defense is in some respect the castle
of Garnsey, and for a land Army the city of Venice, and of Mexico in West
India. Moreover, let it be considered, whether equally in all places as the
aforenamed, or but on some sides that defense grows, as that of Dover, castle
to the sea-ward, and toward the town. Likewise what other natural strengths
be within, as plenty of ground to preserve victual, good springs that cannot
be withdrawn or corrupted, and such like, which naturally do fortify places
greatly in times of besiegings. Now th'artificial stre^gths of Forts consists
in ye Matter or Form and figure, whether without or within. Touching the
matter and substance of every particular, let it be questioned whether they be
of old or new erectio^: for the old in times past were made of stone, brick,
or such like hard stuff, which now in the perfection of artillery are more
easy to be battered tha^ Forts of earth, and are found more hurtful to the
friend within, and favorable to the enemy; yet in special cases where
Artillery cannot come to batter, are notwithstanding momentable: the which if
it be well considered, seldom shall men find old fortifications, but they were
even seated so, as Artillery could not play upon them. In like sort are those
new fortifications to be considered, of what matter (for of earth there is
diverse sorts to make good fortifications) of what greatness, largenes, thicknes,
depth, and height are the members of them: as walls, vammures, ramparts,
curtins, cauallirs, parapets, counterscarfes, mounts, platforms, trenches,
ditches, etc, and how replenished with water, what sluices, what Saleis, what
droit and oblique passages are to the same: the which, discreet questioning,
and good indgement of the eye, shall inform a Trauailer of. Touching the
forms and figures of Forts, that is either regular or irregular. The regular
be either Rotunds, Quadrats, Pentagonons, Hexagonons, etc. according to the
quantity of the Fort, every part answering in correspondencie. The irregular
retain those forms which most naturally may help the weakness of the place,
yet answerable one to another, according to the rules of fortifications: whereof
we had a notable piece of work for example, in that in Ostend in Flanders. And
for better judgment herein, let it not be grievous to any Trauailer, if so he
happen into the wars, to observe the notable means is taken in the field by
good Soldiers for the fortifying of their Camps daily after this irregular
distribution. Now the last of these 3, that pry into the fortifications of
Countries, is to understand what Captains and soldiers ordinarily belong to
them; their munitions, their paies, and finally their ordinances and
privileges. Let these things suffice for the first of the artifical
commodities of the Country.

The second is that of Trades, 2, Trades, Mechanic sciences six,
and Mechanical Sciences; the which are fashioners and finishers of handicraft
works made through man's invention, and are in number six, for a Trauailer to
consider of; through which al commodities pass and repasse, namely, Husbandry,
Clothing, Masonry, Carpentry, Smithery, and Engining: these are general heads,
whereunto all other trades of necessary observation may be referred, that
accommodate a Land. Let us take Husbandry for an example, under which is
comprised the sciences of gardening, of planting and grafting, of manuring, of
grasing, of breeding and cherishing of Vegetables, Plants, beasts, and such
like fostering sciences, for the nourishment of the creatures, but singularly
of man: Upon which also other infinite trades depend, whereof we will omit to
speak. Husbandry discou^red in three points.
But to our point in hand; a Trauailer shall discern the husbandry of each
country in three points: first, by observing what corn and grain the
country yields generally, and that with what pains and means the land is
tilled and manured, what usual increase the land yields, and such like:
whereof there is such difference as is almost incredible, yea, between setting
and sowing. Secondly, what cattle are usually bred there for the state as well
of the Land as of other Countries. As in Muscouie and Poland, Bees; in the Low
Countries, Kine; in England, Sheep, and such like. Lastly, what fruits the
country yields: as Grapes, Wine, Oil, Apples, Pears, Plummes, Orenges,
Limons, Nuts, and such like: and lastly, with what fuel the Land most
abounds.

Touching the second Mechanical trade, Clothing.
namely, Clothing, a Trauailer must note what special stuff that Country
yields for the same: whether of Lether, Furs, beasts skins, hair, flax,
wool, barks of trees, bombasie, silk, gold, silver, or such like: and also
how the same is employed, for garments or otherwise.

So the third, Masonrie.
which is Masonry, requires the knowledge of such as are workers of stone,
brick, or mortar and their artificial compositions and symmetries. The fourth,
Carpentrie.
which is Carpentrie is displayed in wood Caruers, Ioyners, Carpenters, or
builders of houses, shipwrights, and in all other dependances. The fifth, to
wit, Smitherie, Smitherie.
is as variable as any of the former to be sought into: whether for variety
of metals to be wrought upon, as Gold and Siluer-smithes, Coppersmiths,
Brasiers, Tinkers, Pewterers, Founders, black and white smithes, and all such
like: or for infinite kind of tools and Vtensils, for the necessaries of man,
the which are more excellent in some places than other, even by so much as the
matter and the Arts-men tend to perfection. Engining.
The sixth and last is Engining, which being an extract from the grounds of
Mathematical knowledge, is also much the more to be considered well of
Trauailers, in how much there may arise many singular commodities to ones
Country, both in times of peace and war. Wherein let Trauailers make
observation who be the most famous workers, and what admirable things they
work and bring to pass, either by conueyance of water by scrues, by pullies,
by weights, by causing vacuums or reinforcing of spirits together in narrow
straights and Cylinders, and by such other draughts of nature, kept secret from
the vulgar sort: the which in the wars are so necessary, as in the city for
civil and necessary uses. Insomuch as if any man travailing shall grow thereby
excellent, he is worthy the name of honor and estimation, though in other
points he be found a weak obseruer. This thing being of such singular proof
and use every where, may seem to privilege Trauailers above any one point of
knowledge besides. About the consideration of which although we could not
dwell too long (for of it self it requires a volume) yet other manifould
points untouched do crave our discourse now.

Only for discovery let this be added, that whatsoever by natural conclusions
and (as we say) by sleight, with small ado effects great things (as to move
bodies contrary to nature violently, and swiftly; to make powerful any weak
thing, and to discover things unto the senses afar off out of their ke^ning, or
to penetrate any thing resistable) may be contained under the art or science
of Engining. Hitherto concerning the commodities of the Country:

The Discommodities now may easily be ex opposito collected from the former, 6.
Discommodities.
to enlighten the sixth and last point, concerning the Country.
Notwithstanding, we will for better understanding to some as it were make
repetition. The discommodities then of Countries are either imperfectious, or
wants. The imperfections natural, are either intemperatenesse and unwholesome
air or extreme barennesse of the Soil yielding little or no commodities, or
abundance of cruel beasts: of which our Trauailer must have a care, to
understand whether the same be not for want of good husbandry in the people of
the Country. The artificial discommodities are likewise two, Buildings, and
trades. The defect of the one hinders a Country from well peopling, of the
other from well and orderly living. For it is a maxim in policy, that no
Country can be ever civil and orderly where there be not good trades planted
for setting the Commons to work, for the husbanding all such commodities as
their Country yields, and of such as are brought unto the same from foreign
parts: the which to a Country much peopled is most needful also. Thus much
concerning imperfections. The wants are of those things properly, that other
Countries abound with: which necessarily civil Estates do want daiely, and
must expect them from other places to furnish them. For though there be many
Islands in the World, that content themselves and live without the commodities
of other places; neither have they other then a certain natural kind of
provision, distributed well and orderly alike to all Nations for the natural
support thereof: Yet being once brought unto civility, and to the taste of the
World, either to be equal with others, or to be engreatned; there is no Nation
or Country, but stands in necessary need and want of foreign things: the
which being once tasted of generally, it is almost impossible to be left and
forgotten. The conclusion then of this point, for our Trauailer may be, That he
observe what special thing the Country stands in need of, the which is
either of clothing or of victual: For, these two a Nation that is civil and
well ordered cannot long want. As concerning clothing let it be sufficient
which we have touched already, in the Commodities: for out of the same may be
gathered the discommodities e conuerso. In like sort may it be said
forvictuals: Only let a Trauailer make observation what living Creatures he
shall find that cannot live or be found in the Country: As our Theodore
Zuingerus reports of Africa that never Heart or wild Boar was found there.
And Pliny mentions that in Arabia no Swine lives. So in the Islands of Nea
there are bred no Patridges, nor being thither brought will live. So some
report of Ireland, that in it lives no venomous beast; for the Climate works
all upon the people; a strange Constellation, for want of of good Religion.

Let these things suffice touching the 3 general points of knowledge
respecting the Country. The fourth point of knowledge.
The fourth now offers it self to our consideration: which is of the Laws
and Customs that be used in the Country: Concerning Laws.
the knowledge whereof may well reform the weedy affections of Trauailers, and
redress distemperatures grown in their Country, and lastly, open the door
of many policies, into which a Politician will soon enter. But first concerning
the word Law, in the intendiment there is a double respect to be had thereof.
For, Laws divine and humane.
all honest laws have their deriuation and springhead from the eternal
fountain of reason of the will of God: in which respect they in substance are
all divine. Notwithstanding in regard of the diversity of people, as of
sundry causes for which they have been revealed and promulgated, they are
also humane and multiplex. Wherefore, in the first respect, the Law is an
opening of the Divine and eternal will, whereby GOD teaches and commands
what shall be done and left undone, of men, ordained for his own glory,
chiefly then for the public and private use of men. Now, since the revelation
of that divine will of God has not been manifested in one and the same manner
always to all people, therefore in this respect the law is distributed into
three kinds properly: Into the Law of GOD, The Law is triple.
into the Law of NATVRE, and into the Humane or Law of Men. Touching the law
of God, we observe the same either written or not written. 1. The law of God.
The not written the learned call that which before the fall, and afterward,
Note.
was exercised till the Law by Moses was delivered to the people of Israel
inscribed in Tables of stone, and since of Christ himself, the Prophets, and
Apostles, enlarged, expounded, confirmed, and set forth: the which was either
Moral and perpetual, or Judicial and political. But as concerning the
written Law, committed wholly to the Israelites, let it be observed first
that there were Laws Moral contained under the Decalogue or ten
Commandments, perpetual to all people and Nations: though for a season the
Gentiles were governed by another consenting Law therewith, namely, the Law of
Nature. Secondly, that there were Laws Political and Judicial peculiar to
the Commonweal of Israel; and lastly Laws Ceremonial, which being merely
political also were temporal and to be abrogated by the perfecter, namely, by
Christ by whom all the Ceremonial and infantiue Laws were disannuled and
utterly cancelled. Moreover it may not be forgotten, that under that unwritten
Law of God is contained the Law of the spirit and of life, which is peculiar to
the Church of Christ, that quickens the unsanctified and weak Law of Nature
inscribed in the hearts of men, imprinting the will of God in their hearts:
whereby men by many degrees step forward in the true knowledge of God and
serving of him, at an instant as it were, through the efficacy thereof, more
then ever by the Law of nature they are able to do. These things thus briefly
exposed unto Trauailers, let it not seem tedious to any to consider well
thereof. For without an exact knowledge of the Law of God, there can be no
sound judgment of the rest. And as our Savior Christ soundly reproved
Nicodemus the Pharisie, for that he was a judge in Israel and knew not things
of such excellency and of so great importance: Note.
so might a Trauailer be censured for a shallow and ignorant person, that
trauiling into the laws of Nations and peoples, is nevertheless to be found
ignorant in the Laws of God, and of their deriuations, which properly be the
fountains of all natural and humane laws that be good and honest through the
world.

But touching the Law of Nature, 2. The Law of Nature.
there is some controversy amongst the learned. For the Lawyers define the Law
of Nature to be that which teaches all Animal living things. But the Scholist
Divines say the law of Nature, that to be, which is common to all people, and
that by instinct not by constitution, restraining the same only to men.
Wherefore, to make the same more evident, by favorable interpretation of both,
we distribute the Law of Nature into Common and Proper. The Common is that
which equally is common to other living Creatures as well as unto men, that is
to say, to defend themselves against violence, to preserve and maintain their
lives and States, to propagate, procreate, nourish and instruct their own, to
eat, drink, sleep, rest, move and such like things, every species
according to his being and kind. The Proper is that law which is only
peculiar unto men, being the will of God and divine reason inscribed
immediately by God in the hearts of all men; whereby generally they know what is
good and evil, and consequently what is to be followed and avoided: the law of
conscience, by which the heathen and such as have not the law of God written
shall be judged. The effect of which law is displaied in the knowledge of God
and in the worship of him; and also in the conservation of mutual love and
society betwixt mankind: From which not only the law of Nations has a name
of substance, but the humane and positive laws their descent and special
deriuation, as from the spring of right and reason.

Moreover, this law is not equally or so effectually planted in the hearts of
all men alike, but in some more plentifully then in others, according to the
secret and wonderful dispensation of the good pleasure of God in the
government of the world: From whence there arises such strange worshipping of
God amongst the Heathen, almost every Nation in a variable sort. Thus we may
see furthermore, that the law of Nature and of Nations strictly and in the
proper sense taken may well be confounded, for one and the same, concerning
actions: though after the common sense they are distinguishable. Law of
Nations.
For, the law of Nations is a certain right and equal reason that naturally
bursteth out of men and Nations, for the necessary use and conservation of
mankind and for society; the which is also perpetual, and arguing the
conscience, if it dissent from the same. From whence the Laws of Arms
concerning prisoners taken in the wars; the entertainment of messengers and
foreign Ambassadors, as all manner of contractes twixt person and person,
State and State, have their authority and reason, and do in special manner
give a name to the law of Nations, to the law of Nature: which offers to our
Trauailer these three considerations. First, A consideration of moment.
that in the Courts of Princes as otherwhere he observe, what order and manner
of entertainment and respect is given to Ambassadors, and Messengers of
foreign States. Secondly, if such an one chance to arrive in the wars of
other Princes and States, to note the carriage of one adversary to another in
matters of right, and of Prisoners and Captives especially as of Combattes, In
a word to get their discipline.

Lastly, to note amongst heathen people, what order in buying, and selling,
exchanging, lending, borrowing, mortgaging, pawning and keeping of society.
For, happily from thence he shall descrie a more equal carriage and behavior
in them by the law of Nature only guided, then many of our Civil States do by
all their means of knowledge in the laws of God, Sed hoc non defectu legis,
sed sensus.
of Nature, and of men: the which we might easily prove. But to our Point now
concerning the Laws Humane.

Those are called the Laws Humane, which from the capacities of men are
conceited and by men are promulgated and authorized: whether they depend upon
the Law of God and of Nature, 3. The law Human.
or upon their own fancies: Whereof, there are two ranks, Honest and Just, or
Tyrannical and unjust. The honest and just do flow from the general springs
and Maxims of the divine and natural law ordained for the public good of the
Church and Co^mo^-weale; Whereas the Tyra^nical and unjust, issue out either of
the usurping breasts of unlawful authority that have no power to make laws:
or from such as having power do after their own carnal minds, make ordinances
for their own proper commodity and behoof: whereunto the traditions of men,
yea and every superstitious ordinance and evil custom may be referred.
Wherefore whenever a Trauailer shall look into the body of the laws of any
Country or people, let his judgment be neither partial nor weak, Note.
but grounded upon the sound rules and eternal reason of the divine and
Natural Law. Moreover by the word Laws humane, is meant in this place the
written positive and political Laws: For in substance they are all one and
conuertible, yea and for the profitte of each Nation commutable, so as they
never contrary the laws divine or natural. By reason whereof we find that
some honest laws in quality differ, either in punishing, or rewarding, or in
inciting to that which is good, or restraining from that which is evil: the
which is merely a political promulgation consonant to some States for a
season, and very needful in special cases.

Nevertheless there be many very pertinax in this opinion, that Though a
State shall inflict for good causes a greater punishment on malefactors for
such and such crimes, then the laws of God or of Nature do, yet they are
ignorant by what warrant of like policy, any State may abridge the rigor of
the law of God in capital offenses. For such laws say they are both judicial
and eternal, by which policy no doubt States may be best governed: for proof
whereof the abbridgers (say they) of such laws are, by the heathen people that
have not the written law of God, convinced and taught how to rule in like cases.

Of humane and positive laws there is a variable consideration, Laws positive
variable.
according to the use and titles that every Country and State holds
peculiarly almost. As generally here in England we term our law by the name
of Common law, it being a peculiar law to this State and members. So the Romans
in times past called their law the Civil law. Though indeed all good laws (as
Justinian himself confesses) may well enough be termed Civil laws; yet for
distinction sake, let it be taken here whenever we shall name Civil laws,
for those that were refined by the Emperor Justinian, and set forth by him:
the which at this day are used in most of the civil States and Nations of
Europe, either in part or altogether. From whence let Trauailers make this
observation, Whether the laws of the Country wherein they travail, be laws
prerogative or positive. For there are some Countries governed by laws merely
prerogative: Laws prerogative.
of which we will first expound, to such as intend for to travail.

These kind of Laws be for the most part unwritten; and therefore require the
more care to be searched out and into, for their uncertainty. Moreover, let
Trauailers observe how far the prerogative of Princes and States does stretch
over their Subjects. For, there are some so absolute and sole tyrannous, that
all things are governed according to the will of the Prince: and every
commodity of the Country stands at the Princes pleasure. Such is the
Tartarian and great Came. Others there are half tyrannous, whose displeasure
and will has no law to curb the unruliness thereof: such is the Turk, the
Muscouian, and the Pope.

Others there are, according as they are, religious and fearers of the true
God, and Princes of civil and religious States, whose prerogative is much, but
yet in civil and honest actions: being free themselves from punishment of
their laws in some sort; and may from time to time dispense with and change
their laws, constituting new as is expedient for the good of the Commonweal.

Nevertheless, some there are that have, of these also, greater prerogative
then others, according to their government and state of policy. For better
discovery, the law prerogative is to be searched either in the person of the
Prince, How to discern laws prerogative*
or in the Magistracy which has his power from the Prince on State. The
Prince (or State if it be an Aristocracie) has absolute power, and not
controulable, to command anything, action, or person, whatsoever carries
semblance of good to the State, or that co^trarieth not the law of God and of
Nature. Moreover, to forbid and control anything, person, or actio^
whatsoever of like nature, whether by word of mouth, whether by letters,
proclamatio^s, edictes or such like means as Princes or States use. And lastly
by commission to authorize other to reward and punish, according to the offense
done, every fault that is not encountered by the Law positive already;
perseruing the life, members, and special liuelyhood of the delinquents.

The prerogative of the Magistracy may be discerned as in our Country, in the
high Court of Parliament, in the authority of the Council, in that of the
Star Chamber, in the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord high Counstable,
Lord Mareschall, Lord Admiral* in the principal Secretary, in the chief
Justices and judges of the Land, in each Mayor and Town Corporate, and lastly
in every high Commissioner and special Officer that the Prince of this Land
deputeth to undergo any charge at home or abroad. So is it in all other States
and Countries. The which being considered by Trauailers, they shall be able to
discern the authority royal of the Prince and State, as well in Political
as in Ecclesiastical giving and making of Laws. Touching the laws Positive,
they be either Political or Ecclesiastical. Laws positive Political.
The Political are either ancient and Maxims of perpetual obserua^ce, or
Modern and mutable. The ancient are such as the Romans called the Civil laws
in special; such as the French their law Salique, and such as we the Common
law. The Modern are all those laws which go under the name of Statutes,
Decrees, Ordinances, Edicts and such like, being in all Civil States put into
print: the which are by so much the easier to be attained unto by Trauailers,
wherein they may at leisure discover every thing as in a glass, either
concerning the nature of the people, or the State of the Country, The
Political laws are changeable, according to the standing of things; that the
State may grow to perfection. The Ecclesiastical are tradicions lawful or
unlawful. Ecclesiastical,
The unlawful be such as are contrary to the law of God, and tha^ in no
sort tend unto edification: of which crew a Trauailer shall meet, within most
States. But let him be careful to collect the best wheresoever: the which he
shall discern by their coats; namely* if they cross not Gods word or destroy
not more then they edify. The lawful tradicions be rules or Canons of
doctrine, of manners, of rites and Ceremonies pertaining to godliness, that
consent with the holy word of God and tend to edification. Touching the rules
of doctrine, the Apostles inspired with the holy Ghost have left many: the
general and provincial Synodes of godly and honest minded men have set forth
others, the which are for the understanding of the holy Scriptures very
profitable. And lastly, every lawful State and Church has absolute power,
without the consent of the Pope or any other foreign approbation, to do the
like; gathering evermore their constitutions and rules form the word of God.
Touching those of manners and of Ceremonies, every lawful State and Church
has absolute power to decree that which shall be most agreeable with the
nature of the State: yet so as all those Constitutions tend to edification, and
be so nearly drawn from the holy Scriptures and the best discipline of other
Churches, as near may be. These be the exact rules for to make discovery;
whereby three commodities shall redound to Trauailers. First, they shall be able
to judge whether the Countries lean by their laws to this or that religion:
Secondly, whether the people be nourished in the right or wrong: and lastly,
they may gather thereby the most sincere and upright orders for the perfecting
of their own Country and informing themselves. For when such are well seen
into the laws of other Countries and expert in those of their own Nation,
they have well purchased a goodly Manor and trench of Land to build policies
upon. Moreover, it is very expedient for Trauailers to mark not only how many
distinct kinds of Laws the Country uses to govern their people by; but in
special, what are ge^^^^ll, what particular laws pertaining to several
divisions of the Country, as those of shires and Seigniories of towns, places
and persons, etc. And lastly, if, in regard of the time of travailing, such be
able to take degrees for the approbation of their knowledge in the
Universities, no doubt the honor and the commodity will be very great. For, the
title of a degree so achieved, will celebrate more their worth than any other
means, by getting credit to their learning and judgment, and making them
capable of preferment, having authority to be employed in the service of the
Commonweal. Thus much concerning the laws: the which a Trauailer may refer
unto three heads, if he please; To Things, to Persons, to Actions. The Customs
now follow.

Customs, they are certain uses of the Prince, State, Customs.
or people of the country, vnwritte^ for the most part, that do prescribe, or
stand in force as laws, chiefly if they be good and profitable for the
Commonweal; whereof there are three ^^nkes, that Trauailers must consider them
in: General, Particular, General Particular, Regal.
and Regal. By the General Customs are meant the ancient use and ordering of
all things according to the ancient nature thereof. Of which let Trauailers
first note their alterations. These may be discerned in the giving of Laws: in
ensample whereof, we have, at this day, a more exact and full order of the
three states, concerning form, than in former times. Secondly, in the Princes
private State and household: Lastly, in Religion, in diet, in apparel, and in
the external order of things and persons. In all which Customs, most
Commonweals differ. Whereof we will ensample only, to our Trauailer, the
Princes private estate and household which we call the Court. Wherein what
ordinary attendants and dependants, and what ceremonies, orders, and customs
are appertaining to the person of the Prince, or to the place it self
wheresoever the Court shall be, or to the Nobility, are the rather to be learned
of Trauailers, that they may not be ignorant of the proper carriage of every
Court, to inform themselves of behavior. In Tartarie this custom is used,
that no stranger of what quality or degree soever, dare put himself in the
Kings presence, to negotiate with him, before he has been purged with their
fire. Neither is it permitted to any stranger, to set his foot on the
threshold of the Cams lodging, or where any of his Princes or Lieutenants
dwell, on pain of death. And in our civil States we see, no forreiner dare
present himself to the presence of the Prince, but by permission, or in
special cases, and at special times. Hence moreover arises our great respect
to our Princes, in honoring and saluting them; whereas the French are little
uncovered, and nothing so respective. Some country people do kneel in the
presence of their Prince, others gaze in their faces only: others cast down
their heads and looks; and some (as the inhabitants of Baccalaos, or of the
new Land fish) have a custom when they reverence their King, in his presence
to rub their noses, and stroking their forehead with their hand unto the neck;
the which the King accepts as an honest and due office and service, turning
his head eftsoons, to his left shoulder, which is a note of singular favor,
and gratefulness of the King to honor his Subject. The which customs, or the
like, though they be strange and not regular, yet do they become well enough
the bounds of every nation. In like sort, the customary phrase of writing and
speaking, of action, of body, of reuerencing, and such such like, are so to be
pondered of Trauailers that they introduce not them into their own Country,
unless those customs be of a more civil carriage, then such as their
Country uses. For, that is a foul and irregular trick of common Trauailers,
to innouate new fangles of fashions in their Country, when they return,
though they judge the^ to be of better esteem. This is a common stain, and
delight of Islands. But as it is a shame for civil States to be variable in the
custom of diversity of fashions, wondering at the customs of other less
civil graces and behauiours, so as needs those must be put in practice by
them; so a Trauailer that innouateth foreign peculiar customs of other Courts
in his Country, where either more civil, or as good are used, swarueth from
the guise of completenesse in Trauailers requirable.

The Particular Customs concern the members of the State, Particular Customs.
as Countries, Dukedomes, Principalities, Counties, Seigniories, Domaines,
Cities, Towns, Corporations, Castles, Cittadels, Fortes, and such like: which
require also in regard of their excellency to be looked into, so far forth
as by discourse and discreet ways may be of Trauailers followed after. The
third and last Customs are Regal, which properly are the maiesticke
prerogative of the Country, Regal
of the Prince, and Nobility, as well within their precinct as in and under the
jurisdiction of another power. Whereof first let it be regarded, what
preeminence the Country claims to have, in and over other Countries not
tributary or subject to the same. Secondly, as concerning the Prince, let it be
noted what titles, of Custom, he is invested with: as the French King to be
the most Christian King, which in those days was well arrogated from other
nations: As the King of Spain to be called, the most Catholic King; which
title in those days was proper to him (I speak as a Romist) for he was
Maximus bellator and professor Romanae Catholicae ecclesiae: And as our
Sovereign King of Great Britain, by like custom now, and with better title,
may most rightfully challenge to be the greatest and sincerest Defender of the
faith of Christ through the world; even so was it a title in those days when it
was reassumed and acknowledged of his Ancestor of proper attribution (though
the Pope had another sly and slouenly meaning and fetch of policy, Quia
scripsit contra Lutheru^.
in the bequest). For, within a little after, that most undaunted King Henry the
eight (whom for perpetual honor sake I thought good to name) by the good
pleasure of God, became the only stout Defender of the faith of Christ
singularly, in shaking off the Popes supremacy, and withstanding his
displeasure. Whereunto also let a Trauailer learn, what place, of Custom, the
Prince has amongst other Princes: and how far the souereigntie of Princes
stretches, and of States. The which souereignty is discernable in four
points: The first is to have power absolute to give laws to al in general and
in particular, without controlment; as Privileges, Liberties, Franchisedomes,
The four marks of Souereigntie.
Honors, and such like regalities to places or persons. The second note of
Souereigntie is to decree war or peace, or to enter into treaties concerning
them. The third is to institute and ordain principal officers. The fourth is
to have the last Appeal, which is one of the true marks of Souereigntie,
under which depends the power to grant pardon to the condemned by course of
law in favor to redress the rigor of the law, and formal proceedings of
Magistrates, whether concerning life, goods, honor, banishment or liberty. In
all which, Trauailers shall find in most States great defect; in few, all
absolutely. For concerning the first, what honorable Prince (not naming the
Pope, the Turk, the Tartarian, and such like tyrants) of himself, without
associates, decrees laws? And not without good cause: for it notes justice,
and desire to govern aright, knitting the Subjects to their Prince.
Nevertheless, we see that in former times the Princes of this Land, and of
France, as of other States, did constitute of themselves many good laws in
force at this day. So touching the second, there be some States that by custom
and willingness to complease their subjects, will seldom make war, or
entertain peace, without private consent of their Council, or general debating
of the Parliament. Likewise of the third there is amongst States and
gouernements, a great diversity, in the instituting and ratifying of
principal officers: which custom has been brought from the Prince or State
no doubt, for the show of the Commonweals good; so the same be not
transported to foreign States, as the Pope arrogateth in Ecclesiastical
promotions. And touching the last point we see also how great Princes are
stripped of their Souereignty, reigntie, by the Pope in matters of appeal, of
giving pardons and such like regalities to subjects, and great offenders
against their Prince and country. Thus in these let Trauailers every where
make observation how of custom either the States do hold their Souereigntie,
or how by like Custom they have abbridged or lost their marks of
absoluteness. Lastly, let it be considered of the customs and prerogatives of
the Nobility of a nation; the chief whereof rests in their superiority and
pre-eminence in sitting, Customs of the Nobility,
going, talking, eating, washing, subscribing, arrogating peculiar phrases, and
order of style in writing, and such like. All which are to be considered by
times, places, and persons, that thus and by a customarie duty and respect
honor each other. Wherein if Trauailers will be very judicial, they had need
to be good heralds and studious in the customarie law and discipline of Arms
of that nation. Hitherto concerning the laws and customs of a nation, so
briefly as we could, to the inexpert in the affairs of the country. The fifth
point of knowledge now offers it self, which is concerning the government of
the country.

5 The Government has a twofold managing thereof: The fifth point of knowledge*
Concerning the gouerme^t.
the one exterior and discernable, the other interior, secret and private
only, in a wise State, to the Counsel thereof, or only lodged in the breast
of the Prince, which to a wise Prince is a high point of politic government.
Of this interior we will give Trauailers a secret taste in the last part,
namely, in the Secrets. For, the object of a Trauailer is properly the public
and revealed government. In this Government three things concur. First, Three
things remarkable in the government
the persons governing; secondly, the people governed; lastly, the common and
special policy, or instruments, that subsist for the establishing of a common
good toward all men; by the virtue whereof, life, health, peace, prosperity
and happiness without interruption is conveyed unto the body politic: Whereas
the defect and vicious ordering of things, soon corrodeth, or puts the same
into a consumptio^ irreuocable. 1. The persons governing.
Concerning the persons governing, we object to Trauailers a triple
consideration according to the threefold diversity of Co^mon-weales. For, by
the persons governing we mean also those simple variable three forms of
government, Three forms of government.
namely, the Monarchial: which is when the Sovereignty and supreme authority,
without controlment, rests in one person or Prince, as in our King of Great
Britain. The Aristocraticall is when as the lesser part of the people, or of
the Nobility have the Souereigntie in body, giving laws to the rest of people
in general and particular, as the Seigniorie of Venice, and the State of the
united Provinces in the Low Countries. And the Democraticall or popular
Estate: which is when as the whole people, or greater part thereof in body,
has the Sovereign authority. Which had need to be well considered of
Trauailers, by so much the more as they see great learned men confounded or
deceived in the judgments of them. For, neither the qualities of persons can
change the nature or number of them; nor can there be any mixed State of form
and continuance, but either by Grant, Permission, Communication, Association,
or Assignation of the Sovereign power, to the members subject. But lest
Trauailers might be misseled by the opinions of others, let them observe
diligently, in what persons and in which of these, those four marks of
Souereigntie (before spoken of in the Customs of the Country) do reign;
which here for brevity I omit, especially the ordering of officers, the
decreeing of peace and war, and taking of Appeals. But for the publishing of
laws, the most civil States for the better security of them, and content of
the people are ever assisted in Monarchies with the three Estates. And in some
States also for the better dispatch of things, many of the other three marks
are committed, but yet restrictiuely, and under controulement. Wherefore let
Trauailers consider now these things aright, and prove the censures of other
men, by those marks of Souereigntie which inuest the forms with supreme
power. Moreover, in the second place let Trauailers note, what principal
officers are in the commitment ordained to help the motion and government of
the helm of the State. And lastly, how far their several offices do
extend. For the better insight into which, there may be gathered a triple
consideration of officers, namely; first, such as stand by ancient right and
Custom, as those which we call Officers at the Common Law: Secondly, such as
have their authority by Commission, and that from the prerogatives of the
Prince or State Sovereign: Lastly, such as are ordained by the positive laws
of the land to undergo any business for the good of the Commonweal. Finally,
let Trauailers be careful to observe the manner and order of making and
publishing of laws there used; the course of entertaining wars; the
ordinary policy used in time of peace, concerning preparation for wars
defensive and offensive; the common course of proceeding in justice and
judgment, the places, and times, and ministers; the fashion of punishing and
rewarding of all sorts of people acording to their deserts, and such like
appurtenances and appendices of the government. Let these suffice for the
persons governing.

The People governed, we cast into six moulds, 2. The governed.
namely into that of Husbandmen, of Handicrafts men, and Laborers; of
Merchants, of the Nobility and Gentry, of stipendarie Soldiers, and of
Ecclesiastical persons. As touching the three first of these, the laws of
most States will discover how they be governed. But as concerning the
Nobility and Ecclesiastical persons, they assume in most States much
liberty: Of whom let it be sufficient for our Trauailer to note, how they
live and what they are inclined unto.

And as concerning Stipendarie Soldiers (if the State afford any) let it be
considered, how they are disciplined, and by whom, their number, their
privileges, and lastly their entertainment.

Now, 3. The policy or Instruments
the last point to be considered in the government concerns the common and
special policy or instruments, whereby the governors convey nourishment unto
the governed to uphold the common health of the State, The means how to
discern the policy.
or to pluck the same upon the knees. These special policies or instruments
may be surueyed of Trauailers in three things.

First, in the goodness or illness of the Countries laws, and customs.
Secondly, in the accidents that move the sovereign Power, for the present
standing of things, to co^stitute and decree timely, and broche such policies
as may encounter cure and remove any disease, surfaite or distemperature
grown, or growing in the body politic, till by a law those inconveniences
may be prevented. The contrary will chance where such defect reigns.
Lastly, in the due execution of such laws as are enacted and in force: the
which unite or disioyne the body, most firmly, or in piecemeales; so as there
cannot but arise from the one a sweet and tuneable harmony of government, and
from the other all iarres and discordes: the which shall minister to Trauailers
plenty of matter to plot policies upon. Thus much of the policies.

The sixth and last point of knowledge now remains: The sixth point of
knowledge, concerning the secrets.
which is of the Secrets of the State where men travail; The singular point
that ennobleth a Trauailer above the home-politician and the foundatio^s of
momentall policies.

The Secrets are those things which are neither noted nor learned of the vulgar
sort of people: they are notwithstanding common and accidental, the which do
often change one into another. The Common Secrets The Common secrets of two
sorts.
rest in two points in the intelligence of such as are foreign friends,
newters or enemies to the Country wherein one trauaileth: And in the knowledge
of the ordinary strength of the State of the Country in which men travail.
The first of these considers friends, 1. Foreign.
newters, and enemies: Out of which though there be several secrets to be
extracted, yet we will for brevity give our Trauailer a release of them in the
discovery of friends; since the rest may either e diuerso or conuer so be
displaied. A consideration of friends to an estate.
Of friends therefore in this kind, namely political, there is a triple regard.
First, by blood and neerenesse of kin: Secondly, by religion and profession
of one and the same faith; Lastly, by mere political conjunction of
friendship, confedracie, alliance and league, to settle and secure etc. each
others State in peace, and safety. Now, since all these friends in matters of
State are ever nearest to themselves, running the straightest course for the
good of their own estates, few can be found so honest and firm as their
friendships are never disioynable. Howbeit we might see a rare example twixt
France and Scotland, in times past. And though Religion be the streightest
conioyner of States: yet when Ambition or covetousness or self-love invade a
body politic, sildome the friendship of such continue longer then they will
aid and cherish those greedy appetites; Envy and fear of overmuch greatness
making the one an hypocrite to hunt with the hounde, and run with the hare,
according to the proverb. From the political conjunction of friendship, Two
sorts of friends political.
we gather two sorts of friends to every State: namely the pleasurable, who
for commodities and merchandise are chiefly retained for friends, to enrich
their States in times of peace and accommodate them with things needful
mutually. Hence we behold the lawfulness of Christian States to traffic with
Pagans and Infidels.

For, contractes of peace and intercourse of commodities may be between any
Nations, since the partition wall is broken down; it being a rule of charity
for one State now to entertain and relieve another, with such commodities as
the one either stands in need of, or excels the other in. Nevertheless,
in leagues, alliances and confederacies, for war, it stands otherwise twixt
Christian and Pagan Princes. That other sort of friends are the profitable, who
for the political defense and offense are collegued and allianced or
co^federated with, either to be relieved for injury and wrong received, or to
be defended against oppression and violence, or in policy only for fear of
sensiblenesse and fear of the worst. Moreover, it is not sufficient for a
Trauailer to note thus, who be pleasurable and profitable friends to that
Country wherein he trauaileth, but to weighe also by all means the power and
strength or weakness of those friends, The strength of friends,
Newters or enemies, to that Country. The which may be discovered to our
Trauailer in four points. As first in the populousness of them, or defect of
people, and in the well disciplining of them; or sufferance to live ad libitum,
and without any Martial government. For, from hence arises one maine secreat
to our Trauailer, That those Countries so strengthened may be presumed upon for
great friends: and contrariwise. So the second rests in the near
neighborhood or fitness of such friends to impeach an enemy.

The third may be noted in the commodities of those friends to aid and
succor that State in cases of necessity, with victual, munition, Arms,
horses, shipping and money; which are the arteries, veins, sinews and muscles
of bodies politic, in foreign troubles. Of which this secret rises; That
such friends so well furnished must evermore be well and euenly dealt with:
considering they are dangerous enemies or neuters; the rather in regard,
before a State can be sensible of their enimitie, they can suddenly offend.
Nevertheless, let Trauailers in this point consider what care those States
take, to retain from traffic, munition offensive: For it is a weakness and
danger to tolerate the traffic of munition offensive, to friend or neurer,
the which in time may beard ones self, and speak terror in the ears of the
first owners. The fourth and last concerning the strength of friends
remains: that Trauailers pry into the revolution of those States in three
things: as, in the Religion of those States; in their Warlikenesse; and in
their Freedom. Religious friends.
Of these briefly. And first let us treat of their religion; whether those
friends hold the same religion that the State whereof they are friends does, or
whether of a contrary profession; the one yielding ever a more steady love,
than the other. And in case of contrary religion, such friends are soon lost,
and soon press a people to be mortal enemies. From whence flow infinite
secrets of this kind, familiar to good Statesmen.

Touching the warlikenesse of friends, that may be considered either in their
good discipline at home, Warlike friends,
or the employment of their people abroad in foreign wars. Out of which let
a Trauailer note this secret, that such are strong friends and to be put in
trust: whereas those States that be so exceedingly desirous of peace, that
they neglect the ordinary discipline of war, are either weak and impotent
friends, or unsteady and wavering. Moreover, from whence an other maine secret
arises: that populous and rich States, which choose rather to yield to
servitude, by paying tribute, taxes and other intolerable burdens, then to
defend their liberties (unless in special cases) are neither trusty friends,
nor great enemies, to be feared. For, that State which prefers not his own
liberty, cannot be sensible of another, in such sort as is requireable.

Lastly, concerning the freedom of friends, there is a diverse standing:
namely, Freedom of friends.
from misery, and from subjection. Of freedom from misery we see most States
of Europe at this day, unless where usurpers or tyrants rule, and dominiere.
Of freedom from subjection there is a proper and improper constitution. Those
States are properly free, whose policy hangs not upon any foreign power,
acknowledging no other superior than God, either in Temporal or
Ecclesiastical matters; nor that are tributary, or homagial to any foreign
State. Such at this day is England, Moscouy, Turkey, Persia, and Tartaria, and
that of Prester Iean, who of the rest vanteth, that his Nation was never
conquered; or acknowledged any other foreign Prince. Those that improperly are
free, are such States as either acknowledge other superior, or equal Lord or
Lords, in Ecclesiastical or Temporal matters, than God, and their political
Lord or Lords, or are tributary or homagiall in any respect to foreign powers.
Such in the first sense at this day are France, Spain, the Empire, Italy,
Denmark, and all those States that hold of the Pope or Emperor. So, such of
the second clause are those States through the world, that pay and yield a
certain tax, homage, or tribute, for acknowledging and respecting their
subjection. Hence it may be inferred, that those friends can do a State
little profit, that are in distress themselves, as engaged with intestine, and
civil distemperatures; or afflicted by an equal or greater enemy, as jealous
of some great and imminent danger themselves: or that be not well disciplined,
or not at liberty to dispose of themselves without those States to whom they
are subject: or in case any of their possessions be in question, as belonging
to an other equal or greater Power. All which, in a word, may Trauailers
confirm to themselves, in those States over which the Pope has any stroke;
who arrogating a power to disioyne the members from the head, and to set the
Subjects against their Prince, can also make debate twixt Prince and Prince,
State and State. Thus much of the first point of foreign friends, etc. to the
Country, into which men travail.

Now touching the second, 2. The State at home discernable in four points.
which we named, to consist in the knowledge of the ordinary strength of the
State of the Country in which men travail, 1, Sufficiency of people.
there are 4 things co^siderable; the Sufficie^cie of the people; Store of
commodities, 2, Store of commodities.
not only to nourish the people within the land, but to make and procure
friendship in special cases; plenty of Munition, either offensive or
defensive; and the fullness of Treasure, 3, Munition plenty.
Revenue, and Domaine. 4, The Treasury,
Of these four we have handled the three former thorowout our Treatise,
sufficiently for a Trauailer. But the fourth, that is to say, the Domaine or
Treasure, we had need to touch a little. First, let it be considered
therefore, that in Monarchies there is a private and a public revenue and
treasure: the public Private and public.
being dispended for the good of the Commonweal; whereas the private
patrimony of Princes are dispendable on their necessities private: yet these
are often confounded. But the first that chances to the consideration of
Trauailers, is to note what sum those jointly or severally do amount unto.
Whereby they shall be able to discern the riches and poverty of States,
computatis computandis. This maine secret brocheth three considerations; First,
how and on what the sum is gathered: secondly, how that is disposed: thirdly
whether there be not always a reservation of treasure, for the sudden and
needful use of those States.

Touching the first of these, Seven means whereby treasures are gathered. 1.
Revenue.
we observe from politicians seven ways that amasse public treasure and
reuenew, honorably. First, by revenue which we term here in England the
profits of the Crown Lands, of Wards, Marriages, of Reliefs, of Eschetes, of
Fines, of Forfeitures, of Amerceme^ts, of Jurisdictions ordinary as
extraordinary, 2. Conquest.
and such like. Secondly, by conquest upon the enemy. Thirdly, 3. Gifts.
by gifts of friends and well wishers to the State and Crown. 4. Tribute.
Fourthly by pension and tribute of subjected States and Allies. Fifthly, 5.
Traffic.
by traffic: the which to some States is very gainefull. Sixthly, 6.
Merchandise
by Merchandise and trade of strangers or subjects, from whence arises the
Impostes and Customs upon every commodity brought in or carried out of States.
7. Taxations.
Lastly, in case of necessity the seventh may be added: whereof in some driven
States there is ordinary and extraordinary (as for casual they be included
in the former). Ordinary and extraordinary.
The ordinary are such as we call Subsides, Lones, Tenths, Fifteenths,
stipends, and asseasments for Soldiers pressed. The extraordinary, are taxes,
tallages, gabels, and beneuolences, either imposed upon particulars, or in
special cases upon the most in general. Out of all which let Trauailers note,
what and how much of either and in what order the same are rated, leauied and
assembled into the treasury. From whence they may collect this and such like
secrets, That unlawful and great impositions and taxes in a free State do often
cause a heart-burning of the Commons, and opens the passage of sedition,
unless in especial cases, in which there ought to be a public ouerture for
the same as for the expense.

Moreover, that may not be ouerslipped, Whether the the Princes or States where
men travail, are enforced upon important accidents to take up money by
imprestes and borrowinges, or by mortgages or at interest. For, as amongst
private persons, so in public States more suddenly there grows a great
defect, and bankeruptnesse, which is subject to dangers.

Now, as touching the maine secret of employing the treasure and reuenewe of
the State in the second place we find six honorable causes to dispend the
same (out of which a Trauailer may cull several secrets: as the good and
orderly government, 6, Causes to exhaust treasures.
or contrariwise, of the Prince or State, his or their virtues or vices etc.)
namely Almeshouses and public relief and provision for the poor of the
Realm; 1. Almeshouses.
whereby is discovered a religious and charitable care of such as stand in
need.

Secondly, 2. Housekeeping.
upon the honorable and necessary support of the household and public Court
of the Prince or State: which, being well husbanded, argues majesty, bounty
and wisdom.

Thirdly, 3. Reparations and buildings needful.
upon reparations and edifications of fortifications and buildings; of building
ships and shipping, and such like public matters of the State, which deserves
a public and peculiar regard of subjects and State, and takes away the hatred
of taxes and impositions by rendering the same back again to the hands of
particulars and States good, whereby profit, honor and security arises.

Fourthly, 4. Due payments.
upon the due payment of Soldiers and men of Martial affairs; the which
argues discretion and high care to encounter infinite occasions of evils,
both growing in the Commanders as common soldiers, whereof a prying care must
be had.

Fifthly, 5. Gifts to strangers and offisers.
upon strangers, as Ambassadors and such of foreign Nobility as are thereby
retained in love and office to be tenderers of the honor and weal of those
States, of visiting Princes, and also upon Officers and men of good deserte
within the State. Lastly, 6. Donatiues politic.
upon the policy of the State it self, for retaining of friends or procuring
the^ by donatiues politic, and lendinges: out of which arise many secreates,
according to the several motions or actions of a Prince or State in virtuous
or vicious dispending the same.

The last point of this common secreat, is to note what ordinary and
extraordinary treasure is evermore reserved in the State. And as it is a
dangerous thing in times of war and troubles to undertake business upon
borrowings or usury, unless in special cases; so also it is perilous to
assemble a greater treasure, then is meet: for that causes subjects often to
murmur if the same come from them, or inuiteth other States to pick quarrelles
to be nibbling therewith. Lastly, whether there be such niggardliness of the
Prince seeking to spare treasure, as he diminish much the dignity of his
household and also the Majesty of his person.

Whereof we read, that King Lewis the Eleventh of France (whom Philip de
Comines so much extolleth) so far diminished his household as he forbad his
Nobles to follow him in Court (at the least at their own charges) as that he
was feign to employ his Tailor for his Heralde at Arms, his Barbar for an
Ambassador, and his Physician for Chauncellor. And for his person, he was so
respectlesse, as he continually ware an old course cloth Cappe, and leaving a
record for buying a pair of mean sleeves to an old plain doublet of his.
And also in his accomptes was observed to pay xv. pence for so much dripping to
grease his boots. Thus much concerning the common Secreats. Quaere tamen si
sit frugalitatis causa, and propter Reip. bonum.

The Accidental follow; which are such as chance daiely in or without a State,
Secrets Accidental,
and that so diuersely as that we can but give an assaie or taste of the^ to
Trauailers in this treatise. For, every action of the State wherein one
trauaileth, or of other foreign States unfold secreates and are meet
materialles to divine of future things* which now in the interim is to be
required of Trauailers. Where those secrets may be discerned.
Those accidental secrets are to be sought in three things: namely, in the
persons governing; in the persons governed: and in the instruments. From the
persons governing I observe these points; First, 1. Negotiatio^s and Contracts.
what be the negotiations and contractes the State or Prince offers and
makes with other States from time to time: the which although they seem hard
to come by, yet discreet carriage and liberality will purchase them. Secondly,
2. Su^cessi^n by election and by inheritance.
what order every principality has in the succession of their governor,
whether by election or by inheritance. The first ordaining of a Prince by
election was good, to avoid all such wants and imperfections, as reign
ordinarily in Princes hereditarie: yet such corruption inuadeth this age, that
sildome sovereign Princes will constitute their vicegerent, or elect Prince of
an other State, a man popular, or that is wiser then themselves. And sildome
will subjects, that are few in number to make election, elect men of more
spirit, wisdom and worthiness then themselves, unless in special cases:
whereof the College of the Cardinals and the Electors of the Emperor find ease
and profitte. Those Countries that are by succession of inheritance, are
likewise of two sorts, general and special. Moreover, under this maine
secret, depends the insight into the Laws concerning the disposing of the
Crown; and the Wills, testaments and devises that are made by Princes, to
bequeath the same, so far forth as they in right may be stretched.

Thirdly, Heirs apparent, and infants of the State.
concerning States that go by inheritance, let it be considered who be the next
apparent heirs to the State, either by the law of the Country, or the law of
Nature, or other pretenses. Under which also let it be noted, how, where, and
after what order those infants are brought up, and what hope there is of them.
Fourthly, A due consideration of the person of the Prince that rules.
what wisdom and discretion the Prince is of: whether he be wise enough to
discern the advice of his Council, subtle enough to perceive whether his
Council plot more for their own particulars then for the public good and
honor of their Sovereign: or whether he rule not all things at his will
without consult of his Council: what spirit he is of, how studious to war
and peace: what care and order the Prince takes to see good justice done to
every one; and so of all other virtues that crown Princes with honor, and
establish their government: the like arise of the Magistrates. But the
contrary must be gathered from the imperfections and vices of the Prince and
Magistrates, mutatis mutandis. Lastly, what choice of persons the Prince has
about him for favorites, and whether he carries an even hand amongst them.
By which secrette the inclination of the PRINCE and his ability and weakness
may be concluded.

Concerning the persons governed, The consideration of the people governed in
six points.
our assaie rests in six Considerations; First, whether the people be given
to much liberty and so suffered to continue, as in the State of Venice and
through Italy: Secondly, how they stand affected to their Prince and
government. Thirdly, whether the Commons suppose not they see much into
government, and think themselves wiser then the Council of State: the which is
dangerous, whether the same be derived from presumption of Nature, or from the
inspectio^ the people have into the governors carriage converting all things to
private commodity.

Fourthly, how the people stand affected in rumors of war, and like
accidents. Fifthly, who are the persons in greatest favor and estimation amongst
the people, besides the Prince.

Lastly, whether the Nobility contemn not the Commons and Citizens, and
whether the Commons hate and envy not the Nobles in outward show; the which
breeds a great thirst after alteration, either of religion or of policy: the
one springing from zeal, the other from malcontednesse and factiousnesse.

The Instruments follow, The instrume^tall secrets observed in eight points.
which likewise be the subjects of many secrets and may be included under eight
heads, namely, under Dearth of the commodities of the land* Secondly, 1, Dearth.
under Mortality of men, and the heavy hand of God on the people. Thirdly, 2
Mortality.
under the Loss of shipping, 3, Lostes.
of Munition and Dominions. Fourthly, 4. Defect of Justice.
under the Want of Justice and good discipline. Fifthly, 5. Riot and expenses.
under the extraordinary cause of Expense, or the lauishe spending of the
treasure. Sixthly, 6, Impositions.
under the strange Impositions and exactions on subjects. Seauenthly, 7, The
good or evil of the State.
under the apprehension of that which most impouerisheth or enricheth a State:
Lastly, 8, Weakness of the State.
under the knowledge of such Weak places upon the borders and confines and
costs of the Country, as also within the Land; wherein I would advise
Trauailers to be very studious: for so much as this point only is of great
moment to be well sought into. Out of which there arise contrary secreates,
mutatis mutandis: Whereof, Trauailers cannot be ignorant, being so common and
familiar. Finally, about these or any other, let not Trauailers omit, to
procure with their purse, what by discretion, observation, and friends, cannot
be attained unto. Thus much concerning those six points of general
knowledge, that accomplish the peregrination of men, and make them complete in
knowledge of things.

It now remains to handle briefly, the behavior of our Trauailer when he
shall return home, to live afterward well contented and happily: the which we
see few do. But before we can observe the offices he must under go, when he
comes home; there are certain points, of him to be performed before, to fit
himself against his return, if so be he expect special grace and preferme^t
afterward: which, being an honorable color and spur of virtue, may neither
be neglected of Trauailers nor indecided of us. These rest chiefly in two
points. First, Their discretion upon returning
in aduertising, from time to time by Letters during their travail, some one
of the privy Council, and none other of the Country to which they belong, of
such occurrences and things as chance worthy to be sent and committed to
consultation and view.

Wherein, let Trauailers be provident to whom they give advertisement: For,
otherwise their labor may be lost, or crossed with ingratitude and
unthankfulness. Neither, is it necessary that such a Councellor should take
knowledge of them before their Travail: for this action will be get
acquaintance, and tie that Councellor afterward to yield such an one due
respect. Neither is it convenient for Trauailers to advertise any other
whatsoever of those matters they send to a Councellor, nor to advertise many
Counselors of things: the one arguing lightness, the other hazardeth the
respect of those Counselors: unless it be apparent, that the Trauailer is
many ways tied to those Counselors, in their own knowledge. Wherein also,
having occasion to write of diverse matters, let him divide those matters
amongst them with discretion. Moreover, let our Trauailer take heed to
advertise an untruth for certainty: but as touching reports and rumors, let
him handle them discreetly; and touching diuinings, probabilities and
consequences, let the^ be sparingly or not at all set down to Councellers
whose wisdom ought to have the reference and collection of them. But unto
other persons and friends they are sensible and plausible enough. Lastly, in
the sending and dispatching of such letters to Councellers, wherein are
supposed to be importances, let our Trauailer be very circumspect: for it
were better for him not to write at all, then by writing either to hazard
himself or bewraie imperfections. And therefore let him take heed to advertise
any thing that is treasonable, or offensive to the State in which he remains:
Unless such light upon good and sound Messengers, Note.
or unless it concern the life and safety of his Prince and Country:
wherein only he ought to hazard his life: especially if his Prince have no
Ambassador in that State at the present.

Hence springs that second office to be performed of our Trauailer, That
he make often repair to the Ambassador of his Prince (in case there remain
any there) aduertising him of such importances as shall chance unto him in
that Country, where he abides with the Ambassador, before he commit the
same in writing to any Counceller at home: For that seems to derogate from the
Ambassador (from whom all importances are expected besides negotiations) and
argues no good carriage of such a Trauailer, unless in special cases;
namely, where the cause urges haste to give advertisement, which by distance
from the Ambassador can not so competently be dispatched, if the same should
be first given unto him; and where the Ambassador is no friend of that
Trauailer. For it is the office of every Subject thus travailing, whether he
go out of the Land, with his Princes Ambassador, or be in travail before, or
travail afterward, to give attendance on his Princes Ambassador, especially
going to the Court. For that is an honor to his Nation and Prince, and a point
of civility belonging to the person of an Ambassador; that equalleth, during
his legation, any Subject in the world, if so such an one be resident, or
near his person. Of which humanity an Ambassador cannot be insensible, no
more than the Councellor written unto, but is tied to have his discretion and
wisdom in recommendation: which often turns to the good of Trauailers, when
they return home to their Country.

Thus having brought home our Trauailer, Six points to be perpended of
Trauailers being returned.
there rest only six offices to be under gone of him, whereby he shall reap
contentment, honor, and estimation. The first is, that he manifest unto all
men his vncorrupt and unspotted Religion, 1. Manifestation of sound Religion.
and zeal therein; Not only in the due and orderly going to Church, and
serving of God, but making expression thereof by the fruits of all virtues,
demeanours, and actions, and that singularly in six habilities and virtues:
namely, Silence; which uses few words, but fitly, and to purpose.
Incuriositie; which banisheth all affectations, and apish tricks, and fashions
of other nations, that are not more estimable then those of ones own Countries
Customs and uses. Spirit; which shall free them from reproach, quarrels, and
putting up of dishonorable injuries; making him equally sensible with the
Italianated Duellist, but far more judicial to take just acception, and make
risentiment. Prudence, which being a discreet Councellor, shall direct all his
words and actions according to reason, and to their proper ends. Bounty, which
strippeth him of covetousness: which in Trauailers is hateful, and rellisheth
of dishonesty. Lastly, Faithfulness, and sociablenesse; which shall enable him
for all companies, to be both honestly thought of and regarded: the which is
free from offering wrong, from Lust and Sensuality, that dissolve love and
society. 2. Honesty before policy.
The second office is, that he prefer not policy before honesty, or equal
with it, either in matters affecting Honor, Wealth, or Revenge; whereof the
Conscience must be a director and a Counselor. 3, To be known by virtuous
endeavors.
The third is, that he make himself known to the Prince and Council, by
commendable means only, in whose hands rest preferment, and are to be supposed
to esteem men according to their worth and merit. 4, To be stored of a worthy
friend.
The fourth is in the choice such an one must make, to procure him an honorable
friend, as is able to have him in reco^mendation to his Prince: such an one as
is not of a covetous mind, but loves virtue, and that has credence with the
Prince, and that is magnanimous, and more feared for his vprightnes, tha^ hated
for his policy according to Machiauel. Fifthly, 5, Constancy without ambition.
being thus known unto the Council, that he covet not special favor, after the
guise of a sycopha^t, or after an ambitious manner of any other persons; but
that he make show of a constant and an understanding Gentlemen. Moreover,
though it be requisite, to be thus generally known of all: yet let such take
heed, to intrude into the friendship of any, but with great respect, and for
good cause: using modesty and sparingnesse evermore in revealing of any thing
observed in travail, unless upon demands, and in urgent causes; and seldom
any thing of a strange and incredible nature, but to familiars, and in private.
Lastly, in our sixth point, let our Trauailer from time to time procure of other
Trauailers, Merchants, and others, 6, Diligence and travailing at home for
aduertisments.
such things as they have observed (for it is a thing impossible for one man to
observe all things fully in a small time, required in travailing to be known,
as we have considered in the six general points of knowledge) comparing them
with his own; as with such books as happily have discoursed of them. Finally,
let him plot to have daily intelligence (if so be he live from the Court
retired) of every accident foreign and domesticke in the Court, Land, and
City: by the which the observations made in travail, shall be kept in
continual tilthe; and being well husbanded, shall occasion, at the least,
sweet contentment (the only pleasure in the world, which no worldling can
obtain) if not advancement in the State to do more good than private persons
in the Church and Commonweal, which is the godly and proper end of our
travail and pilgrimage here on earth, that thereby God may be singularly
glorified, the Prince served, the Commonweal and Church benefited, and our
selves prepared for a greater happiness, then can be represented in any
contentment in this life. The which I heartily wish to be respected of all that
intend travail, and to all, in all perfection.

FINIS.

