A FAITHFVLL ADMONITION OF THE PALTSGRAVES Churches, to all other Protestant
Churches in Dutchland.

THAT THEY WOULD CONSIder the great danger that hangs over their heads as
well as ours by the Popedom, and therefore Christianly and brotherly cease the
private unnecessary and now too much grown strife with us.

TOGETHER WITH A SHORT ABSTRACT of the warning about the Jesuits bloodthirsty
plots published in print at Tubing.

Published by Authority.

According to the Original Printed in the Electors Palsgraues Country at
Nustadt upon the Hardt,

Englished by JOHN ROLTE.

Imprinted at London by Edward Griffin for George Gibbes, and are to be sold
at his shop in Poules-church-yard at the sign of the Flowerdeluce. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE OLIVER Lord St. John, Baron of Bletso, his Majesty's
Lieutenant of the County of Huntington the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
hereafter the Crown of glory.
ABRAHAM the Prophet and root of true nobility (Right Honorable) hasted to
perform duties of love even to strangers, and noble Nehemias stayed not
until his poor brethren spoke to him, but with Moses had his affections
amongst Gods afflicted ones abroad, though they themselves abounded in earthly
comforts. Wherefore I make no doubt of your Honors favorable acceptance of
these my small endeavors; not for my labors being of no worth, neither my
person also of no respect, but of your honors godly disposition, thereby the
better to see how it stands with the people of God elsewhere. The present is
small, and also plain, being served in so homelily in an earthen dishe. With
which presumption of mine, I trust your honor will bear, I being neither
Prophet, nor a Prophets son; but a heardman, and gatherer of wild figs, and
lighting yet (in my living abroad) on this small bunch of Rhenish grapes, which
(though it be not that goodly one, brought out of that land, manifestly
notifying the fruitfulness thereof; to wit, the renowned Prince Frederike his
Catechism, used in all the Churches and schools of his Excellency, and also
all the Netherlands reformed Churches) yet is it of the same grouth, and both
watered and warmed ripe by the Spirit and Son of God from heaven, as well
appears herein by their co^stancy to the truth of God, manifested to them out
of his holy word, by their meekness toward their brethren who yet are too
unnatural to them, and also by their vigilancie to prevent the subtle
stratagems of the arch-enemy of Jesus Christ, intended against them, and the
rest of the Churches of God. And therefore if your honor be pleased to suffer
it, only to be set at the lower end of your table, though under the covert of
some of your goodlier services, I make no doubt but others will thereby be
encouraged the rather to taste thereof, and so find it as wholesome for their
souls, as they have done in Germany. (I assuring my self that no sound body
can take any hurt thereby.) Which I only aiming at, and praying for; desire the
Lord of light, to increase your days in honor, to the further comfort of his
Majesty's subjects in this part of the land, and after you to make your sons
like unto the son of Barzillai to stand before our David, and to follow your
steps, as well in inward as outward graces, to the glory of God, and further
comfort of his servants.

Your honors most humble at command JOHN ROLTE.

Epistle to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, and beloved in the Lord, amongst many frivolous and
slanderous imputations which our adversaries the Papists lay upon our Religion,
this is none of the meanest, nor vnusuallest, that we cannot be the true
Church, which is as a City at unity in it self, because of the manifould
dissentions and divisions which are nourished amongst us, for they thus cast in
our teeth, that the Doctrine of Luther was no sooner bred, and borne, but it
divided it self like a Hidra into many heads: Lutherans, Caluinists,
Anabaptists, Libertines, Swelckfeldians, Arians, etc. which to be a mere
calumniation of theirs, devised as many other things else by them to the
discredit of our religion, may appeate by many reasons, three or four whereof
I will only propound to thy indifferent censure in this short Epistle. First
therefore their calumny does appear in that diverse of those sects which are
named, as springing from Luthers root, are none of ours, neither ever were of
us. We abhor and detest them as much, if not more then they themselves. They
sprung from the Devil, and not from Calvin and Luther: to wit the Anabaptists,
Libertines, Swenckfeldians and Arians: against whom both Luther and Calvin have
written express treatises, that the world may know how far they were from
approving their damned errors, and how our adversaries make no conscience of
open lying and slandering our religion and persons, so that they may discredit
us and advantage themselves thereby. Secondly if unity in all things be a
certain mark of the true Church, and division a mark of the false Church,
then was there never true Church in the world, for there was never any yet in
the perfect unity of opinions that in it there were not many sects and
divisions. Irenaeus an excellent and holy father, tells us as much when he
says: tanquam ex nucleo nucis oliuae nascitur oleaster: sic ex medio ecclesiae
extiterunt hereses: that is, as from the kernel of the sweet Olive springs
the wild: so out of the midst of the Church springs heresies. Thus was it in
the Church of Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica and the rest to whom Paul wrote
his Epistles, where there were many sects and divisions, and many exorbitant
opinions touching things indifferent: the Lords supper, and the resurrection of
the body, Circumcision, the second coming of the Lord, etc. Likewise after and
in the Apostles times, how the primative Church was pestered with Heritikes,
the Simonians, the Nicolaitans, the Ebionists, the Cerinthonians and such like.
Who knows not the like may be shown of all ages successively? Neither was
there ever such a unity to be found in any Church upon earth, that there were
no heresies, nor opposition of opinion lurking therein. Thirdly if this be a
just exception against us, then much more may it take hold of them, whose
divisions are both more in number and weightier in consequent then ours are,
for example, they cannot agree whether the Pope can err in the faith or no:
nor whether the counsel be above the Pope: or the Pope above the Counsel: nor
whether a man may be certain of his standing in the state of grace or no. All
matters of great moment. Again it is notoriously known to all men, how the
Jesuits and secular Priests differ in judgment about the Popes coactiue power
in the temporal affairs of Princes: and how of elder years their divinity
was divided into three families, Thomists, Scotists, Occamists: Thomas against
Scot, and Scot against Thomas and Occam against both. And again who knows
not, how the Romish doctors differ in judgment about the vow of single life,
the lent fast, and auricular confession; whether these be of divine institution
or ecclesiastical only, as also about marriage after diuors, original sin,
and the conception of the Virgin Mary: about all these matters there is such
contention amongst them, and oftentimes with such bitterness, that they would
even seem to devour one another. Lastly it is a wonder to see with how many
idle controversies their doctrine of transubstantiation is enwrapped, one
houlding this, another that, and scarce two of them agreeing all things, the
verse is well known which I shall here set down: Corpore de Christi lis est,
de sanguine lis est: Lis est de modo, non habitura modum. If variety of
opinions now mar the form of a Church, then is their Church utterly spoiled.
and put out of fashion, rather then ours, wherein for one controversy with us,
there are ten with them (I dare bouldly avouch) and those of no trifles but
of main points of their Religion. Lastly if we consider aright the divisions
that are in our Church betwixt the Caluinists and the Lutherans, we shall
easily perceive that they are both few in quantity and in quality, such as
overthrow no fundamental article of the faith: And this to be so, this short
treatise will plainly and briefly discover unto thee, if thou please to
bestow but an hour or two reading upon it.

The Authors thereof are Germans, the translator a man not professing
schollership, but exercised in traficke of merchandise, and therefore thou in
wisdom wilt accept his wholesome bunch of Rhenish grapes, though clad with a
plain and easy garment made of homespun thread. I am persuaded that his zeal
to Gods Church, and his love to the peace of Zion moved him to undertake this
task, and in my judgment this his good intent cannot but in some measure take
some good effect, for this short tract may serve thee for three excellent
purposes: First to discover the malice of our Romish adversaries, who by
mustering up our divisions, would feign prove us to have no verity amongst us,
because we have no unity: whereas our differences are here made manifest to be
not many in number, nor of any great moment, that is such as concern the walls
and windows of our faith, but not the foundation. Secondly thou may also
here take view what the maine differences are betwixt the Lutherans and the
Caluinists, that thou may be able to judge how the unity of faith is not
broken betwixt them, and that both join together in the service of one Christ,
and against his great enemy Antichrist. And Lastly it may serve also, as a
means to calm the heat of the modern quarrels in our Church, which have been
pursued on both parts, with too too much violence of spirit: for here both
sides may learn this wholesome and short lesson, that seeing they build upon
one foundation, therefore though they meet not in opinion, yet they would
meet in brotherly love: and laying aside all rancour and violent courses,
join their forces against the common adversary. And this is the principal
drift of this short discourse.

Now the God of peace sa^ctisie us al throughout both in body, soul and
spirit, that they may be kept blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus: and
give us grace that we may hold fast the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace.

Thine in the Lord Thomas Beard, Minister of Gods word in the town of
Huntington.

Page 4. lin. 25. read, is not.

A FAITHFVLL ADMONITION of the PFALTZGRAVES Churches, To all other Protestant
Churches in DVCHLAND.
Beloved brethren, all you that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus with us,
and desire to be saved by his death and bloodshedding, as well as we; you know
how our true Lord and Savior so heartily councelled us to peace, Ioh.
13.34.35. Ioh. 17.11.21.
And how fervently he commanded at his departure out of this world, that we
should agree one with another: that so, the whole world might know that he was
sent of God.

You know also, how Paul says, 1. Cor. 10.17. 1. Cor. 12.12.13.14.
that we who believe in Christ, are all together one body, and should love
together as members of one body, and one bear with the infirmities of another:
And he that does not so, 1. Cor. 11.16.
but has delight in contention, he is no true member of the Church of God.
For, the congregation of God has no pleasure in contention.

How come we then to it, (Loving brethren) that we have now contended together
so many years with such bitterness, which well beseems not the very
heathen; and that, for such questions, without the knowledge whereof, a man may
well be saved? It being so, that many thousands, are since dead, on both
sides, who understood neither the one nor the others meaning aright, and yet
are nevertheless saved, being dead in Christ.

What intend we then, by so shameful a separation, about such questions,
whereon salvation depends not? One thinks that the bread is to be broken at
the Supper: the other, that it may well be left unbroken. How many thousand
people are saved, who have eaten the bread broken at the Supper? How many
thousand people are saved also, who have eaten the bread at the Supper
unbroken? Is that then such a matter, for which one should condemn an other so
unchristianly: as formerly the Wittenbergers condemned us, and as now the
Darmstatters condemn us anew.

True it is, the Darmstatters and Wittenbergers, accuse us, as if we had begun
such condemning, and had outlawed to Hell, all such, as do not break the
bread at the Supper.

But, the Lord knows it, that they do us wrong.

They would indeed enforce it from this: for that we hold the breaking of bread
for needful.

Now it is most certain, we hold the breaking of bread as needful: for we
take it, that Christ required it so to be: to accomplish his command, is then
needful. And therefore we believe, that they do err, who hold the breaking of
bread for a free indifferent thing, which one, may as well leave undone, as
done. But that we should condemn any man for such an error, that will never be
found in any of our writings, but almost every where the very contrary is
holden by us in this matter. Epist. 2.


Beza writ at least 30 years agone, that one who dwelt in such a place where
the breaking of bread were not in use, was not therefore to refrain the
Supper. For although it be an error to leave the bread unbroken, yet is it not
such an error, for which a man should be houlden a heathen: which a man does
when he refuses to communicate with him that houldeth the contrary. But it is
such an error, which a man for christian love sake, must bear withal in them
that commit it, as with many more others also.

The like also writes Doct. Parens in his remembrance of breaking bread, and
says: that we do not say nor hold, that they that break not the bread at the
supper, have no supper of Christ at all, as some accuse us.

In like manner has been diverse times showed in the three writings penned by
the common consent of the Pfaltzgraues Churches, eight years agone, in defense
of the Anholts reformation, and set against the writings of complaint of the
Divines of Wittinberge, especially in the preface upon the answer of the
Wittenbergers message of the Ambergs information, amongst which these words are
read, therefore we entreat all honest Christians to whom this writing shall
come to be read, that they would certainly hold, that though we maintain
the opinion of our Churches, with befitting zeal, yet do we not therefore in
any sort condemn other Churches which therein hold not with us, namely
concerning the breaking of bread, putting away of Images, and other the like
questions, which are handled in these writings. But we acknowledge all those
for the children of God, and for brethren in Christ Jesus, who desire to be
saved only by faith in Christ, and with such a faith practice a Christian and
blameless life, though they do not practice the very same Ceremonies which we
constantly hold that God has commanded to be practiced.

Behold, loving brethren, what has been ever our opinion and construction
concerning this matter, and is now: to wit that we condemn no man for leaving
the bread unbroken, though we hold such vnbreaking for a thing unjust.

If we then condemn no man that leaves the bread at the supper unbroken,
though we hold such vnbreaking to be unlawful, wherefore shall we be
condemned, for that we hold the breaking thereof at the supper, whereas every
man acknowledges that the breaking thereof at the supper is unlawful, it
being so, that Christ himself brake the bread at his last supper.

That therefore is strained too far, that we should be condemned because we
hold the breaking of bread for needful, it being but a free indifferent
thing, as if all men must be damned that hold an indifferent thing for
needful.

But the Apostle Paul teaches much other ways. One (says he) beleeu's he may
eat of all things, Romans 14.2.
and another which is weak eats herbs, let not him that eats despise him
that eats not: and let not him which eats not Judge him that eats, for
God has received him Who art thou that condemnest an other man's servant? he
stands or falls to his own master: yea he shall be established, for God is
able to make him stand.

These are the Apostle Paul's own words. Wherein he teaches that though one
hold an indifferent thing needful, yet he should not be condemned for it.

But it is yet disputable, whether the breaking of bread be an indifferent
thing or not. We have showed our reasons, in the before named three writings,
and many others of our books, wherefore we hold not that the bread-breaking is
an indifferent thing, of which our reasons every man may judge as his
conscience moves. But, admit that bread-breaking were an indifferent thing,
and that we erred therein, in holding it for needful, yet were it not such an
error, for which we should be condemned as heathens, and be shut out of the
fellowship of the Evangelical Churches.

They allege against us the example of Paul: who else could well have endured
the circumcision: but when it was stood upon as needful: he says, that no
man should enforce it upon him: that he lose not Christ. Even so say the
Wittenberg. and Di Vietor of Siessen, that if men hold the breaking of bread
for indifferent, then they could well let it pass, but when it is stood upon
as needful, then ought every man justly to set himself against it. For
answer: we must know that Circumcision was never an indifferent thing, but was
commanded in the old testament. But in the new Testament and in the time of
Paul, God would have it laid down with honor, and from that time to be
esteemed a forbidden Ceremony. Therefore the example of Circumcision has no
reference to the question of indifferent things. And therefore remains the
rule which Paul gives of indifferent things vncast down with this example.
Which rule is, as aforesaid, that a man should not therefore condemn another,
though he should err in holding an indifferent thing, for needful.

It is further objected, that nevertheless Christian liberty is broken, when
indifferent things are esteemed needful. But this objection is also of no
force. 1. Cor. 14.33.
For Christian freedom brings not that with it, that in indifferent things,
every man may do what he will, Else there would be no order held in the
Church of God. Not. Antes fol. 6.2.
But, it stands free for every magistrate (with help of the ministry) to
take order as every country best fits for their furtherance, as the
Wittenbergers themselves confess.

At last it is complained of, how fearfully the common man takes offense at
the breaking of bread, but we cannot believe that any where a Christian man is
offended at breaking of bread, for every man knows that Christ himself brake
the bread at the supper, as appears by the clear words: Our Lord Jesus
Christ in the night that he was betrayed took bread and when he had given
thanks he brake it. How is it then possible for any man to be offended at
breaking of bread?

No man sure will take offense at that which Christ himself has done. In
sum, let them seek what they can: they cannot find the least occasion to
control the practice of breaking of bread. Yet must we therefore be again
condemned of the Darmstatters, and put into the number of those of whom it is
written: Gal. 5.12.
Would God they were even cut off.

Not so loving brethren, but would God we were all honest: and that the one
would bear with the other with patience, as Christ has given us a
commandment, that were much better then that we desire one another to be cut
off. John. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, says Christ, not if you
desire to destroy each other: but if you love one another. Blessed be God we
are no such folk as they were of whom Paul says, Would to God they were even
cut off. We desire not to bring in again the Leuiticall ceremonies, and to be
thereby just and saved before the Lord, and so make the grace of Christ of no
effect: as they did of whom Paul says, would to God they were cut off, we put
our confidence only and soly in Christ Jesus, and desire not otherwise to be
made just and saved before God, then through faith in him, of such people did
not Paul say, would to God they were cut off: though they should yet fail in
some things: Phil. 3.15. Romans 14.1.13.
But if any be otherways minded, the Lord shall manifest the same unto him.
Also, him that is weak in the faith, receive unto you, but not for
controversies of disputations. Also, let us not judge one another any more; but
use judgment rather in this, that no man put an occasion to fall, or a
stumbling-blocke before his brother.

It may well be, that we fail in something, for we are men: but consider,
loving brethren, that you are also men, and so may fail even as well as other
men.

Where now ye condemn us, and we condemn you, what will be the end thereof?
not otherways, then that we shall be both devoured. Gal. 5.14.15.
As it formerly befell to the Eastern Churches, when they would not cease to
condemn each other.

The Papists plot about it day and night, how they may destroy and consume us,
one with another. When we now our selves shall desire the one to devour the
other, what shall we otherways accomplish, then that we deliver the Papists
the sword into their hands, wherewith to destroy us all? But and if we agreed,
and held together, the Pope with all his adherents would be driven to consider
well with himself, whether he would take us in hand, or not. But if we be
separated from each other, it will be no hard matter unto him to devour one of
us after the other.

Yea indeed, that is the very matter, out of which the Papists ground their
sure hopes, that they will shortly again be masters of all Duchland. For say
they, the Protestants are separated, John Paul Windeck in Prognostico, futuri
status Ecclesiae. Luke 11.17.
and therefore their building cannot hold. This rekoning the Papists themselves
make, and in truth it is an infallible rule, for Christ faith himself, Every
kingdom divided against it self shall be desolate: and a house divided
against a house falls. If we will not then cease one to contend with the
other, then cannot the Papists reckoning fail them, but we must needs be made
desolate.

It is true indeed, the greatest part amongst those that call themselves
Lutheranes, suffer themselves to be persuaded, that the blood-thirsty drifts of
the Papists tend only against those whom some call Caluinists. As for
themselves, there is no danger at all, for the Caluinists (who hold but naked
tokens in the Sacraments) as they falsely accuse them, are not comprehended in
the contract of the peace for Religion. But they themselves are out of all
doubt comprehended in that religious peace, and therefore the Pope dare not
meddle with them, yes indeed, no more then the Wolf dare lay hold on the Sheep
that is branded.

The Papists write, and it is yet vnrecalled, that they are not bound to hold
that religious peace, John Paul Windeck in Pro. sut. sta. Eccle. page 326.
no not with the Lutheranes. For first, it was forced from the Emperor by
constraint, besides that, it was meant only for a time, which is now expired,
since the publishing of the decrees and explication of the Counsel of Trent,
and last of all, the Pope never confirming the same, therefore it never stood in
any force indeed. As also in like manner, every year, in the day of the Lords
Supper, in Rome, all they that are called Lutheranes, as well as they that are
called Caluinists, are in like manner acknowledged and condemned for Heretics,
and excommunicated and pronounced to be out of the number of the Church of
Christ. Therefore they are simple people, that put any trust in this Religious
peace.

Our agreement and bond, next unto God, is a right religious peace indeed, and
had not iuditious Politicians of late hindered it at several Parliaments when
it was sought for, namely, by kindling a breach amongst the Protestant Princes,
by some of the contentious Divines, it would long since have been seen, what
had been the force of a Religious peace.

When the Papists were masters of Aken, what helped the Lutherans their
Religious peace? they must even as well depart the City, as the Caluinists.

And what manner of people were they which were persecuted and banished many
years in Austria, Carinthia, Stiria, also in Frankenlands, and the Abbey of
Fulda, were they not Lutherans?

In sum, the Pope loves Luther and Calvin alike, even the one as well as the
other, and if he could this day destroy them both, he would not tarry till to
morrow.

Therefore beloved brethren, consider what we are to do. The Heathen were
formerly of such understanding, that when they had a common enemy, they laid
aside their private and particular enmity, and appeared against their common
enemy with one accord. Wherefore should not we Christians also use the same
wisdom; when we may with a good conscience do it so, that we may do it well?

For concerning the Ceremonies, there has ever been a difference in the
Church of God, and yet the ancient Fathers never condemned one another for it.
Neither is it the will of God that men should condemn each other for such
outward things. Mat. 12.7. Hos. 6.6.
I have pleasure in mercy (says the Lord) and not in offerings.

Besides, Anno. 1556. at Franckfort.
the Protestant estates have long since therein agreed, that concerning
Ceremonies, when they agree with the word of God, (as the Wittenbergers,
Darmstatters, and Giessers confess themselves that our Ceremonies do,) that
no State should burden, vex, or damnifie another, or falsely accuse them, or
permit any of theirs to do so.

Concerning the doctrine thereabouts, Paul gives this rule, that if men be
agreed in the grounds of salvation, then should no man be condemned for by
faylings, because God will not condemn such people, and therefore also should
not they condemn the one the other. The words of Paul are these, Another
foundation can no man lay, 1. Cor. 3.11.12.13.14.15.
then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And if any man build on this
foundation gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay, or stubble, every man's
work shall be made manifest, for, the day will declare it, because it shall be
revealed by the fire: and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it
is. If any man's work that he has built upon abide, he shall receive wages. If
any man's work burn, he shall loose, but he shall be safe himself,
nevertheless, yet as it were by the fire.

See, loving brethren, Paul says plainly, when one houldeth the grounds of
salvation, though he always build not upon the same ground gold and silver,
but also some wood, and stubble, yet shall he not therefore be damned, but be
saved, and their agreeing of every man be acknowledged for a child of God.

Now do we hold the foundation of salvation on both sides without
backsliding, On the foundation of salvation.
for the foundation of salvation, says Paul, is Christ Jesus, wherein we agree
on both sides in one manner, for, we believe on both sides, that he is the
everlasting Son of God, which at the appointed time took upon him the nature
of man, and so at present is both God and man, and so shall remain
everlastingly in one only and inseperable person, yet so, that the two natures
that are in him, namely, the Godhead, and the manhood, with their natural
properties, remain unmingled everlastingly, and neither nature is changed into
the other, for else could he not be true God and man, when he had not in
himself as well the godly, as the human, and as well the human as the
divine nature, which can no ways be made known one from the other, but by
their natural properties. Also, we believe on both sides, that he in his
natural body which he took upon him, suffered death for us, and arose again
the third day from the dead, and ascended into heaven forty days after his
resurrection, and at this present sits at the right hand of God, from whence
he shall come to judge the quick and the dead: also, that in the mean time,
he causes to be preached repentance, and forgiveness of sins, and that all
that believe such preaching, and repent them, shall not be lost, but have
everlasting life, that is indeed on both sides our faith. And so we do both of
us hold the foundation of salvation without backsliding.

Wherefore then should we not with good conscience keep brothership one with
another, and in all that may befall us, hold together as brethren. The Apostle
Paul says, that we may not only do it with good conscience, but we are bound
also to do it, for he that houldeth the foundation of salvation which I have
laid, says Paul, the same, though he have some wood and stubble in his
doctrine, which in time must be burnt with fire, yet shall he be saved.

Shall he be saved? then must he be a child of God. Is he a child of God?
then must he also be my brother, or else am I no child of God. Is he my
brother? then stands it not alone free for me to perform brotherly truth and
love unto him, but I am every way indebted to him therein.

It is very true, there are some contentious ones that say, that we have not
only wood, hay, and stubble in our doctrine, but that we also err in those
points, that concern the foundation of salvation: as namely of the person of
Christ, and of the holy supper: but especially about the everlasting
foreknowledge of God, or of free election by grace. For of these last points,
say they, give we such fearful reasons; that no Christian can with good
conscience acknowledge us for children of God, and is able to hold any
brotherhood with us.

But if we be innocent in this one point, then are we certainly without blame
in these points, for we believe and teach no otherwise of these points: then as
next the holy scriptures, happy D. Luther himself believed and taught even
unto the day of his death.

The sum whereof is to this effect: Of the foreknowledge of God.
that mankind is so corrupted through the fall, that he is never able to
believe in Christ, or to come unto him by his own power; though he be called
to him by the Gospel: But that he may understand and receive the Gospel of
Christ, God together with the outward preaching of the Gospel must also
inwardly open his understanding, and turn his heart to Christ by his holy
spirit.

And so is faith nothing less then a work of freewill: but a mere free gift
of God, which gift no man has deserved of God: It so being that al men are
sinners. But God gives such grace freely by grace to whom he will. But those
whom he presently will, those has he willed from everlasting: according to
the saying of James. Act 15.18.
From the beginning of the world God knows all his works. Therefore flows
faith from this spring, even the everlasting foreknowledge of God. And the
faithful have no cause to ascribe it to themselves, but to praise God, that
they do believe. The unbelievers also cannot ascribe the fault to God, but to
themselves that they do not believe. For though all men are so corrupted by
nature that they cannot of themselves believe in Christ: yet has not God so
corrupted them: but they have so corrupted themselves: seeing that through the
devils provocation they fell willingly from God. About which fall no man has
cause to complain against God, though he should leave all men in their
destruction and unbelief together. And therefore that he does help only some
out of the same, for that they are to magnify his mercy, and not to dispute
with him about the rest.

But when as one desires to know whether God has foreseen, and chosen him to
everlasting life, or not: Then shall he not search into the secret council of
God: for such a searching is but in vain; and tends to no other end, then to
serve to bring one another to despair, or indeed unto fleshly security. But
when one desires to be assured, whether he be ordained to salvation or no, let
him hold himself to the revealed word of God: and according to the command
thereof believe in Christ, and repent. And then need he not further search
whether he be elected to life everlasting or not, for all they that believe in
Christ without hypocrisy, are chosen to life everlasting, as it is written,
All that believe in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. Even so
and no otherwise has D. Luther constantly taught continually of the
everlasting foreknowledge of God.

As is to be seen in all his writings, which he put forth from year to
year, which writings, he that has them not, or cannot read them: let him read
only the abstract taken out of them, and was printed certain years agone at
Amberge under this title: Anno. 1598.
The Constant doctrine of D. Martin Luther of the first moving causes of faith.
Or he that cannot get that abstract, let him read only the Preface of D.
Luther upon the Epistle to the Romans: in his Dutch Bible: which he ouersaw a
new, and caused to be printed the last year before his death, there may he
clearly find it. And if he have an upright heart in him, must acknowledge
that D. Luther never believed and taught otherways, then as is above
mentioned, we therein believe and teach.

Whatsoever fearful reasons are objected against us, above and against such a
doctrine, they are nothing else then bare forges devised by peace hating people
thereby to discredit us.

And it skills not much that they note the books and leaves, wherein such
fearful reasons stand. When one is a man's enemy, easily may he find something
in his arguments and writings, which he may have show to make an evil
construction of.

When Julian the Apostata, was enemy to the Christians he accused them that
they would have Magristacy cease, and would cast all good order on an heap: for
they taught that men should not any more punish thieves and Murderers: but let
every man fulfill his own evil desires: and to show them to be such, he
repeats Christ's words: You have heard what is said, eye for eye, and tooth for
tooth but, I say unto you, that you shall not resist evil. What could be more
manifestly in show said and laid before them, and yet nevertheless they
suffered wrong. Even so in truth are we also wronged, when men broach such
fearful and odious matters of us. which a man cannot easily utter without
sinning:

For example they say of us that we teach that God is the cause of sin, and
has a delight and pleasure in sin, and helps to sin, but God knows, whom
no man can deceive, that such blasphemy against God never entered into our
minds. The contentious would wring it out of this, that some of ours write,
that there befalls nothing without the foreknowledge, council and will of
God, no not sin it self. Now it is certain; our men write thus: that there
can nothing be done, without the foreknowledge, council, and will of God,
whether it be little or great, bad or good, either in heaven or on earth. But
they do not therefore say, that God is the cause of sin, or has delight and
pleasure in sin, and helps therein. But they teach in all their writings
the clean contrary, that God is not the author of sin, that also he has no
delight and pleasure in sin, and that he helps no man to sin, or does
either secretly or openly provoke them to it.

But whereas indeed they do write that there comes nothing to pass without
the foreknowledge, council and will of God, yea also that which in it self is
evil, and sin. That understand they thus and not otherways, as Luke
understands it, where he writes of the fearful and great sin, which Herod
and Pilate committed against Christ: Act. 4.27.28.
doing whatsoever the hand and council of God had determined before to be done.
More clearly, they understand it thus: That God is an almighty God, and so can
hinder all things which he will not suffer to come to pass, and that therefore
also the evil spirits and men can perform nothing, when as God has not
determined it, or as Luke says: when that God in his counsel had not
determined that it should come so to pass: that and no otherwise is the opinion
of our teachers of the foreknowledge of God, and it is in very truth a right
comfortable opinion, for woe unto us poor folk, if the Lord were not so
almighty, that he before knew all our enemies bad intents, and could let them
pass, or hinder them according to his council and will? How long would the
Devil, Pope, and Popish confederates suffer us to live when that God by his
providence did not govern them, and bridled them?

Even so do we believe of the foreknowledge of God, and are assured that no
Christian man does believe any otherwise thereof, yet will they persuade the
people that we believe and say more haynously of the foreknowledge of God:
then the Jews, Turks, and Heathens.

We will show one example more, out of which such as fear God, understanding
and impartial men may see how hitherto they have dealt with us. We say it is
not possible that the elect should perish, which they construe upon us, as if
we had said and written: he that is elected must be saved, do what he will.
And on the contrary, he that is not elected must be damned, though he live so
honestly and holily, as he can possibly. But we testify before God, and before
Christ Jesus, who is to come again to Judge the quick and the dead, that such
an opinion never came into our mind, we say indeed that the elect cannot be
lost. And why should we not say so? Christ says it himself. Mat. 24. Chapt.
And D. Luther says so also in innumerable many places. But that we should say
that the elect cannot perish, with this addition do they what they will: that
will never be showed in our writings. But that is our opinion, and for that we
say, that the elect cannot perish, 1. Pet. 1.5. Luke 22.32.
because God keeps them by his power in faith to salvation: and though they
sometimes fall, yet they lie not therein, but he raises them again by
repentance, for whom God has elected to everlasting life, those has he not
otherways elected, Ephe. 1.4.5. Romans 8.30. Ezekiel. 36.27.
then with this condition, that he would give them faith in Christ, and that by
his holy spirit he would make them new creatures, and such people as should
walk in his commandments, Therefore are they no elect that do what they
will, but only they that have a hearty purpose, and an earnest intent to do
what God will, that is our opinion herein.

Concerning the person of Christ, Of the person of Christ.
thereof do we believe no otherways, then the other Protestant Churches
uniformly do believe, namely that Christ is true God and man, in one
inseperable person.

That is the common consent of ours, and all other Protestant Churches also.
But that the body of Christ should be every where: that is the private opinion
of some few contentious ones, whom not only many Lutherans Churches, as
Brunswick, Pomern, Holst, Mark, and Denmark speak against, but also most of
their own auditory give no, credit unto it: as a man may perceive if he come
into conference with them.

Setting then aside this private opinion of some few contentious ones, about
the vbiquity of the body of Christ: we are not inferior in the doctrine of
the person of Christ, as also of the everlasting foreknowledge of God, to the
other Protestant Churches: And to D. Luther himself in all things, Of the holy
supper.
and in all points agreeable. And so there remains no more besides, wherein
there is any difference betwixt us, and D. Luther, then alone that point of the
holy supper. And yet differ we not in the whole point, but only the least
part thereof is in controversy. D. Martin Luther postie: de anno 1529. in the
winter part fol. 102. b.


The principal part in the holy supper, is the spiritual eating and drinking
of the body and blood of Christ, which only makes a man right and blessed
before God, the bodily eating and drinking, is but a token, that makes no man
right and blessed before God: Even as the horse can never be satisfied with
painted oats: says D. Luther.

Now, we in every thing agree with D. Luther, in the spiritual eating and
drinking of the body and blood of Christ: and we believe as well as he, that
it is done by faith: When one feeds himself with the comfortable promise of
God, that he gave his son to death for him, and for his sake will bestow
upon him everlasting life, through which faith a man is so incorporated into
Christ, that he is, as it were, one bread and one meat with him, as D. Luther
says.

Whilst, we then on both sides agree in the spiritual eating and drinking of
the body and blood of Christ: wherefore will we sever our selves, and condemn
each other for the signs sake, by which the spiritual eating and drinking, is
represented. Doc. Luther says: the tokens in the holy supper, which men eat
and drink with the bodily mouth, are not only bread and wine, but also the
body, and the blood of Christ, present in the bread and wine, unseen.

We say, the body and blood of Christ, are not the tokens: but the betokened
heavenly riches: which cannot be laid hold on, neither fed on by the bodily
mouth, but only by faith. But the tokens which we shall, and can eat, and
drink in the supper with our bodily mouths, we say, are bread and wine,
ordained of Christ, to this holy use, that through such bodily eating of
tokens, the spiritual bliss, making, feeding, by the betokened heavenly
riches (Namely the true body and blood of Christ, which is performed by faith)
are represented, confirmed, and sealed.

And so, in no manner of ways do we teach, that men do eat and drink
only bare bread and wine in the supper, as the contentious falsely accuse us:
but we do teach that men eat and drink in the supper, both bread and wine:
and also the true body and blood of Christ: but with this difference, that men
eat and drink the bread and wine with the bodily mouth: but the body and
blood of Christ with the spiritual mouth: namely by faith, by which only a
man can blessedly take hold on Christ.

And therefore there is no strife betwixt. D. Luther and us, whether we eat
and drink the true body and true blood of Christ in the supper: but there is
the difference: how we eat and drink the true body, and true blood of Christ
in the supper.

We say, we eat and drink the true body and true blood of Christ in the
supper only spiritually by faith.

D. Luther, D. Martin Luther. Tom. 1. fol. 208. Tom. 2. fol 197. tom 3. fol.
487.
says: we do not only eat and drink the true body and blood of Christ in
the supper, spiritually, by faith: but also bodily with the mouth.

That cannot we believe. Not that we would not gladly believe the word of God,
but because we cannot find in our judgments, The body of Christ is eaten
with the mouth of the faithful and unfaithful, as well of Judas as of Peter.
that that is Gods word, that we should eat and drink the body and blood of
Christ, with our bodily mouths.

D. Luther says: Christ has said it, in that he took the bread and said:
Take, eat, this is my body.

Now dowe gladly believe the words of Christ, but that the words of Christ
should have such an understanding, as D. Luther gives them, as if he had said,
namely. In, or under the bread, is my body unseen, and yet really together
with it. And therefore when you eat the bread with your mouths, so do you
therewith eat my body also with your mouths, it being in or under the bread
hidden. That that should be the meaning of Christ, that cannot we believe.

For such a construction runs against the articles of the Christian faith,
and the whole holy Scripture, therein being plainly testified, that Christ
has but one body, wherewith he sat at table in their open sightes, at the time
of the first supper. And wherewith he also in open sight ascended into heaven,
forty days after his resurrection: but not much the better if he has one
body at present seen in heaven, and an other unseen on earth, in every host
one.

But we understand, that this is the meaning of Christ, when he took the bread
and spoke: This is my body, which is given for you: as if he had said, that
shall be unto you a remembrance of my body, which I have given for you to
death, that so I as the right heavenly bread may feed you to everlasting life,
or which is to one effect, that so I may deliver you from the everlasting
hunger and misery, which else you must have suffered in hell.

We understand, that that was the meaning of Christ in these words, This is my
body which is given for you: Whilst he presently after says, do it in
remembrance of me: and whilst in all Sacraments God used so to speak, he
naming the tokens even so, as if they were the betokened treasures themselves.
For example, when he ordained circumcision: he said: Genesis 17.10. Genesis 17.11.
Romans 4.11.
This is my covenant, yet was it not otherwise meant, then if he had said: This
is a token or seal of my covenant: even as presently God himself declared,
where he for the words: this is my covenant, presently uses these words: It
shall be a sign of the covenant betwixt me and thee.

Also the Easter lamb is called of God the Pascha, which is in dutch as much as
Passover, Exodus 12.27. Exodus 12.17. Exodus 13.16.
when he made his devouring Angel pass by the houses of the children of
Israel. And yet it was not meant by it, as if the Easter lamb were the
Passover it self, but that it should be a token and a remembrance of the
Passover, as the Lord again himself declared where he said: This shall be a
token to thee in thy hands, and a remembrance before thine eyes. Even so do
we understand that also in this sacrament, namely in the holy Supper, Christ
spoke Sacramentally, and so said first: This is my body which is given for you,
and after added, do such in remembrance of me: thereby demonstrating, that he
called the bread his crucified body for us; therefore because he ordained it
in remembrance, or for a witness, seal, or pledge of his crucified body for
us.

In which opinion that confirms us also, Ioh. 6.
which we find in the holy Scripture, that Christ most flatly again and
again casts away the bodily eating and drinking of his body and blood. With
these two grounds: first, Verse. 61.62.
that he would ascend to heaven, where we could not sease on him or eat him,
with our bodily mouths. Secondly, that also, Verse. 33.63.
such a bodily eating and drinking of his body and blood was not profitable
unto salvation. But rather who so does eat and drink him spiritually, or as
he had presently said before, he that comes to him and believes in him, he
shall have everlasting life, and he will raise him up at the last day.

Whilst now Christ has again and again cast away expressly the bodily eating,
and drinking of his body and blood: therefore cannot we believe, that he
would ordain against himself, a bodily eating and drinking of his body and
blood in the Supper.

Those be our grounds, which move us to hold that the words of Christ, This
is my body, are not so to be understood, as if the body of Christ were really
there present hidden in the bread: (as they sing: hidden in the bread so
little) but that the bread and the same food should be a remembrance or putting
us in mind of the body of Christ, which he gave up to death on the cross for
us, as Christ presently himself has cleared and said, Do this in remembrance
of me: that is, take this bread, and eat it, in remembrance that I as the true
heavenly bread gave up my body for you even to death on the cross, and have
spilt my blood, for the forgiveness of your sins, and shall be unto you a true
meat and drink to everlasting life, which meat and drink nevertheless, you
must eat by true faith, and let slip into your hearts, that it may comfort,
wash and quicken your selves, both in life and death.

Admit now that we did err, with such a construction of ours: yet did not such
an error, concern the grounds of salvation: for Salvation depends not in the
bodily eating, and drinking of the body and blood of Christ: but salvation
stands in the spiritual eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ:
as D. Luther confesses himself, therefore and if indeed we did err, about
the bodily eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ: yet
nevertheless did we not overthrow the ground of salvation with such an error.

Wherefore they have no sufficient and urgent cause, for this points sake
(namely, for so much as concerns the holy supper) wherefore they should
condemn us as heathens, and with such condemning any longer hinder the highly
needful agreement of the Protestant Churches.

Intruth it were well to be wished, Romans 12.16. Romans 15.5. 1. Cor. 1.10.
that we were all of one mind, and used one form of reasoning, even all of us
together of all and every point of Christian Religion: as also the Apostle Paul
in diverse places most truly admonishes us thereunto.

But it is impossible that we can ever bring it perfectly to that pass in
this life. 1 Cor. 13.9.
For we know but in part: and God gives always more light in spiritual
matters to one then to another: as a man may notably see in the writings of the
old fathers, whereof not any of them agreede in all things together.

If then we shall not love one another before, and as brethren hold together
till such time as we have one understanding, and meaning altogether in all
godly matters, then shall we never in this life love one another, and hold
together as brethren.

Now then this is the very Pith of the whole Christian Religion, that we do
out of a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, first love God,
who gave his son to death, for us, and then also our selves, that we love
each other.

Therefore Paul gives us not only this command that we should be of one
mind in all things, and should be diligent to use one form: but he gives us
also yet another commandment to this effect, that though there were some
difference found in us about the understanding of godly matters, we should not
break the bond of love, and part the unity of the spirit, but bear patiently
the one with the others ignorance and weakness. Paul's words are these. Phil.
3.15.16.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and if ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same unto you, Nevertheless, in
that whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one rule, that we may mind one
thing. That is the commandment of the Apostle Paul: namely, that we separate
not our selves for one point, or other, but give place to God (whosoever he be
that at the present houlds any unfit thing) to make it more known unto him in
his time; And in the mean time walk peaceably, as is said according to the
common rule or ground of Christianity, wherein by the grace of God we do agree.

This command of the Apostle Paul, loving brethren, we entreat you to
consider and to begin from this time forth to live brotherly and peaceably with
us.

We do not desire, that you should for our sakes be silent in any thing you
hold to be truth, or not to confute our grounds if you can do it.

But only this is our desire, that you would for those errors sake, which we
hold (in your opinion) of the holy supper, not so shamefully rail upon, us
and condemn us, in your sermons and writings. When you shall but do so, then
is the peace readily accomplished.

For we desire not to condemn you. But when you live godlily, according to the
knowledge which God has given unto you, then hold we you for children of
God, and for brethren in Christ Jesus, for all the errors which we are
persuaded that you have about the holy supper.

And therefore it rests in you loving brethren, you can help the Churches of
God, if you so please. And there is just cause why you should please: being it
is so Gods pleasure: and also our great necessity requires it, for it is
impossible that ours (namely the Protestant Churches) should be able long to
stand, if we do not quickly make peace one with another, and lay down the
unhappy contention that hitherto has been betwixt us.

For by such strife, do we make our selves naked of all armor, which we
should have both from God and man against the Pope. Psalm. 133.
It so being that God will not assist the contentious, but if we agree, and
call upon him with an humble spirit, then will he bestow upon us his grace, and
blessing.

And indeed the power of the Protestant Princes and States, is also not
sufficient to counteruaile the Popedomes, if they sever themselves into two or
three sides, and the one part shall help to rippe up the other.

As touching the common man, he understands almost nothing any more now of the
abominations of the Popedom, for that he hears almost nothing else from the
Pulpet but only railings upon the Caluinists, yea he hears that (according to
their teachers suggestions) the Papists are not by much so bad, as the
Caluinists, and therefore is it not possible that in the time of necessity, he
should have a sound zeal to fight against the Popedom, but in time he will
hold as much of one Religion as of another.

And grant it, that we should never be bodily set upon by the Papists, yet are
we at this very present so set upon by them spiritually as never before the
like. The Jesuits plot subtilely day and night, how they may make their bad
cause good, with serpent-like writings, and on the contrary side, bring our
good cause into all evil suspicion, not only to the common man: but also, and
that most especially, to all great Princes.

We in the mean time are together by the ears and the youth of the
Protestants study almost nothing else, but how the Lutherans may match with the
Caluinists, and the Caluinists with the Lutherans: that is, God be merciful
unto us, almost all the divinity in our times of the Protestants and should not
a man also find a great number amongst the Preachers, who do not well and
groundedlie know whereon depends the certain grounds of strife betwixt us
and the Papists: and wherefore our forefathers did separate themselves from
them, or what grounds they maintained against them.

To what manner of end these things will at last reach unto, we entreat all
understanding people to consider. And when yet they will not think upon it,
who ought most of all to think upon it, then the Lord God grant that the
Princes and Lords together with their peacelouing counsels, may for that end
once open their own eyes: It is high time, and if it come not to pass
speedily: then will the mischief which the Pope has intended against us, most
assuredly not long be kept out from us.

The God of Peace, who has ever hitherto taken his Church into his fatherly
protection, he be pleased furthermore also to take pity upon the same: and
to stir up godly people, who may rightly consider, and take to heart what that
is that Christ says: Mat. 6.5.
happy are the peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God.

To the almighty true God and Father, together with the son and holy Ghost,
the only and alone true God: be thanks, honor, and praise, both now, and for
evermore: Amen.

A SHORT ABSTRACT, TAKEN out of the warning about the Jesuits bloodthirsty
plots, which was put in print at Tubingen, by Doctor LVCAS OSIANDER.
DOctor Lucas Osiander published a book at Tubingen, under this title: Warning
about the Jesuits bad practices, and bloodthirsty plots, etc. In the which
book (even from the Jesuits own pictures and writings) he manifestly notes
and testifies, that the Jesuits together with the Popes confederates have
wholly concluded, that they will no more dispute with us out of the word of
God, but would consume and destroy all those with fire and sword, by the help
of the worldly potentates, who were fallen from the Pope. And that they are
determined to put in practice, such their blood thirsty plots, and bad
practices, so soon as may possibly be brought to pass, and that most
especially in our beloved fatherland the Dutch Nation. In the same book are
two things most especially to be marked, the one is, that the Papists are even
as great enemies to the Lutherans, as to the Caluinists, and desire to consume
and destroy the one side as well as the other: the other is; That the religious
peace would nothing at all stay the Papists from their intents: when they can
but come to practice them. These two things do not all men in Dutchland
believe: but Doctor Lucas Osiander does constantly believe them, as indeed the
truth is not otherways. Doctor Lucas Osiander his words are as follow.

Pap. 5. Although Satan be a thousand fold more subtle spirit, and much more
secret and crafty together with the children of this world in their practices,
then the children of light in their business: yet for all that, our Lord God
oftentimes so blinds Satan, that he cannot in all things be secret and close
in the wickedness which he goes about, but he tickleth himself so with his
intended practices, that men of understanding can mark, yea and as it were,
lay hold on what he has in his mind. Even so has Satan in the abouenamed
paintings of his trusty beloved, the Jesuits, so let his sharp claws peep
out that a man may gripe how they have hitherto practiced, that the highest and
chiefest Potentates in Christendom (if they would follow their minds) might
fall upon the Evangelical Protestant States of the Augsburges Confession, and
distroy them and consume the faith of the Evangelical professors: for it is
manifest by the counsel of Trent (in the which our Christian Evangelical
Religion is most unreasonably railed on, and condemned for herisie) and in like
manner, out of the manifould poisenous writings of the Jesuits, which they
have these diverse years published against the sound Doctrine of the Agusburges
confession, what people they hold for heritickes, and for enemies of the
Christian Churches (in their opinion) which (in their minds) as wild beasts
should destroy the vineyard of the Christian Churches: which also should be
strangled and distroyed (according to the Jesuits desires) by great and high
entitled Potentates.

And the Jesuits understand by the same beasts, The Jesuits have sworn the
death, of the Lutherans as well as the Caluinists.
not only those who are fallen from the Romish Religion, and yet agree not
rightly with the Augsburges confession, but all those who will not have to do
with the Papists Religion, misdoings and Idolatry.

And especially those who have bound themselves constantly to the Christian
Augsburges confession, and therefore they have also put under the beasts some
of those ensigns, which the Protestant Princes use to bear in their Arms.
And when they should get the gace into their own hands, they would (out of all
doubt) hold the one as the other, and destroy them all who would not
acknowledge the Pope of Rome for the vicar of Christ, nor worship him for their
earthly God. etc.

Also Page 10. If the Jesuits had but one drop of Christian blood in them, and
one spark of the meek spirit of Jesus, they would not only in right not
hate us, or persecute us, but love us with all their hearts, and in time of
necessity even wager their very lives for us.

As John teaches in his Epistle, where he says: we should even lay down our
lives for the brethren, therefore the Jesuits have no reasonable cause to
persecute us, if they were true Jesuits, that is, were faithful Christians.

And though there be here and there some Christians, N. B. The Caluinists are
also true Christians.
(most especially in France, and the low Countries) who are found, to have
fallen from the Pope, and nevertheless do not agree with us in every article
of Christian religion, whose error we indeed cannot also allow of, as being
against the holy Scripture, yet is not this any Christian way or means to
help the Church of God, and to maintain pure Religion, that the same should
be destroyed with the sword.

And the Jesuits should in all reason consider, that look how often the same
Christians defend one Erroneous Article, that they the Jesuits have always
ten Erroneous Popish Articles, which they both believe and hold, which yet
they shall never be able to defend to the end of the world: and therefore they
might very well carry water with them upon one colestaffe.

And besides that, consider that under the aforenamed Christians, there are
certain thousand simple people, who have never been better instructed, and
that if they heard of a better religion in their Lands, they looking to it
themselves would take it in thankfulness. And so there is a great number under
them like to those of whom the Lord said to the Prophet Jonas, that they know
not the difference betwixt the right hand or the left.

And therefore if the Jesuits had that Christian love (by which Christ
wills, that his disciples should be known) in their hearts, they would not
cast out the child with the bath, or rend up the good wheat with the weeds:
much less so lay their platformes, that the child should be murdered in the
mothers bellies, as is manifested by their prouocations in France, at Paris,
Orliance, and other places upon Bartholmew day, Anno. 1574. etc. practiced,
where no woman with child was spared.

But the Jesuits would gladly begin the play with those simple Christians, who
are not in all things sufficiently informed, N. B. The Jesuits would begin with
the Caluinists, that so they might end it with the Lutherans. M. Lucas
Ostanders gloss, The Jesuits esteem one Evangelist Christian as the other.
whereby they might end it, with those who do in every point hold the pure
doctrine of the Augsburges confession. For the Jesuits esteem the one as they
do the other. Who will not make himself partaker of their Idolatry, iugling
and false Romish Religion, he is adjudged of them to death.

These Christians which fail, men ought to inform out of the word of God, and
make them to understand better the truth, but for the cause of Religion (which
they do nevertheless maintain quietly and reasonably) should they not be put
to death.

Also page. 14. If we had no better testimony against the Romish Antichrist the
Pope, that he is from his Father the Devil, yet were it sufficiently
witnessed by this, that he has in the cause of Religion stirred up so much
shedding of blood: and yet at this present day does most eagerly provoke and
desire to drive on the Potentates thereto, that they might stain their hands
in the innocent blood of honest Christians.

And to effect this, The Jesuits care for no religious peace.
he uses his Scoutwatches (the Devils posts) the Jesuits, who under the show
of great holiness possess the hearts of many people, and desire to bring the
matter to that pass, that a fearful cutting of throats, and butchery might
be set abroach in Dutchland, and other kingdoms, the peace of Religion be
broken, and that the stronger should put the weaker in the sack.

In like manner also, before this time, one that thought himself a Lawyer, but
a bad and false Christian, Doctor George Eder mocked the Religious peace in
manifest writing put in print, and drue the same only to a toleration, which
neither could nor should be of force.

Such folk has the subtle Devil kept till the last end of the^ game, and
made his cards of helps, that through them he might set a work misery and
necessity.

And therefore whilst there is not only so much to be gathered out of the
abouenamed pictures of the Jesuits, but also out of their writings, practices,
and plots, that their intent and purpose reaches to that end, to destroy the
Protestant Religion and Estates: By this it is manifest that the murdering
spirit, namely the Diuellrideth them, and will not let them keep holy day,
till that they (when the Lord shall tolerate them) have set a work a fearful
bloodbath. Therefore is it much better to hold nothing, then to be such
people, who desire to overthrow the peace of Religion, and also the worldly
peace, and to be set a work, to the furthering of Misery and necessity.

FINIS.

