AN INTRODVCTION into the Books of the Prophets and Apostles.

Written by Peter Palladius, Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Rochil.

Faithfully translated out of Latin into English.

By Edw. Vaughan.

LONDON, Printed by G. S. for William Holme, dwelling upon Ludgate hill, at the
sign of the Lamb. 1598.

To the Right Honorable and virtuous Lady Elizabeth Russel, Dowger.
Having duly and dutifully considered the powerful providence of the Almighty,
I find of al creatures in the earth, that are humble and harmeles his Majesty
has recommended unto us the Lamb, to signify Jesus Christ our Redeemer: Of
all Creatures in the Air, that are mylde and chaste, he has recommended unto
us the the Dove, to signify the Holy ghost, our sanctifier. Even so (right Ho:
Lady) of all books that are Authentical and ancient, and of all books that
are profitable and true, this maiestical Creator has recommended to our
studies, for the groundwork of Religion, the book of his Covenant
comprehending all things that ever was, al things that now is, and al things
that ever will be to come; in heaven, concerning his Deity: in earth,
concerning his elect* and in hell, concerning the damned. There was two waights
in the holy sanctuary; the one called Stater, a balance to weigh all things
belonging to the common weal: the other Siclum, a sickle, which was to wey al
things belonging to the Temple: showing thereby, that al things whatsoever, do
apertain either to gods glory, or our good, are to be mesured and proportioned
by the same book. God said to Moses, Take sweet spices, pure Mirth, Calamos,
etc. then offer: wherein also he plainly shows, that al kind of serving his
Majesty, and all professions whereby we live and have our being, are excluded,
as things not sanctified according to this book. And yet good Ho: Lady and
mistress, I say, and most wise me^ see^, that few do read it, fewer regard it,
and fewest of al do frame their lives according unto it. It is as rare a a
thing to see noble women, and men of great place, to have the Bible in their
hands, and to order their conversation accordingly, as to see a man of pleasant
possessions, sell all he has and give it to the poor: or to see a Camel go
through the eye of a needle. By how much the more right Ho: are you to be
admyred and had as a wonder in this world, for your darely endeavors after
Divinity for your knowledge in the holy tongs: and especially for your careful
practice thereof, at home amongst your household: and abroad amongst the
distressed Saints. As the people of the captivity could not discern the sound
of the shout for joy, from the noise of the weeping when the foundation of the
temple was laid; even so the greatness of your greese, with continual study at
home, cannot be discerned from the greatness of then joy whom ye relieve
abroad. Your Ho has constantly continued hitherto, proceed, I pray you, Rule
on right Ho: good luck have you good La: in the name of the Lord. As the Jews
finished the Temple, with weapons in one hand and nowels in the other hand, so
I pray god you may finish your faith unto death: with your book move hand, and
your aliues in the other. I must be forced to cease keeping the limitation of
the Printer. Only desiring your Ho: to accept of this my labor, which I off^r
unto your La: before all others, as a token of my humble duty, Protesting that
I have to the uttermost of my power, truly t^anslated the same: not inte^ding
your Ho. instruction therein (though the original be very profitable for the
understanding of the Bible) but to instruct the ignorant multitude: for whose
sake I know your Ho: will patronize it. The spirit of him that raised up Jesus,
from the dead, sanctify you and save you.

London Ia: 20 1597. Your Ho: most humbly in the Lord. Edw. Vaughan.

An Introduction into the Books of the Prophets and Apostles: written by Peter
Palladius Doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Rochil, translated out of Latin
into English, both faithfully and truly.
To the Reverent and worthy man, for learning and virtue, Master Peter
Palladius, doctor of Divinity and Bishop of Rochil, Philip Melancthon wishes
al happiness.
IT is good for men oftentimes to call to mind those testimonies which either
do compel them, or allure them to consent unto the doctrine which GOD has
especially delivered unto his church, and does persevere therein: of which sort
are Miracles, Antiquity a kind of doctrine, a myraculous preservation thereof
amidst the ruins of Empyres, the constancy of confessors, and pledge of Gods
spirit in the heart.

In the first place, are reckoned Miracles, which are wonders done beyond the
course of nature; for although the whole course of of nature be both a witness
and a warning of God, yet when he preferred his doctrine, especially that which
goes beyond the sight of reason; he added singular deeds beyond the course
of nature, that it might be known not to be devised by man, but set forth by
the guider of nature, and a most mighty creator, being distinct from the
opinions of other nations: which miracles do boast of certain of our own
Miracles: but there are other Miracles peculier to the church not to be
imitated by any creature: as raising the dead, to stay the course of the sun,
the going back of the sun, a virgin to be with child, and others such like.
These God would have us to look upon, that we might be thoroughly persuaded
that the doctrine is given by the very ruler of nature. Among the miracles, I
also account the prophets, forsayinges of of Empires, and other affairs,
which the wisdom of no creature could certainlye forsee: for in that the event
has been aunswearable unto them, we must confess that those forsayings were
manifested by that divine spirit that knows all things.

In the 2. place, is antiquity named, which albeit, that it does not convince
as miracles do, yet does it alure the minds of men: for it is likely that God
should from the beginning have laid open himself, and have been of this mind,
that amongst men there should be always some of whom he might be truly known,
and not that al mankind as wretched should from ye beginning be made, only for
eternal destruction. Therefore, comfortable is that former age, and well is that
spoken by Tertulian. Whatsoever is most ancient, is most true: In like manner,
does Justinius and Clemens confute the Ethnickes: that seeing the doctrine of
the Church is more ancient then the opinions of the Ethnickes, the oppinions
that do gainsay it are to be rejected, and that the books of Moses, are of
more antiquity then the writings of the heathens, the very order of times and
Empires do make manifest For no Nation has a certain observation of years
from the beginning, as have the Eclesiastical books: the names of the heathens
do also show, that the monuments of the former Church are more ancient, for
that the Grecians do retain the names of Iapetus, Jove, Aeolus, and many
others, not knowing whence they sprung: but when the story of Moses does show
their kindred, we must needs confess, that it is more ancient then the
monuments of the Greeks: a mighty and a famous people was that of the
Imerians, whose posterity without all doubt, was the Cimbrians, but their
stock your Greeks know not, which the some of the word does show to be Gomer
the son of Iaphet. Now there is a kindered among the Egiptians, called in
their natural speech, and in the A^rabian tongue, Mizrai, but books do show
Nizraim to be the son of Cham, the first ancient among the Greeks, were the
wars of the Argonians, and then of the Troianes, but the time and course of
years, which the Grecians themselves have observed, does show that the Troiane
war was not long before David, and that Hercules was almost of the same time
with Sapson: So the names and histories of the heathen do testify, that the
books of the church are the more ancient, which is very necessary for the
studious to consider.

In the third place, we have set a kind of doctrine, whereof there are two
parts, the Law and the Gospel, and seeing that the knowledge of the law is
graffted in the minds of all men, reason in all men is enforced to confess,
that it is impossible for any nation to be the people of God, which do
establish laws, contrary to the law of God: but this is the common madness of
all the Gentiles, to call upon a multitude of Gods, and to devise monstrous
fables of the gods, and even in their laws to yield unto the filthy confusions
of lust. Some of them also, the murdering of men, whordoms and adulteries, have
bin thought a good serving of God. Reason therefore enforces to confess, that
in the church, the law is taught much better. This argument also, the old
writers have used in confuting the heathen: and howsoever the Gospel be not
known unto reason, yet does it lay open those things whereof the doctrine of
the heathen can speak no certainty: and yet it cannot be denied, but that the
understanding of the^ is necessary; for so much as man is the Image of God, and
is made to know and praise the Lord. From whence come so many doubts in the
disagreements of the mind and heart? whence is that stubbornness of the heart,
and such a burning desire to sin, seeing that y^ law shines in y^ mind? Are
men made to live in everlasting sin and mysery? what is sin, and whence comes
that vast heap of humane myserye? whence are those so many dissentions about
God, as whether god does hear men, or why he should regard them. Whether
after y^ bodies are once dead, there shall be another life; in which shall be a
difference between good and bad?

What, men are Gods temple who he does hear and help. Of these so weighty
matter, what great darkness is there in all the wisdom of the heathen? How
many furies of the Philosophers, who like the sons of Tytan make war with
heaven: either imagining that there is no providence, or being God to secondary
causes, and labor to prove that al sins are of necessity.

Seeing therefore we must confess, that the doctrine of the causes and remedies
of evil is necessary for men; and yet the wisdom of the heathen sees it not
truly, let us embrace Gods voice in the church, seeing he has added great
testimony thereunto Reason acknowledges, that the law is no where purely
delivered but in the church. And seeing it is certain that the voice of God is
there, let us hear this doctrine of which the Heathen are enforced to confess,
that there is great ignorance in their religion and doctrine: and yet the
opening of these questions are necessary for the knowing of God (for the which
man was made) and for true comfort. Therefore that kind of doctrine in the
Church, is most delightful to good minds, when the pure fountains are thereof
tasted. I account not in the Church the Roman tyrants, and the Monks their
cha^pions, who have dispersed throughout the world their filthy poison, for the
doctrine of the son of God, and have transformed the doctrine of the church,
into heathenish opinions. They pray unto the dead men, they command men to
worship their breaden God, which they carry about in their great solemnity:
they sell sacrifices for the quick and dead: they make Gods worship stage-like
vestures, and other delusions, and confirm their rouing lusts. This wicked
rout, I call not the church, but them which deliver the sound doctrine of God,
delivered in the books of the Prophets and Apostles, and in the Creeds. Many
others also do corrupt the simple truth, and the sleights in disputing are
delightful to some: as in time past, to the Stoics, Epicures, and Academicks.
But when we commend this kind of doctrine, we do exclude al corruption and
toys in vain disputings.

In the 4. place, we account the wonderful preservation of the church, in the
midst of the ruins of Empires: which although it may be gathered under the
first testimony that is among miracles, yet in this it differs from the former,
because it is a perpetual miracle of the continual presence of God, and
pertains to that special rule. The word of the Lord abides for ever, and not
by the help of man, as it is written, Not in an host nor in strength, but in
my spirit, says the lord God of boasts.

In the 5. place, is the constancy of Confessors accounted, which confirm
others 2 ways. First, because it is a man's miracle, wherein God strengthens
the weak against fear and punishments, and shows his presents many ways, even
in their sufferings. Many simple men have raised the dead, and done many
wonders. 2. Because the high minds in such as quietly bear affliction, does
show the gospel is powerful in them, and that it is the seed of god, as John
says: whereby eternal life, righteousness and joy is begun in them. 6, This
testimony of the gospel in the faithful does plainly convince their minds:
namely, the comfort and joy which is kindled in the^ by the holy ghost (whereof
Paul says, you have received the holy spirit, whereby we cry abb^ father)
whereby they see, how in great sorrow they are comforted, which uphold
themselves with meditation of the Gospel and with prayer, as Paul says, The
spirit helps our infirmity. These testimonies must be often thought on, and
especially let us be careful of the sixth, least it be taken from us by the
illusions of mad men: as the Anabap. etc Steukfeldians boast of false
inspirations: who setting apart Gods word, pretend their reuellations, as I
have found out the lies of many such, and the examples of Munster shows the
maliciousnes of many. Steukfild writes, that God communicates with men's minds,
without any means: from whence he proves the divine motions are kindled, not by
meditation of the written doctrine, but by a faming of heaviness. If with their
speech they mix fained sighings, Crocodiles tears, and other legerdemaines
devised by Art, amongst ye which slanders and strange positions, do specially
increase their authority. As Sebastian the Frenchma^ reviled the teachers, and
called a great volume of the sayings of ye prophets and apost. which in show
seemed not to agree. From whence he gathred, that we must not judge after the
letter, but as ye spirit directs. And in their Paradoxes they insert things to
please people, and enlarge licentiousness. Some there are which carry about
with them the books of Sibils, whence they take such Oracles as best befit
their affections, whom they flatter. This kind of Idol priest must be taken
heed of, and that rule is firmly to be held, Thy word is a lantern unto my
feet. And again, To the Law and the testimony. And again, The Gospel is the
power of God unto salvation to every one that believes: and those deceivers
are not to be harkened unto, which cry out, that inspirations must elsewhere
be sought for, without thinking of the holy word. The saying of the son of
God must be held fast, who commands to preach repentance and forgiveness of
sins in his name. To this end let our teaching be applied: that repentance,
faith prayer and new obedience may increase in us, by the meditation of Gods
word, and let god be praised with true duties, according, to that saying: Fight
thou a good fight, holding fast faith and a good conscience. For traps may be
laid by men by the advancing of Inspiratio^s as we have often seen. By this
means, as by an enchantment the people discerned of seducers. Therefore the
son is sent to reveal unto all creatures, the secret and unknown promise of
reconciliation, and that it being heard, faith might be wrought in men, and
God might communicate himself with us, as Paul says: Faith is by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. Wherefore these Idol priests of Cibel, which
withdraw men's minds from the written word, do reproach the son of God, and take
away both faith, and all the exercise of faith.

If the writings of the Prophets and Apostles were taken away, so that every
hypocrite might lawfully brotch his counterfeit Oracles from his inspirations,
as from his three footed seat: how great furies would ensue? We have seen
example heerof, in the Tragedies of Munster and elswher. Wherefore all holy
teachers and hearers, with all constancy, ought to set themselves against these
doting devises.

Thy purpose and endeavor therefore (O Peter) I do commend, that thou art an
incourager of all the godly unto reading. As Paul says: Be conversant in
reading, showing the way to every book, and declaring the arguments of them. I
would to God that our youth were accustomed rather to reading and godly
prayer, then to cauilles in disputing: for when matters are well opened, and no
kind of false doctrine approved, there should be an end of disputing; and it
is a most true saying: that to play the Sycophant is too great diligence.

And whereas, by the wisdom of your noble King, and the diligence of godly
teachers in your kingdom, the studies of your youth are so ordered, that no
liberty to cavil is permitted unto them. You have well provided for the peace
of the church; and their wits are accustomed to modesty. All things though well
delivered, may be weakened, if cauels may be regarded; as in time past were
those of the Pirchonians, and the Academicks. Therefore Paul does strictly
charge the Phillippians, to hold fast the Canon or the rule of the word.

Now I beseech the Son of God our Lords Jesus Christ, to keep and to govern
the churches in the kingdom of the Danes, and in Germany, and to make them to
abide for ever one in him.
Farewell. call. Feb. 1557.
CONCERNING THE Authority of Gods: word and holy Scripture.
THE authority of Gods word and holy Scripture, ought to be so great with all
men that no one should doubt thereof, but as we look up unto heaven with our
eyes: so should we think that the holy Scripture was brought from Heaven: and
as he that came from heaven is above all: so the holy Scripture does far exceed
the doctrine and wisdom of man. Christ asked the Pharisees of the doctrine of
John the Baptist, whether it were from heaven, or of men, signifying, that
those two kinds of doctrine did greatly differ one from another, the which also
Christ's disputation with Nichodemus makes plain. Ioh. 3,

The word of God is the holy Scripture of the old and new Testament, which is
called holy (that is) severed from all other writings written by the holy Ghost
and brought from heaven.

And Christ deuideth the old Testament into 3. parts in the last of Luke,
where he says that all things must be fulfilled whatsoever are written of
the son of man.

In the 1 part. Moses. 2 part. The Psalm. 3 part. the Prop.
The other parts do belong to these.

The new Testament comprehends, chiefly Gospels and Epistles, which are the
seals of the Gospel: as I Paul thus subscribe: thus I seal the Gospel of
Matthewe with my blood. I Peter subscribe, I John, etc. The doctrine of the
holy scripture is twoe fold.

The one The Law. The other The Gospel.
But the holy Scripture is commended, For the Sufficiency. Truth. Profit.
Authority. Dignity. Eternity.
thereof.

1 Christ shows the sufficiency thereof when he says: They have Moses and
the Prophets. Again, search the scriptures because you think in them to hane
eternal life. And Paul Galat. 1, If any man shall teach any other Gospel,
let him be accurssed. Esa. 8, To the law and Testymonie you shall not add:
neither shall you take from it his Deuteronomy 8, and in the 12. cha, What I command
you do it, thou shall not add nor diminish any thing.

2 The truth of the scripture is proved by the words of Christ. John. 8, Thy
word is truth. Ioh. 2, The old and new Testament is true and the true light
now shines. Number 23, God is not as man that he should lie.

3 The profit of the scripture is showed by Paul Rom 15, Whatsoever things are
written they are written for our learning, that through patience and comfort of
the scripture we might have hope, 2 Timothy 3, all scripture in spired of God is
profitable to teach, etc.

4 The authority thereof is in the last of Luke, all things must be
fulfilled which are written of me in Moses, in the prophets, and in the Psalm. 2
Pet. 1, Prophecy is not given by the will of man: but holy men have spoken as
they have been moved by the holy Ghost.

5 The dignity thereof appears, Esa. 55, as heaven is lifted up from the
earth, so are my thoughts differing from your thoughts: and Christ says, give
not holy things to dogs, neither cast ye pearls amongst swine.

6 The eternity thereof, as the word of God abides for ever: And in Luke,
Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word shall not pass. Ioh. 16, To whom shall
we go, thou have the words of eternal life.

Concerning the holy Bible, and books of the old and new Testament.
THE Bible or Bibles, although generally it signifies a book, yet more
particularly by ye holy Bible, is the books of the old and new Testament,
called holy; for the holy Divinity and doctrine of God, are severed from the
wisdom of the world, and brought from heaven; and a Bible, because many
books are therein contained; The first whereof is Genesis, and the last the
Revelation.

The first division of the BIBLE.
THe holy Bible is divided into the old and new Testament.

The old Testament contains those books which were written before Christ
was borne; as the books of Moses, the Psalms and the Prophets, with some
other, which are in number 48.

The new Testament comprehends those books which were set forth after the
birth of Christ; As the books of the Gospelles and the Epistles, with others,
which are in number 27.

The 2. Division.
THe holy Bible is divided into six parts, in respect of so much as concern
the difference of the Books, For some of the books of the Bible are Legal,
Historical, Doctrinall, Prophetical, Evangelical, and Epistolar.

1 The sieve books of Moses called, etc. are Legal, because the law is specially
described in them.

2 Historical, are those which simply contain Histories, or things done, as
are the books 1 of Joshua. 2 of Judges. 3 of Ruth. 4 of Kings. 5 of Chron. 6 of
Ezra. 7 of Nehemiah. 8 of Tobias. 9 of Judith. 10 of Hester. 11 of Machabees.
12 of The acts of the Apostles.


3 Doctrinall, are those which contain some special doctrine, for the
edifying of the hearers, as are the books 1 of Job. 2 of Psalms, 3 of Proverbs,
4 of Ecclesiast. 5 Canticles, 6 Wisdom, 7 Jesus Sirach,


4 Prophetical, are those which were preached and written by the Prophets:
whereof 4. are called the greater, and the rest are called the lesser Prophets.
The greater, because they write greater and longer books: the lesser, because
they write lesser and smaller books.

5 Evangelical books, are they which contain the Evangelical stories of our
Savior Christ, set forth by the 4. Evangelists.

6 Epistolar are the writings and letters of the Apostles, and specially of
the apostle Paul.

The 3. division.
Some books of the Bible are Canonical. Apocrypha.


Canonical books are those, in which is preserved the authority of
Ecclesiastical oppinions.

Apocrypha or doubtful books, are those whose credit is doubted of, and serve
only for the instruction of the people: not for confirming the opinions of the
church: such are the books 1 of Judith. 2 of Wisdom. 3 of Tobia. 4 of Jesus
Sirach. 5 of Baruch. 6 of Machabees. 7 of The fragments in Hest. and Da^


All the rest are Canonical books, otherwise called Authenucall, from whence
the Canonical and auten^call scripture has his name, and they are Canonical
which read or expound the holy Scriptures.

Of the Books Legal, or the 5. Books of Moses.
THe books of Moses have their names in Greek Pentatenchou, of the numb. of 5.
because they are but 5. and of the Hebrews they are called 5. fiftes: and they
are ascribed to Moses, either because Moses wrote them, or because they
contain the story of Moses in them, and they are 5, 1 Genesis. 2 Exodus. 3
Leuiticus. 4 Numbers. 5 Deuteronomy.


1. Of Genesis.
GEnesis has his name of begetting, or of generation; because it is a book of
the generation of the world, both for the Creation of things, and for the
restoring of them after the flood. It has in it 50. Chapters, and is divided
into six principal parts, in regard of the six famous persons whose stories
are set forth in Genesis.

1. Adam is described from chap. 1, to cha. 6, 2. Noah, from the 6, to the 12,
3. Abram, from the 12, to the 20, 4. Isaac, from the 20, to the 28, 5. Jacob,
from the 28, to the 37, 6. Joseph, from the 37, to the end of ye book.
But Genesis in some contains, 1 The Beginning of the world. 2 The Deluge. 3
The Burning of Sodom. 4 The Destruction of Babell. 5 The Deeds of the
Patriarchs. 6 The Fall especially of mankind, and his restoring again by the
blessed seed of the woman, that is Jesus Christ.


2. Of Exodus.
EXodus is so called of going out, because here is described the going of the
children of Israel out of Egypt, as also the conversion of many in the
wilderness, where the law was published because men knew not what sin was.
For then God gave to his people the law of the ten commandments, and after by
Moses ordained Ceremonial and Judicial laws, that Religion and government
might be preserved among the Jews. In all which, as in the building of the
Tabernacle Christ was shadowed, so the law is a schoolmaister unto Christ.

The principal division of Exodus,
1 From the first chap. to the 7, after the description 1. of the birth. 2. of
the hiding* 3. casting into the water, 4. adoption, 5* slight, 6. marriage of
Moses, God gives (...) commandment both of his restoring into Egypt, and of
his bringing the people o^ Israel out of Egypt, because they were oppressed
with a hard bondage by Pharao* which co^mandme^t after long delay he does
execute. In ye midst of the 4. ch, he goes into Egypt, and with his brother
Aron goes unto K. Pharao and reasons with him about ye letting go of the
people, which is in the 6, chapter

2 From the 7. chap, to the 12, are described the ten plagues of Egypt, as that
1 of Blood. 2 of Frogs. 3 of Lice. 4 of Flies. 5 of Mouen of cartel. 6
Blanes. 7 Hail. 8 Locusts. 9 Darkness. 10 death of the 1. born


3 From the 12 cha. to the 16, is described the deliverance of the people of
Israel out of Egypt, not without puisuing, and yet by the mighty power of God.

4 From the 16, ch, to the 20, is described the going forward of gods people
through the desa^t, and their murmuring, and Gods deliverance with M^nn^ and
Qua^les.

In the 20, chap. the ^. commandementes are given to Moses.

6 From the 21, to 25, Judicial laws are ordained.

7 From the 25, to 32, are ordained laws ecclesiastical or ceremonial,
concerning the building of the Tabernacle.

8 From the 32, chap. to 36, are the tables given of the ten commandments.

9 From the 36, to the 40, chap is described the building of the Tabernacle.

10 In the last chap. hamely in the 40, the erecting of the Tabernacle is
described. Thus much of the book of Exodus.

3. Of Leuiticus.
LEuiticus the third book of Moses is named of the tribe of I euy, for the
Priesthood of Aron, which in this book is ordained with the laws thereof, and
is appointed for the purging and e^p^ation of sin, that it might signify the
true priest Christ Jesus the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the
world. For, for this cause were the Leuiticall Sacrifices, the Leuitical
hallowings and uncleanness, and other Leuiticall observations, wherein Christ
was shadowed.

This book is divided into many particulars, because it contains many
Ceremonial or ecclesiastical observations, so that it may well be called the
Ecclesiastical ordinance of Moses.

From the beginning of the first chap. unto the 6. some kind of Sacrifices are
described, as in this book many are contained, whereof some are here mentioned.

1 Of the first kind was the burnt offering, as a Sacrifice wholly to be
burned, because all of it was to be burnt and nothing thereof reserved as of
other sorts, some things were to be preserved for the priests. chap. 1,

2 [A meat oblation] which sacrifice is otherwise called CARBAS, a gift or
offerings as the oblation of sundry kinds of bread, chap. 2,

3 [A peace offering] wherein men being reconciled and obtaining peace did give
thanks unto God; wherefore it takes his name from peace among the Hebrews,
that it should be a sacrifice of thanksgeuing with clean beasts of both
sextes, offered by one that is received and reconciled. chap. 3,

4 [A sin offering] a sacrifice that should be offered for the sin of the
priest, people and prince, chap 4,

5 There are other sorts to be annexed, whereof there is mention made in this
book, as the sacrifice for the ignorance of the priest Prince, and people.

6 [A trespass offering.]

7 [A drink offering] in Hebrew called NESICH.

8 [A sacrifice of vowes] of the Hebrews called NEEDS, when men of their own
accord did vow some vow of sacrifice.

9 [The Ban offering] when men cursed themselves if they should take this or
that, and that wherein they cursed themselves, was to be offered unto the Lord.

Summarily, in the five first chap. are described sundry kinds of sacrifices,
and the causes for the which they were to be offered

From the 6. chapter to the 9. are diverse laws for sacrifice repeated: As
first of the burnt offering. 2. of peace offering. 3. Of sin offering, and
the preserving of them.

From the ninth to the 11. three things are set forth to us for example sake.
First, obedience to God, chap. 9. Secondly, disobedience toward God, chap. 10.
Thirdly, a precept of sobriety.

From the 11. chap. to the 18. are described, not only the unclean beasts, but
also other uncleanness and the purgings of the^, as, 1. Of childbearing women,
cha. 12. 2. Leperous men, chap. 13. 3. Menstruous women, chap. 15. 4. Dead
carcases.


From the 18. chap. to the 23. not only the degrees of consanguinity is
described in the 6. precept: but other precepts with a larger explication of
them is repeated.

From the 23. chap. unto the end, do follow other divine ordinances, as of
feasts, and for the poor. Secondly, of vows and tithes, then Sermons and
exhortations to the obedience of Gods word, with threatninges that the
offenders shall be punished.

Hitherto was set forth the book of Leuiticus which delivers the laws and
ordinaces of Moses concerning the outward worship of God, which did not only
discern the Jews from the Gentiles: but also they exercised themselves
therein, not that sins could be taken away before god with burnt offerings,
because the forgiveness of sins is by the only son of God. But that by
this outward discipline which had a reward anexed unto it, they might serve God.

4. Of the book of Numery.
THis book has his name of numbering, because the people of God are numbered
after their tribes, and are ordered for the exercise of religion, and their
places of abode, and their offices are distributed and apponited for every
several tribe. Here are repeated also many transgressions of the people, many
dangers, many punishments, and many blessings of God bestowed upon the people,
as they were between mount Sinay and the land of promise. Al which matters
have reference unto Christ, for whom the commonweal of Israel was set up. The
prophesy also of Balaam concerning the kingdom of Christ is in this book.

From the beginning of the book to the 5, chap. are numbered generallye: first
all the Tribes of the people of Isr. and the tents of every tribe are placed
about the tabernacle. Then particularly the tribe of Leuy is numbered, unto
whom by themselves their offices are appointed.

From the 5, chapter to the 7, are diverse laws described, as 1. of casting out the
host, 2. of Ielousy, 3. of Nazarits, unto which in th^end of the 6, chap. is
anexed a form of blessing, which our ministers do use (in stead of It^missa)
when the supper of Christ is ended: whereof there be these particulars, 1 The
Lord bless thee and keep thee. 2 The Lord lighten thee with his countenance,
and have mercy on thee. 3 The, Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and
give thee peace.


From the 7, to the 11, are sundry ordinances described: for the noble gifts
of Princes which were offered in the dedication of the Tabernacle being
erected, and of the altar, as the ordination of consecrating the Levites in the
8, chap. the ordination of the feast of the passover in the 9, cha. the
ordination of the trumpets in the 10, chap. which part is ordained in the end
of the 10, chapt. prayer of Moses before the lifting up and disposing of the
Arc.

From the 11, to the 17, are described fearful examples whereby men ought to
be brought to fear, as 1. The murmuting of ye people for flesh, and the
punishment of their murmuring. 2. The sedition of Aron and Marie his sister,
who was punished with Leprosy (against Moses.) 3. The unfaithfulness of the
spies of the land of Canaan which put the people in fear. 4. The murmuring and
weeping of the people, and the punishment of their incredulity. 5. The
punishment of those, that sin of ignorance, pride, etc. and of one that
gathered sticks upon the sabbath day. 6. The sedition and punishment of Corah.
Dathan. and Abiron.



From the 17, to the 21, besides the miracles of Arons rod bearing blossoms
is described, the dignity, office, and reward of the priests and Levites, with
the making of the sprinkling water of the ashes of a Cow, whereunto is added
the story of Arons death and of his sister Mary.

From the 22, to the 25, after the Conquest in battle against the Cananites,
is discribed a fearful example of Murmuring, punnished with fiery serpents:
where ye brazen serpent represents Christ John;, And then in the other 3
chapters is discribed the blessing of the people, and balams prophecy of
Christ.

From the 25, to the 28, besides ye dreadful punnishment of Fornication, the
people are again numbered before the division of ye land of Canaan, and the
law of inheriting is published.

From the 28, to ye 31, is discribed the ordayning of Sacrifices in every
feast, as Sacrifice.

1 Of the daily sacrifice. 2 Of the Sabaothes. 3 Of the new moons. 4 Of the
passover. 5 Of Whitsontide. 6 Of Trumpets. 7 Of Propitiation. 8 Of
Tabernacles. 9 Of Collection
To these is added a Description of sundry Vows.
From the 31 to the eude are established certain matters concerning Policy.

1 The parting of the spoil after the victory, in the war against the
Amalakites.

2 A particular dividing of the land of Canaan.

3 A rehearsal of the places of ab^ade, where the Israelites sometimes stayed,
for the space of 40. years.

4 A description of the bounds of the land of Canaan, and the choosing of them
that should be deuiders; with the part of the Levites, the Cities of refuge,
and possessions which might not be translated to another Tribe.

All these are full of Examples, of Faith and unbelief, of transgressions,
punishments, and of the marvelous administrations of God; having reference to
Christ that was to come in the flesh.

5. Of Deuteronomy.
SO called of DEVTEROS and NOMOS^ that is, of the second rehearsal and
publishing of the law: for whatsoever is propounded in Exodus and Leuiticus,
concerning moral, Ceremonial and Judicial laws the same Moses does almost
repeat in thi^ book. For it was very requisite, that the people being
punished for their disobed^ence, should again be brought to the observing of
the law. Moses therefore repeated the Law again, with all things that happened
unto them. Besides, what pertayned to the priesthood: and from the 9, chap, he
declares all those matters which pertained either to spiritual or corporal
government; all which he applies to this end, that they might draw us unto
Christ, of whom he prophesyeth plainly in the 18. chap, I will raise up a
prophet for them from among their brethren, etc. For the law is a schoolmaister
unto Christ, and the end of the law is Christ.

The Book is very fitly divided into 4. principal parts.
1 From the beginning to the 5. chap, are rehearsed some of Gods works and
benefits past unto the^, whereby the people are sharply admonished both of their
own unthankfulness and disobedience, and also put in mind of Gods goodness,
thereby to obey him.

2 From the fifth to the 20, he repeateth those things which either might
further or hinder faith, and which do chieflye concern spiritual government
and the true worship of God in the first Table: for first unto the 13 chap, he
repeateth the ten Commandments, with weighty admonitions and exhortations to
the fear of God and keeping the x. commandments of God, and with exhortations
from the Idolatry of the gentiles; especially after the inioying of the land of
Canaan, with a recital of some stories. The^ he faithfully repeateth the
ecclesiastical ordinances concerning ministers, and the ministry of the word,
Tithes, the year of Iubile, the principal feasts, choice of magistra* right of
the priesthood, and the Cities of refuge.

3 From the 13, chap, to the 20, all those things which belong to ye worship of
ye first Table.

4 From the 20, to the 31, he repeate^ those things that might either work or
hinder charity.

In the second Table, that which conce^^ outward government, as political
ordinances.

1 of Warlike affairs. 2 of The works of charity. 3 of Those things that were
fit for at office, of the^ that were to take i^ 4 of The bill of divorce. 5 of
thanfulnes toward Gods word.
Hereunto are added punishments for the breach of Gods commandment, and
rewards for keeping them: and that which is most comfortable he shows in the
30, ch, that through repentance there is a way for sinners to the mercy of God.

5 From the 31, cha. to the end of the book, are set forth those things which
happened about the death of Moses. For first he comfort the people, least
they should grieve and be discouraged because of his death, the^ with a notable
song he gives thanks unto God, and foretells what shall come to pas in the
land of promise. Afterward he blesses the people; and after the example of the
Patriarch Jacob. Gen 49, he blesses every several tribe, taking his leave of
them, and prophesies what shall befall unto then*

Lastly, he goes up to the mountain, and receiving comfort from God departs
this life; and as it is thought, he was both with body and soul carried up
into heaven, as he appeared with Eliah in mount Thabor.

Thus far of the Pentatenk of Moses, which is so called of the number five,
and of the last ve* be Tencho, which sign is to give instruction; as if it
were an instrument which is of five stringes: having respect to the only Lord
Jesus Christ, as he himself elsewhere, but especially in the last of Luke
does testifye, saying: Those things which are written of the son of man in
Moses, etc. also there are diverse places in the new Testament alleged out of
Moses.

Of the Book of Joshua.
NOw some of the books Historical do follow in order, until the 5. book of
Job. Amongst which, the chiefest are first: As that of Joshua, the Judges, and
Kings. Wherein we may plentifully learn, 1. The fear of God and Fai h. 2
weakness and the cross. 3 repentance and amenedment. 4 patience and comfort.

1 The book of Joshua takes the name of Joshua himself, the son of Nvun;
who was otherwise^ called Jesus Naue. He succeeded Moses in the office of
Magistracy: and as Moses guided and governed the people 40. years, being
(delivered out of Egypt) in the wilderness by the mighty hand of God* so Joshua
by the same power of god, brought the people into the land of Canaan, or the
land of Promise: taking the Caties, and killing or putting to flight the
inhabitants, and divided the land among the^, in which these three things are
to be severally observed.

1 That God kept his promise made to five Patriarchs, concerning the land of
Promise.

2 That the Commonweal of Israel is preserved for the foretelling of the
blessed seed of the woman, our lord Jesus Christ.

3 That God fights for his people against the wicked, whose sins he
punishes by wasting and killing them, for an example to all the ungodly, that
they might repent.

This book is divided as the principal book of Deuteronomy. into 4. parts.
First, from the beginning to the sixth cha, besides the calling of Joshua and
the confirming of him, and his governing of the common weal of Israel, and the
sending out of the spies: their danger and return: they^ myraculous passage
over the river lordan is described, with the remembrance thereof, and with a
new command of Circumcision, which for 40. years space had been omitted, and
the celebration of the Passeou^^.

2 From the 6 Chap: to the 13, besides the league made with the Gibbonites, and
the sin of sacrilege: the sacking of the Cities of Ieric^: Hai: etc. And the
killing of many Kings are here discribed, which in the 12 chapter are numbered,
that we may see how God fights mightily for his people, and that he rooteth
out the ungodly.

3 From the 13 chap. to the 20, is discribed the division of the land of
Canaan and the distributing thereof by lots, according to the Tribes of
Israel; whereby is showed that the promise of God is true.

4 From the 20 chap: to the end; the Cities of refuge are appointed, and the
fields of the Levites near to the city: then Rub. Gad, and the tribe of
Ma^asses are sent away to their own possessions, according to the covenant.
Number. 32, Afterward the care of I^su^ touching his posterity is showed by a
notable exhortation; and forbiding them to have society with the Gentiles; and
he shows a lardge rehearsal of Gods benefits: and making a covenant between
them and God: he calls back the people unto God, Lastly is declared the
death of Joshua and Eleazar the son of Aron, and the burying of Iosephes bones.

The book of Judges.
THe book of ye Judges, is named of those Iuges which after the death of
Joshua, Governed Israel: For it contains a description of Israells proceeding
after Iosuahes death under the Judges, who marvelously defended the people
from their enemies, wherein is to be observed that God preserved the common
weal of Israel for the same cause, for which he did establish it; Namely, for
his sons sake, that should be borne of the Ieweish people: also this is to be
noted, that the people of the old Testament were under four kinds of
Government, according to the diversity of the times.

1 Under a Fatherlye Authority, in the time of the Patriarchs, Moses and
Aaron.

2 Under the authority of Judges, during the time of these Judges.

3 Under the government of Kings, in the time of the Kings.

4 Under the government of the Priests, in the time of the Priests until
Christ: Who one for all is 1 Eternal Father. 2 Judge of the quick and dead.
3 King of Kings. 4 Everlasting hie priest.


There were in number as Judges 16.

1 Judas. 2 Simeon. 3 Othoniell. 4 Aroth. 5 Samgar. 6 Deborah the Prophetise. 7
Baruck. 8 Gedeon alias Ierobabell. 9 Abimelech. 10 Thola. 11 Iair. 12 Iepthe.
13 Abesau. 14 Achial^n. 15 Abdon. 16 Samson.
Now the book of Judges is deuied according to the order of the persons, as
they ruled in Israel.

From the beginning of the book to the 6 chap. 7. histories are discribed, of
the Judges, Judas, Simion, etc.

Amongst whom Deborah the prophetis sings a notable song in the 5. chap.

From the 6. to the 13, besides the story of Giddeon and his son, three
other Judges are discribed, Thola, Iair, and Iepthe, of the Sacrifising of his
daughter. chap, 11, from the 13, to the 17, is described an exelent story of
Samson, and here is Samson peculiarly commended in it, he was a figure of
Christ.

From the 17. to the end of the book, beside the Idol of Mica, and the
children of Dan is set forth a fearful and a lamentable story of a Levites
wise, for whom being ravished, fallen down dead, and cut into 12. pieces, the
whole tr^be of Benjamin was al most extinguished: that by this one example, we
may learn that God does severely and fearfully punish adulteries.

Thus far goes the Book of Judges, wherein are set before us many examples,
to stir us up to repentance: in which we also see that God has always
sharply punished Idolatry and other fearful sins, but has been merciful
to the repentant: that this book may well be called, the boo^ of the Wrath
and Mercy of God.

The book of Ruth.
THe book of Ruth is so named of Ruth, a woman that was a gentile, to wit: a
Moabite of the people of Moab, who was the son of Lotte Genesis 16,

This book contains only 4, chap, besides that, it is an example of
domestical care, wherein it also declares, that God even then had care of the
Gentiles, and that the Gospel was revealed to the Gentiles: after these things
Ruth and other of the Gentiles are joined to the seed of Abraham.

This book contains part of the genealogy of David, which by the Evangelist
is translated into the genealogy of Christ: so that you may say that this
book also has reference to Christ; and thou may know that it was decreed
long before, that Christ should be borne of sinners and harlots, for the
abolishing of sins. And furthermore thou should not doubt salvation also to
be ordained for the Gentiles.

It is divided into 2 parts.
JN the two former chap: Ruth is set down for an example, how all Daughters in
law ought to behave themselves: Humbly and dutifully toward their Mothers
in-lawe. 2, In the other chapt is an example of Chastity in Booz.

The books of Kings.
THe 4 Historical books which are entitled the books of the Kings, after
the usual edition, are in Hebrew only two, whereof, the first is named
SAMVELL, and is divided of the Latins into 2 books, the which are called the
books of Samuel. The later of them is called the book of Kings: which in
like manner, is divided into 2 books which are called the books of the Kings.

This Samuel was a most faithful and constant Prophet of God, under King
SAVL, of who^ the 2 first books do take their names: and in the one of them,
the story of Saul; in the other, the story of David is larglie discribed.

The two latter books are commonly called the books of the Kings, because
they conteyne the History of all the other kings, both in Israel and in Judah.

In the first book of Samuel is discribed the beginning of the third kind of
government, namely, the Kings under wicked K. Saul; under whom, the kingdom
and monarchy was ordained in Israel.

In the second book of Samuel the kingdom is translated from Saules house
unto David's, the most godly king and Prophet, which is worthiely called the
crown of prophets.

In the 1. book of the kings, it is according to the vulgar edition; and in
the third of the Kings is discribed, first the story of Sallomo^: the king,
in whose time the Temple was built unto the Lord in Jerusalem. 2. the dividing
of the kingdom into two parts: namely, Judah and Israel: and in the
histories, some of the Kings of both parts are largely discribed.

In the 2. book of Malchim, that is to say, in the 4. book of the kings,
according to the vulgar, all the kings in Israel and in Judah are discribed:
also the wasting and carrying away the people of Israel, captives into Assiria,
and Judah into Babylon. In the mean while, the books are garnished with ye
promise concerning Christ which were made unto David. 2. Kings 3,

A Catalogue of the Kings of the People of Judah.
Saul, David, 1. Kings 9, 2. Kings 3,
Sala:
These 3. reigned over all the People of Israel and Judah, before the
description of the T^^bes: Afterward ten tribes sell away from the ten, and
they became two kingdoms, as the Kingdom of Iud: with the two tribes: Judah
and Benieamin, and the kingdom of Israel with other ten Tribes.

The Kings of Judah.
1 Roboam. 3 12. 14 2 Abias. wicked. 3 15. 3 Asa. 2 (...) 15. 4 Iehosop. Godly.
2 16. 5 Za^bnas. 3 12. 6 Ioram. wicked 4 11. 7 Ochozl^s 8 Ioas. Godly 9 Amasias
partly wicked, and partly Godly. 10 Azarias. like father, like son. 11
Ioathan, such an other, 4 14. 15. 12 Achas. wicked. 4 15. 16. 13 Iachi, as
Godly 4 18. 21. 14 Manasses wicked, 4 21. 22. 15 Anion, like father, like 4 23.
16 Josias 4 24. 17 Ioachas Godly 4 24. 18 Ioachim wiiked. 22 19 Ioachim, a
child like the father. 20 Zedechias wicked, 4

This Zedechias the last captain and king of Judah, was with the people of
Judah carried into Babylon, 4. Kin, 25, and the people of Judah remained in
captiuitye 70. years, according to the prophesy of Jeremy.

The kings of Israel.
1 Hieroboam. wicked 4 book of Kings. 13 2 Nadab. 3 15 3 Baasa. 3 15 4 Hela. 3
16 5 Lambti. 3 16 6 Achab. 3 18 7 Ochozias. wic. 4 kin 3, 8 Ioram. 4 9 Iehu
partly god, part. wic. 4 kin. 10, 10 Ioachim. wic. 4 kings 12 11 Ioas. 4 13 12
Jeroboam, wicked. 4 k. 14 13 Zacharias, part. good, part. bad. 14 Sellon
wicked. 4 kings. 15 15 Manachem. 4 15 16 Phaceas. 4 15 17 Phasea. 4 15 18 Ose.
4 15

In the days of this last king, Israel was carried into Assyria, where they
remained in captivity, 4. king. 17,

The first book of Sammuell may fitly be divided into three principal parts.

From the beginning thereof to the ninth chap: is set forth the story of
Samuel, which was both a Judge and a Prophet in Israel, and namely the

Birth. Of Samuel. Calling. Of Samuel. Oblation. Of Samuel. Old age. Of
Samuel.
The sight also of Gods people against the the Phillistians is discribed, and
the Mirracle done about the Arc: and the hard hap of Helie the priest; for ye
cockering of his sons, is by Samuel foretold to the People, in the end of
this part.

2 From the 9. chapter, to the 16. the first part of Saules history is
discribed:

1 the Calling, of Saul. 2 the Anointing of Saul. 3 the Prophesing, of Saul. 4
the Confirming, of Saul. 5 the Victory, of Saul. 6 the Kingdom, of Saul. 7
the Meekenes, of Saul. 8 the Offense, of Saul.
1 From the 16. chap: to the end, is the other part of Saul's story
described, how until his death he was employed not only in the war against
the Philistians, but much more in pursuing of David: where not only David's
being anointed ouercomming of Goliath, and league with Jonathan Saul's son,
but also the manifold and dangerous fights of David, and his deliverance is
described, that every one may see how the Lord made his servant admirable, and
carried him to the pit of destruction, and brought him back again, til at
length being strengthened with the cross, he obtained the ^ingdome, and
proved a most godly King and Prophet.

The 2, book of Sam which contains the whole story of David may well be
deuid into 3. principal parts.
From the beginning to the 11. cha, besid^ the revenge upon the traitors and
murtheren of Saul, is described the anointing and the consecrating of David
unto his Kingdom after the death of Saul, and his happy success, being full
of humility, of piety and forwardnes to the building of Gods house, victories
against the Philistians and others, mercy, fidelity, benefits, etc. to whom
also was made the promise of Christ, chap. 7. whereof mention is made in the 10.
to the Heb.

From the 11. to the 22. are described the the adultery and murder of D^. and
his hard hap after his repentance, at the parable and preching of the Prophet
Nathan, through his own sons who committed whoredom with his wives. And
namely the danger of sedition by his son Absolon, with other punishments of his
sin, and decay of his kingdom. Also ye famine and other calamities that
followed ye adultery and murder of David.

From the 22. cha. to ye end do follow first ye song and tha^ksgiuing, the^ y^
last words of D. and his great offense committed against god, in numbering the
people, with the great punish me^t of his sin, which Da. chose before y^ rest
of 3. kinds of punishment set before him, having his choice, so that here also
we may have an especial book, concerning the wrath and mercy of God.

The 3. book of Kings which is called the first of the kings, containing both
the story of Salo. and of some other kings, and is divided into 3, principal
parts, the 1. of Sal. the 2. of Roboam Salo. son, and of some other kings, the
3. of the wicked K. Achab, and of ye most ungodly Q. Ies. and also of Eliah the
prophet.

The story of Sal. is divided into three parts.

1. Before the building of the Temple. 2. In his building the, etc 3. After the
building.
Before his building the temple, from the beginning of the 5. chap. besides the
story of David's old age, in the 1. chap. and of his death in the 2. is
discribed the consecration of King Sallomon, his wisdom, Justice, and renown:
whereof Christ also makes mention in the 6. chap: of Matthew.

In the building of the Temple, first how he deals with King Hiram about the
matter, then the fashion; and lastly the frame and buildings from the 5. to the
8. Chap.

After the building of the Temple, from the 8. chap: to the 12. does follow:
First the hallowing of the Temple, and prayer of Solomon: then the building of
Cities, and the magnificence of Solomon: after which both lust and fearful
Idollatrie did ensue; and for the same, the kingdom of Israel was divided
into two parts, and Ieroboham was stirred up against Solomon; so flourishing
kingdoms are wont to decay, faint, and in the end by Idollatrie to perish
altogether: lastly Solomon is saved through the blessed seed of the woman: He
dies in peace, and is buried in the City of his father David.

The 2. part, from the 12. to the 17. besides the story of certain kings,
co^teyneth the seperatio^ of ye kingdom of Israel, from the kingdom of Judah.

The 3. part, from the 17. chap: unto the end of the book, conteyneth both
the in^ piety, wrong and tyranie, of King Achab, and Queen I^^abell, and also
the prayer, consta^cie, and flight of the Prophet Elias, and his personal
fasting 40. days and this book may be very famous, because of king Solomon
and the prophet Elias: who reigned not only in earth; but in heaven also.

The fourth book of the kings is called the second of the kings.

Conteyneth the histories of others the kings of Israel and Judah; after the
wicked king Achab: and is famous for both captiuities in the caryinges away;
one of Israel, into Assiria: in the 17. chap. the others Judah into Babylon in
the last chap.

Also besides the histories of Helias and Elizeus the prophets unto the 10.
chap. by order of succession, do follow one an other the kings of Israel and
Judah, sometimes good and sometimes bad: sometimes most Godly, as Josias,
Ezekias, sometimes most wicked, as Ioas and Manasses, with other, to the end
of the book: under which kings, all ye prophets, both Elias, and they which
were before the captivity of Babylon, did prophecy and many of them were
crowned with martiredome, as Esaias, Jeremy, Amos, Zachary, Zachary, and the
rest.

Of the books called Paralipomenon.
PAralipomenon takes his name of leaving, because it handles that, which in
the books of the Kings is left out or omitted; and is derived of Para, that
is like, and Leipomai, to leave or omit: they may be also called, books of
chronicles, because they conteyne histones of things done from year to year,
whereupon the Title in hebrew is dibre haiamaim, that is, words of days, for
in these two books are described particularly, the acts and deeds of the
kings of Israel: but it is uncertain, whether these 2. books be that one,
whereof mention is made in the books of the Kings, when it is said; are not
those things written in the book of the words of the days of ye kings of
Judah?

These two books are thus divided.

The former (which has 30. chap.) conteyneth the histories of Saul and David,
besides the numbering of the tribes.

The latter which has 36. chap. conteyneth the histories of Saul, Solomon, and
all other kings of Israel and Judah.

The sum of the first book is this.

1 From the beginning to the 12. chap. besides the story in the 10. of the
priests and Levites, and in the 11. of Saul's death, are set forth the
rehearsals of the fathers and Patriaches from the beginning of the world, and
especially of the 12. tribes of Israel.

2 From the 12. chap: to the 24. the history of David is amplified; which is
in the Second book of Samuel.

3 From the 24. chapter to the end, is set down a catalogue of the princes of
David: also how forgetfullnes and death and the end of all ceased upon David.

The some of the 2. book called Paralipomenon.

1 From the beginning to the 10. chapter those things of king Salom. are enlarged,
which are contained in the greater part of the third book of kings.

2 From the 10. chap: to the end, are discribed the acts and deeds of the
other kings which are written in the 3. and in all the 4. books of the kings.

The book of Esdras.
The two books, to weet, the 1. and the 2. of Esdras, which is also called the
book of Nehemias, are by the hebrews joined together in one, but the third
and fourth book of Esdras, are not commonly used amongst the Hebrews, albeit
the third be for ye most part taken out of the book of the Chronicles.

The books of Esdras and Nehemiah do by good order of the historye follow the
books of the kings and Chronicles. For as the book of the kings and
Chronicles do contain the histories of the state of the Israelites, before
the captivity in Babylon. So these two books of Esdras and Nehemias, do show
what things were done amongst the people of the Jews, after the captivity
in Babylon. For Esdras and Nehemias (which are said to have been scribes to
Jeremy) do bring back the people from that captivity in Babylon, and restore
the City of Jerusalem and the Temple, I mean both the Common weal and the
church, whose hearers and incouragers, were the prophets Agge and Zachary. And
this reedifying was made, because of Christ, who shortly after was to come, and
to be borne in Bethlem, to preach in this second temple of Jerusalem, and in
the end to suffer without Jerusalem.

The sum of the Book of Esdras.
It has ten chap, which are thus divided. From the beginning to ye 4. ch, is
described ye releasing of the Jews, granted by Cirus K. of the Persians. Then
the people are numbered and gathered together in Jerusalem, by Z^robabell their
captain, beginning again their oblations and festiuals. And here may be
observed the marvelous judgment of God and his goodness toward the Gentiles,
by the captivity of the Jews. For as Nabuchadnezar and Euilmeredech before the
deliverance, were converted by the mean of Daniell and Darius king of the
Medes, and Cirus king of the Persians after the deliverance: so the captivity
of the Jews was profitable unto the Gentiles.

From the 4. chap; to the 9, is described the building again of the Temple by
the persuasion of Agge and Zachary the pro^hets, after the hinderance thereof
42. years under Darius the younger: so that you may ^^e the envy and policy
of Satan in hindering ^he true worship of God as much as may be. Then the
temple is furnished again by Es^ras. Darius supplying religiouslye that which
was wanting, and restoring those things which had been taken away.

From the 9, to the end, is described the ^eale of Esdras, in separating and
removing (...) strange women; where especially are to be observed, the common
places of praye^ and of true repentance. And in this whole book must be
observed, how God one while punishes his elect offending, as here, by the
captivity of Babylon: another while receives them again to favor, as here,
by Esdras and Nehemias.

The sum of the book of Nehemias, which also is called the second Book of
Esdras.
1 First, from the beginning of the book to the 8 chap, after the faithful
prayer of Nehemias the Jew, with the confessing of his sins; he obtains of
his heathen Lords Artaxerxes the king (whose Butler he was in Persia) leave to
return to his brethren in Judea: so as we may see that deed do follow
faithful prayer: coming to Jerusalem he begins to reedify the City, not
without troble, persecution, and many hindrances: so that the people were both
molested in such sort by their enemies, that they were driven to hold their
sword in one hand, and to build with the other: and also they were afflicted
with so great famine and s^arsitie, that Nehemias in the 5 chapt, commanded by
an edict, that all they which had taken ^surie, should restore it wholye unto
the poor. Lastly, though he were not free from the deceipts of wicked men,
yet he went forward with the work, until he had appointed a continual watch,
and the gates to be shut in the night season.

2 From the 2 chap, to the 11, religion is restored, the Law is repeated, the
people are instructed, and the covenant is renewed: for without Religion and
the word of God, al is filled with errors.

3. From the 11 chap, to the end of the book: first the habitations of the
people are set out by themselves, then the Levites are numbered: lastly, strange
women are separated; order is taken for the Leuies, and the keeping of the
Sabbath is renewed.

The third book of Esdras (as it is called) contains only an amplification
of those things which are comprehended in the book of Nehemias, except those
which are repeated in the first chapter, out of the books of the Chronicles.

The 4. book of ^sdras, which is not his, seems to be collected out of
diverse places, and contains an amplification of those things which are
sufficientlye described in the first Book of Esdras: so as it is not likely
that Esdras would thrice repe^ts the same things. But howsoever the matte^ be,
these two last books as they are not (...) Hebrew, so seem they for little
use.

Therefore let us come to the books th^^ follow: as 1. of Tobias, 2. Judith,
3. Hester. All which may be reckoned among the books which are Historical,
and brief be running over them, let us see what especially they contain in
them that may serve to edification.

The book of Tobias.
THE book of Tobias, whether it be a story or some devised thing, as it may
seem to be a Comedy. It has his use, for it shows how it usually falls out
to the religious country man, o^ any other that lives in wedlock: namely,
that he is subject to afflictions, but the end thereof is good. So that such
as are married, may here learn to have patience in faith, in hope of eternal
life. And thus the book of Tobias is a glass for the^ that are married, at ye
book of Jesus Syrach is an instruction for an householder.

There are 14. chapters in it, which may thus be divided; if once we know that
Tobias with other Israelites, was in the time of Salmanaser king of the
Assyrians, carried captive into Assyria, and lived there with trouble and
persecution amongst the wicked.

1 From the beginning of the 5. chap, is described Tobias the fathers or the
Elders,

1 His Religion. 2 His Marriage. 3 His Godliness. 4 His Troble under
Senacherib. 5 His Carfulnes in butieng ye godly deceased. 6 His Blindness. 7
His Prayer. 8 His Fatherly love toward his son. 9 His
2 From the 5. cha, to the 13, are described Tobias the younger.

1 His going to Rages a city of ye Medes to the house of Gamaliel. 2 His
Deliverance from a fish by the An. 3 His Marriage with Sara Raguels dau, 4 His
Prayer. 5 His Return. 6 His Curing of his father. 7 His The departure of the
Angel.
All which things do commend unto us the estate of Marriage as honorable Heb.
13. which is governed even by Angels.

3 From the 13, to the end, is described old Toby

1 His Thanksgiving. 2 His Prophesyeng of Jerusalem. 3 His Years. 4 His
Death. 5 His Burial, with the description of the destruction of Niniue, the
restoring of Jerusalem, and of young Tobias re^nno to his own: his death, etc.
Thus God disposes of household affairs, and is a comfort unto the faithful
which are married, in all their troubles.

The Book of Judith.
THe book of Judith, is so called of Judith, and is reckoned amongst the
Apocripha books: for men doubt whether it be a story, or some devised matter,
as it has the form of a Tragedy. But howsoever the case stands, it is a
profitable book and was confirmed in the Nicen Synod, to be accounted amongst
the holy books of the Bible: for it points out the Tyranny of the wicked,
and their fearful overthrow as also the confidence and victory of the godly,
albeit they are exercised with afflictions.

It has 16, chapters, which are thus divided.
First, from the beginning to the ^ ch^, is contained, first generally the
victory of Nabuchadnezar by his prince Holofernes.

Holofernes threats and wrath against the Israelites, and lastly, the
Israelites resista^ce one while, and fear another while, as it comes to pass
in the afflictions of ye saints, through the weakness of the flesh, the
dyuell in his instruments rages so greatly.

2 From the 8, to the 13, is set forth the constancy of Iudyth, who was a
widow and a Jew of the Tribe of Symeon, and her hope of deliverance. 2 her
prayer, 3 policy, 4 her success, 5 her bolduesse, in cutting off the tyrants
head, her return into the City of Bethulia: so that we may certainly
conclude, that God is as well able to save with a few, as with many; as well by
women, as by men: that the victory may be the Lords, whose power in our
weakness is perfected.

3 From the 13, to the end, the Jews do triumph for the victory, and their
enemies being slain, they give thanks to Judith, and she unto God, and at
length in a perfect age she ended this life. Praise, glory, and honor, be
ascribed unto God, who in vanquishing the ungodly does defend and preserve his
elect, by what means soever it be.

The Book of Hester.
THe book of Hester, is so called of Hester a Jewish woman, whom Ahasuerus had
taken to wife, who otherwise was called Artaxerxes successor to Cirus, in the
Persian Empire. For those things which are contained in this historye, happened
in the Persian Monarchy, after the return of the Jews from Babylon, but
before the restoring of the people.

And God to preserve his people, among whom Christ should be borne, he did
here myraculously put away a danger, which was intended against all the Jews,
which as yet remained in Persia, by this example to comfort them that returned
home, and incorage them confidently and cheerfully to go forward in restoring
that commonweal wherein Christ was to preach the Gosper, and to begin his
government.

Now concerning the division of ye book, we must note, that only the 9. sonner
cha, are in the hebrew, and none of the rest unto the end; and therefore in
Luthers-Dutch copy, it is separated from the other part, and set by itself in
the end of the old Testament.

Otherwise, there are 16, chap, as in the book of Judith, which are divided,
as it were in manner of a Comedy,

The first act might be unto the 4. chapt, wherein Queen Vasthi disobeying her
husband, is put away, and Hestera most beautiful virgin, is chosen Queen. But
by the advancement of Haman, and his deceit, the Jews do mourn, because that
all of them were in danger of their lives, by the letters that the king sent
out against them. So may we see by this example of Vasthi and Hester, how
God does put down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the humble: and
in Haman, how God for a time does suffer tyrants to flourish and tyrannize,
that their fall and punishment may be the greater in the end.

The second act, is from the 4. chap, to the 9, in which follows a comfort
by this Qu. Hester, that being persuaded by Mardocheus his many prayers,
takes upon her the defense of the Jews, and brings Mardocheus into the
kings favor, whereby at length Hamans deceit being made known to the king,
he is hanged, and other letters contrary to the former, are sent forth,
whereby the people of the Jews are delivered from danger of death, and their
mourning is turned into joy, that it might be verified of Haman, which the
Psalm speaks: He fell into the pit which he made but of the Jews: the net
is broken and we are delivered.

The 3. Act is in the 9. chap. concerning the revenge which the Jews took,
partly on the sons of Haman, and partly on other their enemies. Thus far
goes the story in Hebrew.

The 4. Act is of those things which are not in the Hebrew, concerning
Mardoche^^ dream, with the interpretation thereof, and of the letters
published against the Jews, and of Mardocheus prayer: unto ye 14. cha.

The 5. Act to the end, of the mourning and prayer of Hester, of her suit to
King Ahasuerus for the Jews, and letters sent forth contrary to the former:
of the saving of the Jews, and of their appoynting of festival days, in
remembrance of so great a benefit as God bestowed upon the Jews by Hester,
Ahasuerus and Mardocheus. So God is now and always present with his Church and
people, to help them at all need. Glory be to Christ for evermore, Amen.

The book of Job.
THe book of Job is named of Job, of whom is said in the 14. of Ezech. If
these three were in the midst of them, Noce, Daniell and Job, they in their
own righteousness should deliver their own souls, says the Lord of Hosts.
But who wrote this book? Moses (as some thinks) or some other, it is
uncertain. Neither skilleth much to know it, seeing it is out of question,
that this book contains the words of the holy ghost.

The sum of the book handles this question. Whither the righteons are
afflicted of God, or not? Job proves by many firm arguments, that God uses
to send many afflictions to innocent and godly men, only for his own
glory: as Christ speaks af a man borne blind, John. 9.

But the friends of Job impugn this sentence, and they contend with him in many
probable arguments, that the godly are not afflicted of God, but if they be
afflicted, then it is for their sins.

This whole book is spent betwixt Job and his 4. friends; at length God
himself dissolues the controversy.

This book contains 42. chap, which are thus divided.
In the first three chapt, is contained: history of the diverse afflictions of
Job, and the temptations of Satan, that first assailed Jobs children and his
possessions, but when he suffered all that most patiently, at length he set
upon his own person, whereby he was made so impatient through the greatness
of grief, that he did not only horribly curse the day of his nativity, but
also praise death before this life: where it is to be observed, how diligently
satan persisteth in temptation, until he make man horribly to sin against
God.

From the 4 chap, unto the 8, is described the first disputation betwixt Job
and his friend Eliphaz the Themanite: the argument that Eliphaz propounded
against Job; to wit, God punishes men only for their sins: Job answered,
that he took it not to be so: and he complains of the troblesomnesse of his
friends, that they did more terrify him, then comfort him.

From the 8, chap, to the 11, is written the second Shuhite disputation,
betwixt Job and his second friend Bildad, concerning the same argument: that
God punnisheth Job for his sins, the which Job again denies to be so, with
a complaint that he did not know the cause of his affliction.

From the 11, unto the 15, follows the 3. disputation concerning the same
argument, betwixt Job and his third friend Zophar, the Naamathite, to whom Job
did propounde this question. Wherefore are good men sometimes in distress? 5.
and afterward he unfolds the question or argument, and at length bewails all
men's myserie on earth.

From the 15, unto the 22, again Jobs three friends begin in order to dispute
against him. First Eliphaz accuses Job to be a sinner, the which Job denies
not: and then reproues Eliphaz and his fellows, saiing: that they were badde
comforters. Secondly, Bildad, as he had before, says; that God uses to punish
the wicked for their sins with many plagues; and he would infer, Job to be
wicked, because he is much punished of God. Job answers, that his fortitude
and strength was in the grave. Thirdly, Zophar alleges that it goes well with
wicked men, but not long: and labors to prove that Job is such a one. Job
shows the contrary to be true in every part that is to wit; that it goes long
well with the wicked in this life, but that he is not wicked.

From the 22, unto the 32, Jobs 2 friends Eliphas and Bildad, did yet more
vehemently set upon him with the same opinion, repliyng herewith according to
man's reason as they did before, but in vain was it. Job stands with a settled
mind, although he lay in great mysery. Sometimes he teaches them, and
sometimes he adds his complaints: sometimes he purges himself before his
friends, that he was of an unblameable life.

From the 32, to the end, God himself at length does preach before Job,
rehearsing all the works of his power, minding to teach him, that he was
unjustly accused of him. Upon the which sermon in the last chap, Job
repents, and is restored to his perfection, for an example to us all of true
repentance.

So much concerning the book of Job, In which was handled concerning the
suffering of the saints, and of the impatience of flesh and blood, which God
pardons in his saints, thanks be to God for ever.

The Psalms of David.
Psalms has his name or deriuation of singing, because it is written in verse
to sing. More anciently, it is called a private speaking, because that an only
speech was had, betwixt God himself and Christians only. It is called a
little Bible, because it contains briefly, all that is in the Bible. As for
example.

1 Histories. 2 Law. 3 Promises. 4 Faith. 5 Consolations. 6 Repentance.
David, a King and Prophet, is the author of the Psalms: the holy Ghost
speaking in him. Matthew. 22, How does David in spirit call him Lord.

There are of the Psalms in number 150, which are to be divided 3. manner of
ways.

The first division.
Some are properly called Psalms, others are called Hymns. They are Psalms,
as long, or as often as David does desire any thing of God.

They are called Hymns, when as he giver God thanks for a benefit received.

The second division.
The Psalms, according to the Hebrews, are divided into 5. books, which are
discerned or known in the vulgar edition, by these notes or marks, Amen, Amen:
or So be it, So be it.

The first book contains 41. Psalms, which are al David's, whence all the
psalms are ascribed to him: and this first book continues unto this psalm. As
the Heart desires the water brooks, etc.

The 2, Book contains 31, psalm. which are ascribed in the beginning to the
sons of Chore, being singers: they are al David's, except one of Asaph, and
the last Salomons: and this second book continues unto this Psalm; How good is
God unto Israel.
The third book contains 17 Psalm. of which 11, are to be ascribed to
Asaph, ^hree to the sons of Chore, one to David, and the two latter are
ascribed to two other ^ingers.

The fourth book also contains 17, Psalms, of the which, the first 9. are
attributed to Moses the servant of God, the rest are David's: and this book
does last unto the 107 Psalm, Praise ye the Lord.

The fifth Book contains 45. Psalms, of the which many are attributed to
David, in the mean time, some of them being uncertain for the hearers, they
are marked sometimes before the Psalm, sometimes after, and sometimes in both
places, by this Hebrew word HALLELVIA, so as it seems to be a giving of
thanks to God, for such a Psalm. The Author is not known: And this 5. book
continues unto the end of the Psalter.

The third division,
All the Psalms are 5 fold, to wit:

1 Prayers. 2 Giving of thanks. 3 Consolations. 4 Prophesies. 5 Doctrines.
1 All the Psalms are prayers, in which something is sought of God: as this,
Be^ merciful unto me O God, etc. Again, He^^ us O god, etc. Again, Lord in thy
wrath, etc

2 All the Psalms are Thankesgiuings it which we do give thanks unto God for
be benefits received: as this, O praise ye the Lord, etc.

3 All the Psalms are consolations, in which we comfort one another: as this,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven Blessed is the man.

4 All the Psalms are prophetical, in the which the Messiah is foretold, with
his kingdom; his resurrection and ascension: as, O Lord our God. God shall
arise, and the Gentiles, etc.

5 All the Psalms are Doctrinall, which continues histories and instructions
or reformations of manners. As behold how good and pleasant, etc. He that
dwells in the closet of the most highest, and does re^^an^e in the shadow of
the almighty. Unless the Lord build the house, etc. Again, by the rivers of
Babylon.

Besides all these, there are sundry and diverse uses of the Psalms. As for
example.

1 So often as thy heart is heavy. 2 So often as thou art destitute of man's
help. 3 So often as thou art oppressed by thy enemy. 4 So often as thou art
molested by the eues. 5 So often as thou art enforced to exilement, or driven
into banishment. 6 So often as thou art in danger of laiyng await of others. 7
So often as thou art deprived of wife and chil. 8 So often as thou art
oppressed with poverty. 9 So often as thou art ouergrown with diseases 10 So
often as thou art pressed with envy. 11 So often as thou art had in contempt.
12 So often as thou art deposed, or put out of of.
But it is to be observed, that the vulgar edition has erred in the numbering
of the Psalms. Therefore they are to be numbered according to the Hebrew truth.

This is to be observed, that David is painted and set forth with his harp,
because of those Psalms: as from him playing or singing upon the Harp.

The Books of Solomon the K.
Three books are attributed to Solomon.

Proverbs. Ecclesiastes. Canticles.
Which thus among themselves are to diuid.

1. Proverbs for young men. 2. Eccle. for men of stayed years. 3. Cant. for
old men.
The book of the Prou. does contai^ doctrine concerning obedience, co^cernin^
good works, and manners, withthe which christian young man is adorned.

Eccles. contains doctrine concerning the cross, and consolations in
temptation with the which they are aflicted and tempted, that are settled and
full grown in religion and godliness.

The Cant. are certain, pleasant, and swee^ thanksgiuings, with the which the
godly* that are ready to depart from hence in: full age, do ascribe all that
power unto God, by which they have been here lustained.

The Book of the proverbs.
THe book of the Prou: besides this, that it contains most excellent
sentences, in which it teaches, partlye the fear of God, and faith in God,
partlye honest manners and conuersations in this life.

He has a most excellent Oration, by the name of wisdom, concerning the
eternal word of God, by the which all things are made and governed, that is
Jesus Christ our Lord.

This book is divided after this manner:

From the beginning unto the 10, ch^. there are certain common exhortations,
by way of preface to those things that teach a christian man, as are
exhortations to wisdom, discipline, knowledge, honesty, and perfectnes in the
1. chap,

In the 2. chap, to hear and learn the word of God, with promises thereunto
anexed,

In the 3. chap, to believe the word of God, and to use rightly our goods and
possessions, to suffer adversity in the cross.

In the 4, chap, to obey parents, promises being added.

In the 5. chap, exhortations to chastity, against adultery and fornication.

In the 6, chap. to must in God, contrary to the confidence in man, and again
to labor in youth.

In the 7, chap, to concord, and chastity, against adultery, and that most
sharply.

In the 8. and 9, chap. He come^ds wisdom excellently, that is to say, the
word of God: and thus far the preface.

From the 10, unto the 25, he sets down proverbs or sentences in every chapt,
there are many and diverse sorts, which cannot be aptly reduced into any head.

From the 25, to the 30, chap, does follow proverbs, which are attributed to
Solomon, but were taken perchance out of a certain book, by Sela and some
other writers of king Ezechiah.

In the last two chap, there are the Proverbs of Solomon, but under strange
titles. As Agur and Lamuell: in which words it is thought that Salamon is
called. First, of gathering, because he gathered such Proverbs. After that,
from the presence of God, because God was with Israel in the days of Solomon.

The book which is called Ecclesiastes.
THe second book of Solomon called Ecclesiastes, because Solomon was called
Eccles. that is to say, A preacher. Or else, because he speaks to a multitude,
and not to one only: or for his wisdom, with the which he was plentiously
endued.

This book seeks in every kind of life and institution of men sure felicity
in this world, but he finds nothing but vanity.

Therefore at length he comes and pronounces, that nothing is better for manne
then to fear God, and to keep his commandments: that whatsoever shall happen
in this world, yet man should remain in the judgment of God. But because these
things cannot be without Christ, therefore this book as the rest does send
the Reader unto Christ.

There are 12. chap, which are thus to be divided.
From the beginning unto the 8. cha, instructing men of a ripe age, he teaches
that in earthly things there is nothing everlasting, but momentany and
altogether short whatsoever we do see: and he condemns al men that put their
felicity any where else but in God. For after his preface which hand leth the
nature of things,

He condemns 1 the Wisdom. 2 the Joy. 3 the Unstableness. 4 the violence
and reproach 5 the babbling and chat. 6 the Covetousness 7 the shortness of ye
days
of this life.

From the 8, cha, unto the end, he sets forth wisdom with her effects, and
afterward with the fruits, to wit:

True repentance, Amendment of life, Almes-deedes, etc.
And he teaches, that they are truly blessed of God, which are joined with
God, and are united unto him through religion, and godlynes, and also the
lawful use of other things.

In the end he reckens up the inconvenience of old age, and the decay of all
his strength, that draws nigh to death Therefore let every man live in the
fear of God, let him faithfully perform his office, and let him use the
things created of God to the glory of God.

The book of the Canticles.
THe 3. book of Sal. whose Title is, The Song of songs. Solomon has set
forth many songs, to wit 105.3. King 4 but because that this song is more
excellent the^ the rest, and more glorious, it is called the song of songs: and
it contains secreete mysteries under the Metaphors of the bridegroom and the
Bride, of Christ and of his Church, or of all the godly. For though the verse
be thank of giving, in which, thanks are given to God, because he has adorned
the common weal of Israel with great benefits: to wit, with a king and
priest. Yet he shadoweth the kingdom of Christ, for whom all men does give
thanks unto God, that here have fought a good fight, to whom is appointed a
crown of righteousness in heaven, whiles they are ingrasted with their spouse
eternally.

Because it cannot be divided into parts, since that through 8. chap, there is a
certain perpetual speech, between the bridegroom and the bride.

To conclude, this book contains most excellent and particular matter,

1 Concerning the kingdom of God. 2 Concerning the Ministry of his word. 3
Concerning the variety of the gifts of the holy ghost 4 Concerning the
perpetual felicity through Christ. 5 Concerning the defense or protection of the
highest 6 Concerning the Tranquillity of the elect. 7 Concerning the peace or
quietness of conscience.
The book of Wisdom.
ALthough this book by the title seems to be Salomons, yet it is ascribed
to Philo, a man most wise and learned of the Jews, who was the ambassador of
the Jews to the Emperor Caligula, against which tyrannous prince and the like
ungodly men, Philo Iudeus seems to have written this book: that it may well
be called the Philosophy, or the wisdom of Philo. The book being very
convenient for our time. He commends the word of God against savageness and
tyranny of the wicked, who will not favor the word of God among their subjects:
even as Caligula did interdict his religion among the Jews.

But thou shall observe, that the word of God in this book is called Wisdom;
and this book to be the interpretation of the first commandment, whence all
wisdom does flow.

Furthermore, the chapters of this book are 22. which are thus divided.

1 From the beginning unto the 6 cha, he makes a comparison betwixt the
righteousness of the godly, and the cogitations of the wicked. 2 Betwixt the
goodness of the godly, and the council of the wicked. 3. Betwixt the
simplicity of the godly, and the tyranny of the wicked. 4. Betwixt the
Martyrdom of the faithful, and the unhappiness of Insidels. 5 Betwixt the
constancy, reward, and felicity of the godly, and the condemnation of the
wicked.

2 From the 6 chap, unto the 10, he lays down grave exhortations, in which
he exhorts wicked men to embrace wisdom, that is to say: with penitency and
repentance, where he shows that wisdom is to be gotten by faithful prayers.

3 From the 10, unto the 16, he comme^deth wisdom by the example of the
Patriarchs, and by the sundry benefits and miracles of God toward his
people, and against Idolatry and impiety, whose curse he sets down with a
derision and detesting of them by praising Gods mercy.

From the 16 chap, unto the end of the book, again he compares the
righteousness and the rewards of the godly, with the unrighteousness and
punishments of the wicked, by bringing an example concerning the destruction
of the Egyptians.

So much concerning this book, out of the which many Ecclesiastical songs
are taken out:

The book of Jesus the Son of Syrach.
THis book thus far is called Ecclesi (that is to say, as some men do
interpret) an Ecclesiastical discipline, much used: yet not accounted amongst
the canonical books. It is called by proper name Jesus Syrach, from the author
(as the preface does show) he lived almost after all the Prophets, in the last
part before the coming of Christ in the flesh. A godly man and learned, but of
the schole of the Egyptians, coming forth in to light, did publishe this
book, gathered out of the writing of many learned men.

The book is admirable, and very necessary and profitable for the use of the
common people: where a Citizen or a householder may learn, godliness, honesty,
and prudence, after what sort he must behave him self 1. toward God, 2
toward Gods word, 3 toward his ministers, 4 toward his parents, 5
toward his wise and Children, 6 toward his own body, 7 toward his
seruances, 8 toward his possessions, 9 toward his neighbors, 10 toward
his friends and enemies, 11 toward magistrates, and lastly toward al
menne^ (...) This book may worthily be called a book of domestical
discipline.

But seeing that it cannot be profitablie denided by Chapters, because it is
not a book written in parts orderly, but gathered out of the books of many
doctors, and heaped up consusedly, even as Bees do gather their honey out of
diverse flowers, it is sufficient to show what it does contain generally.

1 First it contains prouerbiall sentences, and dark similitudes, so as in
this respect, Jesus Syrach seems to be a follower or an Imitator of Solomon.

2 Furthermore, he pours our and sings certain excellent prayers and hymns
unto God.

3 It contains certain peculiar, ancient and divine histories of acceptable
me^ to god 4 Lastly, he shows with what benefits it pleases God most
plentifully to bless his people, and what evils he has heaped upon the wicked.

5 In sum, the book is full of divine wisdom.

The books of the Prophets.
THe prophetical books do follow: there are 16. Prophets, of the which there
are 4 great, and 12 lesser, of whom we have spoken before.

The sum of the doctrine of ye prophets, is this 1. They teach ye kingdom of
Christ to come 2. They expound the first commandment, by many examples and
histories. 3. They comfort the afflicted consciences, and threaten the secure
and careless ones. 4. they condemn the Idolatry of the Jews, which they call
fornication.


It is Idolatry or spiritual fornication, when men do worship the true God,
not according to the word and commandment of God, but according to their own
good opinion (as men say) look Judges. 7, and 17. and 3 king 12, Ose 2. for
that opinion is inhibited, Deuteronomy 12.

The book of Esaias.
Esaias, is the chief amongst the proph. whose writings are extant, next after
David's. For he is joined to Christ, not only in faith, but also in neernesse
of blood. He calls Christ ye bud of the lord, chap, 4. Men think that Amos the
Father of Esaias, was the brother of king Amazia, of whose line Christ is.
Moreover, he writes not only more sermons then other proph. concerning Christ
and his kingdom: but also more clear and more excellent then the
Evangelists: therefore he is rather to be called an Evangelist, then a
prophet.

Esaias learned in the time of the transmigration of the ten tribes, under Vriah
and Ezechia kings of Judah: he lived about ye age of the world 3200. with Osea,
Joel, Amos and Micha: he prophesied above 100. years.

The book of Esaias the prophet, contains, 1 prophesy, Legal and Euangelical, 2
Historical, as that of Ezechias the K. 3. exhortations unto the Jews and
pentiles, 4. Consolations, 5 prayers, 6 giving of thanks.

In the book of Esaias, there are 66. chap. which are thus divided.

1 From the beginning unto the 13. cha. he deals with the Jews, sometimes he
sharply reproues them: sometimes he prophesies with them, sometimes against
them: he threatens the obstinate with horrible evils He puts down most
excellent promises, concerning Christ: to them that repent to comfort them,
which part he shu^^eh up with giving of thanks.

From the 13 ch, to the 24, he passes over unto the Gentiles, and preaches and
prophesies against them: whereby mine, he taxes, fusle the Babylonians, 2. the
Philistians, 3. the Moabits, 4. the Damascens, 5. The Ismaclites, 6. the
Egyptians, 7. the Titia^s, 8. the Sidonians, as the evil neighbors of the
Jews, and always offensive to the people of God: in which he prophesies
deuastation and other horrible evils to fall on them, neither does he in the
mean while neglect the promises made to the gentiles that they should be
converted to the says.

3 From the 24 chap, unto the 36 chap, he returns to the Jews, to whom again
he prophesyeth hard things, because of their incredulity. He threatens the
captivity of that proud Sinagogue and the wicked Jews, and other hard fortunes,
and that they were altogether forsaken of God. But the godly and good men he
comfort, in that God would keep and preserve his remnant and little flock.
In the mean time, he omitteth not thanksgiving for the Gospel that should be
revealed in the new testament.

4 From the 36 cha, unto ye 40, cha. he recites the histories of Ezechias the
K. of Judah, who as a godly and fervent beseecher of God, was heard both
against Senacherib, that wicked king of Assyria, and for himself being
greeuouslye sick with a pestiserous disease.

From the 40 chap, unto the end, he again deals with the Jews, sometimes most
sharply rebuking them for their incredulity and Idolatry: sometimes comforting
them, as being to be brought captive into Babylon. In the mean while he puttes
down many excellent prophesies and promises concer^ing the kingdom of
Christ, and the calling of the Gentiles, ioining the Gospel to the Law, to
reprehension and consolation by the Gospel, that he might be said more truly to
be an Evangelist then a prophet.

So much concerning the book of Esaias.
The Book of Jeremy.
Jeremy the son of Helchia the priest, began to prophecy, the 13, year of
the reign of king Josiah; when ye king, the priests, and the people li^ed most
wickedly, until the book of the ^ruine law was found in the house of the
Lord, by Helchia the father of Ieremye. Then the king being moved with pity
and ^ompassion, did restore the worship of god, and did root out Idolatry, as
the last book of the Kings does witness, in the 22 chap^^r.

Jeremy prophesied from the 13 year (...) Josias, unto the time of the
Babylonian c^tiuity, almost 41. years. He also prophesie^ concerning the
captivity of Babylon, and ti^^ overthrow of the city of Jerusalem: he fo^^ told
the time of the captivity, almost 70. years: where we are to observe, by ho^
much the nearer punishments do have (...) draw on, by so much the more the
wick^^ are worser and more obstinate, which app^reth by Jeremy, and by our time
to be true.

Although the order of chapters cann^^ be observed in the books of the
prophers because they seem rather to be sayings gathered out of the Prophets
mouths as th^^ uttered them, then to have been written by them. It is somewhat
to go thus far, if w^^ can go no further, as to observe, that not^^ Jeremy
does handle chiefly 3. things in order, but with often repetitions mingled
amongst themselves.

First, he preaches and chideth vehemently the wicked Jews: afterward b^
foretells their punishments: to wit, the sa^ king and wasting of the City of
Ierusal^^ Lastly, he prophesyeth as other Prophets concerning Christ and his
kingdom; and of the new Testament.

1 From the beginning unto the 20 cha. ^esides the history in which he is
called of God by a vision, and by a sign: to wit, a fla^ing rod, and a
seething pot. In which God ^ewes his sudden and vehement wrath against this
perverse and rebellious people, by ^^e king of Babylon the rod and revenger of
^od. Besides (I say) this history, Jeremy ^eproues the impiety of the Jews,
and their ^dolatry, offenses, wickedness and cruelty against y^ prophets: so
as al these sermons for ye ^ost part, are for penitency, or grave exhor^tions
to repentance. Besides the prophe^es concerning the captivity of Baby. and
^esides consolations, with which God does ^omfort the prophet against
tentations, and ^he prophet the people to be delivered from ^he captivity.

From the 20. to the 40. ch, besides the hi^^ory of the cross, and calamity of
ye prophet, (...) besides those most excellent promises of ^^turn from
captivity, and concerning christ, ^^ee threateneth ye people of Judah, and
speci^^ly the prin. with all evil: which is agrauated ^y this, that God
signifies, that he will stand ^ith the Chald. against his own people, and ^ith
the Chal. afflict his people, which is of (...) other things most horrible: to
wit, God is not to be with his people, but against (...) people. After that he
threatens false p^^phets and preachers, who preached to (...) Princes and
people things pleasing the^^ and not according to the word of ye Lord.

Lastly, he recites the history of Zeded^ the king, that as contemning Gods
word^ he fled to man's aid and help, even so ^^^sery and calamity happened unto
him, whi^^ is the reward of Tyrants.

From the 40 chap. unto the end of the book, besides diverse examples; that is
(...) wit: God delivers and keeps the Prophet, that God is true in his
word; that h^ punishes the contemners of his word: afterward, besides
admonitions to the Iew^ in Egypt, and consolation with which Jeremy comforted
Baruch his scribe: he prophetsieth against the Gentiles his neighbors, the
Egyptians, Philistians, Moabites, and other kingdoms: then he prophesies the
destruction of the kingdom of Babylon, by the Meades and Persians. Last of
all, he concludes the book, with the historye of the deuastation or
destruction of Jerusalem, and with the leading away of the people in to
Babylon: that every man may see the order of the Almighty, in which he is won^
to punish the^, who in contempt of his word do not amend their lives, neither
yet repent.

So much briefly concerning the book of Jeremy.

The Lamentations of Jeremy the Prophet.
IN the book which men entitle Threnos: that is to say the Lamentations of
Jeremy. The Prophet bewaileth the destruction of Jerusalem and the kingdom of
Judah, and the miserable captivity of the people, whom he could not convert
by threatenings nor by promises, by reason of the unbelief or incredulity of
the people and contempt of Gods word: then he comfort himself and the
people with the promises of God, and by his prayers he recommends his cause to
God.

These Lamentations are written after this order in Hebrew, so as the first
verse begins of Aleph, the second of Beth, the third of Gimel; etc. following
and observing the order of ye alpha. for the help of memory, ye same is
observed by some even to this day.

Furthermore, as there are 4. chap, besides the prayer of Jeremy in the 5.
chap. even so there are 4. verses, according to the repetition of the Alphabet
in every chapter.

In ye 1 Chapter the vnfortumate estate of the people and kingdom of Judah. 2
Chapter the negligence of the prophets. 3 Chapter the mercy of almighty God. 4
Chapter the destruction of the Temple, with famine and other punishments of the
Jews, deserved by sins. Every of these is set forth by way of complaining and
Lamentation.


The book of Baruch.
THe book of Baruch, has his name of the Author, whosoever he be. For it is
not likely that he was Baruch Ieremies scribe, of whom is mention Iere, 45.
but a certain other man of that name, although not endued with so large a
spirit. Therefore it is manifest, this book is of no great moment no more than
the third and fourth of Esdras.

This book of Baruch does contain, besides the epistle cast off 5 cha, of
which this in the sum: As he wrote this book in the captivity of Babylon, so
he attributes righteousness to God, who worthily punished the Jews.

Secondly, he confesses his sins, and he accuses his nation for their
stifnecked disobedience and vi. faithfulness.

Furthermore, he desires pardon, and that God would be merciful unto his
people, and return them into their own country.

Lastly, that he might stir them up to faith in their hearts, he promises the
restoring of Jerusalem. The Epistle going under Ieremies name, is added to the
book of Baruch, and is an admonition against Idolatry, that the captives in
Babylon should not serve the gods of the Babylonians, and so to turn from
the true God. Therefore he vehemently inueyeth against Idolatry, persuading
them to worship the true God, and to serve him only. Esaias seems to have his
name of divine vision, and Jeremy of mighty supernal power.

The book of Ezechiel the Prophet.
EZechiell, who has his name of fortitude, prophesied in Chaldea, beginning
his prophecy about the river Chebar. He was brought under Ieconia the king of
Judah (who is called Ioachim the younger) with DANIEL and the rest of the
Jews, into captivity or bondage, six yoares before Jerusalem, and the Temple
was utterly destroyed.

He was seruante to a priest, as was Ieremias, and at the same time, with
Ieremias, and also handling or entreating of the same argument, to weet y^
captivity of Babylon, unless it were, that Ierem. prophesied in Jerusalem:
Ezechiell, in Chaldea or Babylon, did foretell the calamity of the Jews.

Also Ezechiell in order follows Iereremie the prophet, so as Jeremy is the
first in veeres, and in office; Ezechiell the latter: and these did confirm
the prophecy of each other: for whilst they which were departed into Babylon
under Ieconiah, being overcome with vnpatience, began to be sotiethas they had
obayed the voice of Jeremy; by whose persuasion, they themselves had yielded
to ye Babilonia^s, being solicited to this by salfe prophets, as though they
had bin deceived by Ier. God raised up this Ezechiell the prophet in Babylon,
that he might confirm the doctrine of Jeremy, and that he might comfort the
captives.

A Summarie division of the Prophecy of Ezechiell.
From the first chap. besides that obscure vision of 4. chariots, concerning
the enlargement of the kingdom of Christ, in all the 4. corners of the world,
which Ezechiell received from the Lord, by and by upon his vocation, which
continues unto the 4. chap. he abides chiefly in this one thing, unto the 25.
chapter which he foretells much more harder then Jeremy, how Jerusalem and the
people should be destroyed, with their kin. and princes. In the mean time he
adds promises concerning their return to Judah.

Furthermore the prophet shows, first their sins, 2 their unfaithfulness, 3.
their wie kednes. 4. their punishments. 5. the captivity of Ezechias the king,
and the people of Judah: sometimes by visions, cha, 1, 9, 10, 11 then by
figures, cha. 45. at another time by similitudes, cha. 12, and 15. Again, by
dark sayings or riddles, cha. 17. and also by verses, cha. 19. also by
allegories, chap. 23, 24. sometimes by prophesies and manifest fore shewings and
rebukings, as chap. 6, 7, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22.

From the 25, unto the 34. chap. he prophesies many miseries, as the other
Prophets did against the Gentiles being being neighbors to ye Jews,
because they with foul mouths and contemptible speeches did deride the Jews;
his speech does appear with the success of the wicked, and the oppression of
believers, and on the contrary, the health and salvation of these, with the
destruction of them, is set together.

Furthermore, the Gentiles against whom he prophesied, are 1. the Ammonites, 2.
the Moabites, 3. the Idumenea^s, 4. the Palestins chap: 13, 5, Tires, chap.
26.27.6 Sidonia^s chap. 28.7. Egiptians, chap: 29.30.31.32 to whom he adds in
the 33. chap: a grave exhortation to repentance, comparing the word of God, to
the sound of a Trumpet.

From the 32. chap: unto the 40. besides the taxacion of evil Persons, and the
rebukes of the Idumeans, he prophcieth sweeth of the Spirit, and of the
kingdom of Christ, and of Tyrants that should come toward the end of the
world, into the kingdom of Christ, namely, Gog-magog, that is by common
interpretation, the Turk. In the mean time, he uses excellent Similitudes as
in ye 17. chap: of the dry bones, drawing his argument from the resurrection
of the dead.

From the 40. chap: he prophecieth concerning the re-edification of Jerusalem,
and the division of the land, according to the 12. tribes, for the consolation
of the Jews, whereby they should not doubt of their return into the land of
promise, and concerning the restoring of religion and policy, all which
things in that spiritual vision (as in the beginning, concerning the vision
of the 4. chariots) seems to shadow, or set forth the celestial Jerusalem
in Revel.

The Book of Daniel the Prophet.
DAniel, who has his name from Divine judgment, first of all, he is brought
into Babylon under Ieconiah the King, being yet a very young man: Afterward
thorough the kings favor, he was promoted; chiefly, after he had interpreted
the Dream of the king Nabucadnezer. Lastly he continued there lxx. years,
and lived until ye reign of Cirus king of Persia, as appears in ye end of ye
1. chapt. and as it is manifested in the ninth chapter. He was endued with such
an excellent spirit that he did not only see the kingdom of Christ to come
and to remain for ever, and the destruction of other kingdoms, but also he
reckoned the years by weeks, in which Christ should come.

He wholly applies himself in this, that he might manifest the glorious and the
eternal kingdom of Christ: and he foretells that besides him all the
kingdom of the world are vain and transitory.

Furthermore here is to be observed, that Daniel uses the Chaldean tongue, unto
the beginning of the eight chapter. Besides that, the song of the three
children. The history of Susanna and of Bell, as also the fable of the Dragon,
are not accounted or reckoned: neither in the Caldean nor in the Hebtue tongue;
neither yet have testimony in holy scriptures, that Daniell is the author of
these books. Therefore they are separated by the best translators of the
Bible, from the writing of Daniel, and are altogether put by themselves, having
their own proper use to edification. But in the book of Daniel there are,

1 Examples. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6. chap. 2 Histories. 2, 3. 3 Revelations. 2, 4. 4
Visions. 7, 8, 10. 5 Miracles. 3, 6. 6 Sermons. 4, 5. 7 Prayers. 9, 8 Giving of
thanks. 2. 9 Prophesies. 9, 11, 12.
The twelve chap. of Daniel, are divided one from another after this manner.

In the first chapter, besides the history of Daniel and his fellows, being
brought up in the palace of the king of Babylon, is set forth an admyrable
example of godliness in Daniel, how he learned amongst the Gentiles.

In the second chap. is told or rehearsed unto the king, the dream and the
interpretation thereof by Daniell, concerning the 4. monarchies. Where he sets
forth, first the king of Babylon. Secondly, ye king of Persia. Thirdly, the
king of the Grecians. Fourthly, the king of the Romans, under whom the Jews
were to be afflicted.

In the 3 chapter, is described the kings wicked Idolatry: after his fall, and
the miraculous deliverance of the three children from the fire.

In the four the chap: is discribed, besides the dream concerning the tree,
(by the which is set forth, the king of Babylon) the punishment of the proud
king, and the receiving of him into favor, and the forgiveness of his sins,
after his repentance.

In the fifth chap: is described principally, the tyranie of King Baltashar,
the son of king Nabucadnezer, in the abusing of ye holy vessels: and also
afterward, the punishment of his tyranny by the loss of his kingdom and
life.

In the sixth chap: is described the deliverance of Daniell, and the
punishmente of wicked men under Darius, the king of the Babilonians.

In the 7. chaap. Daniell seeeth a dream of 4. beasts: to whom the 4.
Monarchies are compared.

In 8. chap: he seeeth an other dream concerning the afflictions, under wicked
Antiochus, successor to the mighty prince, Alexander the great.

In the ninth chap: afterward, he prays the almighty God, for the
releasement of the Jews, from the Babilonian captivity: and being heard, is
made certain of the coming of the true Messiah, by the declaration, or
manifestation, of the Angel Gabriell, accounted particulerly in seauentie
weeks.

In the tenth chapt: he writes most singularly of Angels, who cease not
continually, to fight against evil Angels, for the defense of good and Godly
men, and of Kingdoms.

In the 11. chap: he prophecieth in order, concerning the alteration of
kingdoms, and does also foretell, under what monarchies the Jews should be
afflicted, before that the Messiah came.

First of all, that Darius, king of ye Medes is slain by Alexander, and after
the death of Alexander, the kingdom of the Grecians is divided into four
kingdoms: First into Asia, Secondly into Syria, Thirdly into Egypt, and
fowerthlie into Greece. and last of all, how Antiochus afflicted ye people of
Israel, until he was resisted and driven away by Judas Machabeus.

In the 12. chap. he prophecieth (according to the common translation) of
Antichrist, under the name of Antiochus, as Paul, in the 2. of the
Thessalonians 2. does interpret this place: Furthermore, by the kingdom of
Antioch, he understands not only, the Papal sea of Rome, but also the
kingdom of the Turks or Mahomet, by whom the church of Christ toward the
end of the world should be vexed.

The song of the three children, according to the common edition, has place in
the third chapt of Daniel, where all kind of Creatures are incited to laud and
praise God.

The story of Susanna is comfortable, because lying and slanderous men at the
length are disclosed, and do suffer shame: and such as are clear and pure are
delivered.

The story of the I doll Bell, does at this day very plainly set forth, the
fraud and dedcipt of the Pope. by the which they have hitherto seduced poor
miserable men, and yet do still seduce and deceive in many places.

Hitherto has been spoken of and concerning the four great Prophets. Now
follows the twelve lesser Prophets. In which books, they covet the increase
and amplification of Christ's kingdom (which is their principal argument)
although by diverse and sundry reasons.

1. Oseas. prophesied against the ten tribes or kingdom of Israel. 2. Ioell.
prophesied against the ten tribes or kingdom of Israel. 3. Amos. prophesied
against the ten tribes or kingdom of Israel. 4. Micheas. prophesied against
the ten tribes or kingdom of Israel. 5. Sophonias, prophesied against
Jerusalem 6. Jonas, prophelied against Niniuy. 7. Nahum. against Babylon. 8.
Abacuc. against Babylon. 9. Abdias, against Edom. 10. Haggei. did urge the
people to reedifie the city. 11. Zacha, did urge the people to reedifie the
city. 12. Malach did urge the people to reedifie the city.
14 Or otherwise thus. In the year before the birth of Christ.
1 Jonas. under Achab. 2 Abdi. under Iereboa^.
kings of Israel.

They lived and prophesied in the year 496. 3 Esaias. under Vsiah and Ezekiah
K. of Judah, at ye time when ye x. tribes were carried to capt. 4 Osea. under
Vsiah and Ezekiah K. of Judah, at ye time when ye x. tribes were carried to capt.
5 Joel. under Vsiah and Ezekiah K. of Judah, at ye time when ye x. tribes were
carried to capt. 6 Amos under Vsiah and Ezekiah K. of Judah, at ye time when ye
x. tribes were carried to capt.
7 Micheas A little after, under Manasses the king of Judah, in ye year 756,
upon the departure of Judah 663. in the same captivity of Judah in the year
598. 8 Nahum. A little after, under Manasses the king of Judah, in ye year 756,
upon the departure of Judah 663. in the same captivity of Judah in the year
598. 9 Abacuc A little after, under Manasses the king of Judah, in ye year 756,
upon the departure of Judah 663. in the same captivity of Judah in the year
598. 10 Jeremy. A little after, under Manasses the king of Judah, in ye year
756, upon the departure of Judah 663. in the same captivity of Judah in the
year 598. 11 Sophony A little after, under Manasses the king of Judah, in ye
year 756, upon the departure of Judah 663. in the same captivity of Judah in the
year 598. 12 Ezechi. A little after, under Manasses the king of Judah, in ye
year 756, upon the departure of Judah 663. in the same captivity of Judah in the
year 598. Daniell. A little after, under Manasses the king of Judah, in ye
year 756, upon the departure of Judah 663. in the same captivity of Judah in the
year 598.
Hagg. Zacha. Mallach.
After the return of the people of Babylon. 559.

Concerning the Book of Hosea the Prophet.
OSeas, by ye Etimologie of his name, signifies Health, and therefore he
married his lawful wife according to Gods commandment; but with such a
reproach, as that she is called his harlot: so comes it to pass, that ye
world does rage against the Ministers of Gods word: Therefore God forbid
that we should think the Prophet to live in Fornication.

In the beginning of his Sermons, he betrotheth Israel to the Lord our God, in
justice, in judgment, in mercy and pity, and reconciles them to David their
king: and so he calls Christ, as being borne of the loins of David.

In the end he threatens the destruction of Death, with great feruencie, I
will says he, be thy Death: Oh Death, I will be thy Death for ever: In the
mean time, he does preach most fervently and consta^tly, against Israel,
against the Idollatrie of the Princes, and Priests of the people: Afterward
he prophecieth very power-fully, concerning the kingdom of Christ: These two
things were the offices and duties of all the prophets, the one out of the
Law, the other out of the promises, for the which they were brought to their
death, as heretics, and seditious persons.

From the beginning to the 14. chap: there are prophesies, and sermons of
reproof, against the kingdom of Israel, because for Idolatry, which he
calls spiritual Fornication, not only the people, but also Princes and
priests are to be punished of God, with corporal and eternal captivity,
unless they repent: he mittigateth these Comminations with the promises of
God, that they should not disp^ire, but convert unto god.

Also in the 2.3.11.12.14. there are prophecies and comfortable sermons,
concerning the kingdom of Christ, the preching of the Gospel, and the
victories of Christ over Death and Hell, together with the Eternal captivity
of the people of Israel, and their restoring by faith in the mercies of god
through Christ.

The book of Joel the Proph.
JOEL, by the Etimologie of his name, signifies beginning, or desiring. Who he
was, of what Tribe, in what time, or under what king he lived, it is
uncertain; chiefly, because he himself makes no mention of this, unless it
be, for that he is thought to live with Osea, and Amos, whilst he preaches
against the kingdom of Israel, He labors only to show, how punishments and
plagues, hang over the earth: for innum^rable sins and grievous wickedness:
Whence S. Peter, on the feast of Penticost, took occasion to preach act. 2.
And Saint Paul allegeth the saying of Joel in the 2. chap. and every one that
calls on the name of the lord shall be saved. Rom, 10.

In the 1. chapt: he prophecieth against the kingdom of Israel, to weet, it
would come to pass, that Israel should be carried away into Syr^a. He
understands the Ass^^ians by these 4. kind of worms, devouring smite and
Corn; to weet, the Palmer worm, The Grasse-hopper, The Canker worm, and the
Caterpiller: showing the vnpe^pling and deuastacion, by little and little of the
kingdom of Israel.

In the 2. and 3. after he had sore-shewed unto the king of Assirta, his
destruction, he prophe^^eth even unto the end of the kingdom of Christ, of the
holy Ghost, and of the celestial Jerusalem.

In that he speaks of the Valley of Iehosophat, in the last cha: He seems
not only that it ought to be understood of the eternal Judgment, but also of
the church of Christ: as the valley of Achor in Osea, in the which, the
Gentiles were adjudged to be sinners, and are called to repentance by the word
of God, the holy Ghost reproues the world of sin.

The book of Amos.
AMos, by the etymology of his name, signifies a burden or yoke: and he
answers more then all the prophets, through his vehemence, to the singularity
of his name. He reproues the Israelits throughout all his book, and does inuey
against them, although a stranger amongst them, as one born in the tribe of
Judah, nor so much as the son of a prophet, but a shepherd and an ordinary
man, as he himself witnesses in the 2. chap.

But he lived in the time of Osea and Esaias, as GOD is of power to call such
by a sudden, or certain divine miracle against all wicked powers, which they
call ordinary, where necessity requires: Even so the holy Ghost, made A
postles of rude and unlearned Fishers. It is thought that Amos was slain by a
wicked priest called Amasia, with a Fullers clubbe.

The chapters of this book are ix. which are thus to be distinguished.
From the beginning unto the 4. chapt: he prophecieth against the neighbors of
the Jews, and of the Israelites, who were the kings of Syria, the kings of
Palestina: of Tire, of Edome, of Amon, and Meab, etc. and says, that it will
come to pass, that they also should be punished of God again.

Afterward he prophecieth against the kings of Israel and Judah, with an
admonition, that they should not contempne the prophets of God.

From the 4. chap. to the 7. he prophecieth against the kingdom of Israel,
and threatens horrible thing, to come unto them from God. 1. Famine, 2.
Dearth, 3. Pestilence, 4. Botch, 5. the sword, and lastly utter distructio^ by
the Assirians, in the mean time, whilst he reproues their sins, he
exhorts them to repentance, by the deuastation of the Assirians.

From the 7, chap. to the end, besides 3. visions which he saw, against the
King of Israel, (to weet) 1. the Locustes, and the fire, and the Line, or rule
upon the Wall) he contendes with the wicked pressed Amasiah to whom he promises
horrible mischief: Afterward he preaches against the covetousness of the
rich, and the oppression of the poor.

In the end, he adds a most excellent place concerning the kingdom of the
Mesiah, which is cited of James the Apostle, Act. 15. As also a place is cited
of Stephen, in the 5. chap: Act. 7.

But that which he speaks in the 1. chap. of 3. and 4. sins; he
understands the greatness, and the multitude of sin, the impatiencie and
defense thereof. 3. and 4. makes 7. which is a Final or indefinit number in
holy Scripture.

The Prophecy of Abdiah.
ABdias signifies the worship of God, that he is the servant or the worshiper
of God He is thought to be the most auncientest of all the Prophets, as Jonas
in the time of Achab, and Ieroboham, Kings of Israel. He inueyeth against
the Edomites, who delighted in the afflictions of Israel.

Edom was the brother of Jacob, to weet, Esau, and as he hated his brother
because his father Isake gave unto him the blessing of the first birth: even
so, all his posterity hated the posterity of Jacob; that is to say, the
Isralites, and whenever he could, he brought trouble upon the^, adjoining
himself with their enemies, and so declaring the vnfaithfullnes of his mind,
as the Psalmist says, 137. Lord be thou mindful of the sons of Edom, in ye
day of Jerusalem, who says, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

It contains one only Chapter, the some Edomites. whereof, is this.

Abdias, 1 He Fortells the destruction of the Comforts the Jews, Abdias, 2
He Shows that saiuatio^ is in Sion. Abdias, 3 He teaches that no injury,
puokes worshipped. Abdias, 4 He the breethren. Abdias, 5 He teaches that god
only is to be
The book of Jonas the Prophet.
JONAS signifies a Dove, he lived a little before Esai, and under king
Ieroboham, he was a prophet in Israel, as it is written in the last book of
the kings. chap: 14. after this manner, according to the word of ye Lord, as
it was spoken by his servant Jonah the son of Aniathias the prophet, which
was of Gad, which is in Hephet.

But it is manifest, that Gad Hephet, was a City in the tribe of Zabulon, so
that Jonas was a Jew, and not the son of an Ethicke widow, in the days of
Helias: of whom mention is made Luke. 4. as certain men do imagine of Jonah.

He is sent into Syria, to preach against the City of Niniue, which was a
famous City: the Metropolitan of the whole kingdom of the Assirians: whence
it appears that God at that time, had not only care of the Isralites, but
also of the Gentiles.

It is notably spoken by Math. chap: 12, where it is said that Jonas was a
Type of Christ, Dying and Rising again. The wicked and adultorous generation
seeks a sign: and a sign shall not be given him, but the sign of Jonas
the prophet: as Jonas himself was in the Whales bellye, three Days and three
Nights: so shall the son of Man be in the heart of the earth, three days and
three nights.

There are only 4. Chap.
IN the first is described very largely a miraculous history how Jonas was
cast into the sea out of a ship, and how he was swallowed up of a certain
great fish, and was tossed here and there in the whales belly, the space of
three days.

In the second is described the song and thanksgiving of Jonas unto God for
his deliverance from the whales belly: where he thought every hour that his
life was at an end, and he praises the work of the lord, who only is of
power in heaven and in earth, sea, and all deep places.

In the third we have a famous ezample of repentance in the Ninevites, to be
followed of all sinners; where these things are severely to be observed, and
by no means to be pretermitted. 1 That God is the god of the gentiles, 2 That
God is of power, good and just, 3 what repentance is, 4 That true fasting
serves to repentance.

In the fourth, the carnal carfulness of Jonas is described, how he would
have him respected with the damage and hinderance of his neighbors: such is the
great imperfection and fleshly fear in mankind, yea even of the saints: but in
God there is mercy and clemency toward all sinners truly repenting. This
does plainly appear by Jonas and the Ninevites.

The Book of Micheas the Prophet.
MIcheas lived in that time, and under those Kings, as Esay^, Oseas and Amos
lived: as plainly appears by the title. He Prophesied against the two Tribes,
and against the ten Tribes, that is to say: 1 against kings, 2 against
Judges, 3 against Priests, 4 against false Prophets, as well in Judah as in
Israel: and he foretells their destruction that rejected the word of God,
and without his sear, followed after vain things.

In this chiefly he is very famous, for that he does not only promise
Christ to come, nor does not only declare the benefits of his kingdom: but
also he shows us the place of his natiuitye. Thou Bethelem Ephrata says
he, Art not the least amongst the princes of Judah: Out of thee shall arise
unto me a captain, that shall govern my people Israel, etc. which place
Matthew cites in the second chap.

And there are 7. Chapters, which are thus to be divided.
In the first three chapt. there are Sermons and prophesies of reprose,
sometimes generally against the Israelites, and against the impiety and
Idolatry of Judah, and their wicked life: and sometimes particular, against the
chief heads, as well in religion, as in policy: but yet with all in the end
of the second chap. the faithful are comforted through the promise of the
coming of the true pastor our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the 4. and 5. are most excellent promises and consolations, concerning the
enlarging of the kingdom of Christ, by the preaching of the Apostles
throughout the whole world.

In the 6. and 7. sometimes he reprooueth the covetousness and impiety of the
people: and sometimes he complains by reason of the great malice of the world
in his time.

In the end, he annexed the promise concerning the beginning of Christ's kingdom
in Jerusalem: and afterwares, concerning the enlargement thereof by the
Apostles amongst all nations: and by the way he condemns their Synagogues.

The book of Nahum the Prophet.
NAhum, has his name of comforting. For he comfort the afflicted
Israelites in this; that he prophesies against the Assyrians, who troubled
and vexed Israel and Judah: although by the scripture it cannot be found, what
time and under what king Nahum prophesied. Yet it seems that he lived after
Jonas. and a little before Esar. He for^t^l the subu^sion of Niniuy which was
^^lle^ unto wickedness, after the preaching of Jonas.

There are three only chapters, which are thus to be divided.
In the first chapter, he prophesies generally concerning the perdition of the
Assirians.

In the second, he foretells especially of the coming of the Babylonian
enemy.

In the third, he shows the cause of perdition, by numbering the horrible
wickedness of the Assyrians, which were these: Fornication, theft, and lying: to
weet, Fornication in the false worshipping of God, or in false doctrine. That
in just vexations, and public exactions levied, only to maintain their pomp
and pride, being in contractts and barhaines.

The end of this prophecy is the consolation of the Jews, to whom he shows
the preaching of peace without distrust: expecting the time of the new
Testament or of the Gospel of Christ, in which time everlasting peace is
preached to the Jews by Christ and his Apostles.

The Prophecy of Abacucke.
ABacuck has his name of embracing as a mother embraces her infant, or as
others embrace one another breast to breast, heart to heart, in comforting of
them: even so Abacucke does embrace the people of Israel, and is greatly
comforted: then exhorting them to remain constant in the faith, and in
aduersiues: So that the holy Apostle S. Paul To. 1. alleges this most
excellent sentence out of the second Chapter, The just shall live by this faith.

It seems that Abacucke lived with Jeremy about the captivity of Babylon:
seeing that he as a Prophet of the Jews, first of all prophesied against
the people, and afterward against the Babylonians.

It is holden for a fable, to say that this man was that Abacucke which was
taken of the Angel and did deliver meat to Daniel, being cast into the den
of Lions.

There are 4, Chap, which are thus to be d^scerned.
IN the first cha, he does partly prech against the Jews, preferring the
preching of the Law before the Evangelical doctrine which does follow in the
second chapter, and he shows the power of the Babylonians to be great.
Partly, he labors by a godly expostulation with GOD, that his own people
being delivered, he would take revenge against the king of Babylon.

In the 2. chap. he adds Evangelical consolation by the divine promises: and
he shows the promise of the speedye coming of the Mes^iah, but in the mean
time to be expected and looked for by faith.

In the third, he prophesies the destruction of the kingdom of Babylon;
foreshewing the diabolical arogancy of the K. of Babylon against God: and his
unjust gathering together of riches against his neighbor, which are two
horrible thefts; to wit, the spoiling of God of his glory, and men of their
goods.

In the 4. chap. seeing that the giving of thanks, and the remembrance of GODS
ancient benefits was pretermitted: at the length, he prays that the
Babylonian kingdom might be utterly destroyed, through divine Justice: unless
that in the end, another joy does comfort the people of Israel.

In the 4. chapter, after giving of thanks together with a large reckoning up
of gods benefies, he prays at the last, that ye kingdom of Babylon might taste
of Gods curse, and then again in the end, he comfort the people of the
Jews most cheerfully.

The Prophecy of Zophoniah.
SOphoniah seems to signify the secrets of God. A name very sit for Gods
prophet, who search the secrets of God: that is to say; the gospel, and the
eternal kingdom of Christ, wrapped up in prophetical promises, visions and
revelations: until the fullness of the time thereof be expired and
accomplished. For which cause, Paul likewise calls it a mystery, Romans last.

The title in the first chapter, shows who Sophoniah was; of what parents he
was borne, and in what time he lived. He was near the age of Jeremy the
prophet. He prophesied almost the same things, but more briefly and strictly;
to wit, the deuastation of the City of Jerusalem, and also of the enemy, and
the destruction of the whole kingdom of Judah, and the deliverance of the
Jews by Christ. Pcincipally he prophesies the destruction of the wicked Jews
by their neighbors the gentiles. 2. The rooting up of the Gentiles, by other
Gentiles. 3 The deliverance of the believing Jews by the birth of Christ.

There are only three chapters, which are thus to be discerned.
In the first chapter, by way of checking and reproving them, he prophesies
the destruction or deuastation of the kingdom of the Jews, by the coming of
the king of Babylon, for the wickedness and covetousness of the Jews.

In the second chap. he preaches repentance to the Jews: and afterward he
fortelleth the destruction of their neighbors the Gentiles: to wit, the
Moabits, Ammonites, Philisti^ns, Assirians, and Nintunes. Last of all, he puts
those Gentiles in hope, that they should be partakers of Christ's kingdom; by
showing, that God was to be worshipped in the Isles of the Gentiles. In the
third ch, partly he sharply reprehendeth and reproves the impenitent or
vnreleating Jews: and partly, he comfort the Jews in a most excellent
sermon, concerning the kingdom of Christ, which was to be spread over all the
world. He speaks concerning those, who were heads or governors, in religion
and pollicye he says: That for because they are princes, they are to be
honored as princes: notwithstanding, in the mean time, they are to be
reproved as sinners.

The Prophecy of Haggei.
HAgge, has his name of mirth and joy. He prophesied after the captivity of
Babylon, under Darius Histaspes: and at length very seriously he did urge the
people to reedisie the Temple, and to restore again the true worship of God.

There are two chapters only in this book.
In the first, he reproues the ingratitude and covetousness of the people, and
he threateneth many euilles to fall upon them: to wit, unhappiness and
poverty, who cared to build gorgiouslie their own houses: but they brought
nothing to the reedys^ing of the Temple.

In the second is the same cominations for the same cause; and also promises
that Christ himself will illustrate and adorn his second Temple with his
Presents, Doctrine and Miracles.

The book of Zachary.
ZAcharias has his name of divine Memory, who was one of the last of all the
prophets.

He lived in the same time with Hagge the prophet, after the return from ye
captivity of Babylon.

He handles also, the same argument with Hagge: to wit, ensorsing and urging
the reedis^ing of the Temple, and that for Christ's s^ke, who would shortly
come to his holy Temple: Therefore he manifestly prophecieth of Christ's
Pomp, that he should go to Jerusalem upon an Ass, and the sole of an Asle:
which came to pass a little before his Passion on Paulme Sunday. Afterward
he prophecieth of his selling for 30 pieces of silver, which was performed by
Judas the Traitor. Also of the piercing of his sides; which place S. John the
Euangellist does allege.

In the mean while, he has certain obscure Visiens, in the which the
Mysteries of Christ are shadowed, which at length he interprets by the
effusion of the Spirit of Grace. chapt. 12.

Therein are fourteen chapters, which are thus to be discerned.
IN the first chapter besides the beginning, in which he does most minifestlie
exhort the Jews to repentance: and besides the prayer of the Angel for the
City of Jerusalem: there are also three visions; First concerning the red
Horse. Secondly of the four horns. Thirdly of the four Carpenters: In the
which, he prophecieth of the peace of the Jews, and exhorts them to
reedifie the City of Jerusalem.

In the second chapter is one only vision concerning a measuring Line, by which
he exhorts the people again to build Jerusalem.

Afterward, there are famous promises made, concerning the kingdom of
Christ, the divine presents, and protection of the godly. And furthermore, the
vocation of the Gentiles, whence the people are exhorted and admonished to be
glad and cheerful.

In the 3. chap: first of all, there is a vision concerning I^sua the chief
Priest, for his comfort, and the reedifiyng of the City: Furthermore, there
are promises made concerning Christ, which he names the root or plant, in
respect of the gospel and faith, and a corner stone in regard of the church.

In the 4. cl^ap. is discribed, the vision of of the golden Candlestick, for
the comfort of Zoro^^bel their Captain; and an exhortacion that he be not
scarred or withdrawn from the building of ye Temple, by fear of the enemy.

In the 5, chapt. is discribed a double vision: that is to say, of a flying
book, and afterward of an^ pha or measure, in the which was showed by the
Angel, ye coming of false prophets into Judea

In the 6. chapt. is described, a vision of sour Chariots; by the which, the
kingdom and the gospel of Christ seemed to be shadowed.

In the 7. and 8. chapt. there are sermons and admonitions against the
hiporesie of of the Jews, in the choice of days and times of their fastes:
Afterward there are sermons of exhortations to build again the Temple; and
last of all, consolations concerning the kingdom of Christ.

In the 9. and 10. chapt. there are prophesies, concerning the coming of
Christ, and of the humanity of his kingdom: by this that he was made to sit
upon an Ass: afterward concerning the power of Alexander the great: by the
which, God has opened the Gates of the world, that the king of glory, might
enter with his holy Gospel.

In the 11.12. and 13. chapter there are ye same prophesies, and indeed more
gravely concerning the Passion of Christ, being delivered into the hands of
the Gentiles: also the desolation of the Jews for their incredulity; and of
the preaching of the gospel amongst the Gentiles: after the pastor was
stricken: that is to say, after the passion of Christ.

In the last chapter, there are yet two prophesies: of the which one contains
the abrogatio^ of the whole sinagog and ye worshipping of the Levites: the
other contain the tentations, and the victory of y^ church.

The book of Malachy.
MAlachyas has obtained the name of an Angel amongst the Hebrews. He is
counted the last among the prophets, and the next before Christ, whom he
soretels to be now at hand: and John Baptist, under the name of Elias, to be
his forerunner. Whether this Malachias were Esdras, (as some have thought) it
is uncertain. But this is most certain, that he has many excellent sentences
concerning Christ and the Gospel, which he calls that pure and perfect
sacrifice for the whole world.

There are 4. chapters therein, which are thus to be discerned.
In the first chapter, sometimes he generally reprehendeth the ingratitude of
the Jews. At another time more particularly, the covetousness of the priests.
The one* because they bring those things which are vnpure, and nothing worth
for sacrifice: the other; for that they offer vnpure and unfit things to God:
and by and by, even in the midst of his threatenings, he preaches concerning
ye kingdom of Christ, and of holy offerings: that is the Gospel.

In the 2. chapt. he goes forward to reprove, and vehemently to reprehend the
priests; warning them of their Office: that it is so holy, as an angelical
name is ascribed unto him.

Also he inuayeth more particulerly, against them who are acused of their
wives, for their evil handling or usage, bringing forth ye example of
Abraham, that would not have them to be hardly used.

In the third chapter, he prophecieth of the forerunner of Christ, and also
of both the comminges of Christ: to wit, in the flesh, and to Judgment.
Afterward, he chideth the Jews for their ingratitude toward the Ministers
of Christ.

In the fourth chapter, he joins as well grave, as short exhortation to godly
men, for the true worship and fear of God, and also joy and consolation:
foretelling to wicked men, Plagues and Destructions: and therefore let us obey
the divine admonitions; and the true serving and fearing of the Lord our God;
and let us also look for the second coming of Christ, with a cheerful
mind, lif^ing up your hands.

So much concerning the prophets, and of the books of the prophets; by the
which, the Doctrine of the new Testament is confirmed: and the sentences of the
prophets are cited sort estimonie; as well by Christ himself, as also by his
Apostles: Let the therefore be recommended unto us, for most sweet
consolations. Let us therefore account them worthy of all praise, for these
sweet consolations.

The books of Machabees.
THE Books of Machabees, have only their name or deriuation of Judas
Machabeus, for his excellent acts that are d cscribed in those books: and it
is the last florie of all the old Testament, concerning things done by the
Jews, from the time of Alexander the great unto Christ: when the people of
god, had neither kings nor prophets amongst them, but Princes and priests.

There were in the old Testament four kinds of government in the elect people
of God: to wit, first a most patriarchall power. Secondly, a Judicial power.
Thirdly, a kingly power, and fourthlie, a Pontifical power. For all which,
Christ only reigns in the new Testament: who first is the father of the
world to come.

Secondly, the Judge of quick and dead.

Thirdly, the king of kings.

Fourthlie, the eternal Priest or Bishop.

Furthermore, the books of Machabees are reckned amongst ye Apochripha books,
and amongst the Canonical books, and amongst other things it conteyneth a
most true description of those things which Daniel prophesied of. in the 12.
chapter to wit, concerning the persecution of the Jews by Antiochus.

The First book is divided into 5. parts according to the circumstances of
persons, and in this book there are 5. persos most famous, whose acts are
discribed for the most part, after the order of an history. First Mathias, 2.
Judas Mac. Thirdly and fourthly Ionathas and Simon the breethren of Judas
Machab, fifthly, John the son of Simon.
From the first chapter unto the third, the impiety and cruelty of Antiochus,
is noted whom the scripture calls, The root of sin. And there is described the
zeal and constancy of Mathias the priest, and of his sons, that it may be an
everlasting example to the ministers of the word in persecution.

From the third chap. unto the ninth, are described the valiant acts of Judas
Match. namely, his wars, his victories, the purification of the Temple: the
confederacy with the Romans, and the manifold conflictes with the Gentiles
his neighbors, and their Princes; whom he discomfited either by enforcing them
to flee away, or by killing them, whose names follows in order.

1 Apolonius. slain, chap. 3 2 Seron. slain, chap. 3 3 Gorgias. driven away,
chap. 4. 4 Lysias. driven away, chap. 4. 5 Timotheus, with the Amonits and
Galaadites. discomfited, chapter 5 6 The sons of Esau. discomfited, chapter 5 7
Antiochus the younger, the leagu-breaker son of Antiochus the tyrant, deceased
with his captain Lysias, and their Elephants sent out of the land. chap. 6. 8
Alci^us the Jew, going to Demetrius. chap. 7. 9 Nicanor is slain. chap. 7.
At length Judah himself after the confederacy made with the Romans chap. 8.
was slain in the battle which was stirred up amongst the Jews at the
commundement of Demetrius, after the death of Nicanor, by Bacides and Alcinus
the princes of Demetrius the king, chap, 9. O most godly captain, and
heroical constancy in the judicial Religion. O most valiau^e sighter and
defender of this Nation, who at length being thrown down in the tru^
confession, most valiantly died for the maintaining of gods glory.

From the ninth chapter unto the thirteenth chapter, is described the history
of Ionath^s the brother of Judas Machabe^s, who dealt with both the Demetrius
and Bacides and Aleinus, of whom he obtained victory, by the help of his
brother Simon. Afterward he had his affairs with the young princes of
Demetrius the younger, until Triphon slew him by subtilty, azealovs warrior
for Religion and the true worship of god.

From the 13. chap, unto the 16, is described the history of Simon the brother
of Judas Machabeus, and of Ionathas.

In the last chap, unto the end of ye book the succession of John his son is
described, after the death of Simon.

The second book of Machabees.
THe second book of Macha^ for the most part is a description of those things
which are written in the first book, chiefly so much as appertains to Judas
Machabeus.

There are 15. chapters, which are thus to be divided.
In the f^^st 7. chap, is described the affliction of the people of Israel:
as well by certain deceits and trecheries of one Simon, as also by the cruel
tyranny of Antiochvs. Wherein is not only declared the constancy of Judas
M^chabeus (who lived abroad in the desa^t) but also of the 7. brethren who was
crowned in martyrdom together with their mother.

In the 8. chap. and the rest of the chapt, are repeated the valiant acts of
Judas Machabeus, unto the end of the book.

So much concerning the books of the Machabees, and also of all the Books of
the old Testament: to wit, The Legal, Historical, Doctrinall, and
Prophetical: which are all in number 48. Concerning Ioh. 5. in the which
Christ says: Search the Scriptures.
The end of the Books of the old Testament.
The Books of the New TESTAMENT.
THE New Testament, contains books which were written after Christ was made
manifest in the flesh. Partly Evangelical, partly Historical. In number 27.
accounting the least, which only contains one chapt. as the epistle of Paul
to Philenion, the epist. of Jude, and the two later Epistles of John.

The books of the Evangelists.
THere are four Books Evangelical, written by 4. Evangelists: to wit,
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John: and they are called Gospels, because they
severally do comprehend the Gospel of Jesus Christ: That is to say; Joyful
news concerning the free remission of sins, to be obtained by the means and
mediation of Christ.

The book of Matthew.
MAtthew, as he is said to have been the first of the Evangelists that wrote
the Gospel: to wit, immediately after the Ascension of Christ: even so, he has
obtained the first place amongst them. These are the parts principallye of
this Gospel.

From the first chap: unto the 5, are showed by way of entrance; not only
those things which do appertain to the genealogy and nativity of Christ. As
first, the numbering of persons in the generations, from Abraham unto Christ. 2
the reuealations made to Joseph. 3 The coming of the wisemen. 4 The tyranny of
Herod: But also the life and doctrine of John Ba^tist: and also the baptisiue
and tentation of Christ, before he began to preach, and before he chose his
Apostles.

From the 5. unto the 8. is described the sermon of Christ, which he made on
the mountain amongst his Disciples: and it was a very sermon of the Law: by ye
which as by a foundation being laid, he prepare^ them in order to the ministry
of the gospel. First, of the blessing and the rewards of good works. 2 Of the
offices of the apostles. 3 Of the true interpretation of the law. 4 Of alms. 5
Of prayer. 6 Of fasting. 7 Of true riches. 8 Of confidence in God. 9 The
sincerity of true judgment. 10 Of continual prayer. 11 Of natural justice. 12
The avoiding of false doctrine. 13 The study of living according to the word of
god. In su^^me, this sermon and general hatration of the law, shows that
the law was a schoolemaister unto Christ.

From the 8. unto the 10. he confirme^ his doctrine with excellent miracles
and benefits: with the which both by sea ^^land he succoureth miserable and
afflicted men: and sh^wes himself to be our famous.

From the 10. unto the 13. he informs, constr^^^eth and comfort his
Apostles, in the mynistery of the word. And also, afterward, he confirms
the D^sciples of John. He commends John, ^e condemns the increduli^^ of
many, and gives thanks unto God the father, for his little stock. Last of all,
besides his disputation with the Pha^lsies, concerning the Sabbath, concerning
Signe^, etc. Again, he shows by manifest miracles, his loving kindness, and
also in that he quenches not the smo^king flax.

From the thirteenth unto the ninteenth, first Matthew shows certain
parabolicall sermons, concerning the force and effect of the word of God: and
afterward the undeserved death of John Baptist, Christ's departure into the
desarte, and his contention with the pharisees: the healing of many sick
people, the confession of Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, the
transfiguration of Christ, the obedience of Christ toward magistrates, the
comfort of the little flock.

Last of all he treats concerning offenses, and the forgiving of our
brethren, illustrated by a parable, of the unjust steward: in which part, of
things done in Gallelie, he shows the great care of Christ for the
salvation of mankind, and also his great diligence in his office of teaching
and showing of miracles.

From the ninteenth unto the 26. cha. he describes chiefly the journey of
Christ from Galilie into Judah, and by the way of disputations sometimes with
the pharisees, and scribes, sometimes with his own disciples, foreshewing also
his passion, and healing of two blind men.

Afterward his entrau^nce into Jerusalem, and his most sharp and last
disputation with the Jews, concerning the duties or office of preaching,
throughout three whole chapters, 21.22.23. of which disputation and
reprehension, these are the chief parts: to weet. 1 Of the Baptism of John,
2 the two sons, 3 of the vineyarde, 4 of the corner stone, 5 the marriage of
the kings son, 6 the tribute to be given to Caesar, 7 the wise of the seven
brethren, and of the resurrection of the dead, 8 the great commandment in the
law, 9 of Christ the son of David, 10 of the curses upon the pharisees and
Jerusalem.

Last of all he describes the communication of Christ with the Disciples in
the mount of Olives, the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the world:
with vehement exhortations to watch. He brings in a parable, 1 of an evil
servant, 2 of ten virgins, 3 of the talentes, 4 in showing the form of
judgment at the last day.

From the 26. unto the end of the book, he describes the passion of Christ,
his death and resurrection. Furthermore the history of Christ, may well be
divided into six principal parts: to wit 1 The supper 2 The garden. 3 Cayphas.
4 Pilate. 5. The Cross. 6 His burial.

So much concerning the Gospel of Matthew. Who this Matthew was before his
conversion, and how he was converted and called, look chap, 9.

The Gospel of Saint Mark.
Mark, does very briefly contain those things, which Matthew more at large
describes. Which book of the Gospel, may be divided very conveniently into
two principal parts. The first part, is from the first unto the 10. chap.
wherein are described all those things which Jesus spoke and wrought in Galilie.

The latter part, from the 10. chap, unto the end, describes all things which
he taught, wrought, and suffered in Judea. In dividing the rest, there is no
hardness or difficulty, if they be compared with ye gospel of Matthew.

The gospel of Saint Luke.
LVke, who was the inseperable companion of Paul, like as Mark was of Peter,
which some men say, is not only more plentiful the Mark, but then Matthew
too: as well in the Gospel as in the acts of the Apostles.

There Is are 24. Chapters, which are thus to be discerned.
FRom the first unto the fourth chap. he annexeth the conception and nativity
of John Baptist, and also of Christ himself: afterward the preaching and
imprisonment of John, the baptism and genealogye of Christ.

From the fourth unto the tenth, after the history of the tentations of
Christ, he expounds the doctrine and miracles of that which Christ wrought
in Galilee: that is to say, in Nazareth, in Capernaum, at the poole of
Genazereth, and in other places of Galilee, disputing with the phatisees
concerning the Sabbath, instructing the Apostles and people, healing the
Centurions servant, and raising the Widows son. After that, how he
commended John Baptist before the people: yea, and the woman that sinned,
before Simeon the Pharisie. How he did expound the parable of the Sower, and
also healed one that had the Devil. How he stayed the woman's issue of blood,
and raised up Iairius the ruler of the sinagogs daughter. Last of all, how that
when his disciples being instructed, sent, and returned. And after his
transfiguration in the mount, and left Galely.

From the 10. unto the 20. is described, that which Christ taught and wrought
in the way toward Jerusalem. He taught either plainly, or in Parables.

Plunely or simply.
1 He Instructs the 70. Disciples. 2 He Obraids cities for incredulity. 3 He
Gives thanks to his Father. 4 He Admonishes the Lawyer. 5 He co^mends Ma. ye
sister of Martha 6 He Teaches his disciples to pray. 7 He Chideth the
Pharisees. 8 He Warnes his Disciples. 9 He Threatens the impenitent. 10 He
sharply reprous the covetousness of the pharisees. 11 He reproues most sharply
Herod! 12 He Foretells of offenses. 13 He Foreshewes the last day. 14 He Calls
children unto him. 15 He Recites the commandementes of the second table. 16 He
Warnes the rich. 17 He Foretells his own passion. 18 He Conuertes Zacheus.
In Parables.
1 of Him that was left half dead. 2 of Him that lent his friend y^ loaves. 3
The Strong man armed. 4 The Sign of the Prophet Jonas. 5 The Candle that was
lighted. 6 The Rich Glutton. 7 The Faithful and unfaithful servant. 8 The Fig
tree. 9 The Grain of mustard seed. 10 The Leaven. 11 The Narrow gate. 12 The
First and last place. 13 The Lords supper. 14 The Building of the tower. 15 The
Hundred sheep. 16 The Hundred grotes. 17 The Prodigal son. 18 The Wicked
steward. 19 The place of Dives and Lazarus. 20 The Servant plowing. 21 The Of
the cruel Judge. 22 The Pharisie and the publican. 23 The Ten pounds or ten
talents.
The Histories and Miracles which he wrought are these.
1 He Threw out a dumb devil. 2 He Made straight a woman bowed together. 3 He
healed a man sick of the dropsy 4 He Healed x. Leapers. 5 He Restored the blind
to his sight. 6 He sits upon an ass. 7 He wept over Jerusalem. 8 He he
cast out the buyers and sellers out of the temple.
From the 20. unto the 22. those things are described which Christ taught in
the Temple of Jerusalem, and disputed with the Pharisees, and afterward
reasoned with his disciples of those things, siuing over against Jerusalem.

He brought in against the Pharisees.

1 The Question concerning the baptism of John Baptist. 2 The parable
concerning ye Vincyard 3 The Prophecy concerning the Corner stone. 4 The
Tribute which was to be given to Caesar. 5 The Answer to the Saduces Argument.
6 The Proposition concerning Christ the son of David. 7 The Alms deeds of
the widow.
He reasoned with his Disciples.
1 Concerning the Building of the Temple. 2 Concerning the False, prophets in
the church. 3 Concerning the Persecution of the church. 4 Concerning the Last
day or second coming of Christ: 5 Concerning the auoidance of drunkenness and
riot
From the 22. unto the last chapter, is described the history of the passion,
sufferance, and death of Christ, how after his supper and talk had with the
disciples, he is first betrayed of his own disciple. Secondly, taken of the
Jews. Thirdly, crucified of the gentiles.

In the last chapter, is described and set down the histories, first of
Christ's resurrection, then his appearance, and lastly his ascension, Besides
that most excellent place concerning the Doctrine of repentance and remission
of sins, preached among all the gentiles.

The Gospel of John.
John has his name of grace or favor, because he is greatly beloved of Christ.
He wrote his Gospel after the Evangelists, and he was very serious and diligent
about the doctrine of Christ: besides a few miracles which were not written by
other of the Evangelists: and as he lived on the earth longer then all the
Apostles, even so he saw many heresies sprung up against the deuinity of
Christ, whence as having occasion, he wrote first of all as concerning the
deuinity and humanity of Christ: afterward he goes forward to speak of
the conversation of the doctrine, and miracles of Christ, and last of all he
adds the history of the passion, resurrection and appearances of Christ.

The Gospel of Saint John is divided principally into four parts, according
to the iournies of Christ: for Christ went four times into Jerusalem in the
time of Easter.
THe first iourny is, after the doctrine of the divinity and humanity of Chr:
after the testimony of John Baptist concerning Christ, after the calling of the
Apostles. And farther after the miracle in the supper at Galilee: all which
things do last unto the fifth chap, in which Christ coming to Jerusalem, first
he threw out the buiers and sellers out of the temple. Secondly he disputes
with the pharisees, and severally with Nichodemus: and having by and by left
Jerusalem: first Baptized by his Apostles, upon which occasion John the
Baptist preached a most excellent Sermon concerning Christ: afterward passing
through Samaria, he disputed at the Well with the Samaritan womi. Last of all,
returning into Galile, he healed the Rulers son.

The second journey begins in the 5. chapter and lasts unto the 7. In which
journey, first he healed a man in Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, by the poole
of Bethesday, which had been diseased 38. years whe^^e as having fit occasion,
he had long disputation against the Jews: he preached a most excellent
sermon, concerning the resurrection of the dead, and of the authority of
scriptures. Afterward, returning into Galily, first of all he satisfied 5000.
men with five loves and two fishes.

And afterward, he disputed very long with the Jews concerning the
spiritual bread, which is the word of God. Last of all, when others taking an
offense, departed from him: Peter in the name of the apostles, made a most
excellent confession of his faith, concerning Christ.

The third he begins in the 7. chapt. and continues unto the 12. chapter.
In which chiefly he taught in the Temple of Jerusalem, not without
contradiction and peril. First, concerning the authority of his doctrine.
Secondlye, concerning the Sabbath. Thirdly, concerning his own person.
Fourthlye, concerning his sufferinge. Fifthly, concerning the water of life.
Then he absolueth the woman taken in adultery, which was brought unto him by
the Pharisees, with writing on the earth with his finger. Straight way he
taught the people: and unto the end of the eight chapter, he disputed sharply
against the Jews. By and by, he gave sight to one that was borne blind:
whence no small contention did arise betwixt the Pharisees and him that was
borne blind, unto the end of the ninth chap. Here he shows himself to be
the true pastor, wherein again he falls into disputation with ye Jews unto
the end of the tenth chapter. And last of all, passing over Jordan, and thence
again to Bethania, he raised up Lazarus, (first having had disputation with
his sisters) and afterward appeased the wrath and evil mind of the Jews, he
went into the desert.

The fourth, he begins in the 12. chapt. and continues unto the end of the
book: in the which, first he turns and directs into Bethania, where as
Marye the Sister of Lazarus, that was raised from Death: showed the work of
her confession unto Christ, Judas the betrayer being angrye thereat.
Afterward, according to the prophecy of Zacharias the Prophet, he entered
into Jerusalem, meek sitting upon an ass. And when as John had set forth
what things were done in the way: alleging many most excellent places out of
Esar.

Unto the end of the 12. chapt. in the next places: he declares, what was
done in the Inn at Jerusalem, in the holy supper of Christ: to wit, How
Christ, after the washing of their feet, after the disturba^ce of his mind for
Judas. And furthermore, after he had foreshewed the trecherye of Judas, and
the denial of Peter unto the end of the chapt. First of all he makes an
excellent sermon, through three whole chap. Whose proposicion is this. Let not
your hearts be troubled. The arguments whereof are three. First, ye shall
prophecy eternal life. 2 In the mean time, the Holy ghost shall comfort you.
3 My father shall hear you. Then he adds a most effectual prayer, to his holy
and just father. First, for his own glorification, 2 for the defense of his
disciples. 3 For all the believers in the true doctrine, that they should be
governed and preserved in the unity of spirit. To this the Evangelist
describes the passion of Christ. In the 18. and 19. chap. First, how for the
salvation of mankind, he was betrayed of his own disciple Judas. 2 He was
accused of the Jews. 3 He was fixed to the Cross by the Gentiles.

In the two last chapters the Evangelist makes up the story, with the
resurrection of Christ, and such things as happened afterward. In one chapter
he describes the apparisions of Christ, being made in Judea, before his
disciples and others.

Whence at length as is testified in the other Evangelist, and in the other his
appearinges to his disciples in Galily. He went into heaven where now he
reigns equal with his fa: eternal in power, whence he shortly shall return to
judge the quick and the dead: and shall wipe away al tears from the eyes of his
elect.

So much concerning the Gospel of S. John the Evangelist and Apostle.
The Acts of the Apost.
THis Historical book, Luke the holy Evangelist has written, and it
conteyneth the principal history of the Primative church after the Assention
of Christ, which does follow the books of the Evangelist after a convenient
order.

Although this book may be divided principally into 2. parts: to wit, the
acts of Peter, and into the acts of Paul done after the assention of Christ,
for Luke has chiefly described 1. the Sermons. 2. the works. 3. the Visions.
4. the Miracles, 5. the imprisonments of Peter, and after that the conversion
of Paul: his peregrinations, his disputatio^s, his miracles, his bonds, and
imprisonments, yet for all that the 28. chapters of this book may very
profitably be thus divided.

From the beginning unto the sixth chapter, Luke does first describe the
histories of Christ's ascension, secondly the election of Mathias for an
Apostle, thirdly the sending of the holy Ghost, then the four most excellent
and fruitful sermons of Peter concerning Christ. The first in the second
chapter, the second in the third, the third in the fourth, the fourth in the
fifte chapters, with the two most singular miracles that were done by Peter the
Apostle, to weet, the healing of a lame man, and of the sodeine death of
Ananias and Saphira: and last of all concerning the fellowship of ye Apostles,
their imprisonme^ts, their persecutions, their prayer and constancy.

From the sixth chapter unto the 13. Besides the history of the conversion of
Saint Paul chap, 9. is described after the election of Deacons, the sermon and
Martyrdom of Stephen, and also the history of Simon Magus, and the conversion
of the Eunuke by Phillip the Apostle; which two does make difference betwixt
the true and false christians.

Afterward is continued the history of the miracles of Saint Peter, in
healing of Eneas and the raising of Tabitha, secondly of ye vision, thirdly of
the calling, fourthly of the going forward, fiftlye of the preaching to
Cornelius, of the vocation of the gentiles: last of all not only the disputing
of Peter with the Jews for the vocation of the gentiles, by the repetition of
the history concerning Cornelius, but also his imprisonmentes under HEROD, and
his miraculous deliverance, the tyrant being stricken and consumed of worms by
the mighty power of God, faithfully and orderly are set down.

From the 13. chap, unto the end, are described the peregrmations,
nauigations, places of any stay or abode, sermons, Miracles, disputations,
imprisonments, stripes of S. Paul, from the day in which the holy Ghost said,
Separate for me Paul and Barrabas, to the work which I have called them.
Until he came to dwell two years in a hired house with the soldier that was
his keeper. In the mean time he faithfully taught both by sea and land.

1 The people of Pathmos chap. 13. 2 The people of Antioch. chap. 13. 3 The
people of Iconium. chap. 13. 4 The people of Listra. chap. 14. 5 The people of
Jerusalem 15, and 16 6 The people of Philippi. 15, and 16 7 The people of
Thessalo. 15, and 16 8 The people of Berea. 17. 9 The people of Athens. 19. 10
The people of Corinth. 19. 11 The people of Ephesus. 19. 12 Trans. Miletam
Tire. Cesaria. cha. 20. cha. 21 13 Trans. Miletam Tire. Cesaria. cha. 20. cha.
21 14 Trans. Miletam Tire. Cesaria. cha. 20. cha. 21 15 Trans. Miletam Tire.
Cesaria. cha. 20. cha. 21
At length being wickedly handled, imprisoned and very often presented for the
space of a whole year and more at Jerusalem and Cesarea, with his accusers the
Jews, until he was compelled to appeal unto Caesar, from chap. 20, unto 28.

Last of all, Luke does descry the Nauigations of Saint Paul, after he
appealed to Caesar, to go from Judea toward Rome: and the testimony of Paul
at Ro^me, concerning Christ: as you may read in the two last chapters. Al which
testimony, in this most excellent book, seems plainly to tend to this: that
we may obtain remission of sins and eternal life, by says only in Christ
Jesus.

The epistle of Saint Paul and the rest.
THe Epistles of the apostles, as we have spoken of before are as it were
seals and subscriptions: even so are their testimonies and illustrations which
are written by the Evangelists, as for example: I Paul do thus subscribe to
the Gospel of Matthew, I Peter do thus subscribe.

The Epistle to the Romans.
THIS Epistle is a method of holy scripture, he briefly comprehends those
things which do appertain to christian religion. To may very well be divided
into four principal parts.

From the beginning unto the fifth chapter, he puts two propositions, and he
defendes both the one and the other, with strong evidence and arguments.

The one proposition is legal: to weet, al men are sinners, this he proves,
showing that all gentiles are sinners in the first chapter, and afterward that
the Jews are sinners in the second chapter: last of all he infers that all men
are sinners in the third chapter.

The other proposition is Evangelical, to weet, that men are justified freely
thorough the grace of God by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. He proves
by many arguments that this Justification is by faith chapter 4 first, from
the example of Abraham, secondly from the definition of justification, thirdly
by the order of the cause and the effect, the 4. by the cause of the promise.

From the fifth chapter unto the ninth, he deuideth both propositions into their
parts and disputes severally of them. In the first what sin is, what the
law is, what grace is: and by the way he shows that grace in and thorough
Christ had more force and effect then sin in and thorough Adam, and her
condemns them that think sin to increase through the proaching, of grace
showing to the contrary that no condemnation is to them that are grafted in
christ, who walk-not after the flesh, where he brings chapter 8. for the
afflicted and such as live under the cross from that place, the afflicted of
this life are not woorthye etc. unto the end of the Chapter 8. excellent
consolations.

1 Concerning the Manifestation of glory to come. 2 Concerning the Like
suffering of al creature, with us. 3 Concerning the Sighing of all the
ministers of ye word. 4 Concerning the Hope of eternal life. 5 Concerning the
Person of the holy ghost. 6 Concerning the Doctrine of predestination. 7
Concerning the Person of God the father. 8 Concerning the Person of the son.
From the 9. chap. unto the 12. he handles the place of predestination,
repeating the question that was put in the beginning of the third chapter:
that is to wit: what if certain of them have not believed; shall their
unbelief make the faith of GOD of none effect? God forbid, whence as having
occasion he first of all disputes of election, that we may know to whom this
grace does appertain, and that also in the 9. cha. And after that in the 10.
chap. he defines and expoundes the righteousness of faith. Last of all, he
teaches that no man ought to take offense at the name of Predestination, that
they are always deceived, that letting pass justification by faith: seek to
begin their salvation from predestination.

From the 12. chap. unto the end of the Epistle, he sets down certain
admonitions concerning good works. First, generally toward every man's
neighbor, where he sets down the ends of good works: as are the works of
confession, vocation, love: afterward, toward magistrates or superious, chap.
13. Last of all, toward inferiors; that is to say, the weak, chap, 14, 15.

The last chapter contains salutations, or vows and Euangelical sermons. And
salutation is not to be thought the least duty of humanity.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians.
HOw long Paul did remain at Corinth: what he did there, etc. look Act.
cha. 18, Paul does most sharply rebuke the Corinthians in this Epistle, whom
he knew to be attainted with many vices. It therefore most chiefly appertames to
the law: for it is a reprehending or rebuking epistle, commanding the
Corinthians to decline from evil, and do good.

Directly against 1 Sectaries, chap. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Incestious persons. 3
Fomicators. 6. 4 Adulterers. 7 5 co^tentious persons. 8, 9, 10, 11 6 conte^ners
of ye weak. 8, 12, 13 7 The proud, 14. 8 Arrogant persons. 15. 9 Them that deny
the resurrection from the dead. 16. 10 Covetous persons.


It is divided very conveniently into five principal parts.
From the beginning unto the 5. chap he labors in the first table of the
commandments, condemning the wisdom of the world, as things pern^ious and
hurtful to the salvation of mankind: for it breeds sects and schisms in
Christian religion: and the contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel for their
pride who are pussed up with man's wisdom.

From the 5. chap. unto the 8 he passes to the second table, and pursues
certain vices. First of al, he commandes the incestuous man to be
excomunicated and to be avoided.

After that, he reprehends wrongs, contentions, and heresies: showing that
injuries are to be suffered, or to be arbitrated: rather then to be adjudged
by unrighteous Judges. By and by, he numbreth heaps of vices, and
particularlye inueighes against the filthy affections of lust, highly
commending marriage, chirst life, and virginity.

From the 8. unto the 12. he reprehends the abuse of Christian liberty, and
warns that the weak are to be forborne, rather then be an offense one to
another: chiefly in outward things: As in meats, drinks, and apparel, and
the communion of the sacrament. At sometunes bringing himself for example, and
at other times bringing most horrible and fearful examples out of the old
Testament.

From the 12. unto the 15. he first repeateth the excelent guiftes of God, in
which the Ministry of the word is presented unto the glory of God, after that
he seteth before their eyes, the duties of Charity. Last of all he so comendes
the Ministry of the word and preaching, that he fears not to prefer the
same before all the Sermons and readinges of the Scripture.

From the 15. unto the end, he shows most euidentlye and plainly the
resurrection of the dead, by the example of Christ: and after that he shows ye
clearnes of their bodies in eternal life; to be diverse by many similitudes,
adjoining the manner of rising; the victory of the Godly, Death being swallowed
up.

Last of all besides that, he speaks very familiarly in the last chapter,
concerning the helpinges and collections for the Saints, he adjoining a
final conclusion, with a horible threatening that he which loves not Jesus
Christ our Lord God, let him be accursed and condemned to eternal death.

The latter Epistle to the Corinthians.
THis Epistle does differ from the first, as oil from wine, or the Gospel
from the Law: for in the 2. Epistle Paul comfort the Corinthians, and
shows him self very kind toward them, and does bid that the
excommunicated man may be received into favor.

This Epistle does consist of five things.
1 Consolations. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Commendations. 5. 3 Exhortations. 6, 7. 4
Inuectiues, 8, 9. 5 Comminations, 10, 11.
From the beginning unto the 6. chap, are commendatio^s. First, when he shows
his love toward the Corinthians, and whatsoever he preached, whatsoever he did
and suffered, was to their profit. The he commends the ministry of the
Gospel, and as a doctrine most necessary, and worthier then the ministry of
the Law; That it is increased also in the beleuers, and bred hope in them of
eternal glory, through affliction.

From the 6. unto the 10. are exhortations. First, he exhorts them, that they
do adorn the word of GOD with the works of patience. And afterward, that
they do give their alines to ye poor saints at Jerusalem.

From the 10. unto the end, there are Inuections and comminations. First, he
inueyeth against false Apostles, he very confidently labors against them,
and does glory in the Lord, after this manner

1 of outward things, and of other men's affairs. 2 of his own sufferings in ye
body 3 of his own passions in the soul for the Church. 4 of Flying and
escaping. 5 of Visions, reuealations, and tentations. 6 of his fidelity in the
ministry of the word amongst the Corinthians. 7 of his desire to secure the
Corinthians. 8 of his readiness. 9 of his will to die for the Corinthians. 10
of the justification of a good conscience, for that he did not hurt the
Corinthians.
Afterward, he shows by many reasons, that Paul himself alone, labored
more in the ministry of the word, and suffered more, then all amongst the
false apostles of the Corinthians: to wit, in labors, in imprisonments, in
stripes, etc. chap. 11.

Lastly, he threatens the Corinthians in the last chapter, who would not
repent (as Augustine says) He writes that he will come as a judge, to the
intent that he do not find whom to condemn.

Furthermore he says that he prayde for the Corinthians, that they do no
evil: whence Augustine says, it does appear that God does correct the will
of man: and does guide it, that he may do good works, Psalm. 63. The ways of
man are directed by the Lord.

The Epistle of Paul to the Galathians.
THis Epistle comes near to that Epistle which Paul wrote to the Romans, as
concerning christian Doctrine. Paul defends the article of Justification
against false Apostles, and confirms the righteousness of faith: that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law, but only by faith in Jesus Christ. And
although there are two principal parts of this epistle: the one, of the
righteousness of faith, unto the 5. chap, The other, of the fruits of faith
or of good works, unto the end. Notwithstanding, sithence there are six
chapters, they may be considered, twoe and two together.

Paul in the first and second chapter, does extol and commend his vocation,
that he teaches the churches by Divine authority, and not by humane: and that
he proves to be true by many arguments: that is to wit,

1 That he Went into Arabia, straight up on his conversion. 2 That he Came into
Jerusalem, only to see Peter. 3 That he Went into the parts of Cilicia and
Syria. 4 That he Circumcised Titus at Jerusalem. 5 That he Received nothing
from the great Apostles. 6 That he Reproved Peter.
Afterward having put this principal proposition in the end of the second
chapter: to wit, that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by
faith in Christ. He goes forward to prove the same in the third and fourth
chapter. First, by scriptures. Secondly, by examples. Thirdly, by similitudes
of Scripture, out of Genesis, Leuiticus, Deuteronomy, and Abacuc. There are
three similitudes besides allegories. Therefore we are not justified by the
works of the Law, but by faith in Christ.

The sum or effect of the arguments with Christ.

1 That He is not the minister of sin. 2 That He delivered himself to death. 3
That He died not in vain. 4 That The holy ghost is given thorough faith. 5
That Abram is justified by faith. 6 That They that justify themselves are
under the curse. 7 That The just shall live by his faith. 8 That Christ was
made a curse for us. 9 That Righteousness was before the law. 10 That
Inheritance comes by promise,
Last of all, he teaches in the fifte and sixth chapter (a conclusion being
made concerning the place of justification) the fruits of Faith, enforcing the
commandementes concerning good works and manners, that the beleuers should
walk according to charity, and should maintain their liberty in Christ: and
yet after that sort as not abusing the same. That Paul was amongst the
Galath. See Act. 18.

The Epistle to the Ephesians.
THe Epistle to the Ephesians is the amplification of the place of
Justification and reconciliation: and the admyrable and profounde commendation
of the Gospel: and also a long rehearsal of Gods benefits in the cause of our
salvation.

It is divided into two principal parts: to wit, the tree, and the fruit of
the tree: that is to say: into doctrine of the righteousness of faith and of
good works.
The some of the first part, that does respect Faith, consists in these
benefits of God given unto us through Christ. As are

1 Spiritual blessing. 2 Election. 3 Predestination, 4 Adoption. 5 Good will.
6 Glorious grace. 7 Redemption. 8 The remission of sins. 9 Vocation. 10 The
gospel of salvation. 11 The spirit of promise. 12 Faith. 13 Love. 14 The spirit
of wisdom. 15 The knowledge of vocation. 16 The knowledge of gods power. 17
Vivification. 18 The calling of the Gentiles. 19 The passion of Christ. 20 The
preaching of peace. 21 The church gathered out of ye gentiles. 22 The minister
of ye word. 23 The love of Christ. 24 The fullness of God.
This is the true and perfect treasure of Christians, gathered by the breadth,
length, height and depth of the love of Christ.

The last part from the 4. chap, unto the end of the Epistle, consists in
these fruits of faith, which are,

1 Humility. 2 Lenity. 3 Patience. 4 Charity toward our neighbors in all
good gifts. 5 Newness of life. 6 Truth. 7 Righteousness. 8 Benignity. 9
Mercy. 10 Chastity with contrary vices which a christian ought to avoid.
Afterward, giving of thanks, with the information of every man's estate, and
with a description of a christian soldier that must fight against spiritual
wickedness, through his whole life. Whose loins must be girded with the
gyrdle of truth: fenced with the breast place of righteousness, and feet, shod
with the preparation of the Gospel of peace (...) their hands having the
shield of faith: their heads having on the helmet of salvation, and on their
side the sword of the spirit, and let his arrows be, first prayer, 2
obsecration. 3 Deprecation. 4 Carfulness. 5. Watchfulnes.

The Epistle to the Philippians.
THE Epistle to the Philippians, written at Rome by Paul being in bonds,
although it does not contain the whole disputation as is in the Epistle to the
Romans and Galathians: yet it is an excellent horritory Epistle to constancy
that the godly may go forward constantly in the righteousness of faith.
Farthermore concerning this Epistle, look for Acts 16.

Although Saint Paul first of al gives thanks, 2. prays, 3. admonishes, 4.
praises, 5. comfort, 6. calls death advantage, 7. desires to be
dissolved, 8. exceedingly reioiceth for that he was near to be offered, 9.
contendeth even to the eude, 10. boasts that our City is in heaven, 11.
looks for the sa^^our to come from thence. Notwithst^nding as there are four
chapters, even so he handles four things most chiefly, every one severally in
a chapter by it self.

In the first Chapter after salvation and entrance, he sets himself for
example, and exhortes them to have patience in afflictions, showing that the
afflictions of the godly do happen unto them for their good.

In the second Chapter, he exhorts them to concord and unity, least they
should do any thing through contempt, but that they should serve one another
thorough humilitye, after the example of Christ who humbles himself etc.
Farthermore he commendes Timothye unto them and Epaphraditus, faithful
ministers of Gods word.

In the third, he exhorts them that they avoid false teachers of
circumcision, or man's merits, and that they do follow only that doctrine
which is concerning the righteousness of faith in CHRIST, again he puts
himself for an example for them to follow.

In the fourth, he exhorts them that they do consist, rem^ine and continue
in the same certain, godly and firm doctrine, received with joy and peace.
Furthermore, he gives thanks unto them for their gifts faithfully sent,
according to the rule of his ministry in the word of God.

The Epistle to the Collossians.
THis Epistle is almost the same with the Epistle to ye Ephesians, but it is
shorter. And as the Epistle to the Galathians, is a method of the Epistle to
the Romans: even so, this Epistle is a method of the Epistle to the Ephesians,
or a certain compendious order.

The sum of this Epistle is that nothing is so contrary to faith and our
salvation, as when we begin to value, weigh or prize, by man's reason, those
things which are Gods.

It is divided into two principal parts, even as the Epistle to the Romans,
Galathians; and Ephesians: to wit, into the tree and the fruit, or into
doctrine of faith and Charity.
The first 2. chap: conteyneth not only that the wisdom to know Christ is the
difinition of the Gospel and of faith: to wit, that he is our Lord, our
redeemer, our God and reconciliator: but also setting down a grave exhortation
to this doctrine of the Gospel, and a deho^tation from false doctrine, which
he pursues most sharply; setting forth like a true Prophet, the Pope and his
Munkes in their religion concerning Angels and such like, against whose
traditions he opposes only Christ the conqueror and triumpher over death,
sin, and the Devil.

The other two chapters contain Admonitions concerning the manners of
Christians, that they live a life worthy their profession, that they putting
off the old man, may put on the new, by charity, and the observation of Gods
word: and they conteyne informations of every thing in household matters, and
of persons in familiar manner, in which he requires obedience of women, of
Children, and of servants, and Love, Gentleness, and Justice of youngmen, of
oldmen and of governors. Lastly, the studdie of praying, and certain familiar
things: as commendations, salutations, and singular precepts of Paul,
according to his fashion.

The first Epistle to the Thessalonians.
AS in the Acts chap. 17. the diligence of the Thessalonians is commended, in
the searching of the scriptures: even so, Paul in this Epistle, does commend
their faith and constancy, and does exhort them to perseverance.

It is divided into two principal parts.
In the first three chapters, he is busied in a certain continual narration:
in which he does not only commend the Thessalonians. First, for the receiving
of the Gospel. Secondly, for the constancy of Faith. Thirdly, for their
patience in persecution. Fourthly, for the example of Imitation. 5 For the
publishing of Gods word. 6 For the celebration of Faith: but also he remembers
or repeateth his labors, studies, perils, striuings, conuersations, desire or
longing, carfulness, prayers to them, for example of perseverance. In sum,
he recites how he behaved himself toward them and what he did abide and
suffer for their example.

In the two other chapters, he first of all, dehortes them from vice, and does
exhort them unto the exercise of good works. Afterward, he confirms them
concerning the resurrection: laying the^ down four arguments. First, of
death, that it is a sleep, 2 of the resurrection of Christ. 3 the order of the
resurrection. Fourthly, the life everlasting. By which arguments, they may
comfort themselves. Last of al, he speaks of the sudden coming of the last
day: in which he exhorts them to watch: adding in the end, an heap of good
works, and of good orders, by the which a christian life is governed.

The last Epistle to the Thessalonians.
THis second Epistle is a correction of the sentence or meaning of the first
Epistle, concerning ye last day: that is to say, we that live and remain etc.
Likewise the day of the Lord is like a these etc. the Thessalonio^s were
terrified with these words of Saint. Paul, whence they gathered, that the last
day should be in their ^ime or age. Therefore Saint Paul corrects himself,
and denies the last day to be at the doors, or at hand, prophesying concerning
the king dome of Antichrist, and of his horrible f^lling from the Gospel,
going before the day of Judgment: what Paul respected in this prophecy, and
what he did forsee in spirit for to come, as in the first of ^imothie 4. or
from the effect and event of the latter, seeing it is a manifest matter, all
the saithfull do know that he prophesied of the Pope of Rome.

In the first chapt. Paul commendes in the Thessalonians, 1 Faith. 2. Love, 3.
perseverance in the Cross, showing a difference betwixt the reward of the
Godly, and the pains of the wicked: and that the wicked so soon as they give
over their impiety, and persecuting of the godly: that they go forward
constantly, and so run that they may receive their reward 1. Corinthians. 9.

In the 2. chap. is interpreted, the sentence or meaning of the first epistle,
concerning the last day by the prophecy of the desolation of the Roman empire
together: and of the kingdom of Antichrist, that he should reign in ye church
before the last day of Judgment, and also should bring to pass, that his
commandments, should be kept above or before Gods commandments: by whose
tyranie men being oppressed, should fall from the says, and give themselves
over to man's traditions.

Furthermore, unto the end of the prophecy, he rejoices as well for the
eternal election, as the vocation of the Thesalonians in Christ: and by the
way, he commendes his own offi^e unto them.

In the third chapter, he apointeth certain admonitions: chiefly against
anidle life: that men should not learn to do ill, as they that by doing
nothing: but that every man should eat his bread in the sweat of his brows.
In the end, he puts the final cause together: and the manner of exhorting,
that the excommunicated person may be shamed, when he s^es himself shunned of
all men. For he may learn to acknowledge his fault, and in the mean time, he
be corrected as a brother, that by no means he be accounted as an enemy.

The first Epistle to Tymothy.
THis first Epistle to Tymothy, although it preaches to all men: yet
notwithstanding, it must be most familiarly known to the ministers of the
gospel.

For Tymothy was a bishop and a faith full minister of Gods word. For Paul,
after he had circumcised him and called him to the ministry of the word. He
had him sometimes as his companion: sometimes as his messenger in his
apostolical office, until he was placed ruler over the churches of the
Ephesians in the word of God. Therefore, Paul did instruct him, being yet a
young manne in those things which did truly and properly appertain to the
office of a bishop, and wishes particularlye unto him, besides grace and
peace, mercy also: as bishops and pastour^ have need of more comfort then
other; in that they suffer beyond all others. Therefore, let the faithful
preachers of the word esteem of this epistle, as most especially unto them.

There are six chapters in this book, which are thus to be discerned.
In the first chap, after Paul had detested fables and wicked doctrine: he
shows or delivers a brief rule, for the use and effect of the Law and of
the Gospel; setting himself for an example, that he might warn and admonish
Tymothy concerning the sum of christian doctrine, which a Bishop ought to
profess.

In the second chapter, he wills chiefly that men, and specially women, be
warned by Timothy. In which word [Men] he comprehends the whole house, that
they do pray for all men in general: for the Magistrate more particularly,
whom God says, He would all men to be saved by christ the mediator. Last of
all, that they do pray in all places, or wheresoever the place or occasion of
prayer shall be. And that women do adorn and deck themselves, not with
sumptuous and gorgeous apparel, with precious stones or with gold, but with
virtue and good works, that the habit may testify the integrity and
shamefastness of their life. And afterward he takes away from them the
office of teaching and authority over the husbands. Lastly, he commends their
offices, and comfort them.

In the third chapter, he shows what kind of men the ministers of gods word
ought to be, and also their wives. At sometimes approving those things which
ought to be: at other times disallowing of those things which ought not to be.
He requires in a Bishop or Deacon, under which he comprehendes the ministers
of Gods word.

Besides integrity of life and Marriage.
1 Sobriety. 2 Modesty. 3 Chastity. 4 Hospitality. 5 Dexterity in teaching. 6
Equity. 7 Household care. 8 A good testimony.
And on the contrary he condemns in them.
1 Drunkenness. 2 Much babbling. 3 Desire of filthy lucre. 4 Fighting or
quarrelling. 5 Covetousness. 6 Pride.
In the Wives of Ministers are required.
1 Shamefastness toward her Husband. 2 Taciturnity, toward her Neighbors.
3 So briety, toward her self. 4 Piety, toward God.
In the end of the chapter, he describs the gift of God: adjoining thereunto
the ministry of the Gospel of Christ, according to his humanity.

In the fourth chapter, he warns all godly men to beware of false doctrine,
with their signs and marks: to wit for bidding marriage and meats, which like
a prophet he foretells and appoints forth so lively, as if he lived in the
midst of popery. There are in Popery, first, the spirit of error. Secondly,
the doctrine of Devils. Thirdly, hypocrisy. Fourthly, seared consciences.
Fiftlye, forbidding marriage. Sixthly, forbidding meats.

On the contrary, Paul wills Tymothie to exercise himself, and to perform
his office diligently toward his neighbor thorough the works of godliness.

In the fifth chapter, ch^efely he reckons three sorts of widows: the rich
he would have to govern their own houses, the poor he would have to be
nourished at the chardge of the Church, and the younger he would have to mary
in the Lord: afterward he would that honor should be ministered and given to
the ministers of the word of god. He warns Tymothie of al things faithfully.

In the sixth chapter, after the instruction of servants, he concludes the
Epistle with a grave exhortation from false doctrine, and from covetousness,
faithfully admonishing Tymothie that he do remain in the true doctrine and in
true temperance, following godliness, faith, and charity: he would have rich
men to be forbidden of these three things. First pride. Secondly, confidence
in riches. Thirdly, abuse of riches. And he would have Tymothie to be a
stranger from idle disputations.

The last Epistle to Tymothy.
Paul proceeds forward, even out of the prison, to warn Tymothy that he
do keep the true and pute doctrine of the Gospel, with a good conscience, as
it were a treasure of hie price, committed to his charge Furthermore, the Holy
ghost preaches by saint Paul: not only to Tymothye, but to all the governors
and teachers of the Church, who had received the true doctrine of the Gospel.
Wherefore, this Epistle ought to be most dear and of very good account and
special reckoning to the Ministers of the Gospel.

There are 4. chapters which are thus to be divided.
In the first chapter, after gratulation, he warns Tymothy, First, for the
stirring up of the grace of God. 2 That he be not ashamed of the gospel, and
of the bonds of Paul. 3. To suffer affliction. 4 For the retaining of the
form of whole some doctrine, 5. to keep that good which was committed unto
him, he inserteth also an excellent and most Evangelical saying: He that has
sowed us etc. which makes against Justification by the works for the only grace
of God: and also commending his office and the house of Onismus, against the
falling away of the people of Asia from the gospel. In the 2. chapter, after
the commendation of the doctrine, chiefly he exhorts him to suffer
afflictions, bringing forth excellent arguments from the reward: then he is
exhorted from the contentions and vain ianglings of men, showing that it is no
marvel, if the good and evil be together in the church, when as in a ritche
man's house there are vessels appointed, some to honor, and some to dishonor.

Last of all in this chapter, is chiefelye handled that he would have him to
divide rightly the word of truth, least he should confound the law and the
Gospel in the handling thereof. But to urge the law against the evil, the
wicked and obstinate that they may be delivered to the magistrate to be
punished, or to be excommunicated, and to comfort the afflicted and godly with
the Gospel. In the end of the chapter, he shows that repentance is the gift
of God.

In the the third chapter, to the first perils: to weet, the falling away of
the people of Asia, and of others from the gospel of Christ, he adds another
peril, and sets forth false teachers very largely, whom he foretells that
should come in the latter days: against whom he exhorts Tymothie by his
constancy he might be profitable also to all his posterity.

Furthermore, as in the former Epistle: even so Paul in this place by the
light of Gods spirit foreseeth the impiety of the Bishop of Rome, and those
things which have been done in Rome these 900. years. In the end he
commends the sacred scripture, then which commendation nothing can be more
excellently spoken.

From the fourth chapter, he concludes ye Epistle by protestations, in which
he does most earnestly charge Tymothie to the work of an Evangelist, showing
that the time of his dissolution was at hand, and that he had fought a good
fight: then with some few points of courtesy he ends the Epistle: he wrote
this Epistle out of doubt a little before his martyrdom.

The Epistle to Tytus.
ALbeit this Epistle is not such a method, as is the Epistle to the Romans: yet
notwithstanding it contains the sum briefly of all christian religion, in
which he first instructs and informs teachers: so that these three chapt,
might be divided according to three principal states: to weet, Religion,
Policy, and Domestical government or rule of an household. The last of which
he places in the midst, because for the preserving thereof God ordained the
other two. Very fitly was annexed to this information the place of
Justification: Again and again, that to the same as to a mark all things
might be directed, aimed, and referred.

In the first chapter, he discerns Religion, and as in the Epistle to
Tymothy: even so here he describes under the name of a Bishop, all the
ministers of the Gospel, what manner of people they ought for to be in life
and doctrine. Now for the faithful themselves, at an other time by reason of
false teachers, which he paintes out unto the end of the chapter, he sets
forth to behold their impiety as it were in a glass: in which our Papists
may the more rightly look into themselves.

In the second chapter, he draws a table as it were of household manners, and
he reformeth the life of every state concerning household affairs, where under
the name of Young he admonishes Tytus himself, that he should show himself
in all things an example of good works: then he shows the reason: to weet,
the appearaunce of the grace of God, in this: that CHRIST gave himself for us,
that we should live in him modestly, justly and godly.

In the third chapter, he gives precepts concerning policy, and of obedience
to be given toward magistrates. He teaches, that all subjects are to be
warned by Titus, adding thereunto great causes out of the Law and Gospel: to
wit, that we are all debtors to the same. Again, bringing in that most
excellent place of Justification, wherein he takes away salvation by works:
and does ascribe it to the only mercy of God, thorough our mediator Christ.
Where he shows very evidently, the form and manner of our redemption. That
whosoever coueteth to be a new man, it is necessary for him to believe, and
to be baptized. In the end, he dehorts to good works, and to avoid foolish
and heretical questions.

The Epistle of Paul to Philemon.
THis Epistle, shows the wonderful love of Paul toward his neighbor, in
this, that he studied to reconcile Onisemus to his master Phylemon, with great
humility of mind: and with sweet words; first, he commends Philemons faith
and charity. Afterward he puts forth his petition for Onesimus, being
converted to the faith. Last of al, with sweet affections, he takes upon
himself the fault of Onisemus, and does reconcile him to his master, not
now as a servant, but as a dear beloved brother in Christ: a great example of
charity, and study of concord in Paul.

The Epistle to the Hebrews.
ALthough it be doubtful whether this be the Epistle of saint Paul, because
of some places in the 9, 10 and 12, chapters. Out of the which it is proved by
some, that it was not Paul that wrote it. Yes, never thelesse, the Epistle
has the authority of the holy Ghost, as appears by the scope thereof. He
delivers plainly christ to be true God and true manne, yea our only s^^^our
and redeemer: and the greater part of the Epistle stands on comparison, by
which it conuinceth ye Lord of all, namely Christ, the natural and everlasting
son of God.

He compares Christ, 1 with the Angels, chap. 1, 2. 2 with the Moses, chap. 3
and 4. 3 with the Aron, chap. 5. 4 with the Melchisedeth. chap. 6 and 7. 5 with
the Sacrifices of the law. 8.9, 10.


It has 13. chapters, which for the better declaration of them, though not
altogether exactly, may be thus divided.

In the first two chapters, after his entrance, wherein he briefly describes
the divinity and humanitye of Christ) and shows him to be much more excellent
then the Angels, by nine arguments: in which he preached Christ to be God, and
the everlasting Creator; and preferring his Gospel before the preaching of the
Law, moke away the objections that are made. This is the principal proposition
of this Epistle: and all tend unto this end that the Jews (to whom he writes)
leaning Iudaisme, should put their hope assuredly in Christ.

In the third and fourth chapters, he preaches Christ to be much more excel
lent than Moses, by making comparison. By and by, he applies the time of the
Gospel unto that which is in the ninth Psalm, called to day: with an horrible
threatening, by their example, who for their incredulity perished in the
wilderness, being shut out from the rest, in the land of Canaan.

In the fifth, sixth and seventh, he begins to describe Christ to be a priest, by
comparing him with Aron and with Melchisedech. In the end of the fifth chapter,
for the slothfulness and dullness of the Jews a dangerous dissession, whose
description he seems willingly to pass.

In the sixth chapter, it seems that a place of repentance is denied to an
offender, to strike a terror into the obstinate. In the seventh chapter, he
describes and commends Melchisedech, in which he extolleth the priesthood of
Christ.

In the eight, nine, and ten, he shows by many grave arguments, Christ to be
the only priest, and the only sacrifice for our sins: which he prefers
before al Legal sacrifices, calling it the new Testament, out of the 13.
chapter of Jeremy. Afterward, he reckons ye part^ of the Tabernacle,
chapter 9. that is to wit: The gate or portch: the holy place, and the holy of
holiest, with their significations. In which figures, he applies the blood of
Christ, purifying the consciences. He calls Christ the Mediator of the New
testament: signifieng the blood of Christ to be powered out in the new
Testament, for the remission of sins. Last of all, by repetition he
amplifyeth the same: that is to wit, The sacrifices of Christ, with the
sacrifices Leuiticall, Psalm. 39, and 31. chapt, At length, he concludes this
whole place by an exhortation, to settle confidence in the blood of Christ,
and performs the duties of mutual love by good works, making preparation to
the chap. following.

In the 11, 12, and 13, he commendes by examples the faith of the Patriarchs,
and of other saints of the old testamant. Then he joins an exhortation for
the fruits of Faith, patience, discipline, peace sanctification, true
repentance, obedience toward the word of the Gospel, not only bringing the
example of Christ, but also threateninges out of the old Testament. In the
last chap, he reckons a heap of good works, with an exhortation to avoid
false doctrine, and with an exhortation to confess the true doctrine of Jesus
Christ, and to give thanks.

The Epistle of James.
SOme men think that this Epistle is not written by James the Apostle, which
was slain by Herod: not only because of that place cited out of Genesis,
concerning Abraham, for the Justification of works; contrary to the analogy of
Faith: but also, for other places, taken out of the epistle of Peter and Paul,
and of this Epistle, mixed here and there. It is not a methodical epistle, as
other say: neither does it contain one certain matter: but as a man may say;
dissolved or vnloynted scopes: that is to say; Sentences not agreeing in order
amongst themselves. And the sum is, that he urges the Law and good works,
against secure and careless men, and boasters of faith with our good works.

There are five chapters, which are thus to be discerned.
In the first chapt, he proponeth parcicularly these 8. sentences.

1 Patience is to be showed in adversity. 2 Divine wisdom to be desired of
God. 3 We must believe without wavering. 4 We must use riches rightly. 5 And
suffer tentations which do rise from concupiscence. 6 To hear the heavenly
word diligently. 7 And do good works, being the effect of the word. 8 To live
in true religion.
In the second chapter, he handles only two things: the one, that poor
Christians be not contemned, seeing that faith in Jesus Christ does not suffer
the exception of persons: the other, concerning good works; by the which faith
toward God and our neighbor is showed, as this place is a collation betwixt
man and man; not betwixt God and man, where faith only justifies: when he
faith; show me thy faith by thy works.

If any do not thus understand James. but will wrest this his sentence to
Justification, which auailes before God; he takes away the analogye of faith.
And the Epistle of Paul to the Romans, which seeing it is absurd, the
sentence of James may admit a profitable interpretation, and the analogy of
Faith. Otherwise, places or examples out of Genesis, or of the book of Joshua,
concerning justification, might be cited directly against natural sense of
scripture, concerning Justification.

In the third chapter, are also twoe places well handled: of the which, one is
the restraint of the tongue, that he teach not false doctrine: which is to
arrogate and usurp to himself magistracye in the holy scriptures, above the
holy ghost the true teacher and master, whose disciples are all true teachers
in the church. The other place, is concerning the divine wisdom which is in
the doctrine, Law and Gospel, the very light of faith in our minds, and the
beginner of obedience, agreeing with the law of god, according to this saying:
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet.

In the fourth chapter, there are forewarninges, concerning virtues in every
commandment of the Tables, as in one knot or heap bound together.

1 Concerning the avoiding of contention. 2 Of pleasures or desires. 3
Concerning prayer. 4 The avoiding of adultery. 5 Of pride and humility. 6
Concerning obedience toward God, and so forth unto the end of the chapter.
In the fifth chapter, he chiefly inueyeth against those that do abuse their
riches. I hen he exhorts the godly to patience and sufferance, and he
dehorts them from the custom of swearinge. Then he persuades to have a care
of the weak, and to pray one for another. Last of all, he exhortes to prayer,
and he commends it by the example of Elias. In the end, he shows the true
effect of conversion.

The first Epistle of PETER.
THis Epistle is truly Apostolical: as of him which being asked of Christ,
who he was: answered. Thou art Christ the son of God, Matthew 16. Again, to
whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life. John 6. For it has a
sweet savor of the same confession, with constancy and sincerity in Faith. For
he confesses Christ syncetely, taking away salvation from our merits, and
delivering the true knoledge of Christ: in which he would have all the Gentiles
that are converted (unto whom he writes) to go forward constantly, and to
increase from day to day: so as they may answer in their lives, manners, and
conuersations, to the Gospel, of what state soever they be: as those whom he
numbreth,

1 The Subjects. 2 The Servants. 3 The Women. 4 The Men. 5 The Priests. 6 The
Youngmen.
There are five chapters, which art thus to be discerned.
The first chapter is divided into twoe parts. In the first, which is begun
from the induction or entrance, he puts down the true reason of salvation:
where all these things are to be considered in dus order.

1 The great mercy of God. 2 Regeneration by a lively faith. 3 The resurrection
of Christ. 4 Heavenly inheritance. 5 The power of God. 6 Faith. 7 Trial of
Faith. 8 Joy and gladness. 9 The writings of the prophets. 10 The Gospel. 11
Grace. 12 Glory.
In the other part, he puts the consequence of this antecedent, or that which
follows it: and does exhort the believers to newness of life: as for example.

1 Sobriety. 2 Hope of offered Grace, as newness of life follows faith. 3
Obedience. 4 Holiness. 5 Invocation. 6 Fear. 7 Love.
He joins and sets unto this discourse, the most excellent cause of this
regeneration: to wit, that we are redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus
Christ, and renewed by the word of God.

The second chapter is divided into two parts: for in the one he goes
forward to exhort the believers, to offer spiritual sacrifices, and to have
good conversation to the edification of ye faith full. And he adds a reason,
because says he: all believers are priests, and called unto holiness of life.

In the other, he appointes the reformation of diverse states: in the which, he
labors to the end of this chap. First, the subjects to obedience toward
the Magistrates; the servants to obedience toward their masters: as he
puts Christ himself for example, who suffered a greater wrong.

In the third chapter, he first of all speaks concerning the obedience of
wives, concerning the modest apparel of wives, and the forbearance of the
husband toward his wife. Then he warns all men in general, to exercise
themselves in the virtues of true charity, and in patience, and also in true
confession, together with the righteousness of a good conscience, bringing
again the example of charity and patience in Christ.

Last of all, he sets down a most excellent place concerning Noah's Ark, that
it was a sign of Baptism.

But what he means by the preaching of Christ to certain spirits not
believing, in the days of Noah, we are not ignorant and we judge the true
interpretation of this place, it to be reserved to the master himself: to
wit, to the Holy Ghost.

In the fourth chap. he goes forward at one time, to exhort al godly men to
sobriety to watchfulness, to modesty, to prayer, to mutual charity: At
another time, to other fruits of Faith, according to the variety of guiftes,
with patience and joy in afflictions, by doing good to all men for Christ's
sake.

In the 5. chap, he insonneth and instructs Ecclesiastical persons, under
the natures of Priests: sometimes to feed their flocks, and at another time
to live well. After that, he exhorts youth to obedience: and in general, he
would have all men to be humbled, to trust in God, to be sober, to watch
against the ^^^ersarie the devil, and to resist him in says. Lastly, he
concludes the Epistle with exceeding consolat o^ that they might know
themselves to be confirmed and strengthened of God unto faith.

The last Epistle of Peter.
THere are only 3. chapters. The first against hypocrisy. The 2 against
Antichr: The 3. against Epicures. Peter in the first Chapter, would have faith
and the vocation of faith to be showed as most certain by good works, least
that faith be as a vain dream: without virtue, without knowledge, continency,
etc. seeing that it is not by the hearing of fables, but of the Gospel.

In the 2. chap, he sets forth the same, as Christ himself did, when he said
Mat. 7. take heed of of false prophets, and Paul. act to take heed to your
selves, etc. Also phil. 3. Beware of dogs, take heed of wicked doers. Peter
does warn the godly concerning false teachers, and of the coming of
Antichrist, of whom he prophesied. S. Paul 1 Timothy 4. shows their damnation,
by bringing 3. excellent examples. 1 of Angels. 2 of them that were lost in the
flood. 3 Of the Sodomites: and then he paintes them out in their couloures, for
because they walk after the flesh, in concupiscence and uncleanness.

Lastly, he puts forth a most horrible sentence or judgment of such in twoe
proverbs, of a dog and a Sow: by the which he expresses, the which he
expresses, that the latter ends of such is worse then the beginning.

In the third chapter, he warns the godly that they should beware of
Epicures: that is to say, of profane men, walking according to their own,
concupiscence, who only do regard this life, and not the life to come: They
have always in their mouths, Let us eat and drink to morrow we shall die.
After death there is no pleasure. Again, that which is above us does nothing
concern us. Against whom Peter affirms: with out doubt the last day shall
come, unto which, both heaven and earth are and shall quickly perish in their
appointed time, reserved for fire. Wherefore he affirms, that every one of the
godly should study die to live in that state, as being called out of the
world, he might die boldly and confidently.

The first Epistle of John.
SAint John the Apostle and an Evangelist, who wrote this Epistle, and leaned
at supper time upon ye breast of Jesus Christ, and did draw sweet water out
of the well of our Savior: even so here he breathed mere love: both of God
toward us, and our love toward our neighbor. Gods love, that the same being
apprchended by faith, we might be justified freely by grace, without works,
and obtain everlasting life. Then our love next, that our faith be not idle,
but that it should work by charity, otherwise it is not true faith, but only
fained: who have these three signs. First, not to strive against sin.
Secondly, not to beware of false doctrine, Thirdly, to hate our neighbor.

There are five chapters, which does so agree in one and selfsame matter, as
hardly they can be decided one from an other. All things therein does agree
with his Gospel, chiefly with these two commandments of Christ: ye believe in
God, believe also in me. Again, I give you a new commandment, that ye love
another, which two commanundementes, John does join after this manner in the
third chapter, and this is his commandment, that we believe the name of his
son Jesus Christ, and love one another as he gave us commandment.

The sum of the Epistle is, concerning faith and charity, the chapters after
a sort are thus to be divided.
In the first chapter, having gotten the good will of the Auditory, he puts
this exposition of the whole Epistle: that we being made clean by the blood of
christ, and remaining in the society of Saints, ought not to walk, in
darknesses that is to say, without good works but in the light that is to say,
in the exercise and the wing of good works, together with the true confession
of sins.

In the second chapter, after the cumgelicall common place of Christ, the
advocate and our propitiator. First, he reproues them of lying, who does boast
of faith and does no good: and affirms that those that are to be reproved, as
yet do lack faith. Afterward, he warns every age that they would remain
in those things which they had received of God. Lastly, he commands that they
eschew false opinions, and the unrighteous desires of the world and Antichrist,
By anointing, he understands the holy ghost. He calls Antichrist false
Apostles, who were then: and afterward he speaks of others: as of Heretics,
of whom, some have denied the Divinity, and some the humanity of Christ.

Furthermore, upon this excellent place. He that says himself to be and
remain in Christ, he ought to walk as he walked. I am not ashamed to write S.
Augustines most excellent exposition, out of his book: of the life of a
Christian, cha, 14, who says as follows.

1 He is a Christian who Shows mercy to all. 2 He is a Christian who Is moved
with the iniurye of all. 3 He is a Christian who Suffers not a poor man to
be oppressed, he being in place. 4 He is a Christian who Helps the miserable.
5 He is a Christian who Succoureth often the needy. 6 He is a Christian who
weeps with them that weep 7 He is a Christian who Feels the grief of another
as his own. 8 He is a Christian who Is provoked to weep, by the weeping of
another. 9 He is a Christian who whose house is common to all men. 10 He is a
Christian who Whose gate is shut against no man. 11 He is a Christian who
whose talk no poor man is ignorant of. 12 He is a Christian who In whose
house bread is offered to al men. 13 He is a Christian who Whose goodness all
men knows. 14 He is a Christian who Of whom no man feels wrong 15 He is a
Christian who Serves God day and night. 16 He is a Christian who continually do
meditate and think upon gods commandments. 17 He is a Christian, who Is made
poor in the world, that he may be rich with God. 18 He is a Christian, who
With men is counted ignominious, that he may appear glorious with God and his
Angels. 19 He is a Christian, who Has nothing feigned in his heart. 20 He is a
Christian, who whose mind is simple and immaculate. 21 He is a Christian, who
Whose conscience is faithful and pure. 22 He is a Christian, who Whose whole
mind is in god 23 He is a Christian, who whose whole hope is in christ. 24 He is
a Christian, who Desires heavenly things rather then earthly. 25 He is a
Christian, who does despise humane things that he may posses divine.
Thus far S. Augustine.
In the 2. chapter, he continues an exhortation, concerning newness of life,
by many arguments taken, first from the love of God toward us. 2 From ye hope
of eternal life. 3 From the offices of Christ, which are to take away sins.
Fourthly to dissolve the works of the devil. 5. From the efficient cause of
righteousness: to wit, from God. 6. From the uprightness of a good
conscience. 7 From the promise and commandment. 8 From the love of Christ
toward us.

In the fourth chapter, he exhortes to take heed of the doctrine of Antichrist,
and to confess the doctrine of Christ. Afterward he goes forward unto the
end of the chapter, to admonish them concerning charity: having once made a
sweet comparison betwixt the love of God toward us, and our love toward God
and our neighbor, as betwixt the efficient cause and the effect.

In the fifth chapter, he follows after faith, whence proceeds al good
works, to whom victory is ascribed, which he shows must be confirmed by
three testimonies: to wit, the spirit, water and bloud^ that is to save, by the
word of God and the two sacraments. Afterward, he makes them more certain
of life everlasting, together. with the hearing of the word. Last of al, he
discerns sin not to be unto death, from the consideration of that sin
that is committed against the holy ghost: pardonable from unpardonable.

But they are sins against the son, which proceed through the weakness of
the flesh, from them that believe in the son of God, and does repent.

And sins which are done by y^ wicked against the holy ghost, are first the
resistance of the known truth. 2 Repining at the good gifts of our brethren.
5 final impenitency.

The second Epistle of John.
IN this one chap. of this Epistle of John: first he calls himself an Elder,
because he was a priest, and the chief Apostle, now being old, for he lived in
the time of Tra^^ne the Emperor, under whom he died as it is ^^unde in the
histories, in the year of Christ 101. and of his own age ninety. Afterward
he exhorts his elect Lady, excellent both for her birth, and also for her
virtue. First to love, then to perseverance in the doctrine of Christ. Lastly,
he warns to excommunicat the haters of Christ.

The third Epistle of John.
IN this one chapt. of this Epistle, John names three men, of the which, first
he names Gaius, to whom he writes, and calls him his son, commending him for
the truth, or word of God: next for love: and lastly, for his hospitality.
The other was Diotrephus a wicked Bishop, not only as an inuector and
backbiter: but also being no houskeeper and an hater of christian brethren, and
also an excommunicater, he sharply reproues him and rebukes him.

The third was Demetrius, whom he commends, sometimes by the testimony of
others: and sometimes by his own proof and testimony for the truth: that is to
say, for his knowledge and obedience toward the word of God.

The Epistle of Jude.
THis Judas was surnamed Thaddeus, the son of Alpheus, brother to James the
younger, as men call him, and of Simon, and this Apostle wrote this one chap,
only of this in which throughout he answers to the second chapter of the
second epistle of Peter.

First he threatens horrible punishments to heretics and false teachers:
bringing forth the example, first, of the Egyptians. 2 Of the Angels. 3 Of the
Sodomites. 4. Of Caine. 5 Of Balaam. 6. Of Chore, he sets them forth in their
colors. Afterward, he describes what manner of people they are (as Peter did)
in which description, whom it concerns in our time, it is not hard to judge.

Lastly, he exhortes all godly men to perseverance, First in faith. 2 in the
holy ghost. Thirdly in prayer. Fourthly, in Love. Fifthly, in looking for Gods
mercy 6 In compassion. 7 In newnes of life. In the end, he would have the
godly to keep the faith, and to beware of false doctrine.

The Reuellation of S. John.
THe Ecclesiastical history shows, how John being under the Emperor
Domitian, was banished into the Hand of Pathmos, and there wrote this
Apocalypse, or Revelation. And again, after the death of Domitian, when he
returned from the I Will of Pathmos to Ephesus, to have written his Gospel
against the Heretics, Marcio, Ebon, and Cerunhus.

This book under the name of Revelation, conteyneth prophecy, concerning
event, fortune, matters, and of the derived church: that is to say, ye church
derived from the Primitive church, and thence to be derived unto the end of the
world.

It may very well be divided.
1 Into Seals. 2 Into Trumpets. 3 Into Vials.
The 7. seals signifies the persecution of the church which is under Tyrants:
to wit, Domitian, Traianus, etc. which truly began in the primitive church, in
ye time of the Apost. and continued thence the space of 300. years, unto the
time of Constantine, and it is described in this book chap. 4, 5, 6, 7.

The Trumpets signifies heresies, as the Arians, etc. From the time of
Constantine unto Theodosius, for other 300. years, yea unto Mahomet and the
pope This is described, chap. 8 unto 18.

The Vials, signify the plagues of Antichrist for these 900. years, from the
time of Bonif. y^ pope unto this our time, of the which thou may read from
the 17. chap, unto the end of the book.

It may otherwise be divided: to wit, into seven visions: that is to say,
into figures, most wonderfully showing to the mind and cies of all men.

The first vision of the seven churches of Asia the less.

The second vision, concerning Christ and his church being exalted.

The third vision concerning the diligence of the disciples of Christ.

The fourth concerning the affliction of the church.

The fist concerning the last persecution under Antichrist.

The sixth concerning the day of Judgment.

The seventh, concerning the victory of Christ and the church.

Briefly he describes.
1 The Kingdom of Christ. 2 The comfort of the godly afflicted 3 The Threats
of Tyrants. 4 The priesthood of Christ. 5 The Prayers of the Saints. 6 The
Histories of the new Testament is reueiled.
The chapters are thus to be discerned.
From the 1. chap. unto the 4. chap. is the preface, in which first of all it
contains the commendation of these revelations from the efficient cause: to
weet, from God. Then it contains the admonition to the seven bishops of the
Churches of Asia the less, which he calls Angels, Candlesticks, stars,
etc. For the ministry of the word.

From the fourth chapter, unto the 8. is the first part of the book with the
7. seals. Where first he would have to be understood by Elders, the Prophets.
Secondly, by beasts, the Evangelists. 3 By birds, Doctrine. 4 By the Lamb,
Christ himself. 5. By Angels, the ministers of the word. 6 By Seals,
Persecutions. 7 by Horses, Tyrants. 8. by sealed ye elect. the Jews. 9 by the
multitude, the elect of the Gentiles, 10 by the book, the ministry of
Revelations.

From the 8. chapter unto the 15. cha. is the second part of the book of
Trumpets: by which he understands Heresies. 2. by stars, Heretics. 3 By the
angel, the ministry of the word. 4. by the the Gospel. 5 By the measuring of
the Temple, Religion. 6 By the holy City, the Church. 7 By the two witnesses,
the Prophets and Apostles. 8 By the woman, the Church* 9. By the 12. stars,
the 12. Tribes. 10 By the wars, the preaching of the Gospel. 11 by Mychaell,
Christ Jesus. 12 By the Beasts, the Roman Monarchy. 13 By ye lamb, Christ.
14 By the voice of thundering, the word of the Gospel. 15 By the new Song, the
Gospel. 16 By the women, Idolatry* 17 By Virgins, sincere Christians.

From the 16, unto the end is the third part of this book. First, by the
beasts, he would understand the Roman Monarchy. 2 By the Harlot, the
Idolatry of Antichrist. 3 By the golden people, hypocrisy. 4. By Characters, a
perfect sign of Antichrist. 5 By vials, the plagues of Antichrist. 6 By the
marriage of the lamb the humanity of Christ. 7 By the name written, the Divinity
of Christ. 8 By new heaven and new earth, the Image of everlasting life. To the
which place he shall bring us, who has signed this his holy scriptures with
his own precious blood, even Jesus Christ our Lord, who with the Father and
the holy Ghost, be praised for ever and ever* Amen.

FINIS.

