A GODLY LEARNED EXPOSITION, TOGETHER with apt and profitable Notes on the
LORDS PRAYER.

Written by the late Reverend Orthodoxe Divine, and faithful Servant of Jesus
Christ, SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Divinity, and Preacher of Gods Word at Deptford
Stronde, in the County of Kent.

Published since his death, BY NATHANIEL SNAPE, of Grayes Inn, Esquire.

LONDON: Printed by THOMAS HARPER, 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS Lord Couentry, Baron of Ailsborough, and Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND, etc.
Right Honorable.
YOur natural propensitie and noble inclination to Learning and Religion, your
good acceptance of this Authors little Manual of private Devotions, lately
presented to your Lordship, and my particular obligation, are the cause of this
my dedication. My relation to the Author, brought his papers to my hands, and a
desire of the Churches benefit, bids me send them to the Press. I thought fit
to begin with this upon the Lords Prayer, it being the Principle and Rudiment
of Christian Religion: And albeit diverse learned Expositors have traveled very
far in discovery of the hidden treasure of this Celestial Mine, yet such is
the mysterious plenteousnesse of this compendium of Divinity, (which is a
contexture of God Almighty his own making) as that it does, and ever will,
afford continual study to the most laborious and curious searcher. This is
such a prayer, as S. Augustine, Math. 6. speaks of, Quae paucis verbis res
multiplices comprehendit: Cuius mysteriorum profunditate Ingeniosorum prudentia
stupescit. It is a prayer dictated out of Gods own mouth for our study and
imitation: and therefore I shall need no other motive to your Lordships
favorable acceptance hereof. For the Author, your Lordship had some knowledge
of him: he must be tam quam, that is, a right Minister of God: all his life
must, as Saint Greg. super Eze. hom. 3. says, sonare verbo and ardere
desiderio. And that the Author was not unlike: thus far I may safely
adventure to the praise of his memory; that the Clergy thought him a reverend,
learned, and orthodoxe Divine; and that the Laytie found him always painfully
zealous in the Ministry, upright and conscionable in his life and
conversation: how he has approved himself by these his labors, I do in all
humbleness submit to your Lordships grave judgment, and the judicious Reader.

Your Lordships humbly devoted NATHANIEL SNAPE.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE LORDS PRAYER.
LVC. 11.1. And it came to pass, that as he was praying in a certain place,
when he ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as
John also taught his Disciples.


I Follow our Church Catechism, for after the law of the ten Commandments,
this caution follows: know this, that thou art not able to do these things
of thy self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him,
without his special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by
diligent prayer.

And as we cannot obey without the help of prayer, neither can we pray without
both 1 Teaching what and how to pray. 2 Help and assistance in our prayer.


The Apostle does confess this general and common defect in us all.

Romans 8.26.
We know not what we should pray for as we ought: so there is a quid, the
matter of our prayers, and a sicut, the manner of them to be learned; and there
is an help to be sought for, to carry us through this holy duty, that God may
have honor, we good by our prayers.

Therefore I begin the doctrine of prayer at this place, wherein

1 There is example of praying showed, the best and greatest, Christ himself.

2 Thereupon a motion is made to Christ, the best and ablest Doctor of the
Church, to direct in prayer, Doce nos.

3 An instance given of the like. Sicut Ioannes etiam docuit discipulos suos.

1 Concerning the example.

It came to pass that he was praying in a certain place.

1 Note.
This (...), factum est, does intimate the example of purpose showed to the
Disciples, to give them this occasion to desire instruction in the use of
prayer, for by such baits, the great Fisher of men does catch men, and if we
could take notice of it, God has many means in continual tender to us, to
inuit and provoke us, to guide also and direct us, to put us on and encourage
us to those holy duties which please him.

Satan, and the world, and the flesh, cast out their baits of temptations to
evil, and few of them miscarry, but they take.

Let us not omit these living books of Doctrine, these walking tables of duty,
when good examples offer themselves to our eyes: especially seeing Saint Peter
says, we must ambulare sicut ille; we are much bound to the love of the holy
Ghost, who left us these true Records of his walking, that as his mediation
with the Father, is our way to glory, so his example of good life may be our
way of holy conversation.

It is that which the Apostle does require in Timothy, Be thou an example of
the believers, in word, 1 Timothy 4.12.
in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity: and in Titus.

In all things show thy self an example of good works. Tit. 2.7.


The Minister that builds only by his Preaching, is but an holy day
Preacher, but he that builds also by example, is a continual preacher. Me
audite has life in it, when it is followed with sequimini me; you shall see
after, how this good example wrought.

Christ prayed: 2 Note.
there is often mention of Christ's praying, the Author to the Hebrews says,
that in the days of his flesh he cried with strong cries.

He spent a whole night in prayer.

He rose in the morning a great while before day, Luc. 6.12. Mark. 1.35.
he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.

So that he has given himself to us an example of prayer, of frequent, of
fervent prayer, of public, of private, and secret prayer.

Consider then who gives us example of prayer, the Son of God in whom
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and who thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, who therefore is heir of all things, and who was in want
of nothing, who could say, Omnia mea tua sunt, and omnia tua mea sunt.

There be three uses of prayer.

1 For necessity, some say that petitio est soboles indigentiae: and so Christ
needed not to pray, for he wanted no grace which God had to bestow upon his
humane nature; but prayer is our city of refuge, for our help is in the name
of the Lord.

Pro. 18.10.
The name of the Lord is a strong tower to them that trust in him: the
righteous runs into it and is safe.

Prayer acquainteth God with our necessities, not that he is ignorant of them,
for we say well, that he knows our necessities before we ask, and our
ignorance in asking, and he desires not our prayers for his own information,
but that we may declare our selves sensible of our wants, and that we may
thereby make profession of our dependence upon him, and confess all the good
that we have, as from the opening of his hand

Object.
Therefore whereas some have argued to what purpose should I pray to present my
wants and necessities to God, who knows them well enough, and better then we
already.

Sol. Mat. 6.8.
Our answer is, that our Savior has made that a reason why we should pray;
for your father knows what things you have need of, before you ask him.

Every beggars plea is; if you knew my misery and necessity, you would relieve
me, and show me mercy.

For many complain without cause, and pretend more want then they feel: but
we go to God as to one that knows what we want, who having commanded us to
seek, and ask, and knock, we cannot hope to have our wants supplied by any
other way, then by his relief of us.

Therefore Solomon in the dedication of his house of prayer to God, does not
beg that God would give us what we want, but by the way of petition, and so
his prayer runs: for though he charge God with a promise made to David his
father, concerning the establishing of his throne; yet he asks it of God by
supplication, and desires that promise to be given to his prayers.

Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, 1 Reg. 8.28.
and to his supplication, O Lord my God, to hearken unto the cry, and to the
prayer which thy servant prays before thee.

And when he prays for such as have trespassed against God, he desires not
their pardon, but upon their prayer for it.

When they pray, and thou hear, forgive.

Whereas God has determined what he will do before all beginnings of time,
Verse 30.
Object. 2.
not only in the general administration of the whole, but in the particular
and individual manage of all things in several, it may seem that whatsoever
our necessities are, the decree of God has fixed a resolution how all things
shall be, against which there is no speeding in our prayers, and which will be
by virtue of his decree, whether we pray or no, which seems to make prayer
altogether vselesse.

Our answer is, that the example of Christ is clear, Sol.
both*

1 For praying for those things which he knew determined by God to be done.

2 For praying against those things which he also knew appointed by God to be
done. And if Christ should not have prayed in these cases, he should never
have prayed.

1 He knew that God had given him a light for the Gentiles, Is. 46.1. Psalm. 2.8.
and yet God the Father bids him to ask this of him by prayer. And though
Christ knew that he came into the world to suffer and lay down his life for
his Church, and he told his Disciples in the way to Jerusalem.

Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered, etc.

Yet he prayed three times in the Garden, that if it were possible that cup
might pass from him, that he might not drink of it: the reason whereof is
this.

For the punishment which he did willingly suffer as our mediator, he did
wisely decline as man, who may lawfully pray, Libera nos a malo.

Therefore Christ's prayer is exemplarie to us, and tells us that for all good
things, supplication against all evil deprecation, is so necessary, that in
both we must resort to God. Let no man allege the constant will of God by no
means to be swerued, as an evasion from prayer; for the will of God is
revealed, that he will be sought by prayer.

2 A further use of prayer for maintenance of our familiar acquaintance with
God: nothing draws us nearer to him, that puts us in his sight, in his
ear, and abstracteth us from the world, even from our selves in an holy
rapture. Is. 1.18.
Come, says the Lord, let us reason together: then God and we reason
together, when he speaks to us in his word, we to him in our prayer: and
that was another reason why our Savior did pray often, and all the Saints of
God delight in prayer above all other exercises of religion for the
conversation with God.

The way of religion, and holy obedience, is called walking with God, and as
they that walk together do commonly comfort the way, and pass the time of
their journey in conference, so do the faithful confer and talk with God.

It is a great ease of the heart to open our griefs to one that can and will
comfort, to reveal our ignorance to one that can inform us aright; our wants
to one that can supply us. The interest that we have in the love of ou^
familiar friend, does extend to a communication of good things, and good
offices to one another.

This access to God in all our occasions, by our humble prayer, keeps us in
his eye, and ear, and confirms us in his present protection and supply of
all wants.

Daniel will not neglect the times by him appointed to give God meeting by his
prayers, though the Kings contrary decree make it death to pray to any God but
him.

3 Another reason of the use of prayer, is the very (...), the worship that is
done and given to God in it: for it is our reasonable serving of God, the
lifting up of our hands, that is prayer, is our sacrifice in incense; these be
the odours, the sweet odours of the Saints.

And we are an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ; 1 Pet 2.5.
these be thanksgiving and prayer, and these Christ offered to his Father, both
for us: 1 ad beneficium: 2 ad exemplum. It is not here recorded what prayer
Christ used to his Father, or what he prayed for; but no question his prayer
was for his Church, for so he says, I pray for these, Io. 17.9.
I pray not for the world.

He prayed for us that our faith might not fall, he prayed that God would
keep all those that he had given him in his name, that he would save us from
evil.

And being now at the right hand of God, he makes intercession for us, for we
are his care, and he cares for us.

Concerning the place where he prayed, 3 Note.
it is not here named, neither needed it, for all places are oratories for
private prayer; the Lions den is Daniels Chapel, the belly of the Whale
Ionahs. Isaac prays in the field, Daniel in his chamber, Ezechiah upon his
bed.

And as all places are alike, so are all times; at morning, at noone, at night,
in the midst of the night, all the night, as occasion may sort, so that we
avoid the vanity of ostentation by Christ forbidden.

Public prayer with the congregation, is a common worship of the Church,
wherein the Minister and the people meet in a fit place, and in a solemn and
reverent manner to seek the face of God.

Here to avoid confusion, the Minister is the voice of the congregation to God,
^oel 2.17.
so says Joel. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord say, spare thy
people O Lord. And the people declare their assent to his prayers, by their
joint Amen. The Jews uttered this with great zeal, and therefore doubled it,
saying, Amen, Amen. They had four sorts of Amen at prayers, whereof three they
condemned and refused.

1 Was that Amen which was given to prayers that they understood not, they
called it Iethima, like to the Amen in the latin service, which the people do
not understand, only they know when the prayer is ended, and for fashion sake
they say Amen.

2 Was that Amen, surreptum, which was uttered before the prayer was finished,
which showed a weariness, they would feign have it done.

3 Otiosum, when the people did join only in the Amen at the close, and took
no regard to the prayer going before, which is the most general fault of
congregations.

4 Tzaddik, the Amen of the just, whose hearts following the voice of the
prayer quite through, the mind and intention zealously affixed to the holy
worship, concluded with an Amen.

And Saint Jerome commending the devotion of Christians in his time, does say
that the noise of the Church at this Amen, was reboatus Amen ad similitudinem
coelest is tonitrui.

The proper places for these public meetings, be those houses of God which are
consecrated to prayer; our Churches, and Oratories, and Chapels.

Private prayer does not discharge us of the duty of public prayer with the
Church, though some schismatickes, and separatists, too confident in their own
gift of prayer, and ill affected to the Church service, and uncharitably
preiudicate against their brethren, do despise our Church prayers, and think
their duty sufficiently discharged in their private devotions.

For in all ages of the Church, since Christ, Christians, as they were able,
did strive to erect houses of prayer, Temples for the public conuentions of
people to the worship of God.

They begun this even in the time of their persecution, and ever since they
have had the estimation of Religion and devotion, that have advanced any such
works for the accommodating of congregations to this worship, as our Church
Homily of prayer has very fully and profitably expressed.

This prayer of Christ here mentioned, was private, and though he retired from
his Disciples, as it may be conceived, to some private place, yet they take
notice of his errand, and thereupon follows.

2 The motion following.

When he ceased, one of his Disciples said to him, Lord teach us to pray.

Wherein I observe,

1 The discreet seasonablenesse of the time for this motion, quando cessauit.

2 The manner of it: one of his Disciples.

3 The motion it self: doce nos orare.

1 Of the seasonablenesse of the motion.

When he ceased, after his prayer was ended, and that he returned to his
Disciples, this was moved.

Christ withdrawing from them to this private place to pray, did admonish them
of his desire to be private, and therefore in good manners they would not
interrupt him with unseasonable Interpellation; (...).

1 It is our lesson from hence, not to give over our prayers to God, till we
have brought our service to a pawse: it is one of the quarrels against our
Church service, the longsomnesse of it: yet the whole service at the longest,
distinctly read, may be well comprehended within an hour, and Christ speaks
it passionately, and taking it unkindly: Could you not watch with me one
hour? Let us not be weary of well doing.

Thou love to bring all thy business to a full end that concerns thy
estate, or thy delight; and will thou slight the greatest work of all, which
crowns all the rest with the blessing of God, by thy unconstant and vnfixt
indeuotion? think not the time long that thou spendest in conference with thy
God: finish thy holy work with him, and then return to thy occasions as
Christ did.

2 It is our lesson from the example of these Disciples, not to interrupt the
devotions of others, not to hinder their prayers: it is a kind of quenching of
the spirit in our selves and others, to disturb devotion, or to interpose in
an unseasonable time to hinder Gods service.

It is observed in Samuel, that when he had assembled the people in Mispeh, to
pray to the Lord, and to offer sacrifice, and that the Philistines hearing of
their meeting, came upon them, neither Samuel nor the people gave over the
service that they were then about, but rather the more earnestly applied it;
for,

1 Samuel 7.8.9.
The children of Israel said unto Samuel, cease not to cry unto the Lord our
God for us, and he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines: and God
answered their prayers and desires with desired success.

But Saul contrarily, upon the coming of the Philistines against Israel, and
being then with the Priest to have consulted with God about that assault,
hearing of their near approach, said to the Priest,

Withdraw thy hand; 1 Samuel 14 19
and interrupted the consultation, and went immediately to the battle, which
though it succeeded well for Isreal's sake, yet Saul did quench his own spirit
in neglecting the ordinance of God, and hindering the Priest of the Lord in his
holy office.

Amongst our selves, let us take warning not to do any thing that may disturb
one another private or public devotions. If we have any thing to say to one
that is praying, let us after this example of these disciples, tarry the time
till it come to an (...).

Men will take it ill to be troubled in the time of their game, or in the
press of a serious business, or in some earnest conference, or in the times
of their refection: these are no fit times of interpellation, who dares take
off, or call aside a subject that is speaking to a King, who is a man? and
shall we withdraw one that is in speech with almighty God? Do not say now is
best talking with him, he is in a good mind.

For I say unto you, he that prays to God as he should, is not his own man
for the time, he is in the spirit, and has abstracted himself from the world,
and even from himself, to attend upon God.

Therefore prayer is called a pouring forth of our souls before God.

2 The manner of this suite.

One of his Disciples.

One of them, but it is not said which of them, but one of them; it appears in
the behalf of the rest of them with himself, and so Christ did understand
him, and therefore in answer he said to them, verse 2. when ye pray.

It seems by this, that the example of Christ took amongst them, for whilst
Christ was from them praying, we find it agreed upon amongst them, to make
this motion.

Note.
Observe in this the power of a good example, for when it is in the eyes of them
that desire to serve God aright, it works in them an affection of imitation.

There were heretics that denied any original sin by propagation, but
charged all the evil that corrupts man, upon imitation: surely although they
went too far in this opinion of the force of imitation, we may truly charge
a great deal, even the most of our evil upon it.

It gives all Superiors warning to observe their whole carriage warily. For
children will take great notice what their Parents say or do; the eyes of the
Handmaid upon the hand of her Mistress, the eyes of Pupils on their Tutors,
of Subjects to their Sovereign; and their good example may do much good,
their ill example may corrupt and pervert much here. Christ's example of
praying, did put them all upon it, to make a motion concerning prayer.

Observe also a modest civil manner observed amongst them, though there were
many of them, I suppose the full number of his Disciples, yet but one speaks
for all.

It is a good precept of the Apostles, and applyable to all conuersations of
men.

Let all things be done decently, and in good order.

In our public meetings, where all of us do come to move our God in
petitions for things necessary for us, it were a rude and uncivil confusion if
we should all speak at once, every man the desire of his heart; therefore the
Minister is appointed to speak for us all, and we as before, declare our
consent of hearts, either in some short eiaculation of prayer, or in our devout
Amen.

3 The motion it self.

Lord teach us to pray. Wherein observe,

1 That they found it a necessary duty to pray.

2 That they found themselves not well instructed in that duty, and therefore
desired to be taught.

3 That they resort to their Master, and entreat him to teach them.

1 They find it a necessary duty.

If there had been no other provocation but the example of their faithful
Master, that had been sufficient to prove to them the necessity of this duty.

1 I cannot conceive of these Disciples that they were utterly ignorant of this
duty before, because I know that prayer, which is the invocation of power, able
to help us, as we believe, is a suggestion of nature; for as no man is
simpliciter atheos, but believes in some deity, whose power is sufficient to
protect them from evil, and to give them supply of their wants; so natural
reason directs to seek that protection and supply by way of petition; and
therefore in the ship that transported Jonah, in the storm, every man called
upon his god.

Every man had a god to whom he might fly in time of need and danger, and in
that extremity, to that god every man directed his prayer; therefore the
Disciples could not be ignorant of this duty, which is a lesson taught in the
school of nature.

2 The practice of the Church taught them the use of prayer, there was Domus
orationis, and men usually went up thither to pray. The Scribes and Pharisees
were great examples of frequent, of long prayers.

Neither can I suspect these Disciples strangers to the better examples of the
holy men and women of foregoing times, whose holy devotion and worship of God,
those Books of Scripture which then were read publicly in their Synagogues,
did sufficiently declare.

But all this is helped, and their affections be now by Christ's example stirred
to apprehend the necessity thereof more then before.

Examples be of great use in this kind.

Beloved, this is a necessary point to be taught and believed: whosoever shall
desire to be instructed in the doctrine of prayer, let him be first persuaded
of the necessity of this duty.

Two things do make this duty of prayer necessary in the Church, and amongst
the holy servants of God.

1 The ordinance of God who has commanded it.

2 Our own necessities, which are no other way to be relieved.

1 Concerning Gods ordinance.

We find it often commanded in Scripture in direct terms, and it is implied
in the two great Commandments of the Law; for not only obedience is commanded
therein, but all those holy duties also by which our obedience may be any ways
furthered, and that gives great place in the precept to prayer, seeing that is
the chiefest means by which we do obtain that ability by which the law of
God is in any measure fulfilled.

And therefore it is a note of the faithful, that they be viri orationum, and
where God gives his spirit, there is prayer, for his is a spirit of grace and
supplications. Zach. 12.10.


Under the name of prayer is comprehended the whole duty of Christian religion:
for the Apostle says, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, Rom
10.13.
shall be saved.

Which words are taken from the Prophet Joel, Joel 2.32.
as the margent of the Bibles directs you. Act. 2.21.
And it is urged also by the Apostle Saint Peter. And the Apostle does well
declare that prayer is the chief part of Gods worship by that gradation: for
no man prays aright, but he that believes, and none believes, but he that
has heard, and none can hear without a Preacher, none can Preach, except he
be sent.

In which gradation you may observe the whole work of man's guiding to
salvation is accomplished in prayer. For, first God sends his Minister to
Preach his word to his Church, he is not disobedient to the heavenly calling,
but goes on the errand of God, and preaches in season and out of season.

The faithful hear the word from him, faith comes by this hearing, and does
bring forth this ripe fruit of invocation, so that the work of means is
complete in prayer, and salvation follows, which makes prayer the sum of
Christian duty, and to stand there for the whole exercise and practice of
religion.

In the contrary, David describing the ungodly by many notes, does conclude
with this, as the last and strongest proof to convince them of ungodliness.

They call not upon the name of the Lord. Psalm. 14.4.


The reason on Gods part is, for by prayer God is honored: This declares him
to be God, when the eyes of all things look up to him, when we seek his
face, and confess him the only giver of every good and perfect gift, this is
a sacrifice of righteousness.

With such sacrifices GOD is pleased, so that our Savior pressed no doctrine
more by precept then prayer, in three several words, commanding the same thing.

Petite: quaerite: pulsate.

And to encourage the service, he directs us both in the matter and form of
prayer, and in the way and means to the Father in his name, and he fortifieth
the precept with full and gracious promises made to them that do pray to him.

And the Apostles do so much urge this duty: Saint Paul to pray continually,
to put our whole strength to prayer. Saint James urges the same precept, and
shows that wisdom is obtained by prayer, and declares what it is that
makes many prayers miscarry, when we ask amiss: But the fervent prayers of
the just do speed always.

2 Another matter that necessitateth the duty of prayer is, that God has left
us no other revealed means to obtain supply of our wants, but by prayer;
insomuch as what God has directly promised to us, yet he requires us to
demand this of him by prayer, whether it be for giving us good things, or for
removing evil from us.

God himself does give it a cause of his indignation against Jacob.

Isa. 43.22.28.
Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, therefore I have given Jacob to the
curse, and Israel to reproach:

God in favor meant to forgive the friends of Job, who had not spoken right of
him as Job had done, and therefore he blames them, and shows his anger
kindled against them: yet notwithstanding he directs them the way of their
reconciliation to him.

^ob. 42.8.
They must offer sacrifice to God for themselves, and Job must pray for them.

Him I will accept, says God, so his prayer prevailed for them with God.

The like favor God meant to Abimelech, yet he passed it to him by prayer, by
the prayer of Abraham.

He is a Prophet, he shall pray for thee, and viues. Genesis 20.7.


Pharaoh himself could discern, that there was no way out of the plague that
oppressed Egypt, but by prayer, and therefore he says to Moses, Entreat the
Lord that he may take away the Frogs from me and my people. Exodus 8.8


It is objected, that the wicked of the earth do possess many great favors
of God, Object.
and in more plenty then the just, and yet they neither pray for what they
want, nor give thanks for what they receive, and indeed, God is not in all
their ways.

Let not this quench our zeal, Sol.
or abate any thing from the reverent frequencie of this holy duty: for God the
Father has two manners and kinds of distribution and dispensation of his
favors amongst the children of men here on earth.

1 God bestows his gifts as a faithful Creator, and so he is conseruer of
his creatures by a general providence, and thus he lets his Sun shine,
and his rain fall upon the just and unjust; thus he opens his hand, and
fills all things with plenty.

2 God bestows other favors as a merciful Father for Jesus Christ's sake,
and with those favors, his blessing goes forth, and passes upon them only
that fear him: for seeing he has ordained Christ his Son to be the way of
his blessing, all the benefits that he bestows on man without the mediation
of Jesus Christ, do come without his blessing.

The ungodly of the earth do receive many of Gods common gifts, but not by the
way of grace, therefore they are without his blessing, so that we cannot
esteem the owners thereof rich: seeing the blessing of God makes man truly
rich.

But whatsoever the ungodly possess, is to them unsanctified; therefore let
not our eye be set upon that which they have and enjoy, to envy their
prosperity, rather let us consider the want of Gods blessing, to lament their
misery, and let Saint Paul teach us that

The good things which God bestows on his dear children, are sanctified by
the word of God, and by prayer.

Thus the gifts of God are made blessings to us, and the holy Ghost has an
hand in the dispensation of them to Gods glory in us, and the advancement of
our salvation.

The difference between these two receivers, does appear to us, 1 In the
effect that these gifts work in them. 2 In the use to which they are applied.


1 For the effect.

Where God for Christ's sake does bestow, and we do receive good things from
him, there follows contentation, which ever accompanies godliness: but the
ungodly man is never satisfied.

2 For the use.

The just man applies all the gifts of God to three ends.

1 To the glory of God, for he uses the gifts of God as the faculties of well
doing, whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God.

2 To the good of our neighbor, for that is the law, proximum tuum vt teipsum,
so that in the Church of God there is (...): and both our spiritual and
temporal gifts do by communion of charity so participate themselves to our
brethren and sisters, as the stomach in the body, receives in nourishing food,
not for it self only, though into it self first, but for the good of the
whole body.

3 Because the end of our creation was not for this life, and we have here no
abiding city, therefore the faithful do apply all the gifts of God, as helps
to the prosecution of eternal life, whereas the ungodly find them impediments
to them: the cause is, for they make them the end of their labors, and fix
their hearts upon them.

The doctrine of the necessity of prayer is thus cleared from the Commandment
by which it is imposed, and from our necessities no other way to be relieved.

2 In the next place. I observed in those Disciples, that they found themselves
not well instructed in that service of God, and therefore desire to be taught.

And this is a common defect, for although by a natural instinct we know that
good things are sought by prayer, and the wants and griefs which we do feel,
will easily break forth into words, yet the Apostle says, We know not what
we should pray for as we ought. Romans 8.26.
I understand that the Apostles do here desire to be instructed, 1 In the
matter of prayer: what to ask. 2 In the manner of it: as they ought.


But because this motion does arise from a sense of defect in themselves, we
know not, says Saint Paul.

1 Then of that sense.

1 Every man has this defect, for flesh and blood is not wise enough to pray,
prayer is the work of a better spirit then that which enliues and actuates our
mortal bodies, it is the work of the holy Ghost: the same spirit that is the
spirit of grace, is also the spirit of supplications.

But every man does not feel this defect, for many do ouerweene their ability
this way, and despise the help of all set prayers, and take upon them to be
able without any other directions, to tell their own tales to God Almighty,
and upon this ability which they conceive in themselves, for this service they
do neglect the public meetings of our Church to our common prayers.

I judge not their sufficiency that way, but I must admonish you that you do
mistrust it every man in himself, so far, as to put all the fear and holy
reverence you can to this work.

For if we be careful in petitions to great personages, and Princes, to weigh
our words, and to advise with our best care, both what and how we desire.

This holy service of God which is so maine a part of Gods worship, cannot be
undertaken with too much fear and reverence, we cannot come too prepared to
this conference with our God.

They that are sensible hereof, as no doubt these Apostles were, do well to
desire to be taught.

We had need to be taught our own, and it is not quenching the spirit in our
brethren, to admonish them of this natural unfitness that is in us to pray:
that spirit that makes us ouerbold with God, is a spirit of presumption, and a
spirit of pride.

The holy Spirit of God does so reveal us to our selves, that we have cause to
fear, but not to despair of grace in time of need; it does not discourage us
from praying, but helps our infirmities in praying.

They that feel not these infirmities, need not this spirit: the whole have no
need of the Physician: therefore incipe ab hoc sensu. Thus awakened to a
feeling of their want, they cry, doce nos.

Which teaches us in all defects in our understanding to seek instruction, to
desire to be taught; Note.
for that is the wise man's, it is wisdoms advice.

If thou cryest after knowledge, Pro. 2.3.
and liftest up thy voice for understanding.

If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures.

Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God.

Wisdom must be sought, and you see it is worth the seeking.

It is a great favor of God, that he has left his spirit in his Church to
teach us all things necessary for us to know.

And it is a good method of holy discretion, to begin at doce me, before we
undertake to say, Come ye children, hearken unto me and I will teach you.

This is one of the showers of grace that fell upon the Church after Christ's
ascension: for he led captivity captive, and he gave gifts unto men.

The Apostle comes to particulars: some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.1^.
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers:

For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ.

This shows that God has left in his holy Church sufficient means for the
instruction thereof in all holy duties.

The point is that so many as would be perfected, and built up in these
duties, do seek that perfection and edification in the means ordained by
God: he has said spiritus docebit vos: and we have this treasure of the
spirit in earthen vessels, that is, in them whom the holy ghost has set apart
by special vocation to this service of God in the congregation. So Saint Paul
admonishes the Elders, that they take care to feed the flock whereof the holy
Ghost has made them overseers.

And as it is our duties to be (...), so our hearts must be (...) and (...),
such as must feel their own defects, and must say to their teachers, Doce me.

Now for the matter of their suit.

1 Their desire to be taught what to pray for.

A necessary point to be learned, for our desires do affect many things which
we may not ask of God by prayer; petimus quae appetimus. Solomon had the
treasures of grace set wide open to him, and commanded to ask what he would of
God: he asked wisdom, which God took so well, that with wisdom he gave him
other things in abundance, hear the word of God to him.

1 Reg. 3.11.
Because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for thy self long
life, neither have asked riches for thy self, nor have asked the life of thine
enemies.

These be things that every man would feign have, long life, and riches to
accommodate that life withal, that our heart desires; and all our enemies out
of the way, that we might have nothing to cross us.

Solomon past by these, and begged wisdom, this does serve for all those
turns.

2 For long life, for Solomon says, dixit pater: Pro. 4.10.
Hear O my son, and receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be
many.

2 For riches; he also adds

Pro. 3.10.
Thy barnes shall be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with
new wine.

3 For the life of our enemies we need not pray, for if our enemies be Gods
enemies, he shall destroy all them that hate him, he will make their flesh to
consume like the fat of lambs.

We are assured that if natural parents will hear and grant the requests of
their children, much rather will God give good things to them that ask of him.
Mat. 7.11.


What those good things be in general, we may know by that of S. John.

If we ask any thing according to his will, 1 Io. 5.14.
he hears us: Si utilia, non futilia, petimus.

The Scripture is the clear revelation of the will of God, best light that
shows us what is good, and what the Lord requires of us, and what we may
lawfully desire of him.

And our Savior Christ when he answers this their request, does briefly
comprehend in a short prayer that same summam petendorum, which both directs
us what, and limiteth us how far we may ask of the father in his name.

They that come to ask by prayer, without this direction, may have the same
answer that the two sons of Zebede had; you know not what you ask.

Therefore we must be well advised what we ask, for unlawful and unmeet
demands do turn our prayers into sin to us, and into dishonor of God, whom
we petition.

2 Their doce nos, does include also the manner of their prayers, teach us how
to pray as we ought.

There are many things required to the right manner of prayer.

1 We must pray with understanding, that is, we must know what we ask of God
in our petitions, 1 Understanding.
lest God answer us as Christ answered the sons of Zebede, you know not what
you ask.

This condemns Popish prayers made in a strange language, and not understood,
which is so great an abuse of that holy act of religion, as nothing can more
unworthy it. Super Ps. 18. Enarr. 2.
S. Aug. alleges the words of David, Beatus populus qui scit iubilationem; as
the Kings Bible renders it.

Ps. 89.15.
Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound, they shall walk, O Lord,
in the light of thy countenance. His note from thence is, Quid hoc sit
intelligere debemus, ut humana ratione, non quasi avium voce cantemus, nam and
merulae, and psittaci, and corvi, picae saepe ab hominibus docentur sonare quod
nesciunt.

Scienter autem cantare non avised homini divina voluntate concessum est.



Lib. 3.32.
Caelius Rhodoginus writes that Cardinal Ascanius had a Popiniay that could
pronounce distinctly all the articles of the Creed.

In Ps. 28.
S. Basils rule is, lingua sonet, men's autem scrutetur sensum eorum quae
dicuntur.

I may use the words of godly Malachy to such as put up prayers which they
understand not, to God. Go now offer this to thy Prince, Mal. 1.8.
and see if he will accept thy person. Will he not think himself abused, and
dismiss thee with some sharp punishment?

Let me now speak to you my brethren who have lived long in the light of the
gospel, where you may have Manna enough for gathering, nay where it is
gathered to your hands, and nothing required of you but to come and fill your
Homers, and carry them away full, in our public ministry of the word:

If we examine you, what is meant by the name of God, what it is to hallow it,
what is meant by the kingdom of God, and how would you have it come, etc.

If you do not understand what you ask of God in these petitions, are you any
better then those byrds that are taught to speak, but cannot understand. And
do not the Papists pray to as good purpose in Latin as you in English, if you
understand not what you ask?

Therefore for your better information resort to such as Christ has left in
his Church to instruct you, and say doce me orare.

For if you understand not your selves in your petitions, neither will God
understand you.

2 We must pray with reverence.

This must be inward, of the soul, and outward, 2 Reverence.
of the body.

The soul must compose it self in holy fear to this conference with God, 1
Inward:
lest when we do seek for mercy from him, we awake his power and justice
against our selves.

Our prayer applies it self that way from whence our help comes; and Our
help is in the name of the Lord, who has made heaven and earth.

Prayer is called the calling upon the name of the Lord; and David says, holy
and reverent is his name. The old law amongst the heathen for their homely
gods, was Deos cast adeunto.

There is in God greatness, which fills us with fear; and goodness, which
fills us with hope; the inward reverence that we must bring with us to
prayer, must be a mixed composition of the heart, partly put on with hope, and
partly stopped with fear, for all fear will keep us away from God, and all
hope will make us too bold when we come to him.

To this must be added to express this, 2 Outward.
outward reverence; for the body must not sit out in this holy service, that is
the temple of the holy ghost, every whit of it must show reverence. I deny not
but the heart may pray reverently to God in inward devotion, when no appearance
thereof comes abroad in voice, in posture, in gesture, in countenance.

But ordinarily, the prostration of the body, or geniculation, the lifting up
of the eyes, and hands, have been the expressions of prayer in great examples.

And the consideration of the great and high Majesty of God may well stoop us
to these reverend forms, which ought not to be forborne, where with
conuenience they may be used, for God challenges it as a part of his honor.
To me, shall every knee bow, and he gives it in reward to his son, that at
his name, every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess to him.

3 Sense of our want.
3 In perfect sense of our want.

1 For if we pray for good things, we must feel the want of them, and rightly
understand that neither we can well be without them, neither are we able to
receive them any where else, then from the open giving hand of God, neither can
we desire them of him, by any meritorious service we can perform to him,
rather we deserve all ill at his hands, malum poenae, to revenge in us malum
culpae.

Neither can we have them from him, but by way of petition, as he has
commanded us.

2 If we pray against evil, we must feel our selves justly imbarqued in the
fear or smart thereof, and that none but the preserver of man, can either
prevent the evil that we fear, or subuent us in the evil we feel; none but
he can defend us against it, or protect us in it, or deliver us from it.

Therefore we must heartily affect the good that we pray for, and perfectly
abhor the evil against which we pray.

4 We must pray in feruencie of spirit; 4 In feruencie.
so the Apostle admonishing us to many holy duties, adds this: Continuing
instant in prayer; for, Romans 12.12.
qui timide rogat docet negare: and therefore he requires us to be fervent in
the spirit: olla feruens seipsum purgat. James 5.16.
The prayer of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent.

It is noted in the best example of all, that Christ in the days of his flesh
offered up his prayers and supplications to his Father with strong cries and
tears; the Evangelist adds, with sweat trickling down his face, of water
and blood, which was like the plague of fire mingled with hail amongst the
Egyptians: for that shower of water and blood which Christ wept from his
agonized body, did lay and calm the storm of Gods indignation against sin,
and did burn up, and drown the proud Prince of darkness, that he was never
able to prevail against the Church, and death was swallowed up in victory.

The greatest prayer is that holy fire with which the Church fights against
Satan, and therefore fervent prayer is by Saint Augustine, called Deo
sacrificium, oranti subsidium, daemonibus flagellum.

They that offer up to God their prayers in the heat of fury, as the two
sons of thunder, let fire come from heaven and consume the Samaritans, and
that vent the bitterness of their intemperate spleen in curses and
imprecations, to Gods dishonor, and the breach of charity, they do offer
strange fire, and this offering does expose the offerers thereof, to the fire
of Gods fury.

This feruor is in respect of the holiness of God.

5 We must pray in sincerity of heart, 5 Sincerity.
not in hypocrisy; the sincere heart is in good earnest with God, and
therefore is importunate, resembled therefore to hunger (...) man, which
indangereth miscarrying, if it be not satisfied.

There is no way for prayers that come of some double hearts; God is one, and
Cor simplex, that is, sine plicis, is his delight: this in respect of the
wisdom of God.

6 In faith.
6 We must pray in faith.

Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith. And Saint
James,

James 1.6.
Let him ask in faith, nothing wavering, for he that wauereth, is like a wave
of the sea, driven with the wind, and tossed: for let not that man think that
he shall receive

The ground of this faith is the goodness and truth of God, whose promise
binds him to grant all that we ask of him in the name of his Son.

7 In the mediation of Christ Isa. 6.2.
7 We must pray in the mediation of Jesus Christ, for if we consider the
greatness and glory of God, it is such that the Angels when they stand before
God, do cover their faces with their wings; therefore there is no appearing
for us sinful men, in the presence of that glorious Majesty, of our selves,
but we must go by the way of a Mediator to him.

This was figured in the old law in the High Priest, who did bear the names of
the children of Israel before the Lord. Exodus 28.29.
Aaron was a figure of Jesus Christ, who is declared our only Mediator, 2.
Tim 2 5.
for there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus. Quid est dulcius quam genitorem in nomine vnigeniti inuocare? Aug. med.
cap. 5. So much of the world as acknowledge one God, but know not this way to
him by Jesus Christ, may ask, but they shall never receive; they may seek,
but shall never find; they may knock, but it shall never be opened to them.

Christ says, I am the way, no man comes to the Father, but by me.

The Papists do forsake this way in their multiplicitie of Mediators, for
though they bear the world in hand that they acknowledge but one Mediator of
satisfaction, that is, Christ: many Mediators of intercession, that is, Angels
and Saints: the prayers that their Liturgies do vent, declare against them
that they invoke the Father in the mediation of Saints, by way of
satisfaction, forasmuch as they plead with God, the merits of Saints, and
ascribe as much efficacy to the milk of the Virgin Mother of our Lord, as to
the blood of her Son.

This in a Book allowed by authority, which concludes with this blasphemous
peremptory prayer to God.

O Lord thou must pardon me, I cry aloud, it is not blood will serve my turn,
I long for milk.

But concerning intercession, Christ himself has revealed no other way, but
quicquid petierit is patrem in nomine meo; and in that we rest.

8 We must pray in fit form of words. 8 Informa verborum.
It is not every man's ability to express the desires of the heart in a good
composition of fit words, we must neither be ouernice, as if we conceived that
God would be taken with the oratorie and rhetorique of words and sentences,
with the music of fine and choice phrases, figurative and affected flourishes
of humane eloquence: neither must we be over homely, and rude, and unmannerly
to solicit God in such language as we dare not tender to men, sad and
serious, grave and gracious must our prayers be, that they may declare an holy
reverent zeal, with true and sanctified judgment.

For neither courting with elegancies of wit and speech, nor slighting with
unkempt and homely rusticity, which with some does pass for plainness, does
please our God: there is an art of praying as well as of speaking, and the
Disciples would learn the Grammar thereof.

We teach children how to ask our blessing, how to call for such things as
they shall need, and we can minister unto them, and no man's own judgment
without good information, can direct him in the great duty of holy prayer,
which is our invocation of God: our asking him blessing, and forgiveness, our
praising of his name.

9 In Method
9 We must pray in method, for seeing God is our principal delight, we must
first seek the honor of God: and seeing our selves are next to us, we must
let our charity begin at home, and so pass to our neighbors, and seeing the
soul is more excellent then the body, we must first desire spiritual, then
temporal gifts, as Christ, seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof.

You see that the mystery of godliness in prayer, is great and deep, and
that we had need to be well directed to do it aright.

Many turn this great part of Gods holy worship into sin, by being untaught,
or not having well learned the doctrine of prayer, it will be worth our
consideration to take a short notice of the common faults committed in prayer.

1 Prayer is of no validity with God, if it come from sinners. God hears not
sinners, If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me;
therefore we must purge our conscience from dead works to serve the living
God.

Understand this comfortably, that it is meant of known sins unrepented,
such as know themselves faulty, and do not use the best means to reform
themselves, and to forsake sins, cannot pray to be heard.

In this case are all they that live in the continual practice, or by the
daily gain of a sin.

2 Prayer is unacceptable, si timida, if we come to God as servants, not as
sons; there is an holy fear that makes us come reverently, that is a great
ingredient in our preparation to prayer: there is a servile fear, which
breeds in us despair, we pray, but have no hope of success.

3 Si tumida. Proud beggars shall be said nay: the Pharisee came proudly to
God to give him an inuentory of his virtues, as one says, as if a wounded man
should come to a surgeon and show him all his sound parts, and conceal his
wound. They that demand heaven of God as wages due to the merit of their works,
pray proudly, and they shall have what they deserve, to their shame and smart.

4 Si anxia. God loves not that we should come to him in distraction, full of
the cares of the world, for they hinder devotion, the heart that sends forth
welcome prayers prevailing with God, must be established with grace.

This holy ballast does make us steady, our own vanities put us to the toss of
every wave.

5 Si multiloqua. for God loves not babbling; the juice of grace is not pressed
out with the weight of words, it was one of the follies of the heathen by our
Savior reproved.

Thou art on the earth, he to whom thou prayest, is in heaven. Sint verba pauca.

6 Si nimium festina. It was a good old counsel, festina lent, nimis propere,
minus prospere. We must be content to awaite the good leisure of God, Ps.
78.4^.
for the holy one will not be limited.

I waited patiently upon the Lord, Ps. 40.1.
and he inclined his ear to me, and heard me.

Is. 28.16.
Qui credit, non festinat.

Idoneus promissor est fidelis redditor, tu tantum esto pius exactor.

7 Si intempestiva. There is a season for all things, the foolish virgins lost
it, and they knocked too late. And Peter was too soon: faciamus hic tria
tabernacula.

Seek the Lord whilst he may be found.

8 Si carnalis. If we have care to the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. As
they that being in the chase of some high preferment, do pray God for the
success they desire, and their thoughts are fastened on the good meat they will
eat, the good clothes they will wear, the great train that they will keep,
whom they will advance, whom they will oppress.

You speed not (says S. James) because you ask amiss, to spend it upon your
lusts, if such speed in their suites, it is a gift given to the owner of it for
his hurt.

And now I think you will confess that it is a great wisdom, to be taught
how to pray, and if you love your bodies or souls, God or your neighbor, you
will not leave till you have learned how to pray.

3 They come to Christ to teach them.

1 Note.
Therein the whole Christian Church was beholding to them, for by this means we
come to an absolute direction, for prayer that will hold out and keep in
fashion, till time be no more. Donec cesset oration.

(...)
And the word used in compellation, which is not (...), praeceptor; but (...);
does fit well to express the high authority of their Master, who by this
direction may establish the same as a perpetual law to his Church to be
always in force, and may endeare to us the direction, as proceeding from one,
who not only had wisdom to instruct, but authority also to establish his holy
instruction in the Church for all ages thereof.

2 The word (...) shows that they desire to be learners of the art of prayer
of him: 2 Note.
for who better knows what may be obtained of God, then he who is in the
bosom of his father: and who better knows that we have need to demand by
prayer, Ioh. 1.18.
then he who having taken to him the similitude of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.
though without sin, has with it taken upon him all our infirmities, and was
in all things like unto us, sin only excepted. For

Such an high Priest it became us to have, who could have in himself the sense
and experience of our infirmities and necessities, seeing none but such could
well instruct us in these things.

Again, seeing all our petitions to the father are delivered up to him in his
name, as he is the great Master of the requests to the great King of glory, so
it was fit that he should approve our petitions, which can by no better means
be performed, then by his direction of them, and giving us instruction what to
request of God.

Their request is to be taught by him, (...), 3 Note.
that is, to pray; teach us the art of prayer: for to teach them words to be
said and repeated, is not to teach them to pray, but to say prayers.

They need not go to so great a Master to learn to say prayers; any that can
teach to speak, or to read, may teach that.

Their request entendeth to the very skill and wisdom of prayer. They consider
that prayer is an address of their devotions to God: and therefore it is not
(...), but (...), to pray to, that is, to invoke the Lord to pray to the
father.

Our lesson then is, to make choice of this Doctor of the Church, this chief
Doctor of the chair, more then Seraphicall, or illuminate, the very light of
the world, and to borrow our light from this Sol justitiae, in all duties of
piety and charity.

Indeed his Discite a me, fills his school with all such disciples as are
(...); and in all real parts of Gods worship we are to admit no other
direction but his, and they who direct by his warrant: And in that sense, he
says, Be ye not called Rabbi, Mat. 23.8.
or teachers; for on is your teacher, even Christ: one by authority, all the
rest by deputation.

The name therefore of teacher is proper only in fullness of sense to Christ,
who in our ministry is the teacher of his Church.

And though some, affecting new forms of speech, have of late called the
Ministers of the word Teachers, and their sermons teaching, in a nice nouelty
to avoid the titles used by the Church; yet let me tell them, that the names
of Preachers, and preaching, are a great deal more modest, and express our
office better and fuller; for Christ is the proper teacher, and we, as his
curates, do but preach his teachings to his Church. And if they account it a
bold ascription to us, to call us pardoners, though Christ says, whosoeuers
sins ye remit, they are remitted; They may as well think it too much to call
us teachers, and our sermons teaching, to whom Christ also said, Ite and docete.

Though I profess distaste of vpstart novelties, yet I admonish you that the
title of teacher is peculiar to Christ; and if any be so in love with that
form of nuncupation, as to prefer it before the Church-receiued titles: I
give them warning of robbing Christ of his due honor; let our teachers and
teaching be understood no otherwise, but as the Apostle says, nos legatione
fungimur: and so are in steed of Christ, from whose instructions we must not
vary.

And therefore the wise men of Berea did will to examine the preachings of S.
Paul by the Scriptures, to see by what warrant he instructed them, and to
enquire who sent them, and put their word into their mouth; for if Christ be
not the teacher, we must not be Disciples.

3 The instance, as John also taught his Disciples, vide diuis. page 3.

Wherein we have to consider, 1 Who John was. 2 That he had Disciples whom he
taught. 3 He taught them to pray.


1 Who John was.

He was the son of Zecharie and Elizabeth, borne to them in their old age,
and sanctified in the womb, to the office of a forerunner, to prepare the way
for Christ, as S. Luke at large reports the story of his nativity: Christ
says of him,

Non surrexit mayor, Math. 11.11.
amongst all that were borne of women, then John, meaning in respect of his
office, for whereas all that went before him preached Christ to come, and
promised; he pointed at Christ then appearing, and performed to the Church,
saying, This is he. Ecce agnus Dei qui tollit peccata mundi.

Yet he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater then he: by the
kingdom of heaven is meant the clear preaching of the full Gospel of Jesus
Christ: and the least of those Preachers, who could preach Christ crucified,
dead and buried, raised up to life, and ascended to the Father, is greater in
the office of ministration of the Gospel, then John. This John was called the
Baptist, for that he was the first Minister of that Sacrament, and (which was
to the honor both of the Minister and the Sacrament) he baptized Christ
himself in Iordane, at which time, both the holy Ghost descended in the form
of a Dove, and rested upon Christ; and he that sent him, proclaimed him from
heaven his well-beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased.

He lived a most holy life, severe, and retired, save when he came abroad to
teach and baptize; he was generally much honored of the people, though some
maligned him, and in the end he dyed a Martyr for preaching to Herod, that it
was unlawful for him to break the commandment of God by incestuous
commistion with his brother Philips wife.

By whose suggestion, Herodias her daughter begged his head of Herod, at a
feast, upon advantage taken of the Kings ouerliberall oath, and so he was
beheaded in prison: thus much the Evangelists do report of him.

Whereas Malachie prophecieth of the coming of Eliah the Prophet.

Mal. 4.5.
Behold, I will send you Eliah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord.

Which many understanding literally, have made themselves believe that the same
Eliah who was taken up in a fiery Chariot, should come down again into the
earth before the day of judgment: our Savior Christ has cleared that
prophecy folly, saying of John, This is he of whom it is written, Math. 11.10.
I will send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before
thee. And a little after, Verse 14.
and if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come.

The later Jews have been so transported with the letter of that prophecy,
that they used to set a void chair at every Circumcision, expecting that Eliah
should come to them, but themselves therein sat beside the cushion.

John is called Eliah, as for the like feruor of zeal, and holiness of life,
and diligence in preaching, and boldness in increpation and chiding, the one
having to deal with ungodly Ahab, the other with incestuous Herod, but
especially as I conceive, propter similitudinem temporum: for,

As in Eliahs time, the Church was so straightened, that few remained in the
true and sincere worship of God: so in the days of the mission of John the
Baptist, true religion was defiled and vitiated with much corruption, and he
was sent to be an instrument of the reformation thereof.

It does stand in good steed to know thus much of John the Baptist, because he
was a man sent of God to this purpose to prevent a judgment, lest God should
smite the earth with a curse.

2 This holy messenger of the Lord did diligently instruct the people in the
doctrine of repentance, and holiness of life, both by the word of wholesome
doctrine, and by the example of unblameable conversation, and so drew
multitudes to his audience, to his Baptism, to his sequence.

And herein he was also the forerunner of Christ, for he had also special
Disciples whom he instructed.

I do not find any of the Disciples of John named, but only Andrew, Simon
Peter's brother, and he was one of the two that heard John saying, John 1.35
etc.
Ecce agnus Dei, and thereupon those two Disciples did follow Christ: Andrew is
named, the other not so. I cannot conceive, nor will too busily search either
who he was, or why his name is suppressed; but I find Saint Andrew named one of
John's Disciples, and worthy of high estimation in the christian Church.

1 Because he adhered to the forerunner of Christ, and was his disciple.

2 Because he no sooner saw Christ, whom John had preached, but he followed
him, and applied himself to his sequence, and was of Christ the first Disciple
that gave him sequence.

3 Because he had not sooner informed himself concerning Christ the Messiah,
but he presently communicated that light that was in him to his brother Simon
Peter, and brought him to Christ, so that Peter, the first of the Apostles in
order, by the nomination of the Text, was in time after Andrew, a Disciple of
Christ, and by him brought to Christ.

But Peter in the election of the twelve, had the first place, though in
priority of notice of Christ, and desire of adherencie, Andrew was before them
all. Andrew first chose Christ to be his Master, Christ first chose Peter to
be his Disciple.

We cannot charge the Disciples of John with newfanglednesse, for multiplying
teachers to themselves, when they forsook the sequence of John, to follow
Christ: for John did but prepare them for Christ, and acknowledged himself but
the Usher of that School whereof Christ was the chief Master.

But during their following of John, he taught them diligently, and preached
Christ to them; and amongst other good instructions which they received from
him.

3 It follows in the last place, that he taught them to pray.

S. Augustine does well observe, that we have many words in Scripture of
things, quae in re gesta non inveniuntur.

Verse 6.
The fall of the Angels who kept not their first estate, is mentioned by Jude,
by way of example, but there is no historical narration thereof in the story
of Moses.

The great contention between Michael the Archangell, and the devil, about
the body of Moses, by Jude

The prophecy also of Henoch, the seventh from Adam, Jude cited, but in no
history recited upon record.

S. 2 Timothy 3 8.
Paul also mentions Iannes and Iambres who resisted Moses: But also of that
particular resistance, no story speaks.

S. Paul also mentions some appearance of Christ after his resurrection,
unrevealed in the holy Gospels: as of that to James, and to more then five
hundred brethren at once.

This is a like example, for here is mention that John taught his Disciples to
pray, but neither have we any record when he taught them, or what form of
prayer he taught them; but whatsoever it was, Christ is now desired to teach
them, and his prayer is left for the perpetual use of the Church.

But I will not con^^a^e from you what use a cunning Spanish Friar would ^^^ne
insinuate of those concealements of Scripture, for he says, these things,
though not mentioned in the historical part of Scripture, yet are of certain
truth.

And so he says, that modus conficiendi sacramenta, and multae pontificiae
ordinationes, the Lent Faest, and such like, Quibus Ecclesia Romana vtitur,
must be believed to be Apostolical, though there be no mention thereof in the
history of those times.

A poor device to legitimate their vain traditions and humane inventions, by
comparing them with those omissions of story which yet are verified to us in
the way of Apostolical doctrine recorded in holy Scripture. For let them
produce any thing to us by warrant of Scripture, though not historified, we
will embrace it, but their unwritten traditions carry no such weight with us,
nor have any such pretense to warrant them.

John, though he had the holy Ghost, yet it was given him by measure, but in
Christ, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily: John was in his time Lucerna
ardens, when the Sun of righteousness arose upon the Church, Christ Jesus:
John gave warning.

He must increase, but I must decrease: therefore the prayer that John taught
his Disciples, gave place to Christ's prayer, as John himself did give place to
Christ. But the fidelity of John is notable, for he omitted no necessary
doctrine to inform the understanding, and to direct the holy practice of his
Disciples: therefore coming now to a fuller vessel, even a living fountain
of grace and wisdom, they desire no longer to drink at the Cisterne, but to
replenish themselves at the Well head.

But the argument is effectual, because John omitted not that care of teaching
his Disciples to pray, that therefore they might boldly claim that instruction
also from him their Master, whose shoe latchet, John was not worthy to loose.

1 Use.
We have our lesson from this example of John, to omit nothing that concerns
the full instruction of them, to whom we preach, that when we come to a suruay
of the service that we have done to God in our holy ministry, we may be able
with a good conscience to avouch with the Apostle:

Act. 20.20.
I have kept back nothing that is profitable unto you, but have showed you,
and have taught you publicly: and again,

I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God.

The principal points of our doctrine are, what we must believe, what we
must do, and what we must pray for. The doctrine of faith, the doctrine of
good life, and the doctrine of prayer.

John taught all these: for, 1 He preached Christ to them, the ground of faith.
2 He exhorted them to repentance, and good life. 3 He taught them also to pray.


His example is our direction in all these things.

You also have two lessons from hence.

1 To stir up your selves by the example of other Disciples, and other
congregations to do the like: if you hear of their diligence in hearing, and
their proficiencie in learning the duties of Gods worship, let their sicut,
their good example inflame you with holy emulation to make as good a
progression in knowledge and piety, as they have made.

For why should other congregations outlearne you in these necessary duties:
do not you think that God will require his good seed of the word sown in
you, and examine what you have done with it?

2 You are further to be moved to an holy emulation of Gods graces in your
selves, to contend with your selves, to increase your knowledge, and add
strength and growth to your judgment, that you may outgrow your own infancy
and minority in that spiritual vegetation which is called incrementum Dei: so
Andrew that had learned of John, comes now to be taught of Christ.

3 You have a fair example to require instruction at the hands of them who
have the oversight of you: you may say to that Archippus, as the Disciples of
Christ did to Christ, teach us* as John taught his Disciples: that is, you may
stir up your Minister to teach and instruct you, as other faithful and
conscionable Ministers of the word do instruct their congregations. The
Apostle bids the Colossians say to Archippus, Take heed to the ministry
which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

You have the same right to his labors in his calling, as he has to the
tithes of your labors. Christ's Disciples put him to it to teach them: and let
all people do the like to their minister.

LVC. 11.2. And he said unto them, when you pray, say, Our Father, etc.


HEre begins Christ's answer to the Disciples motion, in which you may observe,
1 That he answers. 2 What he answers.


1 That he answers.
The answer of Christ is ready and present, declaring that he accepts the
persons and the requests of these petitioners; and herein he comfort such
as cannot pray, declaring himself ready to teach them, if they demand it of
him: and he comfort them that pray to him for any thing necessary, that he
hears prayers, and grants requests.

So that they which pretend they cannot pray, have no excuse, for they know
where they may be taught, even in this, it is but ask, and it shall be given
to you.

If John taught his Disciples to pray, how much more and sooner will Christ
teach those that come to him? if the lamp shined so clear to his scholars,
how much brighter will the shine be of this Sun of righteousness.

But as they made this motion for themselves, and for us, so Christ taught them
in his answer, for themselves, and for us, and for the whole Church to the
worlds end.

Christ is now sitting at the right hand of his father, but this record of his
answer to direct us in prayer, lives in this book of the eternal gospel,
here we may have it at a short warning, and though John's prayer be lost, and
no monument left of it; yet this holy direction contained in his answer to his
disciples, shall remain, and what he says to them, he says to all that have
the same desire and affection to learn to pray. When you pray, say, Our
father, etc.

Our comfortable lesson from hence is, that it is not labor lost to come to
Christ with our petitions to be instructed, as he is the wisdom of the father
to teach us, so he is the goodness and love of his father and our father, to
hear and answer our lawful and good petitions.

Which David does make as an encouragement to all men to pray.

O thou that hear prayer, Ps. 65.2.
unto thee shall all flesh come.

This is wisdom to know how to speak, and what to ask of God, and S. James
bids If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Iam. 1.5.
who gives to all men liberally.

2 What he answers.
When you pray, say, Our father.

His answer does contain a form of holy prayer to be used when you pray;
wherein two mistakes may wrong the good meaning of our Savior.

1 If we think this so precise a direction for prayer, as that we may never
use any other words but these in prayer, but that all our prayers must be
totidem verbis, for, that that is not our Saviors meaning, is plain in the
doctrine of prayer delivered by our Savior in the sermon which he preached on
the mount: where he says, (...), that is, pray on this manner, or to this
purpose, according to these instructions in this form contained.

For I must inform you that the precise frame of the prayer for the words
thereof is not punctually the same in S. Matthew and S. Luke, which shows that
there is no necssitation of the Church obliging it to the words thereof.

2 Another mistake is on the contrary hand, when we quite forsake the words
which Christ himself has put into our mouths, and esteem this prayer but as
a copy to write after, a mould to make prayers by, and not a prayer it self.

This error has put it self in print, and some of our nouelists have taken
upon them to show reason why this should never be used for a prayer.

His late Majesty of worthy memory, gives a quick touch of this erroneous fancy
in his learned and godly exposition of the Lords prayer; for he says, that the
Brownists, the authors of this opinion, do approve this prayer for a samplar
to make prayers by, but refuse it for a prayer, because they hold all set
forms of prayer unlawful.

His Majesty says well that they like, praying by descant, and not by
plainesong, by commentary, but not by text.

1 One reason against the use of this prayer, is, because it is Scripture;
which were a good reason to justify the use of it, for that is the use of
David's Psalms, and the holy hymns of Scripture to apply them to our occasion.
Ps. 31.6. Luc. 28.46.
It is Scripture, In manus tuas, Domine, commendo animam meam: yet Christ used
it for a prayer upon the cross.

2 They allege that prayer must express our wants to God in particular, but
the Lords prayer is general.

Our answer is, that both in general and in particular we must pray to God,
and therefore our larger prayers do refer themselves to the general heads
of this prayer, and this concludes them all, and this prayer is full, even in
particular petitions.

3 They plead that this is not to be used for a prayer, because it is but the
pattern by which prayers are to be made; which we answer thus.

1 It is untrue that this is only a pattern to make prayers by, it is a
prayer also.

2 It is no good consequence, because it is a pattern, therefore it is not a
prayer, for it is plain that it is both, and it is a sin against holy
Scripture to abridge the full use of it.

We allege for the use of it

1 The plain precept of our Savior: Pray, Our father, etc. not thus only, but
this: and so long as we do what he commands, we cannot do amiss:

2 The excellency of it from the author, for it was dictated from Christ
himself, who best knows how to direct, and is best acquainted with the style
of heaven.

3 The excellency of it from the matter, containing in it the sum of all
things to be desired of God by us.

4 The excellency from the method of it, containing the perfect order of those
things which are to be desired, which first.

5 The excellency of it for use, being a short, and compendious composition,
easy to be remembered, and repeated.

6 The excellency of it for perspicuity and plainness, being easy to such as
desire to inform themselves what and how to pray.

7 The excellency of it in the continual practice of the Church ever since it
was taught first by Christ in all the ages of the Church, and the best examples
of all times.

S. Cyprian speaks to so good purpose for the use of this prayer, as I shall
think his words worthy your hearing and consideration.

Quae potest esse magis spiritualis oration quam quae a Christo nobis data est,
a quo nobis and spiritus sanctus missus est.

Quae vera magis apud Deum precatio, quam quae a filio qui est veritas, de ejus
ore prolata est.

Oremus itaque, fratres dilectissimi, sicut magister Deus docuit.

Amica and familiaris rogatio est Deum de suo rogare, ad aures ejus ascendere
Christi orationem.

Agnoscat pater filij sui verba, cum precem faciamus.

Qui habitat intus in pectore, ipse sit in voce; and cum ipsum habeamus
advocatum apud patrem pro peccatis nostris, quando pro delictis nostris
peccatores nos petimus, advocati nostri verba promamus.

Nam cum dicat, quodcunque petieritis in nomine meo dabit vobis, quanto
efficacius impetramus, quod in nomine ejus petimus, si petamus ipsius oratione.

You see in this learned father and godly martyr, that the use of this prayer
is both commanded earnestly, and justified by strong reasons effectually.

S. Aug. preaching upon this prayer, does fall into admiration of it, saying.

O vere coelestis oration, quae tota est oration. De tempore sermon. 126.

Therefore Master Calvin learnedly and iudiciously falls also into admiration
of the loving kindness and favor of Christ to us: Dum unigenitus Dei filius
nobis verba in os suggerit, quae mentem nostram omni haesitatione expediant.

He also calls it formam and regulam of praying; for indeed it is both.

So I hope I have satisfied you in the point of lawfulness to use these very
words in prayer.

3 I must add yet another rub in our way before I come to the words of the
prayer. The King complains in his exposition hereof, that in the conference
at Hampton Court, wherein the chief agents on the behalf of those who took
exceptions to our Liturgy, were heard, and their grieuances there laid open:
this was one, that the Lords prayer is so often repeated in our common service,
as it is indeed.

After the confession, and absolution, and again in the Letany.

And amiddest the service after the lesson, again before the ten commandments
be read, it is appointed to be repeated.

His Majesty thinks they that dislike the often use of it, would have as little
of it as they could, and peradventure none of it, if they durst appear to
their secret dislike.

Let me be accomptable to you why this prayer is so often used in our Church
service.

Durandus says well that it is Sal omnium diuinorum officiorum:

And so interspersed, seasoneth every part of our service.

1 After confession of our sins to God, and the absolution of the penitent,
pronounced to the comfort of all that have repentingly confessed their sins.
This prayer has good place, for how shall we better begin our directions in
Gods house of prayer, then with the prayer that his Son, the Master of this
house has taught us.

This is used at first for the sanctifying of us to the holy service then
begun, for coming there to feed our souls with the bread of life, it is grace
before our spiritual meat.

2 When we have heard the word of God in the Psalms and Lessons, the Priest in
the name of God blesses the people, and they him, and they return to their
devotions in prayer, which we also resume, beginning at that prayer which does
regulate all the rest: it craves a blessing upon the word which we have
heard, and it puts us on with more earnestness, and increase of zeal to
prostrate our wants before God. And therein we show our obedience in praying
the words of Christ, and after our holy wisdom, in our other prayers,
composing them according to the rule of that prayer.

3 The Letany contai^neth a full exposition of the Lords prayer, being the
most divine composition that ever the sanctified heart of man composed, besides
the holy canonical Scripture, fit for all times, for all persons, and
therefore we conclude that with the Lords prayer, as the Well head from whence
every drop of it derived it self.

It is also appointed to be repeated before the ten Commandments, as a
preparatiue to the hearing of the law of God, that we may seek from God all
necessary graces both spiritual and temporal, whereby we are enabled to the
faithful keeping of the law in affection, and holy obedience.

True it is, that if we do but only say over the words of this prayer, and
do not zealously apply it to these occasions, it is a vain lip-labor, and
God is much dishonored in it: therefore do but wisely consider the holy use
that may be made of it, and Gods service shall be much advanced in the reverend
use of it.

Another reason for the frequent use of this prayer, is in respect of the full
contents of it, for it is so large, and extends it self to so many necessary
graces desired, as no man's memory can so soon present them to his affection,
to send up our petitions to God for them all, in the flames of zeal and
devotion, all at once: we have therefore no better way, then to frame our
requests according to every petition, and then to return with the same words
to God.

But what if we repeat the same words to iterate the same petitions to God,
why is it more blameable in us then in Christ himself, Math. 26.44.
who in the Garden is said to have used three times severally the same words,
not the same petition only.

Or then in Saint Paul, who when Satan buffeted him, did three times pray the
same prayer, 2 Cor. 12 8.
as he confesses?

Neither can I be persuaded that the contrite Publican in the Gospel did give
over with once saying, Luke 18.13.
Lord be merciful unto me a sinner; no question he often pressed his humble
suit.

The practice of the Church of Rome, to say over so many Pater nosters, like
Parrets, not understanding what they say, or thinking that God will take his
service, and our devotions by number, without weight, is an abominable abusing
of the Majesty of God, and of the holy exercise of prayer, it is also a
foolish beguiling of themselves.

But the often repeating this prayer, or any other, made by the rule of this,
or any one petition of this, is a good sign of that importunity which Christ
commends in prayer, and which we find effectual by the events thereof in
the parable of the Widow and unjust Judge, Luke 18 1.
and of him that borrowed loaves of his neighbor.

It is a rule of charity to make the best construction we can of any thing
that is done or said by our neighbor, and therefore in the directions of the
holy Church, of which we are members and parts, and into which by our Baptism,
we are admitted, it is both piety and charity to make the best of all, and not
to abuse our wit to find faults: we are very happy in this, that God has by
his own Son taught us both what good things to ask of God, and in what fit
words; and I dare press the frequent use hereof upon warrant of this plain and
clear text: Quando oratis, dicite; quandocunque oratis, (...) of (...) and
(...) may bear a siquando.

Here is the wood for our sacrifice, the very matter of prayer, provided to our
hands, and methodically put in order, we have rather the sacrifice it self
prepared, and nothing wants but fire from heaven to inflame it, that is our
holy zeal, and that may be had for asking, if by faith we demand it of God.

In Alcibi.
Plato finding that the people of his time were very ill instructed how to
pray, and did many times desire things to their own hurt, taught them this
form of prayer from an old Poet: Iuppiter rex, optima nobis, and vouentibus
and non vouentibus tribue, mala autem poscentibus quoque abesse iube.

But we may say of Christ; he has showed thee, O man, what is good, what thou
may boldly ask by faith: he has drawn thy petition himself, and puts thee
on upon thy suit, that thou shall neither go on thine own head, nor in thine
own name, ne pecces lingua tua.

I will yet add one note, Christ says, when ye pray, as putting it for
granted, that you think upon it as a necessary duty, that you resolve upon it
as a fit service of God to pray.

So when you Fast, says he, do thus, as supposing that you will find times
for these things; if you make no conscience of prayer, this direction is of no
use to you.

To pray, you have heard is an holy serious act of religion, and a principal
part of Gods worship, when you really do that, say thus, if it be but saying
of prayers, as good let it alone.

It is to no purpose to teach men how to pray, that have no meaning or purpose
to pray: neither is it to any purpose to teach them the way to heaven, that set
their faces not to Jerusalem, but to Babylon.

It is a great fault in them that do not pray, and yet say, Our father, as all
they do, whose tongues repeat the words, and yet neither their understandings
are instructed, either in the matter or order of the petitions, nor their
affections once moved at any thing they say.

This is a direction for none but such as desire to learn it, for none but
such as desire to make use of it; that is, for such as would pour sorth their
hearts, and open their desires to God.

When you mean to do so, you may either use these very words, or you may
frame your petitions in this order, or if you have any one of these petitions
alone to solicit God in, this may be your rule and direction.

I must therefore call upon you to pray, and in your prayer to follow this holy
direction, and to make you more able for it, I have undertaken to interpret
this holy prayer to you, wherein you shall see what you may ask, and you must
keep you so precisely to this rule as not to dare to ask any thing else: for
Christ would not say, when you pray, say Our father, but that he means to
give you a full instruction, and to set you in a good and perfect way of prayer.

Whatsoever you ask more then this, or beside this, is sin, and provoke
God against you.

Our Father which art in heaven.

I come now to the prayer it self, and herein I will not forsake a path so
well beaten before me, by so many great and learned judgments, both ancient,
and of yesterday, who divide this whole prayer into three parts.

1 An invocation in the first words. 2 Petitions in the body of it. 3 A
conclusion, giving reason of both.
1 Of the Invocation.
This has three words in it, which contain the three parts of the invocation.

1 Father, showing who it is to whom our prayers are directed.

2 Our, expressing the interest that we have in him.

3 In heaven, pointing to the place from whence we look for help, and where
this our heavenly father is.

1 Father, herein consider, 1 Who is meant in that title. 2 Why he is inuocated
under that title.


1 Who is meant.
No doubt is made that this prayer is addressed to God, and it is clear, that
in this we are by Christ only directed to God; for when they said, doce nos
orare, they desired the full instruction in all things concerning prayer, and
when Christ answered them, pray our Father, he gave them a full direction: in
which it is necessary mainely that they be taught, to whom they must pray, and
if Christ do only direct them to God, we may conclude, that none but God may
be called upon in our prayer.

Our reasons for this only invocation of the name of God, are,

1 From this direction, for if any else be to be inuocated, Christ himself
has not given a full instruction; who directs us only to our Father in
heaven.

But it is sinful to charge the wisdom of God with defect in his
directions; Iam. 1.5.
for if we ask wisdom of God, he gives it abundantly, as S. James says;
this had been short of giving wisdom abundantly, for he has not given it
sufficiently, if more be added to his instructions.

2 We must in prayer beg nothing but good and perfect gifts, which I think
none will deny.

And it is folly to beg those of any one, or more, who are not able to give
them, therefore S. James does direct us to God; because Every good gift, and
every perfect gift, is from above, Iam. 1.16.
and comes down from the father of lights: in spinis non quaeris vnas.

3 Prayer is a principal part of Gods worship, and therefore only proper to
God, according to his law: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve.

4 Invocation and faith are joined together, we may not pray, but to him in
whom we must believe: so the Apostle, How shall they call on him on whom they
have not believed?

Where the Apostles argument is plainly urged, that people did not believe in
God, therefore they did not pray.

Which consequence shows, that where there is no believing, there is no
prayer, for faith must go before prayer: Iam. 1.6.
so Saint James: let him ask in faith.

And I hope no good Christian will hold it lawful to believe in any but God,
therefore Our father which art in heaven, which begins our prayer, answers to
I believe in God the Father Almighty, which begins our Creed.

Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.

26.
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

5 Prayer is not lawfully directed to any, but to him who knows what we stand
in need of. And this, none but Almighty God knows, therefore he only is to
be called upon.

Math 6.8.
I take this argument from our Savior, your heavenly father knows what things
ye have need of, before ye ask him.

Therefore babble not in long prayers, he only knows whether our prayers be
for such things as we have need of, for no other things may be desired of him
in our prayer, but what we need; this none of our fellow creatures can
perfectly know, yea our selves want many things and are not always sensible of
our wants; and sometimes we do falsely flatter our selves, that we have those
things which we want, as the Church of Laodicea thought her self rich and
happy, being poor and miserable.

6 It is fit that we direct our prayers to such a one who is able to relieve us
against all opposition; this no creature can do, for Satan and all the evil
angels, which continually pursue us to annoy us, and to hinder our good, will
certainly prevail against us, if we have no strength but our own, and the
assistance of our fellow creatures to aid us.

But our God is the rock and fortress of his Church, which is impregnable; he
opens his hand, and all the kingdom of Satan cannot shut it, he stretches
out his hand, and the powers of darkness can neither shrink up nor shorten
it: for who has resisted his right hand?

None can hinder the dispensation of his bounties, none can stop the decourse
of them to us, none but himself can take them from us.

7 Prayers must be directed to him only who alone hears the prayers of all
them that pray all the world over.

It were a lamentable state of man, if his danger be at hand, and his remedy
far off: if he feel his misery, and his mercy be to seek: no, David says
O thou that hear prayers, Ps. 65.2.
unto thee shall all flesh come.

To what creature can we ascribe this vbiquity, this omniscience, this
omnipotence, that we should pray to him; and all things but God are creatures,
therefore none but God to be prayed to.

I will urge the argument of Moses the man of God concerning all other
inuocations of any but this living God.

Deuteronomy 4.32.
Ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day
that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side of heaven to
the other.

Search the living book of Gods truth, the canon of faith and manners, from
the first, in principio, to the last amen; and see if there be either precept
or example of any other invocation then that which Christ here teaches of God
only.

Examples and instructions are frequent for this invocation, none against it,
therefore no other invocation but this pleadable.

I deny not but the Church of Rome has both doctrine and practice against this
truth of the word of God, and it is no news, for their kingdom is of this
world, and it were much out of their way that all the world should believe that
the way to God is open in the only mediation of Christ Jesus for all that we
would have either given or forgiven us, therefore they maintain prayer to
Angels, and to Saints.

Which they have long labored to defend, but their pretended proofs have
been ever so learnedly and fully reproved by the patrons of the truth, that
any indifferent minded man might see the light, even through the mists which
they cast upon it, and poor shifts have they made to put off the shame of
their foil.

I will give you instance.

In the controversy between Bishop Jewel and Harding. The Bishop does press
him with this their blasphemous prayer to the Virgin Mary. Defens. of the
Apology, p. 2. page 244.


Salva omnes quae te glorificant. Hard. Our meaning is: pray for us to God that
we may be saved.

Were not words taught us to express our meaning, do these words import any
such thing as their gloss puts upon them?

But because we live now in the times wherein the Papists make more bold then
ever they durst, these 60. years and more; and because his Majesty has left
their doctrines open to our confutation, though for some reason of State, their
persons are privileged from the justice of the laws of the state.

Seeing prayer is a chief part of our holy service of God, and it belongs to
us to teach the doctrine of prayer: it is fit that we be settled in judgment in
this first point: to whom we must pray. Wherein because there is a difference
between the Papists and us, let us set that to rights first.

In a late pocket Pamphlet, which smells yet of the Press, dispersed to corrupt
the religion of such as are either ungrounded or giddie; it is undertaken to
be proved out of the Kings Bible in English, 1 That Angels may be prayed to. 2
That Saints may be inuocated.


1 For invocation of Angels.
1 It is alleged that Jacob blessing the sons of Joseph, used these words,
Genesis 48.16.
The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads.

What is this but a calling upon the Angel, and as much is it a prayer, as the
former wherein he inuocateth the name of God who fed him all his life long.

The state of this question lies in the search and finding out what Angel
Jacob means in that benediction.

His words are plain, the Angel that redeemed him from all evil, and will it
not fall out to be the same God that fed him in the former verse.

In very grammatical construction, if he spoke of two persons, God Almighty in
the first, and a created Angel in the second place, he would, he must have
said in the plural, benedicant.

Therefore many learned judgments have understood this Angel to be Christ
Jesus, who only is called the Redeemer, and deliverer of his Church from all
evil.

Therefore we say to the Church of Rome, let them direct their prayers to him
only that saves and delivers from all evil, and we will pray with them,
and that Angel we will worship with all holy worship.

Isa. 47.4.
As for our Redeemer, the Lord of boasts is his name, the holy one of Israel:

If we look back into the story of Jacob, you shall meet with former
mention of this Angel, which will sufficiently declare that he was no bonus
genius, or good Angel created, but the Lord of all Angels, that is so called.

For it was God that said to him in his sleep, when he had the vision of the
Ladder.

Genesis 28.15.
Behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go,
and will bring thee again into this Land, for I will not leave thee, till I
have done that that I spoke to thee of.

When Jacob awaked, he said surely, Jehovah is in this place.

There he delivered him from the fear of his journey, and established him in
the faith of his promise.

After, when he suffered under the oppression of Laban, and was in danger of a
new injury, it is said.

The Angel of the Lord comforted him.

Genesis 31.11.13.
But that Angel says, I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the
pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me.

This Angel we invoke with Jacob, he is also our preserver and redeemer, he
is our King and our God.

And this I find the judgment of the learned Rabbines of the Jews.

Of this Angel is mention in the Prophet Osea.

He had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept and made supplication
unto him: he found him in Bethel, Hos. 12.4.
and there he spoke with us: even the Lord God of hoasts, the Lord is his
memorial.

This refers us to that history where Jacob wrastled with the Angel and
prevailed.

Which Angel, some of the later Rabbines have thought to be the Angel keeper
of Esau, who would have hindered Jacobs journey on Esaus behalf, which fancy
Lyranus does well confute.

Others conceive him to be the Angel keeper of Jacob, but Jacob himself
says, he had seen God face to face, and therefore called the place Peniel.

Osea says plainly, that this Angel is the Lord God of hoasts.

Called there a man, in respect of his sensible apparition, as an Angel in
regard of his divine operations.

And this place will as well justify prayer to men, as to Angels.

Christ then the second person of the holy Trinity, who was revealed in
paradise, the only Mediator between God and man, is that holy Angel, who
often in the old Testament is sent for the special good of Gods Saints.

Two proofs were alleged in that lame and unlearned pamphlet, to prove
invocation of Angels:

One from the Song of the three children.

O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him.

Which is taken from David, in whose imitation that Psalm of the three
Children was composed.

Psalm. 148.
Praise ye him all his Angels, praise him all his hoasts.

And from both we may as well justify the invocation of the Sun and Moon,
as of Angels, for so are they spoken to.

This is all that there is said for invocation of Angels, this also is the
chief argument urged by the Apostate Renegado of Spaletto in his last Pamphlet
worthily called his Manifesto, which has declared him unsavory salt, worthy
to be trod upon.

2 Concerning invocation of Saints.

We are accused to deny our own Bible in denying prayer to Saints.

Luke 16, 24.
1 They allege, that the rich man in hell prayed to two Saints, to Abraham, to
send to Lazarus to come to relieve him.

They are near driven, when they rake hell for examples, and the Church must
be ruled by the practice of a damned soul in hell. I hope this proof will be
soon out of countenance, but even that example cuts to the quick, for he
asked and prevailed not, they would not help him.

2 They allege for invocation of Saints, the words of Eliphaz, saying to Job.

Job 5.1.
Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints
will thou look?

Lyranus understands this as a direction to invoke Angels.

And the pamphleter does cite Aug. in his Annotations upon Job, for proof
hereof; in whom, no such thing is found, therefore that is a manifest
falsification, which he hoped his reader would not have examined.

The course of the text gives another sense, Chemni. exam. p. 3. page 174.
for the question between Job and his friends is, whether Job be punished for
his sin. Job confesses his sin, but denies that that is the cause of his
punishment, but God has some other end in it.

Eliphaz proves that none is punished of God, but for sin, and here he does
will him to search and enquire out if any can say that the just God has at any
time punished any, and not for sin; and to which of Gods holy ones will he
look for an example of any such punishment?

But in their exposition, it holds not for them, for it shows that none of
the Saints can give him help.

Therefore they help it in their false translation, reading thus.

Ad aliquem sanctorum conuertere: so that they must take help from their own
translation, who pretend to confute us by ours: but ours is the same, word for
word with their Montanus in the King of Spaines Bible. Ad quem de sanctis
obtueberis? by way of question: not obtuere, by way of counsel; so they teach
the text of holy Scripture to speak the language of their superstition, before
he falsified S. Aug. now the very text of Scripture.

But officiosum mendacium, does pass amongst them inter pias frauds, and it
is held no sin to lie, to serve a turn for the good of the Church of Rome.

So Cardinal Bellarmine belying Luther, says, Reinold de Idol. 1.7.2
vt Fredericus Staphilus citat fratres in malo: Staphilus believed Luther, and
Bellarmine did not cite Luther himself in his own words, but Staphilus
teaching Luther to speak.

3 They allege for proof of this invocation of Saints, 2 Pet. 1.15. where
there is no syllable to that purpose.

3.28.
3 Daniel is cited, where in like manner nothing is said to that argument:

4 Hester 13.14. it is Apochryphall, but I will not refuse the authority, for
they are directly against them: they are a part of the prayer of Mardoche.

Neither will I worship any but thee O God, neither will I do it in pride.

5 1 Chronicles. 29.18. Another shameless quotation against themselves: for there
David prays to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, not to them.

And to him alone we direct our prayers, not unto them, for they know us not,
so says the prayer of the true Church.

Isa. 63.13.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not: thou O Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, thy name is from
everlasting.

If Abraham the father of the faithful, and the friend of God be ignorant of
us, I know not how he should hear or know our prayers.

6 They allege, Luke 15.10.

Where Christ says, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over
one sinner that repents, a gross non sequitur, so Saints may be prayed to.

7 They allege, Luke 16.9.

Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye
fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

How this may make to their purpose, their own Stella says.

Nihil aliud Christus hisce verbis innuere voluit, nisi vt bona nostra
pauperibus impartiamur, vt in aternis habitaculis recipiamur.

And there is nothing that sounds at all to the justification of invocation
of Saints.

But these are the false shows that the Papists make to blind the eyes of the
ignorant, and to benight the clear light of the Gospel.

If they could but divert us from God, that we might seek for help any where
but from him, they had their will of us, but our help is in the name of the
Lord, who has made heaven and earth, and we say with the holy Church, O Lord
our God, Isa. 26.13.
other Lords beside thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will we
make mention of thy name.

They allege, Object.
that they do not pray to them as to the giuers of good things, but as to
Mediators to pray to God for these things for us.

And so they rob not God of his due worship, but give due honor to Angels and
Saints.

So the Spalatine changeling does excuse it in his Manifesto.

But we answer, Sol.


1 That they teach so, but practice the contrary, as all their Missalls, and
Breuiaries, and Rosaries do demonstrate.

Their invocation of Saint Roch.

Tu qui Deo es tam charus,
Et in luce valde clarus,
Sana tuos famulos;
Et a peste nos defend,
Opem nobis ac impende
Contra morbi stimulos.
It is their own saying, deum Rocho per angelum promisisse, vt qui ipsum
inuocarent a peste liberarentur.

You see they invoke him, not as the Procter (...) a father whom we do
solicit by our prayers: for Christ says,

Fathers do know to give good gifts unto their children, and it is good
praying where there is good to be gotten by it.

The wicked and ungodly of the earth, do not believe any such supreme
goodness in divine providence. You hear what they say in Zephan: Zeph. 1.
Verse 12.
The Lord will do no good, neither will he do evil.

A most unhappy condition of men, who cannot look beyond and above earth for
good things; natural light does reveal this truth to men without the Church:
for the Apostle says, God left not himself without witness, Acts 14.17.
in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness.

This is the work of a father, thus to provide good things for his children,
and so we go not beyond the Gentiles in this, who are not yet come into the
communion of the Church.

The book of nature, the great volume of Gods works is written within and
without with this name of a Father, so that if the Council of hell, like the
Council of Trent would devise an Index expurgatorius, to put out the
testimony of Gods fatherhood, the darkness of hell would not be dark enough
to benight this light.

But we who are the Disciples of Christ, that learn

God has many great and glorious titles, which would rather discourage then
inuit invocation; the terror of his Majesty is such, that the Angels are
said to cover their faces when they appear before him.

If we hear him called the God strong and mighty, how dare we the poor
worms and grasshoppers of the earth approach him?

If we call him the holy one of Israel, how dare we that are conceived in
sin, and borne in iniquity, whose life is polluted with a daily infection of
actual transgressions, draw near to him?

If we call him Lord of heaven and earth, how dare we that have not given him
the honor due to his name, that have not obeyed his holy and just
commandments, solicit him?

If we call him King of Kings, how dare we that have said nolumus hunc regnare
super nos, come in his sight: rebels to his will, vassailes to his enemy?

There is no name so fit for invocation, as the name of a Father; that is a
name of such loving conjunction, that when we have wasted our whole portion,
and dishonored our parentage, and are come to the lowest ebb of all
worthiness, to the fullest sea of all indignity, yet there is hope in that
name of a Father, as there is of the end of the root of a tree cut down, and
whose very root is rotten in the earth? for there is a scent of water that will
keep life in us, and give us vegetation from the juice of that name,

1 A King offended with a Subject, may banish him his dominions for ever.

2 An husband justly provoked by his false and disloyal wife, may separate
from her by diuorcement.

3 A Master may revenge the trespasses of his unprofitable servant, by turning
him out of his service, and forbidding him his house.

4 Fratrum quoque gratia rara: the quarrels of brethren hardly reconciled, like
a Castle barricadoed.

5 Friends may forget the loving interest that they have exchanged one with
another.

But the name of a Father is a name of such tenderness, as will carry a plea
when all these do fail: Can a Father forget? can a Mother forget? as putting
it for a kind of impossibility.

David cannot forget Absolon, he did him two the most incompatible injuries
that could be offered to jealousy: in his wives, he defiled them in the sight
of the sun, and of the people: in his kingdom, for he attempted the
dethroning of him, and sought the Crown in the blood of his father: yet David
forgot not that he was his father, he pardoned him living, he deplored him
dead: would God I had dyed for thee, etc.

So that one comes to God, touched with a conscionable remorse of all his
sins, saying, Etsi ego amisi ingenuitatem filij, tu non amisisti pietatem
patris.

So that the name of Father here given to God, does denote these two gracious
properties of complete love: where, first, tenderness; secondly, immutabilitie:

2 The name of Father puts us to search what right we have to that name.

1 There is a general interest in that name which is communicated to all
creatures, by which all things that have being, must call God their Father,
because he is to them all, the author both of their being and conservation;
for of him, and by him, and through him, are all things.

And if Iabal may be called the father of all such as dwell in tents, and of
such as have Cattle. Genesis 4.20.


And Iubal, 21.
the father of such as handle the Harp and Organs.

Because these were the first beginners of these arts amongst men.

Much more may all things call God their common Father, in whom all things
live, move, and have their being.

But thus God is the father of wicked men, of the devils, and of hell, as being
the Creator of their substances, and the author of their being.

The Church of God does not undervalue this interest in God, though thus common
to all creatures that have being, though the worst and most despised creatures
of earth, sea, and hell, do participate with them therein.

Who loves the air the worse, because evil men, and noxious creatures,
hurtful to man, do breath it in and out, and live by it.

Who loves the Sun the worse, because it shines upon the good and bad, upon
sweet gardens and loathsome stinkes and dunghils, or the rain that falls upon
all grounds? Amongst the benefits that we thank God for, this has good
place, we give him thanks, that when we were not, he gave us a being.

Heb. 11.3.
It is a great wisdom, and it is attained by faith, to understand that the
world was ordained by the word of God, so that the things which we see, are not
made of things which did appear.

And therefore the Prophet calls upon the creatures, the Angels, the host of
heaven, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Waters, etc.

Psalm. 148.5.
Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he commanded, and they were created.
He also established them.

The donation of being, and the conservation in being, be great favors, and
therefore God is called Father: (...) as it were, (...) keeping all things.

This puts us in mind to take heed that we turn not the blessing of our
being into a curse, by corrupting our ways, and doing evil in the sight of
God.

It is otherwise with us, then it is with other creatures, many of them perish,
and loose their being: Angels and men are created to immortality, and they that
possess not the immortality of life and glory, shall be possessed of the
contrary immortality, of confusion and pain.

So that the doctrine of our creation does admonish us to remember our Creator
betimes, that we may address our whole being to him: for we see that all other
creatures in their kind do serve him, and keep the use for which they were
ordained.

2 There is a more special interest in this title of Father belonging to men,
who have received favor in their creation above other creatures.

1 For he made man in imagine sua, which he did to no other creature on earth.

2 He made him in honor: but a little lower then the Angels crowned with glory.

3 He made him immortal, for though his fall brought in death, yet the death
of Christ destroyed it, and the souls of men cannot die, and the dead bodies
of men shall rise again to an eternal reunion with their souls.

4 He made him to rule.

And this puts us in mind of a great debt of duty to God, who having us as
his clay in his hand, when he might have made us beasts, or fowls, and fishes,
worms or flies; he chose rather to make us men, to give us the use of reason,
discourse and speech.

Which though it be a gift common to us with the wicked and ungodly of the
earth, yet let us think never the worse of it; for to be a man, is to be an
epitome, a little Map of the whole world, and there is a way open for men, as
much to excel men, as men generally are more excellent then bruit beasts.

3 There is yet a more special interest that some men have in this title to
call God Father, then others have, which none but Christ can warrant us to
challenge, and therefore none but he can teach us to call God Father in this
sense, and that is by right of adoption.

For when we had lost the favor of God, being dead in trespasses and sins,
and separated from the life of God, and thereby in a more miserable condition
then all our servant creatures, associated also with those rebel Angels that
kept not their first estate, but forsook their habitation.

Then it pleased God to send his son; first, in promises, then in types and
shadows, and in the fullness of time, in the fullness of performance, to
reconcile us to himself, and to purchase for us an eternal inheritance, that
we might be called the sons of God, and enfeoffed in all the liberties of
Gods elect children: so the Apostle,

Romans 8.15:
We have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba. that is, father.

This is the interest of all the faithful in God, and none but the elect do
call him by that name by a just claim to the graces annexed to that name, and
derived from it.

One Mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ.

For in this last kind of gracious paternity, God is only a Father to us in
Christ, and for his sake.

And to show our faith in God, grounded upon the sufficient merits of Jesus
Christ, we seek the face of God under that title which our Jesus has bought
with his blood, which is called the blood of the everlasting covenant. So that
the name of Father given to God in this prayer, does teach us that all the
prayers of the Church must be offered up to God in the mediation of Jesus
Christ. For we call not God Father by Angels or Saints, but by Christ only;
therefore we must seek this Father only in and by Jesus Christ.

He himself has taught us this, for he says: whatsoever you shall ask the
Father in my name, it shall be given you.

The Renegado of Spalato, in his last Manifesto, does muster up heaps of
proofs to maintain invocation of Angels and Saints against the truth, against
his own former auouchments of the contrary, against his own conscience, if
he have any left after his apostacy.

He labors to prove that Angels and Saints departed, do continually pray
for us; we deny it not, we know that there is a communion of charity in the
whole body of the Church, and doubt not of their perfect charity who are
released hence, and are with God, toward that part of the Church which is
militant here on earth, and we give God thanks for them and their glory.

But we have no warrant to resort to them for their intercession, but have an
open way to the perfect and full all-sufficient Mediator, Jesus Christ, who
sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

Yet let us see how faithfully this apostata does quote the Fathers, to the
maintenance of this idolatrous invocation. I will examine some few of his
quotations out of the Fathers, that you may taste him in a little; for he that
has dealt doubly with God, and unfaithfully with the faith it self, what hope
can we have of him that he (...) same: he being now in the clear light where
he may behold the truth, would therefore pray to God for such as sit yet here
below amiddest many clouds of darkness.

But that he meant not to make Cyprian a Mediator between God and the Church,
who can better tell then Saint Augustine himself? Deciu. 9.15.
who of purpose handling this point, does

1 Show the necessity of a Mediator between God and us.

2 He shows what kind of Mediator he must be that will serve our turns:
God and man: and from thence,

3 He excludes Angels, Boni igitur Angeli inter miseros mortales and beatos
immortales medij esse non possunt.

This declares his found judgment against mediations of any but Christ.

So that adiuuet nos orationibus suis, is no prayer to him, but a figurative
kind of Colloquie with him: as when David says, Laudent eum coeli.

The next authority is S. Aug. De verbis Apostoli Sermon. 47. I know not where he
found that sermon; for we have in print but 35. in all.

It were a long work for me, and not so pleasant for you, nor profitable, that
I should pursue this fugitive Apostata in all his colorable pretenses for
invocation of Saints. I desire to establish your hearts in the doctrine of
truth, grounded upon the name of Father.

It teaches us to seek the face of God only in his mediation, for whose sake
God is become our Father.

To work this steadfast faith in you, know that there be three things which
properly belong to a Mediator, which can be found in none but Christ only.

1 He must be of Gods appointing and declaring to us, none but he can tell
whom he will admit or hear for us. And we find Christ only revealed.

If any sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

I am the way, no man comes to the Father, but by me.

2 He must be iustus institia sua: we say of Angels, that they are just,
iustitia data, a quo nostram ab eo habent iustitiam: we say of Saints, that
they be rather Iustificati then iusti.

But Christ is called sapientia patris, iustitia nostra.

3 He must be able to merit for others; that, no Angel nor Saint can do:
Christ confirmed Angels, Christ restored man.

For the angels, we deny not but they may know what our wants are, because
they are ministering spirits, that by the appointment of God, do attend upon
us; yet no Scripture has revealed any example of invocation directed to them.

But for the Saints, they know not our particular necessities, they see not the
evils which we suffer, only they know, as having been members of the
militant Church, that we are left behind them here in a valley of tears, and
therefore in general they pray for us, as has been said.

Against their particular knowledge of our wants, two plain texts convince our
adversaries of error therein.

Is. 63.16.
1 When the Church confesses that Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows
us not.

2 Reg. 22.20.
2 Huldah the Prophetess tells Josiah, he must be gathered to his fathers,
and put into his grave in peace, that his eyes may not see all the evil that
God would bring upon that place.

From whence we may conclude, that they who see not our miseries, hear not
our prayers, and therefore are not to be required to mediate for us.

I conclude this point in the words of S. Aug.

All christian men commended each other in their prayers to God: and he who
prays for all, Contra Epistolam Parmen. lib. 3 c. 8.
and for whom none prays, he is that one and true Mediator: you may easily
know whom he means.

We call him Father, to teach us that prayer is a spiritual exercise, a work
of the holy Ghost in us, therefore

It is the spirit of God only which witnesses to our spirits, that we are the
sons of God, by which we call Abba, Father.

Therefore all those that pray to God by that name, without that sweet, and
secret testimony of the holy Ghost, assuring them that they are the children of
God, do not pray, but prate and babble, and God hears them not.

This confuteth the Popish doctrine of doubting whether we be in the state of
grace: for shall I call God Father, and yet stand in doubt whether he be my
Father? if I believe as I say, that he is my Father, upon what shall I build
my faith, is it not the suggestion of Gods spirit, that is the author of my
regeneration, and that leads me into the way of all truth that tells me so?

This is the right coming to God in prayer, to ask as S. James teaches,
nothing doubting, to come in assurance of faith.

We call him Father* to comfort all our distresses, and children, and in
tenderness of compassion of them, and in readiness to hear them, and grant
their requests, and in giving good things to them: what can I sin against my
father that he will not forgive, what can I ask that he will not give?

John does urge it.

1 Ioh. 3.1.
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God.

This would be thought an high honor if we did wisely consider the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God hereafter, the gracious liberty of them here.

We call the sons of rich men happy, because they are like to be left full;
and the sons of great men, because they shall sit amongst the Princes of the
earth: but if these be not the Sons of God, they may one day see poor
Lazarus in joys, when themselves are tormented in flames.

The truth is, (though the flesh, the world, and the devil oppugn it) that
there is no man in the way of happiness, but such only as are the Sons of
God, such only as have God to their Father, by a special interest in him by
Jesus Christ.

If these sin, God corrects them like a Father, pro peccato magno paululum
supplicijs satis a patre; says one.

For he that is called our Father, is called pater misericordiarum, and Deus
omnis consolationis.

If these beg a suit, manum suam implet, saturat, dat cito, dat abunde, dat
quod est vtilius: therefore David,

Psalm. 4.2.
O Ye sons of men, how long will ye look after vanity, and seek after
leasing?

3.
But know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself.

And as a father has compassion of his children, so has the Lord compassion
of all them that fear him.

Princes and great persons are called filij excelsi, in respect of the eminence
of their places, and the trust of authority and power committed to them; these
are filij celsitudinis Dei, but that honors them only amongst men, because
they represent the authority and dominion of God here on earth: filij quos
honorat.

But there is another sort of Sons, who be filij amoris, and these do
represent their father in his holiness and goodness, and these are the Lords
delight. Ioh. 1.12.


S. John calls this a prerogative, so many as received him, he gave them a
prerogative so be the sons of God: (...). 1 Either dedit eis licentiam. 2 Or
dedit eis Ius. 3 Dedit eis honorem and dignitatem.


(...): shows that there is a new making required to this filiation; for we
are fallen from our first creation so far, as from (...), to become (...).

The honor therefore is great to us, in that we are the sons of God.

1 Because God who had an only begotten Son, the express form of his
substance, equal to himself, whom he made heir of all things, needed not to
adopt any other sons, or to cast the inheritance, as Abraham once thought to
do upon a servant; yet even so, O Father, thy good pleasure was such.

2 Because by this adoption, he has brought us into the society of inheritance
with that son, and has made us coheires with Christ, without derogation to
the heir, without diminution to the inheritance: for we are the sons of God
here, it appears not yet what we shall be, but this we know, that when we
shall see him, we shall be like him; so united to him, as that his interest in
the Father, shall be ours.

I may add one reason more, that there is no name

S. Cyprian observes, that God has no title that gives him so much honor in
his Church, as this of Father.

For as God is called Jehovah, which is the name of his being, so he either
enjoys himself eternally, or he communicates himself at large to all
things that are.

But in his title of Father, he is impropriate to his Church, and hereby he
magnifieth himself in that divine attribute which excels all his works;
for his mercy is above all his works.

And it is confessed of all hands, that the work of Redemption was a greater and
more honorable work, then the Creation.

You hear of no joy of Angels at the Creation; at the nativity of the sacred
Heir, ye know what Iubilation there was, joy to all the earth.

1 Pet. 1.12.
The Angels do search into this mystery, and stoop themselves to the
inquisition.

Ephesians. 3.10.
And the manifold wisdom of God in this work of our redemption, is by the
Church revealed and made known to the principalities and powers in heavenly
places.

I conclude this point with the holy exhortation of S. Peter.

1 Pet. 1.17.14.
If ye call on the Father, who without respect judges according to every man's
work; pass the time of your soiourning here in fear; and as before, as
obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to your former lusts,
in your ignorance, etc.

Let us make conscience of doing the duty belonging to that gracious name, in
imitation of our elder brother, who says, I come to do thy will O my God, yea
thy law is written in my heart.

For him, God testified, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

If we will ambulare sicut ille, as S. Peter bids us, we must begin where
he began: at lex eius scripta est in cord meo.

And then we shall not sin against him, then shall the power of this Father
protect us from all evil, the providence of this Father shall supply all our
wants: the love of this Father shall be a banner to us: the wisdom of this
Father shall be a guide to us to govern all our ways: and the eldest son of
this Father shall speak a good word for us, that we may have an inheritance
amongst those that be sanctified.

So long as by our faith and obedience we can continue this God our Father, we
are in good case, we shall want nothing, he will bring us by rivers of waters,
and feed us in green pastures.

Doubtless mercy and loving kindness shall follow us all the days of our
life, Psalm. 23.
and we shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

2 Our, this word expresses the interest that we have in him to whom we pray.
From whence we are taught, 1 Vox directionis.


1 To whom our prayer is addressed, not to the first person of the holy
Trinity, God the Father, but to the whole Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

For the first person has but one Son to call him Father, and he is called
Primogenitus, and vnigenitus; but God that is the holy Trinity, is our Father,
he is the common father of all the elect.

Quest.
Yet if you demand whether it may be lawful to direct our prayers to each of
the persons severally.

My answer is, that I find inuocations of each in Scriptures, and holy
stories, but so as the whole Trinity is ever sought, because the prayers of the
Church do always respect the whole godhead: so that he which calls upon
God the Father, does use the mediation of God the Son, and is assisted
therein by God the holy Ghost. The Father is principally respected in the work
of Creation, the Son in the work of Redemption, the holy Ghost, in the work
of Sanctification; yet neither of these persons is alone in any of these, but
one God in three persons does work all our good in us.

2 Cor. 13.13.
And the Apostle blesses in that holy name, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you: and we
baptize ye in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: for the
three distinct persons do subsist in one godhead.

Vox fidei.
2 We say Our, to express our faith; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin,
and our prayers are turned into sin, if we waver and doubt in them, but our
faith does apprehend an interest in the love of our God to us: if we pray,
believing that he is our Father, we pray with assurance of persuasion that we
shall prevail.

For they that have the comfortable persuasion of their hearts, that God is
their God, cannot doubt of right and interest in his good and perfect gifts; if
he be ours, qui se dedit, dabit sua. In our right we can call nothing our
own but our sin, for our bodies and souls are not ours, glorify God in
your bodies, and in your souls for they are Gods, Gods in the right of
creation.

And ye are bought with a price, so not your own, in respect of redemption.

And God to show his right in his Saints, makes them a temple for his holy
spirit to dwell in, so he takes possession of us for himself. But all our
sins are ours or Satan's: those that grow out of our own corruption, are
ours; those that are infused in us by Satan's temptations, are his in us, yet
our guiltiness and infection. The grace of God which brings salvation, does
make us proprietaries in God, and calls him ours.

The comfort of this interest, takes away fear. Genesis 15.1.
So God to Abraham: fear not, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.

This fixing of our faith upon him to whom we pray, does put it out of
question, that none is to be prayed to, but he in whom we must only believe.

Indeed, we have no right or interest in any of our fellow creatures, but by
the interest that we have in God by the mediation of Jesus Christ. Sin has
both diuested us of the primitive right we had in them, and them of the
primitive power that they had to aid and support one another; so that faith
carries noster to God only, and rests in him.

Master Fox, from sufficient testimony out of Scotland, reports, that in
anno 1551. there arose a great schism in Scotland about the Pater noster,
whether it might be said to Saints or no.

It was delivered publicly in a Sermon at S. Andrews, that we could call
none our Father, but God only; and presently a gray Friar took upon him to
confute that doctrine in the Pulpit, and to prove that it might be said also to
Saints.

And first, because we call old men fathers, one may therefore much rather call
a Saint our Father.

2 Because God has made the names of Saints holy, therefore we may say to
them, Hallowed be thy name.

3 Because the kingdom of heaven is theirs by Gods free gift, therefore we may
say to them, adueniat regnum tuum.

4 Seeing their will is Gods will, else they had never come to that kingdom,
we may say, fiat voluntas tua.

But when he came to the rest of the petitions, his wits failed him, and he
began to allege that they might use the intercession of Saints to God, for
daily bread, and for forgiveness of sins, and for deliverance from evil.

But the three first Petitions which directly are referred to the only glory
of God, these he blasphemously applied to Saints.

Which gave occasion of a great schism in Scotland, insomuch as they
distinguished their parties by this Shiboleth: to whom say you the Pater
noster, to God or to Saints?

The people were much distracted with this schism, and in the Abbey Church of
S. Andrews, this pasquell was set up.

Patres nostri in Collegio
Concludunt idem cum Lucifero
Quod sancti sunt similes altissimo.
Another in english.

The Friars would be called Rabbi and Magister noster, and know not to whom to
say Pater noster.

But after much contention, it was at last resolved, that it was only to be
said to God. This word Our, joined with Father, is vox fidei, as you have heard
and directed to one, and therefore not to be either communicated with others,
nor withdrawn from God.

3 Vox charitatis.
Our, is vox charitatis; for it contains the spiritual kindred of the
faithful, who do all acknowledge but one common father of all, one God, one
Father: this is the object of our common faith.

We have patres carnis, our natural Parents, we have Magistrates and Princes
in things temporal, Bishops and Ministers in spiritual, and all these have
the honorable title of Fathers given to them in the law of the fifth
Commandment; but this compellation extends not to the longitude or latitude
of this fatherhood in the Lords prayer: these have particular references, this
has an universal relation to the whole body of the Church, and herein God
goes alone away with the name of our Father: the other hold by service this
honor from him; only he holds that in Capite, over them and their sons.

And herein the Pope encroacheth upon God with abominable usurpation, and is
by his Parasites styled, Sanctissimus pater, and the blind ignorants that see
no further then by his Lampelight, and speak no other language then what he
has taught them, do mannerly call him our holy father.

God has no honor entire, but he comes in for his share with him; not the
name of Lord God: he inuadeth that also.

It is a known and printed blasphemy, Gloss. in extrau^ Io. 22. cap. contr.
Dominus Deus noster papa, which the gloss upon the extrauagancie of John 22.
does lewdly give the Pope.

True it is that when the Bishop of Rome was an orthodoxe Bishop, and
maintained the Apostolical doctrine of the true Church: he was called Pappa or
Papa, of (...) the Greek word which is Pater. And so it was not a proper title
to the Bishop of Rome, but common to all Bishops, as at this day the name of
Father is given to them.

But this unlimited claim to the name in chief over all, not only the lay
people, but the very Clergy of the whole Church, he has rather purchased with
S. Paul's sword, then with S. Peter's keys.

But he holds it now with that absolute right to it, that none can be a
member of the true Church, but he must be his son.

And therefore Gregory the fifteenth, in his letters lately sent from Rome, to
our then most excellent Prince, residing for the time in the Court of Spain,
does thus court his Highness.

Truly the arms of papal charity, with sighs, do worship the God of mercy,
and do stretch them forth for your safety to embrace you a most desired son,
etc. I cannot blame him, for when the Kings and Princes of England were popish,
his Holiness had his coffers much the fuller for it, and his Kitchen was the
better provided.

But one thing I note in that letter, that this Gregory, the then Pope, does
confess himself modestly, far inferior to Gregory the first, whose name he
assumed at his Coronation, in sanctity and virtue, although equal in dignity,
and of the same name.

I wonder that he should be so open, as to confess a succession in dignity,
and not in sanctity, in seat, and not in virtue, for this makes it no
argument, which yet is falsely urged, and his Holiness forsakes the truth in
it. He affirms that Gregory the great, did first by his apostolic authority
bring the Gospel into this kingdom.

And infers, that he being his successor, and equal in name and dignity,
though inferior to him in sanctity and virtue, should follow his footsteps in
restoring the gospel to this land again.

But the assertion of Gregory's first plantation of the Gospel in England, is
most false: for Parsons in his Book of the three conuersions of England to the
Gospel, does make that of Gregory, the third, and not the first conversion.

But were it true, the argument follows not, that he who now carries his
name, but is inferior to him in holiness and virtue, should have the same
power, or hope to work the same effect that he did; for the instruments of
God, in the conversion of souls, do not work by name and dignity, but by
sanctity and virtue.

And even herein this Gregory that then usurped the Church Monarchy, is
inferior to Gregory the great in holiness and virtue, because Gregory the
great did not only abstain from the name of universal Bishop, and the common
Father of the Church, but he wrote most inuectiuely against it.

For he wrote an angry reprehension to Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria, for
stiling himself universal Biship.

And when John, Patriarch of Constantinople, usurped that undue title, he wrote
to him to rebuke it; he called it nefandum, stultum, superbum vocabulum; he
says that the Council of Chalcedon offered his predecessors at Rome, that
title, sed tame^ nullus sibi hoc temerariu^ nomen arripuit. But now Bellarmine
has charged the late Kings Majesty, with denial of the faith, because he
supposes that in the oath of allegiance, he denies the Pope the title of
supreme Father of the Church.

I had not diuerted thus far to the Popes usurpation of this honor of Our
Father, but that the times grow sick of a surfer of light and truth, and
begin to incline, and propend to apostacy, that the God of mercies grows
impatient thereof, and by admirable iudgeiudgement declares his indignation
against it:

Therefore restoring this title of Our Father, to God, to whom only it
belongs, and taking it away from the Pope, who blasphemously usurps it: we
say Our, is vox charitatis, and calls all the faithful sons of God
brethren, all the world over, Christ Jesus our elder brother, being the author
and maintainer of this brotherhood.

It is the said Kings Majesty's learned observation upon this word, that it
shows the communion which is among the Saints, and that every one is a member
of a body of a Church that is compacted of many members, contrary to those
vpstart Amsterdam sects, where two or three make a Church.

Lib. 1. Ep 3.
Who as S. Cyprian says, do sibi extra Ecclesiam, and contra Ecclesiam
constituere sibi conuenticula perditae factionis.

And yet nothing is more usual with them, then to give the name of the
Brethren to their irregular societies, and schismatic accomplices.

But this common interest of the faithful in God, unites them in one holy
society, and they that divide this into factions, are schismatiques, they that
break forth into new opinions against the truth of God, are heretics; only
they are brethren truly, who increase the truth of God in unity: and these do
pray to God, omnes pro omnibus and singulis, and singuli pro omnibus, and
singulis.

4 Vox humilitatis.
4 There is no pride in them, they are not ashamed to call one another brethren:
King David calls his subjects Brethren and Companions, for my Brethren and
Companions sake, etc.

Math. 23 8.9.
One is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren; one is your Father,
which is in heaven.

This Father is no accepter of persons, he is as much father to the poor as to
the rich; and though here on earth the difference of rank and degree does much
advance some, and deiect others; in this court of supreme audience, Princes
have no more right to the fatherhood of God, then their meanest vassals, their
wants are no sooner seen, their miseries no sooner pitied, and releiued, their
petitions no sooner received and answered, then of those that lie in the dust;
and they that wander up and down in Sheep skins and Goat skins, derided,
despised, persecuted, are as graciously invited, and with as much welcome
received with our Father, as those that have their paths anointed with
butter, and whose portion is the fattest.

It is a certain rule, that the proud man who despises his brethren, cannot
pray; he that will not own his brethren, our Father will not own him.

The common duty of Christians, Romans 12.
is as the Apostle admonishes, in giving honors, go one before another.

This very compellation, calling God Our Father, does honor all the faithful
servants of God with the honor that is due to them; according to the precept
of the Apostle, Honor all men.

And we not knowing who belong to the kingdom of God, and not daring to judge,
1 Pet. 2.
are therefore to esteem all men our brethren, and to honor them with the
name of brethren.

I beseech you let prayers and supplications be made for all men, for seeing
Christ has prayed not only for his twelve, but for all those that shall
believe through their word, we do charitably conceive, that all men are either
in present profession, or in Gods gracious expectation, our brethren. Let us
not boast our selves either against them who are not yet come into the Church,
or against them that are gone out; for such pride, God resists, and let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Phil. 2.3


Let nothing be done in strife and vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let
each esteem others better then himself.

Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
others.

This is called the same mind that was in Jesus Christ, and they that pray to
God in Christ's words, and not with his mind, loose labor.

They be flatterers that ouerdoe in giving honor, belying men to their faces,
with false and undue ascriptions. They be slanderers that put unjust aspertions
upon their brethren: they be proud or worse that ouerlooke them, as unworthy of
their regard: humility finds an equality in the ho^shold of God, and they say
with the sons of Jacob, we are brethren, the sons of one God, Genesis 42.11.
our Father which is in heaven: we are all one man's sons in the land of
Canaan.

2 Vox pacis.
There is no malice in them that say aright, Our Father; they pray one for
another, and wish the welfare of one another.

They remember that they were all at first, in the loins of the first Adam,
and that now they are in the love and favor of the second Adam, and this
reuiueth that principle of nature; fac^^lijs fieri quod cupis ipse tibi: It is
not lawful for us to beg any thing of God for others, that we would not wish
to our selves.

Why should we strive, says Abraham to Lot, seeing we are brethren? and
therefore he that bids us to pray continually, bids, if it be possible,
as much as in you is, have peace with all men; for the God of peace must be
sought in peace; and it is a note of the ungodly, The way of peace they have
not known.

Therefore before thou fall down before the face of God in prayer, empty all
malice out of thy heart, and remember that thy father is thy brothers father,
and the communion of charity does give him a share in all thy holy prayers and
devotions.

But this neglected, will fall so heavy upon us, before we have done this
prayer, that God shall condemn us from our own mouths, when we desire to be
forgiven as we do forgive.

Here arise certain quaeres.

1 Is it not lawful to pray, saying, My father, Quest.
give me?

No doubt it is, and without prejudice of christian charity, for we have the
warrant both of reason, precept, Sol.
and example for it.

1 Of reason: the common right of all does not impeach the particular right of
each in this Father: this name is borrowed from nature, whereby every child is
warranted to call My father, without invasion of the right of his brethren to
that title.

2 Of precept, God himself says, But I said, how shall I put thee among the
children? Ier. 3.15.
and I said, thou shall call me, my Father.

3 By example; Christ, O my Father, if it be possible, Math. 27.46.
transeat calix iste.

Thomas, My Lord, my God. Io. 20.28.


Indeed, we have each of us our particular occasions to repair to God, and
desire his help; in which cases we may either plead the common interest that
we have in God, as members of his Church, under the name of our Father, as
here: or we may by faithful zeal invoke him in our own right to him by
Jesus Christ; saying, My father; so the Son of God is my Redeemer and
Mediator: the holy ghost, my sanctifier and preserver.

2 Seeing our Father is a name of such charity, as does combine us in love and
well-wishing, may it be lawful to use imprecations to pray against any?

The content of this word our, does include all men, for all men are by
creation, and by conservation and protection, the Sons of God, and God only
knows of these who are his; we know that there is no universal grace; Christ
has said, many called, few chosen. so that mankind is divided into two
portions, Gods friends, Gods enemies.

But they be all our fellow creatures, and the law of charity does bind us to
the love of their. persons, so far forth praying for them, as may stand with
the maintenance of Gods glory.

Indefinitely we may pray against all the devices of the wicked, that God would
make them frustrate, as he did the counsel of Achitophel; so David,

2 Samuel 15.31.
Lord I pray thee turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness.

We hear that Antichrist is Gods professed enemy, we may pray for his
confusion, for we may hate where God hates.

Whence the enemies of our Church wish the light of the Gospel quenched, and
the superstition of the Church of Rome, and her abominable idolatry revived
amongst us; we may lawfully pray to God against their machinations, that he
would confound their counsels.

We have seen what they would have done in their Powder Treason, we may see
how they fell into the pit that they dug; we may say with Deborah and
Barack, So let all thine enemies perish O Lord.

Finally, whosoever are not the sons of God, either in present admission, or
in his holy election, we may pray against them, that God would glorify
himself in their confusion and utter destruction.

Generally, against all impenitent sinners, whom God has given over to a
reprobate sense, we pray to be preserved from their society, and from all
infection by them, and against their prosperity, as hurtful to the Church of
God.

3 Seeing the law of charity does thus bind us all one to another In christian
love, that we must pray for all men in our own particular quarrels, one with
another: is it lawful to pray against our enemies?

Our answer is, Sol.
that Christ has made it a law to his Church in the exposition of the second
great Commandment concerning the love of our neighbor: But I say unto you,
love your enemies, Matt. 5.44.
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despightfully use you and persecute you, that you may be children of your
Father that is in heaven: whereby he puts all them out of the number of the
children of God, that do not pray for their enemies: and if no children, we
cannot say our Father:

Therefore our Church in the holy Letanie thereof, prays charitably, and
according to this holy rule: That it may please thee to forgive our enemies,
persecutors and slanderers, and to turn their hearts.

And by this charitable Shiboleth we are distinguished from the heathen and
Publicans, from the pharisaicall interpreters of that law, who have said, Thou
shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.

They that seek and love the peace of God, do desire the saving of the enemy,
the destruction of the enmity.

Our enemy is one of the medicines of our life, he serves us to good use to
exercise our patience, and our charity and wisdom, to keep us in awe that
we give no advantage against our selves: if naturally we love not physic,
yet for healths sake, we out of judgment do approve it, and take it patiently.

4 Whether we may rejoice at the destruction of our own enemies, or the
enemies of our religion and state.

Sol.
1 The very title of our father, which does unite us in one bond of common
brotherhood, does so enjoin us to wish the common good of all Adams children,
that the ruin of any part of this building, ought to be a grief to all the
rest, so that nature bids us not to rejoice in the destruction of any man,
quia homo; he is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, and can the members
suffer, and the whole body not ache for it?

2 There is some remain of the image of God in all the enemies of God, which
is lovely, and ought to be dear to us, the defacing whereof, is such a
grief, that though Samuel knew that God had wisely and justly rejected Saul,
yet he could not choose but mourn for him; and when David saw that Saul was
dead, he bewailed his death bitterly, though he got a kingdom by it; and when
he heard that his traitor son and subject Absolon was dead, he deplored his
death with great passion and much tenderness.

3 The precept of Christ: Be ye merciful as your heavenly father, and his
critis filij patris vestri; by showing love to enemies, does also teach us to
take the fall even of Gods enemies to heart.

Object.
But it is objected against this, that Solomon says, when the wicked perish,
Prou. 11.10.28.28.
there is shouting; he gives a good reason for it, for when they perish, the
righteous increase.

There is great cause of iubilation in the Church, when the righteous increase,
therefore there is cause of joy given to the Church, when the wicked perish.

The solution of this doubt depends upon this consideration.

The enemies of God, and of our religion, are to be considered two ways.

1 As they are the creatures of God, and partners with us of the same nature,
so they are our own flesh, and no man ever hated his own flesh; thus the
persons of all men ought to be dear to us, and their life precious, and their
welfare desired.

2 As they are by their corruptions, turned enemies to God and to his Church;
so shall not I hate them O Lord which hate thee? not their persons, but their
sins, their malice against the Church; that is, odio perfecto odi eos.

Again, in the destruction of Gods enemies, we must consider,

1 Who it is that punishes them, for it is the hand of God, and this is matter
of joy to the Church; it is one of the duties of the Sabbath to rejoice in the
operations of Gods hand, and this is repeated there for one, in the Psalms,
for the Sabbath, Psalm. 92.4.

Thou have made me glad through thy work, I will triumph in the work of thy
hands.

When the wicked spring as the grass, Verse 7.
and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is, that they shall be
destroyed for ever.

For lo thine enemies, O Lord, 9.
for lo thine enemies shall perish, and all the workers of iniquity shall be
scattered.

Mine eye also shall see my desire upon mine enemies, etc.

All which shows that the ruin and confusion of Gods enemies, is the joy of
the Church, as it is the work of Gods hand, for do we not say, Tu Domine
fecisti, and is it not our prayer, fiat voluntas tua? and are we not to
rejoice in it when it is done? does not God do all things well? and do not
all things work together for the good of Gods children?

2 We must consider who they be that suffer, these are brethren with us
according to the flesh, here our bowels yearne, and we have cause to mourn and
lament on their behalf for their sins, that deserved this judicial process
against them.

He that has a crystal glass in his hand, into which his enemy has
infused poison to destroy him, and sees the glass broken in his hand,
discovers the preservation of his life, by that breaking, may he not at the
same time be glad that the poison is spilt, and sorry that so good a glass is
broken. The nature which is impoisoned in Gods enemies, is Gods creature, if
the breaking of this glass of humane nature, do let the poison fall to the
ground, is there not cause of joy for the prevention of that evil, and yet
cause of grief for the loss of that vessel, by which this work of mischief
was to be effected?

Our elements of which we are composed in the frame of our bodies, are mixed,
and not pure and simple bodies: the affections that are in the inferior part
of the soul, are also mixed, for our best courage is shaken with some fear,
our hope, mingled with some doubt, our joy commedled with sorrow, that in the
very service of God we rejoice with trembling.

In our intellectual part, our understanding is not clear of clouds: in our
spiritual and divine inspirations by the holy ghost, there is aliquid carnis,
some of the natural man that eclipseth the light, and weakeneth the force of
the holy ghost in us.

Therefore as there is cause of joy, so is there cause of grief in the case of
Gods enemies, but it is a safe rule always to rejoice in the Lord, and to
approve, admire, and bless the operation of his hands.

The powder traitors, whose zeal of the religion of Rome, turned them all
into gunpowder, and inflamed them to that fury and malice, as to destroy the
peace and the Religion of this Land with one blast; how would they have ioyed
to have brought forth the mischief in full birth, which they had conceived?
yet the bowels of our compassion were moved toward them, to see them dye and
suffer the just reward of their most damnable proiection.

But the bowels of the wicked are cruel; shall I show you the mercy of a Pope,
it was Sixtus 5. upon occasion of the murder of Henry the 3. the French King,
who in joy of it, being performed treacherously by a Monk, set on by himself,
does make a panegyricall oration in the praise of the Creator, and admireth
the excellent work of God in it, quod simplex monachus non mutato habitu,
nongladio, clipeoue armatus ad regem libere penetrauit.

Is not the folly of this son of Belial worthy to be despised, that makes
this a miracle, that a Monk unarmed, and in his own habit, wherein no man
mistrusted him, did commit this treason, for so these false Monks were without
suspicion admitted to the Kings presence; but had he changed his habit, and
come armed, he had been prevented.

He rejoices in the Kings death, yet he was no heretic, as Rome calls
heresy, but a son of the Pope, and he lays the murder to Gods charge.

Regem Deus per sacratum virum interfecit: the whole oration is extant in
print, and they are all ashamed of it, so full it is both of folly and malice.

We may not do the God whom we worship and serve, that unthankful injury,
to omit the late fearful example of his judgment, declared upon a Popish
conuenticle assembled in a private meeting to an heretical Sermon; they are
blind that see not the hand of God in it, and they that take not warning by it
to avoid the like, may tempt the justice of God to some new execution, for he
has treasures of wrath.

I think I speak the charitable thoughts of you all: it was a judgment much
to be deplored in respect of them that suffered the same. So great a number
presently, either broken with the ruins of the house, or smothered with the
closeness of their own heaps one upon another, others wounded, some dead
found, some fallen into madness.

We have cause all of us to lament the sudden violent death of so many, of whom
we have cause to persuade our selves charitably, that they had the zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge, and that they were made believe that they
did God good service.

But how many open Churches did they pass by, how many learned Preachers might
they have heard at that time, from whose light they might have borrowed light,
and in whom they might have heard Jesus Christ speaking to his Church, and
declaring the way of salvation: they forsook the houses of God to retire
themselves into a chamber, where their own weight was their ruin by the just
hand of God, as we must needs confess; for his works are often secret, but
always just.

Did not the blind lead the blind, and both fell into the ditch:

1 I observe how quickly upon the forbearance of the law, the Papists do take
advantage to congregate themselves into assemblies and to make open profession
of their opposition to us.

2. How ready the treacherous Priests, who have fallen from us by Apostasy
are to confirm the Apostasy of such as are gone from us, to tempt others not
established.

3. Another special observation in that conuenticle, was the time when this
sudden destruction came upon Papists, it was by their new computation of the
year, in the Gregorian Calender, on their fifth day of November. So that God
would have them taste of his justice, with a touch and remembrance of that
dismal day which their religion had dessigned to our ruin: now they have
their fifth of November as well as we, but with so merciful a difference on our
part, so just a difference on their part, that when they shall think of our
fifth of November, they may see their own hand plotting mischief, Gods hand
detecting, and defeating it, and their fifth of November will acknowledge, no
hand but of Almighty God, in the whole work of their destruction.

Their intendment forged in hell was to have wrought upward to blow up all;
this execution from the hand of God wrought downward in the fall.

On our fifth of November, the great assembly of the State, which maintain true
Religions was aimed at.

On their fifth of November, a private Conuenticle, heretical changelings, and
such as have denied the faith of Christ, here rightly and sincerely taught,
were hit.

And as their day intended the sudden death of some of their own friends, to
make those whom they hated more sure;

So it is to be feared that some of our own Protestants, somewhat too curious
to pry, and somewhit too daring to adventure into the tents of the enemy did
pay dear for their over curious diligence in joining themselves with unlawful
assemblies.

Use.
The use of those fearful examples of Gods justice, upon those that forsake
the true Church of God, is not to rejoice in their destruction.

But secondly, to remember the threatening Word of our Savior, Except ye
repent ye shall all likewise perish. For God wants not matter of just
quarrel against the best of us all to punish us also, and to make us examples
of his just vengeance, if he were not our Father, loving and indulgent toward
us for Christ's sake, in whom he loves and spares, and forbeareth us, and we
have no other way to keep him a father, but by our true repentance of our
sins, and obedience to his holy Word.

2. It is a warning to us, seeing he that we pray to, is our father, in a
special reference to all the sincere professors of the holy truth of God,
without schism, heresy, or superstition, that therefore we keep our selves
in the unity of the Church, not forsaking the assemblies of our brethren, whom
either faction or superstition has separated from us.

These sinners against their own souls are a dangerous society, let us have
nothing to do with them in their heretical seperations: the very eye upon
them may be dangerous: for these are the windows of the body, and Mors intrat
per fenestras.

David's Prayer is, Auerie oculos meos ne videant vanitatem. And let not us say,
aperiam oculos meos vt videam.

If we take hurt by looking on we may too late complain with him in the Poet,
Cur aliquid vidi? Cur noxia lumina feci?

Is it not safer to avoid poison, then to drink it in upon confidence of our
antidote?

3. Let the name of our Father move a compassion in us toward our brethren
staggering in Religion, to confirm them; fallen from us, to reduce them to the
unity of our Church: this partly by our earnest prayers to God for them, partly
by our wholesome and good counsels given to them, partly by the example of
our good life, directing them when they shall be witnesses of our conformity in
life, with the doctrine of our faith, may be happily performed with much more
joy then we can take in the ruin and destruction of them, though they be a
generation that does not set their hearts aright, and in whose sight our lives
are nothing precious.

Till God do declare them his enemies, let us hope and judge the best of them;
but the time shall come when God will come himself to purge his floor, and to
divide between the Chafe and the Wheat, between the good grain, and the
tares, and then those whom God shall cast off as his enemies, the communion of
Saints shall know them, and they shall have warrant to rejoice in their
eternal destruction, and they shall have commandment from the judge of quick
and dead to triumph over them.

Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has
avenged you on her. Reave 18.20.


And in the next Chapter there is an Halleluiah sung in heaven and God is
praised for the destruction of Babylon, that is, the kingdom of Antichrist.

Let us with prayer strive with God so long as we live to increase the number
of his faithful ones, to dilate the bounds of his Church and to add to it
daily such as may be saved with us.

And let us with patience awaite the justice of God which in the last day will
be revealed when the sheep and goats shall be parted, and when God shall
declare both with whom we shall rejoice in the communion of his Saints, and
over whom we shall triumph in the Synagogue of Satan: then shall the glory of
God both ways delight us, and we shall have our desire upon all Gods enemies.

Which art in heaven, (...), who art in the heavens.

The name of heaven in Scripture is given at large to all that space that is
above the earth, so that the air where the fowls do fly, is called heaven,
and they volatilia coeli: the planets and the fixed stars are heavenly
bodies; and there is an heaven, far above all heavens, to which Christ is
said to be exalted.

We comprehend all in this word, for God is dwelling in them all.

Yet we must take heed that we confine not our God to any certain place, for
he is infinite, and incomprehensible, himself tells us so.

Ier. 23.24.
Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him, says the
Lord; do not I fill heaven and earth; says the Lord? Solomon confesses when
he had built God an house at Jerusalem,

1. Reg. 8.27.
Behold the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, how much less
this house that I have builded?

Else what comfort had we to pray or hope to be heard if we did not believe
the omnipresence of God.

Job. 22.12.
Eliphaz in Job, does dispute this point, Is not God in the height of heaven*
and behold the height of the stars how high they are.

13
And thou say, how does God know? can he judge through the dark clouds?

14
Thick clouds are a courening to him, that he sees not and he walks in the
Circuit of heaven.

These are gross and carnal opinions of God, that his high habitation in
heaven does make him a stranger to us and our ways, or makes our prayers
imperssions to him. Am I a God at hand says the Lord, and not a God far of!

This title of Gods being in the heavens, does not clip the wings of his
presence spread and dilated over all the world.

Whither shall I go from thy spirit, Psalm. 139.7.
or whither shall I fly from thy presence.

If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: 8
If I make my bed in hell, thou art there etc.

We must therefore search the reasons why God, Quest.
whose presence fills all places, is here called upon as dwelling in the
heavens.

He is said to be in the heavens in respect of his Majesty and glory, Sol. 1.
1 Glory.
for as the throne of an earthly Prince is his highest place of greatness and
glory; so we can best conceive God in his glory, when we cast our selves down
before him, sitting upon his throne, so Christ says, Heaven is Gods throne,
and the earth is his footstool. Math. 5.34.
So David.

The Lords throne is in Heaven, his eyes will consider, Psalm. 11.4.
his eye-liddes will try the children of men.

This teaches us to come before God in our prayers, with all humble reverence
and fear, as before a Prince of highest glory sitting in the thron where he
judges right.

They forget this who come before him and present him with their rude and
undigested extemporall euaporations of their desires, daring to petition the
highest Majesty with their vnstudied, vnpremeditated supplications. Solomon
presses this consideration thus. Eccles. 5.1. Reg Bible.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy
words be few.

If the Majesty of earthly Princes do make thee study thy petitions, and take
counsel what thou shall desire, and in what words, and that thou weighest
every word in it, that thou may give no offense, do not make too bold with
God, who though he be thy father, yet is he an heavenly glorious God, whose
seat is above all.

The sweet and gracious name of a father, may peradventure make us too bold,
and therefore this addition of Majesty is put to it, to temper and moderate
our presumption and to awe us.

Omni vidency.
2. This mention of heaven in Gods title, is a remonstrance of Gods
omni-videncie, for he is above as in speculo, in a watch tower, from whence
he discerns all that is done all the world over. So David, Out of heaven did
the Lord behold the earth, Psalm. 102.19.
his eye is over all the world.

Heb. 4.13.
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do.

The Lord is in his holy temple.

Psalm 4.
He sees all men's hearts, and discerns from what affections their prayers are
breathed forth into his hearing.

He sees who come to him, who neglect him, he discerns what it is that
bringes to him, whether our necessities and wants only, or our love to him: he
discerns what use we intend to make of his gifts, if we prevail with him,
how we will take it if we speed not in our suites, for he knows all our
thoughts long before.

So that we are hereby stirred up to a further conscience of reverence and holy
devotion in our prayers, for that we appear in his presence, whose searching
does so narrowly survey us from the height of his Sanctuary.

Omnipotency.
3. This mention of the heavens in his title, does express the high power of
God, for what does more express him to us in fullness of omnipotency, then
this high throne of his greatness established in heaven.

The Heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 29.1.
and the firmament shows his handy-worke. This adds yet more to our fear,
for that power is not to be dallied with.

The Lord kills and makes alive, 1. Sam. 2 6.
he brings down to the grave, and brings up.

By strength no man shall prevail. 9.


Here is no contesting with this power, and no resisting his right hand: our
father which art in the heavens.

Take heed that the presumption on the name of Father, do not dash thee
against the rock of his power: for, There is no rock like our God. 1. Sam.
2.2.


David has secretly directed us herein, But there is forgiveness with thee,
Psalm. 130 4.
that thou may be feared.

This is the best composition of the heart that prays to God, to love, and
hope, and believe, and approach, and sue, and all with fear, for fear will
keep us within bounds, that we offend not.

Now that we have both these considerations in sight together in this
compellation of our father in heaven, we have also matter of faith as well as
fear.

There be two doubts which may be cast in prayer, which are both removed in
this title, and our faith established against them.

1. That of the Leper.

Lord if thou will thou can make me clean. Math. 8.
He confessed him a Lord, he believed of his power, but his doubt was of his
will, But seeing he is our father, there can be no cause of that doubt.

2. That of Israel, Psalm 78.19.
Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? here is doubt of the power of God,
and this is cleared when we confess that our father is in heaven.

For his being in heaven which we here confess, is not a bare habitation
there, for so the Angels of God are in heaven, but it acknowledges his
Creation of the heavens, his possession of them, his dominion over them, the
heavens are his imperial chamber, wherein he sits as supreme Monarch in
most absolute and independent omnipotenc:y As David; He has done whatsoever he
would in heaven, and in earth, and in all deep places.

There be two great hindrances to the preuailance of our prayers.

1. Nimia trepidatio, when we are too much cast down with the terror of Divine
Majesty, that is healed in Our father.

2. Nimia oscitatio, when we bear our selves too bouldly upon the confidence
of his favor, and that is quash, tif we consider him in the heavens the place
of his high glory.

Holiness.
4 This mention of heavens does call us to the consideration of the holiness of
God, for that is called the Lords Sanctuary, the Sanctum, sanctorum, and into
that shall enter nothing that is unclean.

Therefore in the law, so many washings and clensings were in use, so many
preparations, for any special resort to God, and the people called upon to
sanctify themselves; for God that opens his hand and fills our empty
vessels, as the pottes at the marriage in Cana, to the brimme, will not power
his pure graces into unclean vessels.

And he that is pure and holy, will not receive the prayers that come from an
unclean and pudled spring of flesh and blood, he that pours on the house of
David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of supplications, pours
also the spirit of grace to sanctify the supplications. So it is called in
Zech. the Spirit of grace and supplications.

And David can say, If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me.

Observe it in Saint James his directions.

Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: Iam. 4.8.
cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts you double minded.

When God appeard to Moses in the bush, and Moses was approaching to him, he
heard a voice saying to him.

Put off thy shoes from thy feet, Exodus 3.5.
for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground.

There is no Coming then to God without holiness, without which we may seek,
but we shall never see the face of God.

5 This mention of the heavens here does put us in mind of the wisdom of
God, 5* Wisdom.
who of nothing raised up that glorious frame of those celestial habitations,
that high Sanctuary for his own dwelling, for in wisdom he has made them
all.

Which teaches us to beware how we appear before God in our prayers and holy
devotions, not as fools, but as wise.

Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the house of God, and be more
near to hear then to offer the sacrifice of fools.

They that pray not in wisdom, do offer to God the sacrifice of fools.

And Solomon says, God has no pleasure in fools. Eccles. 5.4.
There is no folly like to the folly that is used in prayer and devotion, when
the God of wisdom has us in his eye, and the jealous God who is tender of
his worship discerns; that he is slighted.

That is one of the sins of our time, a foolish worship, without
consideration, care or reverence, which turns our prayers into sin.

Has God any pleasure in the set words of a solemn service! Did he not blame
his own people. Populus hic honorat me labijs suis. David admonishes to sing
praises to God with understanding.

It asks a great deal of spiritual wisdom to address our suites to the
Court of heaven, where the highest King of glory does wisely, consider all the
sons of men, and beholds with what descretion and wisdom they come before
him. Take heed therefore that thou forget not our Father to be in heaven.

6 Celsitude.
Heaven is mentioned for the height of Gods sanctuary, for God is in excelsis
which teaches us in prayer to sublime our souls from the earth and earthly
things, to an holy elevation: thereto agree those outward forms of lifting up
the eyes in prayer.

I lifted up mine eyes to the hills, from whence my help comes.

Our help is in the name of the Lord, who has made heaven and earth.

And let the lifting up of mine hands be an evening sacrifice. Sursum corda.

It is the voice of the Church, Our Conversation is in heaven; and it is the
Apostles counsel.

If ye be risen with Christ seek the things which are above, and not the
things which are below, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.

O that I had the wings of a Dove, the wings of an Eagle, rather to fly high,
there is the Carcass, and thither the Eagles resort.

Our earthly Parents give good things to us, but they have them from hence, the
bread, the fish, the necessaries of life.

Sometimes earthly Parents prove (...), but our heavenly father is one, whose
compassion falls not, when my father and mother forsakes me, the Lord takes
me up.

Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham knows not, though Israel be
ignorant of us. Earthly Parents see us sick, and in prison, and in disgrace,
and in want, they can sit down and drop their tears, and viz their groans
with ours, but there is no help in them; they may be parted from us by death,
but our heavenly father shall endure for ever, his years change not, he looked
down from the height of his sanctuary: From heaven did the Lord behold the
earth: Psalm. 102.19.20.
to hear the groaning of the prisoners, to loose those that are appointed to
death.

7 The mention of heaven added to the title of our Father, does put us in mind
of his goodness, 7. Goodness.
for he dwells in that place from which every good giving, and every perfect
gift does proceed.

From whence also we are directed in our Prayers not to ask of this Father,
that is, nothing but good and perfect gifts.

In temporal benefits, we must still have an eye to the true use of them, to
make them serve for spiritual and heavenly uses.

One thing have I desired of the Lord that I will seek after, Psalm 27.4.
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold
the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

Let our eye be upon the inheritance and the birthright, and for things
temporal, so far as they may be adjumenta or oramenta to us to advance this
final desire of the kingdom of God; so far let us desire and seek and use
them.

Who will petition a King, for beads and babies, and such trifling things:
fear nto little flock, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom.

Let our wisdom seek it where it is to be found, in heaven, where Jesus
Christ sits at the right hand of his father, and makes intercession for us.

Why should we ask stones, where we may have bread for asking: bread of the
finest wheat flower: Manna, Angels bread:

8 Our own home.
8 The name of our father in the heavens, does put us in mind of the country
which we seek, for we are but Pilgrims and strangers, and we have no abiding
City here, we are but soiourners as all our fathers were.

2 Cor. 5.1.
But we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

2
For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon, 4
with our house which is from heaven. -- that mortality might be swallowed up
of life* for

6
Whilst we art at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord.

8
We are confident and willing to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord.

We sit here weeping by the rivers of Babel, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, etc.

Return to thy rest O my soul.

Study those heavens, search and find out the way to them: there is one that
is gone before to prepare a place there for us, in the many Mansions of his
Fathers house, and as the Church sweetly Hymneth.

Heb. 10 20.
He has opened the Kingdom of heaven to all believers: by a new and living
way which he has Consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his
flesh: Conducting us to Mount Sion, the City of the living God, Heb. 17.^2.
the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels.

To the general assembly, and Church of the first borne, which are written in
heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect: And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinckling, that speaks better things then the blood of Abel.

2. The Petitions.
These are of two sorts, for some do concern the glory of God, and our
spiritual and eternal good: the rest have reference to this life and the good
thereof.

It is necessary that we be directed by our Savior, both in the matter, what
we may ask, and in the order, where and at what we must begin, there is a
(...) in our (...). If we put that out of the proper place, we may disorder
our prayers, and speed the worse. Therefore our first petition here is.

Hallowed be thy name.
Which wholly is directed to Gods glory, for that is first to be desired and
sought of us.

In the handling of which words, 1 We must search what is here meant by the
name of God? 2 What it is to Hallow this name? 3 Who must do this? 4 Why we
do ask this of God? 5 Why we make this our first petition? 6 What duties
depend upon this?


1. What is meant by the Name of God.
Names were given to Persons, to Creatures, and things of old for distinction
sake, to distinguish one from another, and that application, by which every
thing is called, is the name thereof. Therefore God appointed the Creatures,
which he had put under the Dominion of Adam, to take their names from him.

And whatsoever Adam called every Creature, that was the name thereof. Genesis 12
19.


But God having none greater then himself, gave himself his names, by which
he made himself known to the sons of men, and therefore Moses desirous to
know the name of God, demanded it of himself.

Exodus 3 14.
And God called himself, I am that I am: and bad him say. I AM has sent thee.
Which great name of Jehovah does express him.

1 Eternal in his own selfe-being, altogether independent: Heb 13.8.
Yesterday, that is, from everlasting, to day, that is for the present, and the
same for ever, that is both so long as time is, and eternally after time is no
more.

Reu. 1.8.
Which was, which is, and which is to come.

2 It shows the omnipotent production, and denuation, of all existences from
him, as the Apostle says: Of him, Romans 11.36.
and in him, and by him are all things.

3 It shows his wise and powerful providence in the gubernation and
preservation of all things, for seeing the omnipotent hand of creation has
extracted all things out of nothing, how easily could they be again resolved
into nothing, if the faithful Creator were not the wise and potent supporter
of this creation.

Sometimes, he is called El, the strong God. Sometimes Elohim: Godds in the
plural, to express the Trinity of persons.

And so the Preacher uses the plural, Remember thy Creators in the days of
thy youth: first the Father, Eclesi. 12.1.
Son and holy Ghost.

Adonai, is a proper name to God, in respect of his Dominion and absolute
Sovereignty, over all the works of his hands.

I cannot blame the tenderness of the Jews, whom the zeal of this glorious
name of God, restrained from taking it in their mouths, or pronouncing it, but
upon great occasion, for they were afraid of the terror of that Commandment
which says, The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain. And superstition in that kind, does come nearer the virtue, then
profaneness does.

But neither that law, nor this prayer does provide for the honor either of so
many letters written, or such a word sounded by the tongue.

But as we use to say, that man has a good name, who has a good estimation,
of whom report speaks well. So by the name of God in this place, I understand
the estimation, and good opinion, and regard, and honor of God.

And so I understand our Saviors prayer to the Father. Father glorify thy
name.

To whom the Father answered.

I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. Ioh 12 28.


His desire is, that God would reveal his glory so to men, that his name may
be great and glorious in the world.

God is very careful of this, for the spreading of his name in the world, for
he told Moses, and bad him say

Exodus 9.16.
In very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, to show in thee my power,
that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.

Deuteronomy 28.58.
To this end, God does exact obedience to his law, That thou may fear this
glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God. David.

Psalm. 8.1.
O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth: who have set thy
glory above the Heavens?

The name of God is also taken for the holy attributes of God his wisdom, and
power, and holiness, and goodness, and eternity, or whatsoever may honor
him, even as the Apostle says, (...)

And for this, God has that glorious name, and is so far advanced above all
things, insomuch as our Help stands in the name of the Lord, who has made
heaven and earth.

Psalm. 20.1.
And so it is said by way of benediction. The name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

Psalm. 75.9.
And it is used in our prayers by way of Mediation, Help us O God of our
salvation for the glory of thy name, and deliver us, and purge away our sins
for thy names sake.

You see cause from hence, that care be taken of the name of the Lord, you
hear what his name is, not only his titles by which he is known, but his glory
in all his due attributes.

2. What is it to Hallow this name?
Psalm. 111.5.
It is nomen sanctum already. So David. Holy and reverent is his name, and our
prayer is, that it may be Sanctificatum, that is, so declared and revealed and
so accepted, and confessed.

Holiness to the Lord: it is his due.

Any thing is then said to be sanctified, when it is vindicate, and separate
from common use, to a special and reverend regard, the word (...), quisi
(...), separate from all earthinesse, and carnalitie.

1 From oblivion: the name of God must never be forgotten of us, as the Church
protests, Isay 26.8.
The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

2 From Contempt: When the name of God is remembered to be honored, and
confessed, and praised, and sworn by, upon just occasion; the temple at
Jerusalem was built to the name of God, and God put his name there, and thither
the Tribes went up to give thanks to the name of the Lord. Psalm. 122.4.


3 From profanation, either by Blasphemy, which is the highest degree of abuse
of the name of God: or by any other pollution of that holy name.

Blasphemy is either as Aug. in lingua in vita.


1. In lingua.
1 When any thing is unworthily attributed to God, that becomes not his
holiness, or wisdom, or power, or goodness, etc.

2 When any thing is wholly derogated from God, which belongs to any of these.

3 When any Creature is joined with God in the participation of his
incommunicable properties.

2. In vita.
When our conversation does not maintain due correspondence with the honor of
God, whose name we profess, and whose obedience we pretend.

Again, Every pollution of the name of God, by vain and idle mention thereof,
without fear and reverence, is an unhallowing of this name to Gods dishonor.

So then: Hallowed be thy name is, let thy glory be declared and confessed,
according to the excellent greatness, and goodness of it, with all reverence,
and fear; let it neither be forgotten, nor despised, nor profaned by any the
greatest or least pollution that may be.

3. Who must do this?
1 Christ said to his Father: Father glorify thy name: he answers as you
have heard, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again. Yet I dare
not leave out this desire in this petition, but that we may beseech God, that
his name may be hallowed by himself.

Ioh. 17.1.
2 Christ prays, Father glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee.

Neither dare I exclude this in our petition, but that we may pray, that the
name of God may be hallowed by the Son of God, who best knows how to do it.

3 The glorious Angels and Archangels, Cherubins and Seraphins, continually do
cry, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Saboath, as our Church Hymneth. I dare not
exclude them in our petition. Let my name be hallowed by the celestial armies,
they are the Churches Sicut, in the third petition. Sicut in Coelo and in terra.

4 We read that the separate souls of Gods Saints, do not cease night and day
praising the name of God, and hallowing it with their devotions: I take in them
also into this petition; let the Saints in glory hallow thy name.

5 We find that the Celestial bodies, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the
sublimary creatures, all in their kinds, declare the glory of God and make
his name glorious, therefore I will not leave out them, let the name of God be
hallowed also in them, let all they that serve him, testify of him.

It is not, Sanctificatu: or Sanctificent illi, or Sanctificemus nos, but it is
Sanctificetur, and therefore let all things that have a being do God right in
this.

6 But I confess, as this prayer is put by our Savior into our mouths, it
concerns us to desire of God that especially we may hallow the name of God.

For the name of God shall never suffer from himself or from his Son, or
from his heavenly armies, or his there Celestial bodies, or Terrestiall
creatures, all the danger of his holy name is from us.

We sinful men, and women do often think, often speak irreverently of Gods
name, we be the swearers, and liars, and blasphemers and profane persons that
blemish the holy glory of Gods name, so that we had need especially to regard
our selves in this suite. Sanctificetur a nobis nomen tuum. So Saint Cyprianus,
Petimus a Deo, vt nomen ejus sanctificetur in nobis. Decronian domini.


And herein we honor God, desiring to be the vessels of his praise, the
organs and instruments of his glory here on earth.

Yet let no man think that any thing can be added from us to the holiness of
Gods name, only we pray that his name which is holy in it self, may be so
both conceived in our hearts; and expressed in our embra'd profession, and
confession, of his name to be so, and that nothing may come from us to blemish
and indignifie it.

4. Why do we ask this of God?
The reason is in sight, Holiness is the Lords, none can give the holy spirit
of Sanctification, but God only.

None can hallow or sanctify, but they who are holy, profane persons and
Devils may glorify God, but they cannot sanctify him. God will be glorified,
even of his enemies, whether they will or no, but sanctified he cannot be,
save only of such as are first made holy.

Isay. 6.3.
The Seraphins in the Prophet I say, cry one to another, Holy, holy, holy is
the Lord God of hoastes, the whole earth is full of thy glory.

Reu. 4.8.
And the four beasts in the Revelation, rest not night and day, saying, Holy,
holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was and is, and is to come.

Upon Aarons brestplate, Holiness to the Lord. Therefore we must resort to the
fountain of Holiness, for the grace of sanctification, that he may first
sanctify us, that we may be made able to sanctify his name.

We ask this of God
1 For it own sake, because the work of hallowing the name of God, is a good
work in it self. So David. It is a good thing to give thanks to the Lord.
Psalm 92.1.


And this begins prayer best, to glorify God, for his favors already
bestowed, for his own goodness; which we perform when we say, Hallowed be
thy name: This is the Confession of praise to his name, these be the calves of
our lips, Sacrum Iustitiae.

2. We ask this of God for our own sakes, for seeing none can hallow the name
of God, but they that are holy, we do herein beg our own holiness of God,
both holiness in our understandings to know God, and holiness in our
affections to love him, and holiness of life to serve him, and holiness of
perseverance to hold out herein to the end.

3 We ask this of God by way of confession of our own impotencie, for when we
desire him, that his name may be hallowed by us, we confess to him, that
without him, we are notable, to do him that service, for it is not in man to
order his own ways, and without him we can do nothing, we confess that he
works all good in us, therefore we go forth in the strength of the Lord, and
make mention of his righteousness only, indeed the holiness that we should
give to the name of God, except we had it from him, would not honor him.

4 We ask it of him, to declare our love to him, for seeing he is our Father,
as we invocate him, it is a debt that sons owe to their Parents, to
perpetuate their names upon earth, and this filial regard of his fatherly
providence, we express in desiring the glory of his name.

5 We ask it of him, for their sakes that belong to him, that God declaring
the glorious holiness of his name, men may trust in him: for so David. They
that know thy name, will trust in thee, So that this makes way for the
following petitions.

5. Why we make this our first petition.
In respect of our duty, for we were created to this end, that God might be
glorified in our bodies and souls, and to this we were also redeemed,
therefore Gods part in us, is our best part, and his glory our chiefest good.
And the truth is, that, except Gods name be hallowed in all that we say, or
think, or do, Nihil rite perficitur.

His name is put upon us, in our Baptism, In nomine patris et filij etc. His
name is in the house of his worship, our meetings are in his name, the prayers
of the Church addressed to his name, the word which we hear is reuelatio
nominis ejus. the Sacraments we receive is recordatio nominis ejus, the Psalms
we sing, to his name.

2 In respect of our own good, for our help stands in the name of God, his
name is a strong fortress, to them that trust in him, and so long as we have
that name to friend, we have a strong city of refuge to fly to, in all our
vexations, an hiding place in a storm, therefore the foundation of our safety
and the beginning our felicity drives it self from the name of the God of
our health and salvation.

We must therefore seek the sanctification thereof first.

3 In respect of all the following petitions, for except the name of God have
the due honor, there can be no hope either of his kingdom, that that may
come, or of his will, that it may be performed of us, etc.

This is Caput votorum, and whatsouer we beg of God in all our other
petitions, if it all aim not at the hallowing of the name, our prayers be
turned into sin.

It is enough, in the second table of the Law, to love our neighbors as our
selves, but this is angusta dilectio, and will not strain to the extent of the
first Commandment, for we must love God more then our selves, we must lay
down all natural, moral, humane respects, and stoop them to this first care
of the sanctification of Gods name.

Exodus 32.32.
Rather then that should suffer Moses cries, dele me delibro quem scripsisti.

Romans 9.3.
So Saint Paul. I could wish my self accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my
kinsmen, according to the flesh.

Both of these holy men saw how much the name of God suffered in the Apstoasie
of their brethren from God, and for the repair of Gods glory in them, and the
hallowing of Gods, they could have been content to have parted with their
glory and salvation, in piety to God, in charity to their brethren.

And surely if the name of God might be glorified in our perdition, we should
rather desire the glory of that name, then the eternal salvation of our
souls, for better all the world, the whole creature perished then that the
glorious name of God should be unhallowed.

And this desire in us cannot hinder our salvation, rather it aduanceth it, for
it is impossible that the soul which has those holy desires should perish.

6. What duties depend upon this petition.

2 We are admonished hereby, to seek the true knowledge of God, for we cannot
honor him before we know him, and the more we know him, the more will his holy
name be dear to us. As David says, They that know thy name will put their
trust in thee.

We are borne with a small glimpse of this knowledge naturally, which we have
from the light of the law of God written in our hearts, but these be so obscure
notions, that if we have not farther help to put God more in our sight, we may
fail of that life eternal, which is in the knowledge of him.

For though the light of nature does reveal to us one one God: yet it is not
clear enough, to show us that God in three distinct persons, and it serves
not to reveal to us, the Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ.

Therefore to accomplish our knowledge of this God, whose name must be hallowed
by us, we must use the means appointed by God, which are of two sorts.

1. Outward. 2. Inward.
1 For the outward means, God has opened to us two books.

1. The book of his creatures.

2 The written book of his Word. And they that study both these, shall see
the name of God so texted in them, that he that runs may read. For the book
of Gods creatures that we are stirred up to study in the Psalm for the
Sabbath, there is no such delight as that study; Psalm. 32.4.
for, David says, For thou Lord have made me glad through thy work: I will
triumph in the operation of thy hands.

O Lord how great are thy works, etc.

These works of God declare his name to us; when David entered into
consideration of them, 1 Gloria.
he says. O Lord our Lord, Psalm. 8.1
how excellent is thy name in all the earth, who have set thy glory above the
heavens? When I consider the heavens the work of thy fingers, the Moon and
the Stars which thou have ordained.

Then he descends to the Creation of man, and the dominion that God gave him
over his other works.

And applies it all to the glory of the Creator; so that the consideration of
the Creature, does reveal to us the glory of the Creator.

2 They declare the wisdom of their maker. O Lord how manifold are thy
works, 2 Wisdom. Psalm. 104.24.
in wisdom have thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches, So is
this great and wide Sea.

25.
He has declared his greatness in the co^pleate perfection of his work, 3
Greatness.
for so Moses says. Because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye
greatness unto our God.

Deuteronomy. 32.3.4.
He is the rock: his work is perfect.

David is full in this point, concerning the declaration of Gods name in his
Creatures, for when he had brought in his provisions, 4 Power.
for the building of the Temple which was to be performed by Solomon his son,
he devoted them to that use in the presence of all the people and there he
blessed the Lord, before all the congregation, saying. 2 Chronicles. 29.20 etc.
Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel our father, for ever and ever.

Thine O Lord is the greatness, and the power, and glory, and the victory, and
the Majesty, for all that is in the heaven and earth is thine, thine is the
kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.

Now therefore O God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.

Here is the very close and conclusion of the Lords prayer, Quia tuum est
regnum, potentia and gloria.

5 When we consider where God has bestowed all this riches of his favor and
holy love, even upon man, 5. Goodness.
this adds to the honor of his name, for what is man that thou art so
mindful of him: Psalm. 8.4.
the Prophets word is Patheticall and makes the favor more. (...) for that
signifies what is sorrowful and miserable man,

The same word he uses in another place, Put them in fear O Lord, that the
nations, Psalm. 3.20.
may know themselves to be but Aenosh. that is; sorry men, incurably sick.

It is a sweet entertainment of our lonely priuatnesse, when either we sit at
home, or ly in our beds, or walk abroad, it will keep us from many loose and
evil thoughts, and it will honor the name of God, to think on his works and
to meditate on these things.

We may thank God for it, that let the Church of Rome do her worst, she
cannot shut up, nor forbid the reading of this Bible of Gods works, they are
in our eyes and we behold them, and take use of them every day, and they that
bestow the most pains in the search of Gods work, do know him most and best,
and from them his name has, or should have most honor.

This book the Apostle calls the wisdom of God, and seeing this was not
found sufficient to make God known to the world as he desired for their good.

2. Another book was opened, the holy Scriptures of God, that by them God
might be made manifest, and his name declared, So says the Apostle.

2 Cor. 1.21.
After that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishnes of preaching to save them that believe.

This preaching takes the text from the written word of God, and they that
study that book well, shall know the name of the Lord.

God has recommended to his Church the reading and hearing and meditating on
his law, and the blessed man does exercise himself therein day and night, and
there is nothing that honors a nation more in the sight of all nations of
the world, then the study and obedience of this law, as Moses, said to the
Lords Israel.

Deuteronomy. 4.6.
Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and your
understanding, in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these
statutes and say: Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.

For what nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord
our God is in all things, that we call upon him for. And what nation is there
so great, that has statutes, and judgments so righteous, as all this law,
which I set before you this day.

In which words you may observe,

1 That God requires an exact care for the keeping of his law.

2 That this is found and professed by God himself, to be the wisdom and
understanding of his people.

3 That it is their glory amongst other nations of the world.

4 That by the diligent study and reading, and obedience of the law, God does
draw nigh to us,

5 That God does therefore set the law before all the (...)

6 That Gods name is hereby hallowed of his own people, and glorified amongst
other nations of the world.

I beseech you, lay all this to heart, and I dare say you will call the Church
of Rome an hard stepmother to her Children, who hides this book of God from
them. for

1 How can the law be well kept when it is not well known, how can it be well
known where it is not well preached, and where every soul has not liberty to
read and study it at large, so that they do herein hinder the obedience which
God requires, to be given to his law: for as in faith, so in obedience, how
shall they either believe, or obey without hearing?

2 Seeing the wisdom of the Church, does consist in knowing and keeping the
law of God does not the Church of Rome infatuate her children, and make stark
fools of them by hiding the book of God from them, and so robs God of his
delight, for God delights not in fools.

3 Seeing the liberty of the law of God is the glory of a nation, the Church
of Rome, by hiding the book of God from their people, do make them
inglorious, and dishonor them to the nations round about them.

4 Seeing God does reveal himself to be near unto them that know and study
his Law and keep it: the Church of Rome does what it can to drive it away from
amongst them.

A strange perverseness, God would draw near to them by the Ministry of his
word, and they refuse him.

He would be far off from them, when they would make him their creature: for
the Priests of Rome profess themselves God makers, and they will enforce his
presence.

5 Seeing God does set his Law before all the people at large, the Church of
Rome which keeps up this book, and forbids the general communication
thereof, to all that are capable thereof does profess it self an Antigod
herein.

6 Seeing by this knowledge and this obedience of the Law, the name of God is
hallowed, and without this it cannot be sanctified as it ought, the Church of
Rome is guilty of hindering the honor of God, both in his Church and without,
and therefore is no way to be hearkened unto, or embraced as the true Church.

Let me therefore exhort you, so many as do make conscience of hallowing the
name of God, in which our help stands, to exercise your selves in the
reading, hearing, and study of the holy word of God, that you may know the
Majesty, Wisdom, Holiness, Power, and goodness of that name, that the name
of the God of Jacob may defend you from all evil.

And to this purpose frequent you both diligently and reverently the house of
Gods name and honor, where his word is read, and preached faithfully and
sincerely, and make the Sabbath of the Lord, which is a day appointed to the
hallowing of Gods name especially, your delight, for this is the only outward
ordinary means by God devised, and commanded for the making his name known
to his Church.

2. The inward means.
This is without us, for it is the work of the holy Ghost, the means to
attain this spirit of God, to assist and enable this work in us by prayer,
for so our Savior says, Luke 11.13.
If ye then being evil know how to give good gifts to your children, how much
more shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit to them that ask him: the
gift of this spirit is not obtained by all them that pray, but by such only as
pray according to rule, and though grace be not necessitated to the outward
means, yet the promise thereof is so annexed to the right use of the means, as
we may be bold in that way to lay claim to it.

God never fails his own holy ordinances, but they that give themselves to
the holy consideration of the works and word of God, and are fervent, and
frequent in prayer, such are in the eye and favor of God, and prevail with
him.

It is a short and sweet prayer of David, let me commend it to you, say it in
your hearts often to your God.

Support and hold me with thy free spirit. Psalm. 51.12.


2 When we know the name of God, our next duty is to be zealous of the glory
of this name, for else we do not sanctify it as we ought.

Take heed that we do not speak of it vainly, that we do not blaspheme it
profanely, that we do not swear by it, but when we are lawfully called
thereto, that nothing in the world be more precious in our estimation then this
name of God: for God is our blessedness, and the fullness of our joy here, and
reward hereafter, his name is glorious, and they that have no other Gods but
him, will with their souls seek him, and in thought, word, and deed, they
will honor his name.

But God may complain of the great want of this zeal, even in his Church,
amongst those that make confession of his name. For the common swearing by the
name of God, and the ordinary idle naming that holy name, vnholily with long
custom of evil doing, is grown to such an habit of sin, that few of us
do lay it to heart as we ought.

We do neither refrain from this injury to the name of our God, our selves,
nor seek to reform it in others.

But where the zeal of Gods glory is truly kindled, it both consumes all this
evil in our selves, and it flasheth out to the combustion of it in others.

For that we pray in this petition, that the name of God may be hallowed, not
only by our own sanctification of it, but by the preparation of others for
it, the provocation of others to it, and the reformation of others as much as
in us lies, who offend against it.

This zeal then of the name of God does require of us, both a conscionable
care of the glory of Gods name, within our selves expressed in thought, word,
and deed: but with it a charitable care of our brethren, that we admonish them,
and reprove them if you hear them at any time speak irreverently of the name
of God.

Remember the word of Gods Commandment: Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart: Lev. 19.17.
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor: that thou bear not sin for him.

Observe that place well and therein note.

1. That if a brother, that is, any man or woman, with whom we do converse,
does do any thing to the dishonor of Gods name, we must not presently hate
him for it as Gods enemy. Therefore he is called our brother to endeare him to
us.

2 That we must severely rebuke him, which is expressed in the Hebrew phrase, in
rebuking thou shall rebuke him.

3 This must be done, as to a brother in love of thy neighbor, showing him the
right, and conuincing of evil.

4 Note the danger, least thou bear sin for him, that is, least thou make
his sin thine by thy silence.

Psalm 141.5.
Reproof is Oleum Sanctorum, let the righteous smite me, and reprove me, says
the Psalmist: it is balsamum amicitiae, it shows true love, and therefore
must be performed very discreetly, the Hebrew Doctors say, Leniter, and molli
Lingua, let us take heed of putting our brother to shame, till it come to Dic
Ecclesiae, and thou spare him not, that he may be ashamed and repent him of his
sin.

3 The next duty is to sanctify God in thy life, that is, confess him with
thy mouth to be holy, believe him to be so in thy heart, teach others that he
is so, and let thy godly conversation testify of thee, that thou seruest him
so, that the name of God be not evil spoken of for thy sake. For they be Gods
enemies, Psalm. 139.20.
that take his name in vain, the Psalmist says.

It is to no purpose to pray daily, that the name of God may be hallowed, if
our life and carriage, our words, and works do dishonor God.

Therefore let this petition of ours to God, remember us of Gods command to us
Sancti estote: the very Idols of the Heathen had that honor done them, that
the Law went for them, Deos cast adeunto.

And if servants must Count their Masters worthy of all honor, that the name
of God be not evil spoken of: 1 Timothy 6.1.
much more must we esteem our heavenly father worthy of honor, least he be
violated in his name.

This Sanctifying of God in our life, extends to the use of his good
creatures, our food and raiment, our dwellings, and such like riches of Gods
mercy when we do

1 Preserve them from abuse,

2 Employ them to the end for which they are ordained of God, and bestowed on
us.

3 When we receive them with thanksgiving, praising the name of God for them.

4 When we suffer the want of them with patience, learning as well how to want,
as to abound.

I conclude this point, Consider how the name of God suffers, without the
Church by Turks and infidels, that worship a God without a Trinity, by Jews
that deny Jesus Christ come in the flesh, by all the barbarous nations of the
world, who have their several Gods, by Papists who rob God of his glory,
giving it to images. By Anabaptists and Schismatikes, that serve God in
separation, by the profane of the world. There are but few left to hallow his
name, let them do it well.

2 Petition. Thy Kingdom come.
When we have provided for the honor of the name of our heavenly father that
that may be believed and confessed to be holy, and that due reverence may be
given by us to it, our next request is for the advancement of the kingdom of
God upon earth.

This is another addition to the glory of God our father, when we desire that
he may reign sole Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth, and that none may rise
up against him.

For our better understanding of this petition, we must consider.

1 What is meant by the kingdom of God. 2 How we would have this kingdom
come. 3 What duties we are taught here.
1 What is meant by this kingdom.
The Kingdom of God is three fold.

1 Regnum potentiae, 2 Regnum gratiae. 3 Regnum gloriae.
1 Regnum potentiae.
In the first we consider God as the Almighty Creator, maker of heaven and
earth, and the high possessor of all that is in them contained, as the mighty
governor and protector of his creatures applying them al to his service and to
the good of each other.

So he is called King of kings, and Lord of all Lords; of this the Psalm.

The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven, Psalm. 103.19.
his kingdom rules over all. A voice from heaven told proud Nebuchadnezar
that his kingdom was departed from him, and that he must be humbled with great
judgments.

Until thou know that the most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives
it to whom soever he will. Dan. 4 32.


This proves him a liar, who told Christ, Luke 4.6.
showing him the kingdoms of the world, All this power will I give thee, for
it is delivered unto me, and to whom soever I will, I give it.

For indeed the Lord is king, and he does whatsoever he will, in heaven and in
earth and in all deep places.

Under this universal dominion, he has subject to him all Creatures, Angels
and Men, and Devils, heaven and earth, and hell, nothing is in being, that is
not in subjection to this universal Monarchy.

2 Regnum gratiae.
This is Gods special power, and goodness in the government of his elect
people: the throne of this kingdom is his Church, Judah is his Sanctuary, and
Israel his dominion.

The subjects of this kingdom are the faithful people of God, to whom he
speaks by his Prophet. Zeph. 2.3.
The meek of the earth which have wrought his judgment, who seek
righteousness, and seek meekness, Mal. 3.16.
all those that fear the Lord, and think upon his name.

The Laws of this kingdom, are the holy Scriptures and these are called often
the kingdom of heaven, in their Ministry, for by them the glory and power of
Gods kingdom is declared on earth, and they are The rod of his mouth. The arm
of God by which he directs and aweth all his subjects.

Therefore the Scepter of this Kingdom is called Sceptrum iustitiae.

This Kingdom of God is

1 Outward, in the visible profession of the same faith, and conjunction in one
body of a Church, and so all that join together in the one worship of the same
God, professing to be ruled and governed by his holy Laws, are the visible
kingdom.

2 Inward in the hearts of all the elect people of God. And so Christ says,
Luke 17.21.
Behold the kingdom of God is within you, For God reigns in the hearts, and
consciences of all his chosen by their faith, and obedience, and love, and this
kingdom is not meat, or drink, but it is

Romans 14.18.
Righteousness, Peace and joy in the holy Ghost.

1. Righteousness, that is, the justification of his subject by faith, whereby
Christ is made to us of God righteousness, because the righteousness of
Christ is imputed to us.

2 Peace, for the Gospel of the kingdom is called the Gospel of peace,
because it fills us with peace of conscience, in the assurance of the pardon
of all our sins: and it gives us a love of outward peace in the Church,
knitting us so together with the bonds of love, that as much as in us lies, we
desire to have peace with all men.

3 Joy in the holy Ghost, for where righteousness and peace dwell, there is
all spiritual joy. The voice of joy is in the Tabernacles of the righteous,
for having once tasted how sweet the Lord is, then the soul delights in the
Lord.

Then the Statutes of God taste sweeter then honey, or the honey comb, they are
more precious then all manner of riches, they are the very joy of our hearts.

Then the feet of them that bring us glad tidings of peace, are beautiful.

Then the house of Gods worship, is the place of our delight; we will beg of
God that we may dwell there, where his honor dwells.

Then we shall love the holy assemblies, and be glad when it is said to us, we
will go up to the house of the Lord, our feet shall then stand in the gates
of Gods house. And the assembly of his armies will seem to us to be in perfect
beauty.

Then we shall call the Sabbath of the Lord our delight, and we shall make
conscience of doing our own will, upon Gods holy day.

Then shall we be weaned from the immoderate love of the world, and
contentedness shall meet with godliness.

Then shall we find and taste sweetness in afflictons, and perciue it good for
us that we have been afflicted, and shall rejoice in our sufferings for Jesus
Christ; so then the kingdom of grace is two fold.

1 General in the whole body of the Church, where Christ reigns King, being
head of his Church, to guide it with his wisdom, to save and defend it by his
power, to Sanctify it by his Spirit.

2 Particular in every elect member of the Church, where Christ reigns in the
conscience, and hid man of the heart, governing and protecting, and teaching,
and sanctifying the same to himself.

3. Regnum gloriae 1 Nostrae 2 Dei.

This is that heavenly inheritance of the Church which Christ has purchased
for all the faithful, 1 Norstrae.
of which our Savior says. Fear not little flock, Luke 12.38.
for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. And of this is said,
Math. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the world.

Of this David says.

Psalm. 17.15.
I shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness; and before.

Psalm. 16.11.
In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand, pleasures for
evermore.

This is a place of glory.

1 In respect of the holiness of the subjects of it, for no unclean thing can
enter into it; it is called Ciuitas sancta.

Isay. 4.3.
He that is left in Jerusalem, and he that remains in Sion, shall be called
holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem.

verse. 4.
When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Sion, and
shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof, by the
spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

2 It is a kingdom of glory because all the subjects of it are stripped out
of all their infirmities, and made like to the glorious Angels of God.

Yea the Scripture tells us more, that we shall be like to Christ, because we
shall see him, as he is.

More it says, that our vile bodies shall be like his glorious body.

Eternal health, eternal joy, perfect, and full knowledge, blessedness which
shall never be taken away from us, and a full and final abolition of all our
wantes.

Here is that Crown of righteousness, and the reward of faith and the
purchase of our Mediator.

Here we are subjects and Kings, our subjection is a royalty, for we reign
with Christ, and the adoption of children is so complete in heaven, and in
glory, that like the Elder son in the parable of the prodigal, all that our
father has is ours.

The kingdom of grace is the way to the kingdom of glory: it is the suburbs
of this abiding city.

The kingdom of grace, is that kingdom which Christ exercises in his Church
here, and which he delivers up to God his father, when the kingdom of glory
comes, of which the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 15.24
Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even
the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and power.

For he must reign till he have put down all his enemies under his feet. 25


Then shall the son also himself be subject to him, 23.
that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. 2. Dei.


Where the Apostle shows the utter cessation of the kingdom of grace,
swallowed up of this kingdom of glory.

This place of the Apostle is notable, and contains points of deep
consideration.

1 Concerning Christ's delivering up of the kingdom, we must know that Christ
is King, as God and man, and so is the head of his Church, and this kingdom
he holds by virtue of his office, as he is Mediator between God and man,
and when that work is accomplished in the fullness of his glory of the elect,
then that kingdom must cease, and be given up into the hands of the Father,
who gave him the administration thereof, for the gathering together of the
Saints, and for the bringing of all the elect to him.

2 When he says that Christ shall deliver up this kingdom to his Father, let
no man conceive that the Father was all this while out of his kingdom, and is
now by the Son restored at last to it. For as the Psalmist. The Lord is king,
be the earth never so impatient, and he sits between the Cherubimes. But
the kingdom of God is opposed by sundry enemies, and he has committed the
vengeance of his enemies to his Son, who when he has subdued all the enemies
of his fathers kingdom to him, then shall the kingdom of God appear in full
glory, and there shall be none left to oppose it, or to rise against it.

3. Where it is said that the Son himself, by whom all the enemies of this
kingdom shall be subdued, shall then be subject to the father: this reuealeth
a double mystery of grace to the Church.

1 That the Son having finished the office of his Mediatourship, between God
and man, shall not lay down his humanity with it, for when it is said that the
Son shall be subject to the Father, that cannot be in respect of his
Divinity, for so he is equal to the Father, he must therefore continue man
still.

2 The use of the humanity of Christ retained after the accomplishment of his
office, and the delivery up of the kingdom of his Father, is another gracious
mystery, for he remains still the head of the Church, and that is the knot of
our union to the Father, for Christ has a double Office.

1 One of reconciling the Church to his Father.

2 Another of confirming and establishing the Church in this glory.

He draws us to him by his word, and by his spirit, that he may reconcile us,
and so he presents us to his father without spot or wrinckle, and confirms
us in that state both of favor and glory, by maintaining our union with him,
for which he keeps, the hypostaticall union eternally undissolved.

Indeed that Hypostaticall union of the Divine nature, with our humanity, is
not complete, in absolute perfection, till we be one with him, as he is with
the father, which he prays for. Ioh 17.


And therefore the Apostle calls the Church triumphant, The fullness of him
that fills all in all; Ephesians. 1.23.
for when he has drawn all to him, and made them one with him, as he is one
with the Father, then there is that perfect (...) which he desires, and no
opposition left to resist or disturb it for ever.

Then the father is declared universal King, and his glory is revealed without
any Eclipse, all the clouds which obscured it, are removed, and all the
enemies of it utterly confounded, Then is he both revealed and confessed The King
of glory.

Now you have heard how many sorts of kingdoms God has, the next question is,
which of these kingdoms we pray for, that it may come.

And here I wonder that I find great interpreters, both ancient and modern,
at some difference, some understanding the petition of one, others of another
of these kingdoms, but the solution is easy, and it is work for another day
to resolve it.

To clear this question of which of these kingdoms this is meant, Solution.
one objection is made that these three first petitions of this prayer, by
consent of most interpreters, are to be referred wholly to the glory of God,
and concern God only, from whence it is concluded, that we pray not here for
the kingdom of grace by which God rules in his Church at large, and
particularly in the souls and consciences of the faithful, for to pray so, is
to pray for our selves.

And the same is alleged for the kingdom of glory, which God gives to his
chosen, for they say to pray for the coming of that, is also to pray for our
selves, and for our own future glory.

And for the first, which is the kingdom of Gods power, by which he rules
the world which he has made, that is thought not to be here meant, because
that kingdom has ever been come, since God began the world, begun in the
creation, and proceeding in the conversation and gubernation thereof.

Therefore it is concluded that no other kingdom here is prayed for, but the
last of Gods full glory, when Christ shall have subdued all his enemies under
his feet, and shall then himself be subject to him, when God shall be all in
all.

To which objection my answer is, that the ground of this dispute is false and
fallacious, that only the glory of God is desired in the three first petitions,
without respect had at all to our selves.

For in the first petition when we desire of God, the hallowing of his name,
do we not desire that it may be hallowed by us? and therein we do as well
beg our own sanctification to that holy service, as the special honor of
Gods name; for as I have showed the name of God will be glorified in despite
of all opposers, but it is sanctified only by such as are holy.

So in this second petition, we exclude not our selves, though we seek the
glory of God, we do withal seek our own glory in it, therefore I am not
carried with the strong stream of our later writers, though of reverend
memory in the Church of God, to shrink up this petition to any one of these
above mentioned kingdoms, but I shall ever in my devotions comprehend them all.

1 We desire the coming of the kingdom of Gods power, in the general
government of the world, for though that kingdom be come already in part, yet
it may be more declared to the world, then yet it is, and it must be exercised
with the continuation of the world, yet more and more, and that we pray for.

For how many nations and languages of the world yet are there, who though they
do confess some deity whom they pretend to serve, yet they are not come to
this knowledge to believe and confess that The Lord is King. The coming of
the Kingdom of Gods power to these may declare him King of kings, and Lord of
Lords.

Though the Devil could not catch the Son of God in this net, he has
prevailed with many to make them believe that he is the supreme Monarch of
this world, and that all the kingdoms of the earth are at his dispose, which
makes many go to the Devil, for the kingdoms of this world, though some
ouer-weaning the Popes temporal power by which he claims a Monarchical
supremacy over the kingdoms of all the world, have sought to him for such
high preferment.

For the Pope stands as stiffly upon the claim of all the kingdoms subjection
to him, as the Devil does. They are all given to me, and to whomsoever I will
I give them.

Therefore I pray, let thy kingdom, O Lord, declare it self, and let the
Devil and the Pope both know and learn the lesson which thou taughtest proud
Nabuchadnezar, that, Dan. 4.32.
The most high rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will. Let all the nations of the earth know, that these two great impostors,
the Devil and the Pope do gull their credulous deuotoes, for neither of them
has any thing to do with the kingdoms of the world, God has reserved that
supremacy of right in regno potentiae ejus.

Lord let that kingdom come, Amen.

It is the phrase of David.

Before Ephraim and Manasse, stir up thy strength, Psalm. 80.2.
and come and save us.

Psalm. 145.10.
All thy works shall praise thee O Lord: and thy Saints shall bless thee.

11
They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

12
To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious Majesty
of his kingdom.

13.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout
all generations.

This Saint Augustine understands of the kingdom of Gods power, for he
says, in it appears quam potens deus qui fecit terram, quam potens qui
impleuit terram bonis qui dedit vitam animalibus, semina terrae etc.

David speaks of this kingdom.

Psalm. 97.1.
The Lord is King, let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of Israel be glad.

Read on and you shall see, that he speaks there of this kingdom of Gods
power, and have we not good cause to pray that this kingdom may come, which
brings such joy to all the earth, such rejoicing to the multitude of the Isles.

2 We desire the coming of Gods kingdom of grace, whereby his Son reigns
in our hearts and consciences, for so we shall be made fit and able to hallow
the name of God, and thus Saint Ambrose says, De Sacram. ^.4.
Tunc venit regnum dei, quando ejus estis gratiam consequuiti.

By the coming of this kingdom the light of Gods truth is set up in our
understandings, and the fire of Gods zeal is kindled in our affections, from
whence arises an utter abnegation of our selves, a contempt of the world in
our affections wholly stooped to the subjection of Christ, and a clear
revelation of the truth of God, in our understanding, by which it is freed from
all errors of judgment, and rightly informed in Credendis, in agendis, in
petendis.

And herein we seek and ask the glory of God, for how can we honor him more
then by desiring that he would advance the kingdom of his Son in his
Church, and in all the hearts of his elect severally: we also desire of God,
our own good, withal that we may be subjects of this kingdom, that his
Son may reign within us. For this he says, My son give me thy heart. Give
it me that I may make it the seat of my kingdom, that I may set up my throne
in it. And we say, take it O Lord, we yield it up unto thee, reign thou and
rule in it, say thou of my heart, say thou of thy Church, Here will I dwell,
for I have a delight in it.

3. There is yet a further request in this petition, for the kingdom of Gods
glory, that which God gives in reward to his chosen servants, let that
kingdom come.

Wherein, first we seek the glory of God; for the subjects, and faithful,
and loyal vassalls of a king, are the glory of his Crown.

In these God is glorified, both in his power and wisdom, and holiness, and
justice, and in his mercy, which is above all his works; this mercy does keep
within the pale and fense of his kingdom of grace, and none but the subjects
of that kingdom drink deep of it; this is the marrow and fatness of Gods
house, that oleum laetitiae wherewith the electare anointed from top to toe,
and it is not given in fullness of measure heaped up, and pressed down, till
it be made complete in the kingdom of glory: Then the glory of God is full in
his triumphant Church, his communion of Saints.

2 We seek our own good in this petition, for this is our summum bonum, this
is the gift of God to us, the glory of his bounty, the crown of
righteousness, by which we are just by Jesus Christ, in the sight of God.

This is that immensumpondus gloriae, the prize of that high calling, for which
we forget that which is behind, and stretch, and strive our selves to that
which is before, running with patience the race that is set before us, and so
running that we may obtain this the reward of our righteousness, the crown of
our rejoicing, the salvation of our souls.

This we beg not so much for our own sakes, that we may be made glorious, as
for the name of Gods sake, that that may be glorified in us, and by us.

And that this is properly also desired in this petition, this proof may
serve: this is that kingdom for which the elect were elected, and this is the
full accomplishment of Gods grace to us, and glory in us; this is the kingdom
provided for Gods Saints, from the beginning of the world. This is the hope and
expectation of all the just: and no question our Savior would not leave this
out of our prayer, and it is desired but by consequent in any other petition,
therefore no question it is included in this, the words, the sense, the matter
do all bear it, for all that hallow the name of God on earth, are promised the
inheritance of this kingdom in glory, and what God promises, we may boldy
ask of him, for he has said, Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it.

Lastly: there is a kingdom of Gods glory, which he reserueth to himself, and
that is his final conquest of all his enemies, and the bringing of all things
in subjection to him, which we have great reason to desire that the glory of
God may be co^pleate, as in us his Saints so in himself, the holy Saints in
heaven do pray for this kingdom, Even so come quickly Lord Jesus, 2 Timothy 4.8.
They desire it that he may deliver up his kingdom to God the father, that God
may be all in all.

And the provision of the former kingdom of glory, is for all such as love the
appearing of God in that kingdom, wherefore we have cause to pray for the
coming of that Kingdom.

So are the faithful described, looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, Titus. 2.13.
and our Savior Jesus Christ.

This is that glorious appearance of God, which we pray for, and which the
souls under the alter, do hasten by their prayers, wherein God shall be all in
all.

Therefore of all these kingdoms, do I understand this holy petition.

Let the kingdom of thy power, the kingdom of thy grace, thy kingdom of our
glory, thy kingdom of thine own final and full glory come.

2 How we would have this kingdom come.

We must therefore know that though the kingdom be the Lords, and he rules over
all. Yet there be enemies, that advance themselves against these kingdoms, and
they not flesh and blood only, but powers and Principalities: Such make war
with God, and usurp dominion.

Our prayer therefore is, that as Moses rod did devour the rods of the
sorcerers, so the kingdom of God may destroy all contrary usurpation or
opposition.

1 The kingdom of Gods power on earth, is opposed by many enemies.

1 Satan takes upon him to be the Prince of this world, and makes many
believe that he has power to give kingdoms where he lists.

2 The Pope usurps dominion over all Princes, and gives out that God has set
him in the world over the nations, and over kingdoms to root out, and to pull
down, Ier. 1.10.
and to destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and io plant. Blasphemously
applying to himself the power which God gives to his Word, in the Ministry
of the Prophets.

3 There is imperium peccati, of which the Apostle says, Romans 1.21 22.23.
When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkened: professing themselves
wise, they became fools: and changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into
an image made like to a corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed
beasts, and creeping things.

Rom 5.14.
4 There is imperium mortis. Death reigned from Adam to Moses. That is, before
the law was written; much more has death reigned since the law published, for
the strength of sin is the law.

Death came in by sin, and has dilated an empire over all the earth, that we
see daily what desolations it makes in the same. It is appointed to al men
once to die.

2 Concerning Satan Christ says,
Romans 16.
The Prince of this world is cast out: and Saint Paul says. The God of peace
shall crush Satan under your feet shortly.

And when we pray, Let the kingdom of thy power come, we pray that God would
destroy the kingdom of Satan, and cast him out, and tread him under our
feet, that God may reign abroad gloriously in the world.

2 These. 2.4.
2 Concerning the Pope, he is that Antichrist, that man of sin, the son of
perdition, of which the Apostle speaks, who exalts himself above all that
is called God, or is worshipped, so that he as God sits in the temple of
God, showing himself that he is God.

8.
But it follows, that, The Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming. 9.
Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders.

Therefore when we pray, that the kingdom of Gods power may come, we pray that
God would be pleased to appear in power against this usurper, and deluder of
his subjects, to destroy him, that he may no longer infatuate and befoole the
world, with an opinion of his power or holiness, but that he may be revealed
as he is a man of sin, full of subtilty and the child of the devil, as Simon
Magus, his predecessor, and the true founder of his impostures, was.

3 Concerning sin, the Apostle has advised, Romans 6.12. verse 14.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that you should obey it in the
lusts thereof,

He has also comforted us again, Romans 6.6.
Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace.

We pray therefore, that God would exercise this his power against the
kingdom of sin, that the body of sin may be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. For the Dominion of sin does teach men to resist the
power of God and to say, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos; it teaches man to be
proud and cruel. David.

Lord how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?

How long shall they utter and speak hard things: Psalm. 9^.3.
and all the workers of iniquity b^ast themselves?

They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, 4
and afflict thine heritage.

They slay the widow and the fatherless, 5
and murder the stranger.

Yet they say, the Lord shall not see.

Sin, is a dominearing and daring tyrant, so that we have cause with David
to awake the justice of God against it.

O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, O God to whom vengeance belongs,
show thy self.

Lift up thy self thou judge of the earth, render a reward to the proud, and
that is our adveniat regnum tuum.

4 Concerning death, which makes such havoc in the works of God, God has
said, O death I will be thy plagues: Ose. 13.14.
O grave I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.

And this is that we pray for, let thy kingdom of thy power destroy death for
ever, that we may insult over it, saying, O death where is thy sling, O grave
where is thy victory?

We pray God to take his rod of iron into his hand, and to break in pieces all
the rebels to his kingdom of power here on earth.

2 Concerning the kingdom of grace.
1 We pray that that kingdom may come, that is, that God would declare his
Son the king, and Sovereign Monarch of his Church, and that he would rule
therein by his Word and holy Spirit.

2 That God would advance the kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, in the hearts
of all his elect people severally, that they may live in the knowledge, love,
faith and obedience of him.

1 And this is a most necessary petition to be put up often to God in regard
of those enemies which do oppose this domination, and seek to dethrone the
Son of God in us.

2 And in regard of those necessary graces, which are wanting in us, and can
by no other way be supplied, but by the advancement and establishment of that
kingdom in us.

1 For the enemies of this kingdom.
1 The great enemy of the Church is Satan, the Prince of darkness, that
great red Dragon in the Revelation, that watched the woman with child, Rev.
12.4.
to devour the fruit of her womb, as soon as it should be borne: this is
the Devil persecuting the Church of God, the fruitful mother of the elect,
whose issue we are.

This is he that corrupted our first parents in Paradise by his temptations,
and having sowed his seed of all iniquity in them, defiled the whole nature of
mankind, and made it obnoxious to the curse of the Law.

And when the second Adam came to accomplish the remedy of that fall, he
persecuted him by Herod in his infancy, that he was to be carried into Egypt
for refuge, and after his Baptism he tempted him in the wilderness forty
days, and this Prince of the world set many a work to bring him to the
Cross, he came himself to him with a new assault a little before his passion,
as Christ himself confessed, but he had naught in him of his to work upon.

This Lion goes about continually compassing the earth, seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist, says Peter; our way of resistance is to pray, Adueniat
regnum tuum?

2 The world is an enemy to this kingdom of Christ, for Christ says; The
world hates you, because you are not of the world, that is, the wicked sons
of disobedience, who are called filij saeculi huius.

Under this title of the world, I comprehend all the open and secret enemies of
the Gospel, The Pope, here we will give him the first place, because his
scarlet vesturs are died deep in the blood of Gods Saints, and he cares not
to destroy Christ's kingdom, to advance his own, usurping that power in the
world in the name of Christ which himself did not assume, who said; My
kingdom is not of this world.

The Turk, the Jew, and all the Barbarous nations of the world, who live in
the dark, to whom the precious light of the Gospel has not appeared, all
profess hostility to this Gospel of the kingdom, that we may say of it, as
the Jews said to Paul, Act. 28.22.
As concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.

But these professed enemies of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, are in open
hostility against the Church, and proclaim wars to it; they are the forces
of that great king who came against that little city in the book of the
preacher, and besieged it, and built bulwarks against it, we can expect no
better from them, then force and fury.

There be secret enemies, Wolves in sheep clothing, whose close malice does
put us into more danger and fear, these hide themselves within the Church, and
carry a semblance of brethren, and they are

1 Heretics, that corrode and fret the holy truth of the Gospel with their
false doctrines, and blasphemous and impious assertions of untruths, to
mis-lead the ignorant into error, and to corrupt their judgments.

2 Schismatikes, that disquiet the peace of the Church, and disturb the order
and ranks of Gods well ordered armies and disfigure the beauty of holiness,
setting us together by the ears, and ferme^ting the mass of Christian
charity, with their gall of bitterness, which they maliciously infuse into the
body of that city, that is compact together.

3 Hypocrites, which put on Religion as they do fine garments for show only
and personate piety, to make the world of opinion, that they are holy, whereas
all their Religion and holiness is in the eye: those are but the outsides of
professors, and their works deny and blaspheme the faith, of which their
mouths and tongues do make formal profession.

Against all these we pray, that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ may come to us,
to reveal to us the light of Gods truth, to establish peace and concord
amongst brethren, and to declare the true and unfeigned Religion which
consists in the sincere service of our God; for where this kingdom is
thoroughly established, there truth and peace, and sincerity do show their
faces, and lift up their heads, and are exalted by all the subjects of that
Kingdom.

3 Our natural corruptions are enemies to this kingdom; the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the law of our members resists the law of God; there
is ventus ab orient, which brings into us whole armies of Grasshoppers, and
Catterpillars: that is, a corruption from our birth, which spanneth in our
understandings, with multiplicity of fantastical opinions, and various
distraction of our thoughts, and fills the inferior part of the soul, with
many unlawful desires, and unquiet longings for things forbidden, whereby our
affections are troubled and corrupted with unjust appetite of things forbidden.

Against these also we pray, in the coming of this kingdom, that God would
rule in our understandings, to instruct us, and that God would rule in our
thoughts, to limit them, and keep them from all wandering and distraction, and
that he would rule in our affections, to bridle and restrain their looseness,
to correct their rebellion to the spirit of God, to awe them to the obedience
of God, and to sanctify us wholly both in our bodies, souls, and spirits,
that neither in thought, word, nor deed, we may grieve the holy Spirit of God,
by whom we are sealed up to the day of our redemption.

So that in this petition we pray against the dominion of sin in our mortal
bodies, against the pollution of sin in our immortal souls, against all
spiritual and carnal wickedness, that the brightness of Christ's kingdom,
may drive away the darkness of Satan's kingdom in us, that he would enter
into us by his grace, and bind the strong man, Satan who possesses us by his
power, and cast him out in his justice, and abide in us by his mercy: For so
shall no iniquity have dominion over us.

What need we have to pray for this, as Christ prayed, with strong cries, we
may easily discern, for when we look about us, and behold what horrible sins
are afoot in the world, even all the works of the flesh Adultery
lasciviousness, Gal. 5.19.
Idolatry, Contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murder, drunkenness, and
such like, all which are the precious stones in the Diadem of Satan:

When we see how much those are despised that walk conscionably, and fear
the profanation of Gods Sabbath, by doing their own works on Gods holy day,
and fear the blasphemy of Gods holy name by an oath, and would feign put off
the very garment that is spotted with the flesh. When we see the proud esteemed
happy, Mal 3.15.
and them that work wickedness set up, yea them that tempt God, delivered:

When we behold corruption in courts of justice, oppressions of the mighty,
persecutions of the poor and weak; Simony, bribery, extort on, trades of
living; swearing, gluttony, drunkenness, filthy speaking, sins in fashion;
There is no hope to help all this, but by the coming of the kingdom of grace,
to pardon these tra^sgressions, to convert these transgressors: for this great
King is able to set up a light in our understandings to inform us in the
truth, and to shed his love in our affections, to knit us together both to
himself and to one another of us.

3. regnum gloriae.
3 Saint Cyprian has a good caution upon this petition. Continua oratione opus
est, ne excidamus a regno Coelesti: this does bring in the Kingdom of glory
into this petition. This is our maine ambition; to be heirs of this heavenly
Kingdom: and S. Cyprian says; Cauendum ne excidamus a regno Coelesti, sicut
Iudaei. For it is an heavy saying of Christ. And I say unto you, Math. 8.11.12.
many shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.

But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, etc.

By the children of the kingdom here he means the Jews, the seed of
Abraham, to whom the promises of this kingdom came, and to whom all the means
for attaining this kingdom were tendered: so that being then the visible
Church of God on earth, they were in a kind of possession of the kingdom of
heaven, but lost it by their disobedience, and so left a way open for many to
come from the East and West, that is; for the Church of the Gentiles to come
in, even in their place, and now till Plenitudo gentium be come in, there is no
promise of the restitution of the Jews, ad viam regni.

It is a good note of Saint Cyprian, quando cessauit in eis no men paternum,
cessauit et regnum: When they gave over hallowing of the name of God, God
withdrew his kingdom from them, and cast them off.

This shows how earnestly we had need to fix our hearts on the hallowing of
Gods name, that we may be bold to ask of him, and may believe to obtain of
him the desired coming of his kingdom.

Concerning the enemies that we have to hinder our settingforth, and
progression to this kingdom of glory, they be all the same which would hinder
the coming of the kingdom of grace; for the way of grace leads us to
glory; Satan by tempting us here and by accusing us to God.

The world partly by fascination of us, leading us into an ouer-loue of things
temporal: partly by persecuting of us with many afflictions and vexations of
life.

Our own body of sin being like tinder, ready to take fire from the least
spark of carnal suggestion: all these lay themselves in our way, to hinder
our passage to this heavenly kingdom.

Against which we pray Adueniat regnum tuum, that is, O Lord let none of our
enemies prevail so far against us, as to hinder the salvation of our souls.

2 It is needful to pray this in respect of the necessary graces of God which
we do naturally want, by which we are made members of that holy commonwealth
which is subject to the Kingdom of Gods grace, and made capable of the
kingdom of Gods glory.

These graces of God are partly outward, partly inward and Spiritual.

1 Of the outward.
1 These are the liberty of the Gospel, that we may freely profess Christ,
and openly avow his holy worship, and keep his Sabbaths and holy days, and
our public meetings in the house of God: there was a time when David was
forced to fly, from the angry face of Saul, and escape for his life, then he
bewaileth this as his most heavy oppression, that he was banished from the
Tabernacle, and might not come to the meetings: of the holy congregations, he
has a psalm of purpose for that complement. Psalm. 84.


Therefore we are much bound to God for this holy liberty of his house and
service which we enjoy under the pious government of our King, and in this
petition we pray that this liberty may be maintained and enlarged to us, and
evermore continued, that the free use of the ministry of the word, and holy
Sacraments may be established in our Church, and that the Lord of the harvest
would furnish his work with worthy and able laborers in this harvest, for the
perfiting of his Saints.

And consequently that God would remove all hindrances to this light, either
arising from the opposition of such as are professed enemies to it, or the
wickedness, or insufficiency of such as by their weakness and unworthiness,
or by their idleness and unprofitableness, or their ungodliness, and
iniquity, may hinder the free course of the Gospel, or bring a scandal upon
the Church of God amongst us.

Further we pray for the efficacy of our Ministry in all those that are
partakers thereof, that God would thereby enlighten the understandings of all
our congregations, that his name and service may be known to them, and that
they may not live in darkness in the sunneshine of this glorious light of
truth.

That when wisdom preaches they may not walk as fools; when truth
preaches, they may not believe lies; when faith preaches, they may not live
in infidelity; when holiness preaches they may not live in all sensual
uncleanness, walking in the way of their corrupt lusts in all abomination, to
the provoking of God to anger against them.

The inward means for the advancing of this kingdom of God, here desired, is
the holy Ghost creating in us new hearts, and regenerating us to a godly life,
and establishing us in the same.

Christ promised to send this Spirit into his Church, to abide with it, for him
forever to instruct it, to be a remembrancer to it of all things that he had
said to it.

To strengthen it against errors in doctrine, to sanctify it against
corruptions of lusts, and fortify it against the principalities and powers
that oppose it, to comfort it in spiritual and temporal grieuances. So
Adueniat regnum tuum, is as much as, reveal to us that spirit which thou have
promised to supply thy room in the perpetual regiment of thy Church, and let
the holy Ghost govern us, This then is the suite. Adueniat regnum gloriae
nostrae.

We pray for the coming of the kingdom of Gods glory, which is the
consummation of our happiness, as if we would answer Christ; he says, It is
your fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom; We cry, Lord let it come.

Where our desire of the coming of it does express our expectation of his
coming to give it to us, our love of his coming, and our longing desire of it:

The reasons why we desire this coming of it, are.

1 Because God has revealed to us so great a mercy, laid up for us, and
reserved in the decree of his good pleasure, and we may bouldly ask it of
him, for his commandment is, Ask and receive.

2 Because God has promised us the gift of it, and we may boldly claim all
the precious promises of God in our prayer; promise is our warant.

3 Because God has revealed to us, that he will shorten (...) days of the
troubles of his Church, for the elect sake: We pray therefore for the hastening
of that time according to his good pleasure.

4 Because we have great examples of this prayer both in earth and in heaven.

Romans 3.22.
1 Of the whole creature, which groaneth and trauaileth in pain together with
us.

Where instead of praying for this aduent of Christ's kingdom, there is The
earnest expectation of the creature waiting for the manifestation of the Son
of God.

For the whole creature has a promise to be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, 21.
into the glorious liberty of the children of God.



2 Of the elect of God here, for that follows: 23.
And not only they, but our selves also which have the first fruits of the
spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for our adoption,
to wit, the redemption of our body.

3 We have help in these our groans, from the spirit, 26.
teaching us as we ought to pray for this. Likewise the spirit also helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered.

2 In heaven.
The souls under the altar of them that were slain for the word of God, and
for the testimony which they held. Revel. 6.9.


They cry with a loud voice, saying, how long O Lord, holy and true, do thou
not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth: and they have
their petition answered. That when the number of these Saints is fulfilled,
then this kingdom shall come.

4 Regnum gloriae dei.
The coming of this kingdom, is the full consummation of Gods glory, both in
his gracious mercy to save his Church, and his upright justice in the final
confusion of all his enemies.

Then shall our glory be full, when God is all in all, and reigns absolute
sovereign, without any eclipse of glory, by the interposure of opposition.

These are the full contents of this petition.

3 What duties we learn from hence.
The proper duties arising from hence, do concern us, 1 In our reference to
our God. 2 In the regard of our selves. 3 In regard of our neighbors.


1 In our reference to God.
1 That we seek and labor to advance the kingdom of God by all means, that
God may exercise his power and grace, and mercy, and glory, freely and fully,
and that neither our ignorance, nor infirmity, nor iniquity, may obscure his
glory, or resist his government; knowing for what we were made, that we might
be temples of the holy Ghost, that Christ might rule in our hearts by faith,
that we might glorify God in our bodies, and in our souls, because in our
creation he gave us a perfect being, and in our redemption, he accomplished a
full and perfect restitution of us to his favor, and to all those full
benefits which follow the same; namely, that Christ is made to us of God,
wisdom, justification, sanctification, and final redemption from all sin
and punishment.

For this, what shall we render to the Lord, is not this a debt that we owe to
him, to seek the advancement of his glory, all that we can, and to set forth
his praise?

2 In regard of our selves.

1 It is our duty to live like subjects of this kingdom, that is, humbled
under the mighty hand of God, to the obedience of his will, and stooped under
the correcting hand, with patience to bear his chastenings, though for the
present they seem grievous.

Contented with the state of life, and the proportion of Gods allowance to us,
for we resist his government, and repine at his administration of the world, if
we be not content with that which he bestows on us, resting upon his holy
providence in the use of lawful means, for godliness and contentedness must
be joined in us, and our hearts must not fasten upon things temporal, but we
must look before us to the full reward which God has laid up for us.

2 Seeing we live under the kingdom of Gods grace in which we have the liberty
of that holy means, by which we may grow up to be perfect men in Christ Jesus.

We must not turn this grace of God into wantonness, by abusing it to our
own perdition, but like thriftie Merchants, make the uttermost of these holy
commodities: that is,

Of the free liberty of the Word and Sacraments, and of the house of God and
his Saints; of the ministry of the Word, and the holy writings of learned and
pious men, set forth for our further building up, to be an house for the Lord.

Not in surfeiting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying, this is not the way to heaven. New creatures.

3 Seeing we live in expectation of the kingdom of Gods glory, our duty is to
observe and remember our latter end, and to consider that our whole life is our
way to this kingdom; let us therefore hasten toward it, to meet it coming
toward us: this was Jobs holy Meditation, All the days of my appointed time
will I wait, Job 14.14.
till my changing shall come.

And when death shall come, let us know and believe that it is no more but a
translation from death to life, and Transitus ad Regnum.

4 Seeing we pray for the coming of Gods glory, that he may reign over all;
let us while we are here, begin an heaven upon earth, by praising and
magnifying the name of the Lord, and practice the new song of the Church here,
that being admitted into the Quire of the just, we may not cease night and day
to glorify him in heaven, where we shall be able to do it more fully and
perfectly.

5 Let us consider that there is no such way to make happy our temporal life,
as to live thus in the humble subjection to this kingdom: for who shall harm
you if you do that which is good? godliness has the promises of both lives,
and all things turn to the best to them that love God.

3 In regard of our neighbors.

We must seek to draw one another to Gods kingdom, Is. 41.6.
like those in the Prophet. They helped every one his neighbor, and every one
said to his brother, be of good courage.

Ezech. 18.30.
So the Lord: Repent and turn others from their transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your ruin.

Isa. 2.3.
And many shall go and say, come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we
shall walk in his paths.

O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord: this
kingdom does not breed jealousy, here is enough for all.

LVC. 11.2. Thy will be done; as in heaven, so earth.


3 Petition.
Observe the coherence of these petitions, which are martialed with such
excellent wisdom, that the first of them is the end which we aim at, that
God may be hallowed in us, in his holy name, and so have from us the honor due
to him.

And that this may be effected in us, we pray in the second petition for the
advancement, establishment, and enlargement of Gods kingdom, both of power,
grace, and glory.

And now in this third Petition, we pray that this kingdom of God being
erected amongst us, we may by his grace live in due subjection to it, that the
Church militant in earth, may honor him, even so, as the Church triumphant
does in heaven.

In the handling whereof, 1 We must understand what is meant by the will of
God. 2 Quid hoc est facere. 3 How this will is desired to be done, as in
heaven, so in earth. 4 What duties are taught herein.


1 What is this will of God.
The will of God is understood two ways,

1 As it is in it self, by which he intends, creates, 1 Quod Deus vult.
governs, and disposes all things according to the good pleasure of his
will, and so the will of God is both absolute, necessitating all events, which
he has foreseen and determined: and of that the Apostle speaks, saying,
who has resisted his will? and of that, Christ says, fiat voluntas tua: and
of that, those holy servants of God spoke, who when they could not dissuade
Paul's going to Jerusalem, they ceased, saying, Acts 21* 14.
The will of the Lord be done.

2 The will of God is understood to be that manifestation of his service, and
our duty, 2 Quod Deus vult nos vel^e.
which directs us what to do, and what to eschew, what to believe, and what
to ask according to his will, and this is written and revealed to us in holy
Scripture.

I dare not with our many English Writers, upon this Petition, quite exclude
the absolute will of God, and limit the Petition only to the will revealed in
his Word, yet. I confess that if it were to be carried by voices, the most of
the Interpreters that I read, go this way.

1 I fear to abate any thing of the full contents of the words, or to shrink
up any of the breadth of them, so far as they may be dilated to Gods glory.

2 Seeing of all hands it is agreed, that the glory of God is especially aimed
at in these three first petitions, which Master Calvin does well call primam
tabulam orationis Dominicae, having indeed, reference to the first table of the
Law. I see that the extent of this Petition, to both the secret and revealed
will of God, does best accomplish that address.

Let thy absolute and secret will take place in all things according to the
royal dignity and high command of thy kingdom of power, and let thy will be
done by us according as thou have revealed it in the laws of thy kingdom of
grace.

2 What is meant by doing this will of God.

1 The absolute and secret will of God is done upon all creatures; so it is
said of him, He has done whatsoever he will: and so this Petition is a
submission of our selves to the same will of God, both in our own persons, and
in all things else whatsoever.

That when God shall by events declare what his will was, we do humbly present
our selves to it, and rest content with it, not murmuring and repining at it,
knowing that God does all things for the best, howsoever humane judgment might
conceive some other way better.

There is great reason to make a petition of this, for many things succeed
according to this absolute will of God, that cross us and our desires, and we
could have wished them otherwise, both our judgments esteeming, and our desires
affecting some other way.

When death takes the husband from the wife, the father from the children, the
Master from the family, upon whose life their maintenance and supportation for
the necessaries of life depended.

When some sudden fire in a few moments of time deuoureth the fruits of many
years labors, and turns a man's whole estate into ashes, that none is the
better for that which perishes,

When shippewrake, or the swallow of the sea at once deuoureth both the lives
and goods of many that might have suruiued, and remained both to the general
use of the commonwealth, and the particular benefit of private estates.

When Thieves and Robbers secretly invade the goods of their neighbors, or by
strong hand strip them out of all that they carry about them, and perchance
thereby do either utterly impouerish their estate in the robbery, or violate
their bodies with stripes and wounds to disable them, or take away their lives
from them,

When sickness comes and weakens the labourer that he cannot work, and
disableth any from the execution of his duty either in his own private, or
in the common affairs of state.

When a foreign enemy inuadeth our land, and lays claim to all our labors
with, Haec mea sunt, veteres migrate Coloni.

These, all these be frequent effects of the absolute will of God, and, coming
to pass, we know that God would have it so, the will of God is therein
revealed, the motives and reasons inducing him, the uses and ends by him
intended, are to us unknown, they may as Saint Augustine says, seem to us
sometimes strange and severe, but they are always just.

We have no fence against the vexation and sorrow of these sad events, but to
rest our selves upon the will of God, and to say in submission and prostration
to it, fiat voluntas tua.

In this acception of the will of God, these words are an humble contentedness
with all that God does, and they are a prayer to God to give us a passive
obedience, that we may embrace with thankful cherefulnesse all that God will
put us to.

This is the duty of our full subjection to this supreme Monarch, whose
kingdom we pray for, we know that there can be no error or injustice in his
administration of this kingdom, for he does al things by a power, that is
managed with wisdom, and sweetened with goodness and mercy, and seasoned with
equal justice.

2 For the doing of the will of God revealed to us in the holy word of God, we
pray first that the kingdom of God may come, which is the kingdom of light by
which we see what is the will of God, acceptable and perfect, and then we pray
to God for active obedience that he will give us grace, to do that which is
good, and which he requires at our hands, according to his will.

We have great need to make this arequest to God, for of our selves, as of our
selves we are not able to think a good thought, And there is none that does
good, no not one, all corrupt and abominable.

All the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts are only evil
continually.

The worst is, so it is with us, and we cannot help it, if to will be present
with us, we fail in performance of good.

Ier. 10.23.
Holy Jeremy confesses it. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in
himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps: We have a great
example in our first parents, who in the state of perfect nature embraced
temptation, and forsook the obedience of the revealed will of God in one easy
commandment.

How then can we hope, whose nature is corrupted with so many sins, to
maintain any fit correspondence with the holy will of God revealed in so many
great Commandments. Primam Magnum, and secundum simile. Nature is now so sick
of that reluctance to this will of God, that the Law of God which should be the
bridle to hold us in, is become the spur to put us on into all kind of evil,
as the Apostle says; The strength of sin is the Law; So strong is our
weakness against the will of our God.

Nec nos obniti contra, nec tendere tantum Sufficimus. And as Medaea said,
Trahit invitos noua vis, aliudque cupido, Men's aliud suadet.

We shall see our selves best, in the glass, the clear Crystal mirror of
the holy will of God, to which he requires our active obedience. For this will
of his is revealed to us.

1 In the 2 Tables of his Law which contains the rule of works.

2 In the holy Gospel which contains the rule of faith.

1 For the first, The will of God concerning our obedience to his Law.

1 This will of God begins at our conversion; we are by nature strangers
and aliens from the commonwealth of Israel: therefore God calls upon us for
our conversion to him.

Christ complains of such as refuse him, They will not come to me that they
may have life. The Prophet declares this to be the will of God. Say unto them,
as I live says the Lord, Ezech 33.11.
I have no pleasure in the death of the, wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way and live, Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye
die, O house of Israel?

Math. 18.14.
So our Savior, It is not the will of your Father that is in heaven, that one
of these little ones should perish.

To declare this to be his will, he rose early to send his Prophets, to his
people to convert them to him.

And our Savior in the Gospel does resemble himself to that good shepherd
that went into the wilderness to seek a straied sheep, to bring it back to
the flock, and to the woman that lighted a Candle and swept her house, and
sought diligently till she found her lost groat; Both of them made merry, when
they found what they had lost. Such joy God has in the conversion of a sinner.

When a profane person becomes holy, when a covetous person turns liberal,
when a drunkard becomes sober, and a glutton temperate, when a swearer fears
an oath, and a lier loves the truth, when a breaker of the Sabbath, is glad
when it is said to him, Come let us go up to the house of the Lord, and
answers them, My feet shall stand in thy gates, O Jerusalem.

When an oppressor turns merciful, and a proud man humble, and a contentious
man quiet and peaceable; this is as God would have it, and this is joy to the
Almighty, and the Angels of heaven rejoice in it, for this is the will of God.

But in the contrary our sins do grieve the holy one of Israel; grieve not
the spirit of God, our sins do ouercharge him, he complains that he is
like a Cart ouerladen with sheaues.

Our sins put him into a storm of indignation, therefore our conversion is
his will.

2 Seeing out conversion begins at the abnegation of our selves, that also
is the will of God; he that will be my Disciple, says our Savior, must
forsake all and follow me, Sua suos, se, as Saint Bernard, and none is
acceptable according to his will, but he that is a new Creature.

This makes a perfect conversion and this incorporateth us in the body of the
Church for God does not will our forsaking of our selves and renouncing of the
world, for our hurt and loss, but for our greater good, that he himself may
be our rock, and fortress, our refuge and exceeding great reward.

3 The will of God is our obedience to his holy laws which he has given us,
as his covenant, that in keeping of them it might go well with us. His own
mouth has revealed his will in this point.

O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep
my Commandments always, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
that it might be well with them and with their children for ever. Wherein God
is not a severe exactor of more duty, then we are able to perform, but
requires our best endeavor to do his will, and takes that for pay. Neither
does he will this to make profit to himself of our obedience, but for us, that
it may be well with us and our children for ever.

4 The will of God is our holiness in this obedience, that we purge our
Conscience from dead works, that we may serve the living God. That we possess
our vessels, that is, our bodies in holiness, for they be Vasa animarum, a
treasure in earthen vessels, of great price: immortal souls in mortal bodies.

For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, 2 These. 4.3.
he gives the reason of it.

For God has not called us to uncleanness but to holy(...)

And this was figured in the washings and purifications of the old law, and
directly commanded by God, saying.

Be ye holy as I am holy.

But ye are a royal Priesthood, Gens sancta.

2 The will of God concerning faith, is that we believe in him, and trust him;
they that know thy name, will trust in thee; that we cast all our care upon
him, that we believe in him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ, and this also for
our eternal good. For so says our Savior.

Ioh. 6.40.
And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the son
and believes in him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. This is the law of faith, and it is the law of life. For it is
written; The just man shall live by faith.

How needful this petition is, that the will of God may be wrought in us, this
way by faith, we may soon see.

1 If we consider our natural infidelity, for the natural man is so far from
believing; that he has not the understanding to discern those things which
belong to the spirit of God, neither can he, says the Apostle, for they are
spiritually discerned. And without faith it is impossible to please God.

This infidelity must be purged, before the will of God can be done by us, and
till this be purged, the very preaching of the word, the means ordained by God
to beget faith in us, seems foolishness.

For it is as much labor lost to preach spiritual things to a man that has no
faith, as to urge natural reasons to a man that has no wit, for neither of
these vessels be open to receive any of this precious liquor stopped with
ignorance and unbelief.

2 We have reason to ask this of God, because faith is his gift, and though he
suffers us to acquire it by little and little, by the hearing of the Word,
yet the word of God is not any better then litera mortua, in it self, except
the holy Ghost do work by it, to beget first, then to nourish and increase our
faith.

3 Because as Saint Cyprian observes well, Nobis a diabolo obsistitur, quo
minus per omnia noster animus, atque actus deo obsequatur, and therefore he
adds.

Vt fiat voluntas dei anobis, opus est voluntate dei; i. e. open et protectione,
quia nemo suis viribus fortis est.

This is a potent adversary, and has both his temptations to allure us, and
his provocation to vex us, we had need crave aid against him, and God has
laid help upon one that is mighty to give us help, we had need pray for faith
to fasten our hold upon that help.

If either by fight or flight we can put him off, and lay hold upon the horns
of this altar, sub hac indulgentia et misericordia (says Cyprian) tuti sumus.

This enemy has a great advantage of us, because of the treason of our own
wills; for nothing is more prone and propense to evil then the will of man, and
there is nothing in man, that man loves more then to have his will, even the
regenerate man finds his will wilful often, and unruly still: We had need
to pray for the will of God to put in, to correct and direct our wills.

3 The manner how we desire this will of God to be done, As in heaven so in
earth.

The 3 first petitions that are addressed mainely to the honor of God, end at
these words; and therefore some have conceived that these words have their
several reference to each of the three petitions and are not a proper appendix
to this alone, but to the rest.

Hallowed be thy name, in earth as it is in heaven, so in the two following.

I approve the necessary implication of it in them all, but I take it where I
find it, and it is a full Sicut, a complete example.

For in heaven are the Angels of God, and David says of them, faciunt
voluntatem ejus, and there are the souls of just men made perfect, and now,
and ever since his ascensio^ there sits at the right hand of God, he that
taught us to pray this prayer: Who came into the world of purpose to do the will
of his father that sent him, he continues the office yet in heaven: A mediator
making intercession to the Father for his Church, and a mighty protector,
sending his Angels as ministering spirits, for the good of them whom he has
called of purpose.

So that the example is full, Jesus Christ, the Angels in what difference so
ever, of rank or degree; the souls of the just, who are also tanquam angeli
dei, all these obey and fulfill the will of God in perfect obedience to the
uttermost, of what is exacted of them: We pray fiat sicut.

2. Cor. 9.7. 2 Col. 3.23.
That is not (...) grudgingly, but as Saint Paul says (...) as to the Lord who
knows when he has service that is due to him.

1 Willingly.
1 They do the will of God willingly, that is their meat and drink, as Christ
said of himself here, they have no body of sin to resist them, they have no
flesh to oppress and burden them: no temptation can fasten upon them, they
always behold the face of God, attending upon him to be commanded by him.

2 Speedily.
2 They are expressed to us as having wings, wherein the holy Ghost does declare
to our apprehension the quick readiness of their expedition in the service of
God. So let Gods will be done on earth speedily. So David.

Psalm. 119.60.
I made have and delaied not to keep thy Commandments.

3 They do the will of God first, 3. (...).
for indeed they have nothing else to do: here on earth we have many
occasions for the necessities of the body, to entertain time and endeavor,
and God is so tender of our necessities, as to dispense with his law in
compassionate support of them.

But the Angels and heavenly spirits have no other business in heaven, but to
attend the will of God, and to do it at first, their nature is so perfectly
divine, that they are only governed by the will of God, there is nothing
concerning themselves to be desired, but the advancement of Gods kingdom over
all.

4 They do the whole will of God in full obedience. 4 Fideliter. Psalm. 103.20.
For David says, They do Gods Commandments by obeying the voice of his Word.

That is the right way of obedience, to be directed by the voice of the Word of
God, and to do so as he commands all that he bids.

Here note that this Sicut, does not imply aequalitatem, that we should
perform it in the same fullness of perfect and complete obedience as they do,
which is impossible for them that dwell in houses of clay, and who carry about
them, Corpus peccati; but qualitatem, and similitudinem, so far as in holy
imitation we can follow them, as Iulus followed Aeneas.

Sequiturque patrem non passibus aequis. This is the heroical spirit of the
elect of God, they are thereby carried toward perfection, and what they fail
either in act of obedience, or in endeavor of service, that they supply with
feruencie of holy desire, and God hears the desires of the poor.

This is further helped by our grief of heart and holy sorrow for our
weakness and holy indignation, against our iniquities that hinder this
obedience, and holy carfulness to amend it, and holy prayers to God to assist
our endeavor herein.

2 Peter. 2.8.
It is observed of Lot, when he labored the conversion of the Sodomites, that
his righteous soul was vexed from day to day with their unlawful deeds.

This also pleases God, that our hatred of sin in our selves and others do
declare that we seek for the fullness of obedience, that the will of God may
be fulfilled according to the great example of heavenly service.

4 What duties are taught here.
1 We must labor for the knowledge of the will of God, Romans 12.2.
so says the Apostle, That ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable
and perfect will of God.

That is first concerning the secret will of God, we must know that it is
absolute, not to be changed by God, not to be resisted by man, but implicitly
to be yielded unto, although we know it not, we believe it does decree all
things out of wisdom and Counsel, with justice and goodness, and all for
the best, and when God shall by events declare it to us, we must know that God
is to be praised and thanked for it.

How therefore we must remember in our devotions to refer our petitions to
this absolute will of God, so that our petitions must be with reservation of
that will, saluo semper decreto diuino.

For so Christ prayed his father to take the cup of his passion from him, he
has warrant from the following petition to pray against all evil, and against
Satan the suggester of it. Libera nos a male.

But because it pleases God for some just motives in himself to determine the
exercise of the patience of his Church in afflictions, or for some other reason
always just, though often secret, to let that evil come upon us against which
we pray, therefore our will in this stoopeth to the absolute will of God, with
that exception of our Savior; Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from
me; nevertheless, not mine, but thy will be done. Luke 1^.42.


Seeing this secret and absolute will of God is within himself, the Saints of
God by a general warrant for prayer for all things needful, do go to God
often for such things, as in that free and absolute will he has decreed not to
grant: and this may be done without sin in the faithful, and without
preuarication of this unrevealed will of God.

So we pray for the peace of Jerusalem, that is, the Church of God, when yet
God may find it fit in his wisdom to send the sword amongst them; as we see
in the Churches of Bohemia, both the Palatinates, and the French Protestants.
God has declared his will to us in that which they have suffered, and in that
which as yet they endure under the Popish tyranny of those Iesuited Princes by
whom the religion and truth of God is oppressed.

Yet we pray still for their deliverance from the hand of their enemies, but
neither disliking the effects, nor doubting the wisdom, nor quarrelling the
counsel of God in this decree, but submitting to it.

So we pray often for the recovery of our brethren and sisters from sickness,
the return of our friends from long voyages, the prosperous success of our
affairs: yet God has sometimes decreed against these, yet we may pray
without sin in all these cases.

We find great examples hereof, for the Prophets, Moses himself, have prayed
to God against his will when he has declared it, and when God has sent the
Prophets, they have both threatened in the name of the Lord, and yet exhorted to
repentance and prayer to divert the judgment menaced. Abraham for Sodom:

David prays for the life of his child, which was appointed to death, and so
much Nathan told David before.

Christ, who came of purpose to taste that cup, and knew that his fathers will
was that he should drink of it, yet does pray the Father to take it away.

Which he did

1 Partly to express the heavy sufferings that he was to sustain for our
sakes, that we may know we were bought at a dear rate, and an high price was
paid for our redemption; for it is applied to Christ by the Fathers, and
fulfilled in Christ.

Lam. 1.12.
Have ye no regard all ye that pass by the way! Consider and behold, if ever
there were sorrow like my sorrow, which was done unto me, wherewith the Lord
did afflict me in the day of the fierceness of his wrath!

No man can tell, the Angels of God would feign know all the ingredients in
this cup which Christ did deprecate.

It is best left with admiration and wonder at it, with due consideration of
it, as the bitterest cup that ever was tempered by the hand of God, not so much
for the bodily passion, as for the inward pangs and convulsions that the soul
of Christ suffered for the sons of his Church.

2 For our example to warrant our prayers against all evil, for though we
know that the hand of God will smite us, and though we be resolved with
patience to bear it, 2 Samuel 25 26.
saying with David; Lo here I am, let him do to me as seems good in his
eyes.

Yet we may lawfully pray, reserving our submission to the will of God, that
this cup tempered of purpose for us, by the decree of God, may be taken from us.

Herein we oppose not the absolute will of God, but we oppose the evil, malum
poenae, which is against us, and contrary to us.

3 For comfort in afflictions, for Christ praying his Father, though he
prevailed not in the maine matter of his suit, ad transitum calicis, yet he
sped another way, for in his agony, when there was fire in his bones, which
melted him that he swet water and blood, Luke 22.43.
There appeared unto him an Angel from heaven, strengthening him.

For our sakes, that we may see the fruit of our prayers, which though they
prevail not for full deliverance from afflictions, yet they may speed for
comfort in them, and strength to bear them.

Therefore it is a blasphemous assertion that one of our nouellists vented in
print, that Christ did directly pray against the will of his Father.

This clears the question, in my judgment; our first duty is rightly to know
what may concern us in the point of Gods absolute and secret will; that is,
that the absolute will of God is, to turn all things to the best to them that
love him: so far we may lawfully pray against that which God has secretly
decreed to do, that his will may be done upon us for our good, and his glory.

We deprecate only that evil that may corrupt either our wisdom, faith, or
patience, which is not properly to pray against the will by which this event is
willed, but against the sting of it.

And so Christ prayed transeat amaritudo calicis, but even that with
reservation of his fathers will, entire and unresisted.

2 There is required of us also knowledge of the revealed will of God.

The Mine of this treasure of heavenly knowledge of the will of God, is holy
Scripture, which Christ bids all men to search, and which are profitable to
make the man of God perfect, absolutely perfect in all good works.

These the holy ghost has recommended to us with all kind of holy indulgence,
and favor, and the blessed man does exercise himself herein day and night.

To assist this work of knowledge of his revealed will, as he has opened the
book of his will to us, the holy Bible, so he has opened the doors of his
house to us for our meetings: and therein he has ordained and established the
Evangelical Priesthood of the new Testament, for he sends forth Ministers of
his gospel to Preach the same, and he furnishes them with his holy
instructions, directing them what to say, and he gives them their errand: then
he opens to them the door of utterance, that he may declare his will in their
mouths, to his Church.

Then he opens the understandings, and moves the affections of the hearers
to receive the word of Gods will, both in Scientia and in Conscientia.

For how can the will of God be done there, where it is not known nor
understood. Surely they had no mind to do the will of God, that cried nolumus
scientiam viarum tuarum.

And they that neither study holy Scriptures, nor good helps in use for the
understanding thereof, nor come to Church to hear there what is good, and what
God requires at their hands, or hear there without profit, not heeding or
observing what is taught; all these have not the care nor conscience of doing
Gods will.

They may give over praying, that the will of God may be done, that care not
for the knowledge of his will.

It is said of Christ, by his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justify
many. Is. 53.11.


1 Either scientia qua scit, for he knows who are his, and none are
predestinate to this life, but whom he

2 Or Scientia qua scitur, for they that know him and the virtue of his
resurrection, will trust in him. Saint Paul esteemed all things as dung in
respect of this knowledge.

This is life eternal to know thee.

It is a vain hope that some have, that their ignorance of the will of God,
will be pleadable for excuse of their disobedience to it, for this may tempt
some to live in ignorance, to go their own ways, and to extenuate their
sin in the day of their account.

To put that pretense out of countenance,

1 Know that ignorantia affectata is a most heinous sin it self, and it
abateth nothing of the judgment due to all the sins that are committed in it.

Noluerunt intelligere vt been agerent: this is the will of God which all know,
that God who would have all men to be saved, would have all men come to the
knowledge of his truth. and we are renewed in knowledge to the image of God.

And God has sent his Son to give knowledge of salvation; they that will be
dark in so clear a sunneshine, show that they love darkness more then light.

These despise the means of grace, and they treasure up wrath to themselves.

2 They must know that all unaffected ignorance in those things that we ought
to know of the revealed will of God, which is rather called nescientia, then
ignorantia; If it do excuse, it is not a toto, but a tanto: for the servant
that does not know his Masters will, and yet does things worthy of stripes,
Luke 12.48.
shall be beaten with a few stripes.

The reason is, because he has not used the means to know so much of the
will of God as is revealed, either by the law written in his heart, or by
outward means.

Quaest. ex utroque test. qu. 67.
Saint Augustine is as favorable in the case of ignorance as may be, saying,
Ille ignorans potest excusari a poena, qui a quo disceret non inuenit.

Observe yet he says, potest excusari a poena, not a culpa; for he has said
elsewhere, quod ignorans quisque non recte facit, and quod recte volens facere
non potest, ideo dicuntur peccata, quae de peccato liberae voluntatis originem
ducunt.

Saint Chrysostom, non potest esse excusatio condemnationis ignorantia
veritatis, quibus fuit inueniendi facultas, si fuisset quaerendi voluntas:

We live in a clear light, and cannot plead invincible ignorance: if we do
not know the will of God, it is because we will not know it: Saint Augustine
says.

De verb Dom. ^ 78.
Impia men's odit etiam ipsum intellectum, and homo mente peruersa timet
intelligere, ne cogatur quod intelligit facere.

2 Remembrance.
2 There is required of us, remembrance of the will of God. We must not be like
leaky vessels, which let go as fast as they take in this doctrine of the will
of God, which is a precious liquour. It is a great charge that God lays upon
his people after he had revealed to them his will in his law.

Deuteronomy. 4.9.
Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all
the days of thy life, but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons.

Pro. 3.1.
So Solomon: my son, forget not my law, but let thy heart keep my
Commandments.

Bind them about thy neck, 4.21.
write them on the table of

It is called bonum semen verbi, that does reveal this will of God, it is
great pity that any of it should be lost.

It is neither safe in the ear from which it often passes with the sound, nor
in the understanding, for no intention of desire, nor attention of ear, nor
apprehension of understanding will serve, without retention in memory.

It would save us a great deal of our labor in our ministry, if it were
enough barely to open to you the whole counsel of God, and to preach his will
to your cares and understandings.

Bethink you how long you have been hearers of the word preached, and how
many Sermons you have heard, how many texts of holy Scripture expounded and
applied, and sanctify your storehouse, see what tarries by you, and how much
you have committed to the trust of a faithful memory, that is able to give you
a good account thereof again.

Saint Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.53.
I think it meet so long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by
putting you in remembrance

There is nothing that helps memory better then meditation and conference.

Meditation does call to mind what we have heard, from point to point, and
makes it our own; it is the best entertainment of our priuatenesse, and
retiring, for it keeps our thoughts at home, and fixes them upon that which
is good and profitable for us; for wandering and gadding thought; run
themselves out of breath, and build castles in the air, but meditation does
clip their wings, and keep them from flying away from that vnum necessarium.

1 Meditation does set the memory on work, to bring forth the store that it
has laid up for use, to see that nothing of it be wanting or lost, as Christ
says, Colligite quod superest fragmentorum, ne quid pereat.

A Sermon perishes in the hearing to them that think they have done enough to
hear it, and think no more of it: so one sees his face in a glass, and
forgets presently as the Apostle says, what his feature is. But they that
examine themselves upon interrogatories, when they are alone, what I heard? how
was the text opened? what were the parts thereof? what points of doctrine, what
applications, what proofs? this does make the memory more capable, Heb. 2.1.2
the matter more terrible, when it is called to account. Therefore we ought to
give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard. (...).

2 Meditation does set the understanding a work, for it makes it search for
wisdom, and examine our hearings, to see what we may add to our former
knowledge, or what we must take better notice of, and make more our own then
it was.

And thus we may much better our understanding, not only by our present
hearing, but by comparing that with what we have either heard, or read before,
for the intellectual faculty is operative, if we exercise it, and will
strain it self to reach at an increase of knowledge.

We must be like little children, who when once they have found their feet,
will not always look to have the help of an hand to lead and support them,
but will try how they can go alone: for the understanding is ambitious of
doing somewhat without help.

3 Meditation works upon the affections, for when the reasonable soul of man
has seriously considered of that which the ear has heard, the affection is
presently set a work, either to love, or hate, or hope, or fear, or joy; or
grieve, according to the condition of that matter which we have heard delivered.

Therefore if we have any desire to the doing of the will of God, we must
think upon the word we hear, to remember it, and to meditate therein day and
night.

Conference also does help memory, Conference.
when we speak of our hearings one to another, and reason thereof amongst our
selves.

It is a good sign that the servants have a care of doing the will of their
Master, when they talk of it amongst themselves, and put one another in
remembrance of that which their Master has committed to their care and trust.

Hearing and reading does make a good stock in the store, but conference is a
kind of negotiating with it, for it keeps our hearings in readiness for use
upon occasion, and by conference a man gains dexterity of discourse, to vent
his knowledge gotten either by hearing, reading, or observation.

Hereupon the people of Israel had the charge given them for the better
remembrance of the statutes and commandments of God.

And ye shall teach them your children, Deuteronomy. 11.19.
speaking of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the
way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

And Saint Paul does admonish the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.11.
Wherefore comfort or exhort your selves together, and edify one another, even
as also ye do. This is done by private conference, when we enlighten one
another understanding, when we help one another memories, when we inflame
one another affections, by animating of them in good ways, this is an holy
building up of our selves, and others, in the knowledge, faith and love of the
will of God.

Men do grow excellent in their mechanical trades, by diligent exercise of
them in their own persons, and by frequent conference with such as use the
same course of life.

They that study living books, which are able to read lectures, and to
resolve doubts, and to admit disputation, do learn more speedily, and profit
more compleately then they that only converse with the dead letter of other
men's labors.

The good man that would profit by the word, does with David hide it in his
heart, it is an invaluable treasure, and therefore no part of him but his
heart, fit for the laying of it up.

Yet our Savior, to show that this treasure is not buried there, Math. 12.35.
says, that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
good things.

Which phrase of bringing forth, does agree with this point of doctrine, that
both to establish our own memory, and to communicate the grace that is in us,
it behooves us to speak one to another, concerning the will of God, that
putting that always in sight, it may be the rule of our words and ways.

For does not the unclean person forget that Gods will is his sanctification;
does not the ignorant person forget that God would have all men come to the
knowledge of his truth; therefore remember, and forget not, says the holy
ghost.

3 To these we must add practice by obedience to the will of God, that is,
doing of this will; for by nature there is in us a rebellion to the holy will
of God, and a desire to walk according to the imaginations of our own hearts,
which must be corrected by our endeavor, and striving to live in the obedience
thereof, according to the rule of Gods word.

The law is open written in two Tables, we have them from the hand of God by
the ministry of Moses; read and hear, and study the statutes and ordinances
of God for your good, that it may be well with you, and with your children
after you for ever.

Christ fulfilled this law of God in perfect obedience, not to exempt us from
the obedience of the same to the uttermost of the measure of grace given to us,
but to satisfy the justice of God offended at our preuarication of his law,
and to give us example that we should ambulare sicut ille.

And that the father of John Baptist does well express, vt liberati seruiamus
ei; for there is a double effect of Christ's obedience.

1 It is effusiue, spent in the work of our reconciliation to justify us
before God.

2 It is infusiue, effectual to our sanctification, to frame our imitation to
a conformity to his obedience in all holiness.

They that apprehend and trust to the one without the other, have part in
neither of them, neither can any man say to his own heart, that he has part
in the effusiue obedience of Christ, reconciling him to God unless he have his
portion also in the infusiue obedience of Christ sanctifying him to newness of
life, and imitation of his holy and perfect example.

This law, as you have heard, does regulate not only the outward man from
doing any thing to the dishonor of God, or the wrong of our neighbor, but it
extends to the government of the tongue, that neither evil words may corrupt
good manners, nor idle words may fill up the evidence against us in the day of
our account.

It reaches also to the government of our thoughts and affections, that
neither in desire we embrace, not so much as entertain in our fancy, the
opposition to the law of God, or the declining in any the least obliquity from
it.

Search the law then wherein God shows you what is good, and what his will
is, and do that best to do that will, and take knowledged from this petition
which our Savior puts into your mouth, how apt you are to break this law,
how ready to omit the duties of it, how propense to commit trespasses against
it, that you may crave help from him, who is mighty and able to manage you
against your corruptions.

And because this may seem to you durus sermo, and a task more then you can
perform: let me comfort you, that the commandments of God in all the elect,
have a treble strength.

1 They serve for direction to guide the understanding, so it is said lex
lucerna.

2 They serve for correction to reform the will, and bring it into subjection
to this will.

3 They serve for corroboration, to strengthen us in our endeavor, and to give
us ability to perform in some measure that which is declared to us to be the
holy will of God.

It is a great secret which God has revealed to his Church concerning the
revelation of his will in precepts; for the precepts of God are of three sorts.

1 Precepts of trial. 2 Of conviction. 3 Of obedience.
1 Precepts of probation are such as God does but try obedience withal, but he
means not to put them to performance, as when God commanded Abraham to offer
his son in sacrifice, he did not mean to put him to it to perform it, as
the issue of it did demonstrate.

So Solomon bade to divide the living child. 1 Reg. 3.24.


2 Precepts of conviction, are all the laws which God commands the reprobate
to keep, for he knows that they will not obey them, yet he commands them,
to make them without excuse when he shall call them to account.

3 Precepts of obedience, are those wherewith God gives both light to see, and
delight to obey, and grace to perform his will.

So when God bids an elect person repent, he gives with the precept, the
grace of repentance; as he commanded Lazarus to come forth of his grave, and
gave him life and ability to come forth.

And that we pray here, for that God with the knowledge of his will would give
us the grace of obedience to do it.

Which shows, that prayer is the best means that we can use to obtain this
grace of obedience, to which our own strength fails us, but we can do all
things by the power of his might, who is always with us by his spirit to
strengthen us.

To work this endeavor of obedience, besides the imperious and royal law of
our God, we have the example of heaven, which is here added, to make us lift up
our heads, to look up to that full president of obedience, which is there
given to us in the tenants of the new Jerusalem.

This is the right way of honoring Angels and Saints, not to rob God of his
glory, to give it them by adoration and invocation, as the Romanists do, and
teach, but imitation.

The best examples are most safely imitated, not sicut in terra, for even the
Saints of God on earth, had their infirmities, and aberrations, and though it
would do well if we did follow them, yet their lame and imperfect example is
dangerous, lest we should fasten upon some of their errors, being naturally
apt thereto, but their example in heaven is without any danger; there they are
as the Angels of God, and we have no such way to make an heaven upon earth, as
to maintain the obedience of this holy will of God: for it is not the place,
but the service that makes that to be heaven, that is, a glorious and happy
place. If Adam had preserved his innocence and integrity in obedience, earth
had been the temple of Gods holiness and the sanctuary of his presence, and
the paradise of man's happiness still.

The way to heaven now is the way of obedience, that is, via pacis, and there
is no hope of the coming of Gods kingdom, but to such as live in the holy and
humble obedience of Gods will.

And therefore to reedifie this obedience, let me admonish you to take heed of
sin.

1 In the antecedents and occasions of it, for he that makes conscience of
doing the will of God, must remove all the occasions and inuitations to the
will of flesh; as Jacob, to prevent the Idolatry of his family, took away all
their strange gods, Gen 35.4.
and their eare-rings, and burned them under the oak which was by Sichem.

When Paul preached at Ephesus, many were converted, Act: 19.19.
and it is especially recorded there, that Many of them which used curious art,
brought their books together, and burnt them before all men.

Genesis 39.10.
Joseph, to prevent the evil which he feared, from the temptation of his
Mistress, he both refused her offer, and avoided her company.

2 In the consequents of sin, for sin does leave behind it, some kind of
delectation, especially, sins that accord with our corrupt will, as the
wanton can hardly so be converted to the will of God in sanctification and
keeping his vessel clean, but he will remember the delight of his
uncleanness with some titillation.

The rich man that has mended his heap, or enlarged his walk by sin, can
hardly recover so by repentance, but that he shall sometimes think how dear
it costeth him to recover the favor of God.

The auenger of his own wrongs cannot so put off that sin, but that the
sweetness of his revenge will leave some relish behind it. And he cannot
prevail so perfectly against his angry passion, but that if there be not
vltio, a full revenge, yet there may remain, retentio. Both these precedents
and subsequents of sin, do hinder the course of the due doing of the will of
God, and therefore are to be warily declined, as the Apostle says.

(...) even as much as in us lies, (...), and and grace be asked of God for it.

4 There is also required a patient submitting of our selves to the will of God
when it is revealed to us; that is, fiat voluntas tua super nos; which is well
paraphrased by the Apostle; in whom you have these three duties put in order,
according as I have taught them.

For this cause we also do not cease to pray for you, Col. 1.9.
and to desire that ye may be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding.

That is the first duty of them that pray this petition, to know and inform
themselves rightly of the will of God; to which we have added a Retention of
the same in the remembrance, helped by meditation and conference.

10.
It follows, That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work: that is the duty of obedience, in laboring to
fulfill the will of God, doing that which he commands, and declining that
which he forbids.

11.
To this he adds, strengthened with all might, according to his glorious
power, unto all patience, and long-suffering with ioyfulnesse.

And this being one branch of our petition, that God would strengthen us with
his might, to bear his will with patience, does teach us that the duty
required of us, is,

1 Patience to bear the hand of God.

2 Long-suffering to bear it out.

3 Ioyfulnesse to bear it with comfort, and contentment in it, without
reluctation or murmuring against it, resting in the will of God, as the full
and final answer to all objections that may arise against our patience of it.

Iam. 1.4.
Saint James his precept is, Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be
perfect, and entire, wanting nothing.

And this is the way to perfect the work of patience, which S. Paul does teach
the Colossians. It is an hard lesson, but they which will go in the narrow
way, and enter in at the strait gate that leads to life, must look for no
easier lessons in the school of the Cross.

Flesh and blood does deprecate all evil, therefore to be put to suffer, which
is the doctrine of patience, seems harsh and distasteful.

And because all affliction for the time, is grievous and painful, therefore
when we are in pain, we pray thrice to God, that this evil may depart from us,
as Saint Paul did. But to be put to suffer long, and to continue under the
cross, which is the doctrine of long-suffering in calamities, that goes more
against the heart: all this is against us.

But to rejoice in afflictions, to take them for medicines, to swallow them for
health, and to believe them to be the favors of God. Flesh and blood has
never an ear to hear of this paradoxall divinity, yet patience has not her
work perfect, and wanting nothing, till all these meet in the work thereof.

Patience is not perfect, except it bear all that God inflicteth on us.

It is not entire, except it bear so long as God shall think it meet to
visit.

It is not wanting nothing, yea it is wanting al things, if it want
ioyfulnesse, which through the bitterness of the physic, does taste the
sweetness of health, and through the dark cloud of calamities, behold the
clear light of Gods countenance.

There is nothing wherein the faith of the Church is more tried, then in
suffering the hand of God upon us when he smites us, and in bearing the
Cross of Christ.

Saint James says, that the Trying of our faith, Iam. 1.3.
works patience.

Saint Paul seems to inuert the proposition, Romans 5.4.
for he says, that patience works experience or trial: they are thus
reconciled.

Saint James speaks of trial actiuely, as it is the work of God by
afflictions, trying our faith, and so whilst we are under the rod of God, God
makes proof and trial of our patience, how we can bear what he inflicteth.

Saint Paul speaks of this trial passiuely, as it is the experience which we
have of our selves, and so it is an effect of our patience, because by bearing
afflictions, we do make a full proof of our faith, for it is not faith,
except it be love also, and love suffers all things, and faith works by
love.

They also do reconcile the two Apostles well, who said, that patience and
experience, mutuo se generant, for one is the effect of the other, as one
exemplifies it well; for health is the cause of stirring and exercising of the
body, and again, stirring and exercising of the body, is the cause of health.

And thus it is between hearing and faith, for hearing begets faith, and
faith begets hearing, and between faith and love, for the love of God
makes us believe in him, and trust him, and the more we believe, the more we
love.

This is that patience which testifies of our faith: as in Job, Though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him: this declares that we are subjects of Christ's
kingdom, when the will of this King is received in his laws with obedience,
in his gifts with thankfulness, in his afflictions with patience.

2 But to patience, we must add perseverance, which is called long suffering;
for it pleases God to try the faith and patience of his servants often, with
spinning out their probation to some length of time, to see if any thing have
power over the^ to withdraw them from him.

The best of Gods servants have felt this an hard trial, insomuch that David
often complains, and thinks the time of his sufferings long, and his
visitation sharp; and Job, the great example of patience, for you have heard
of the patience of Job, says the Apostle, yet even Job felt some cold fits of
fear, and some feuorous burnings of impatience, between whiles, though upon
better consideration, he came again to himself, and went on in long-suffering.

If we consider wisely either with what patience God does bear with the many
provoking sins which we commit to his dishonor, or with how long suffering
he expects our repentance and turning to him, we shall the less esteem the
production of our trial: for if God should in just punishment fit vengeance to
the dimension of our sin, we should suffer both much more, and much longer
then we do.

Therefore seeing we find our selves, not under his execution, as guilty
persons to be tortured for our treasons, and rackt for our many rebellions, but
as patients under the cure of a gracious Physician, who puts us to pain to
cure us, we have no cause to complain though affliction gall us for the time,
which we have deserved, should oppress and confound us for ever.

And seeing the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory that shall
be revealed, who would refuse foul and deep ways to go to the crown of
glory that never withers.

3 To perfect the work of patience we must add hereunto rejoicing in our
tribulations.

S. Chrysostom. does well express the difference between striving for a
mortal, and an immortal crown of glory. Those that strive for a prize here
on earth, have no joy till they come to the end of their labors, all the way
to the crown is fear, and care, and much labor and sorrow; but to the Saints
that strive for that immensum pondus gloriae, non minus iucunditatis adferunt
ipsa certamina, and this proceeds from that difference which is between the
servants of God, and the servants of sin. For in the righteous, though there
be a man of flesh which shrinketh at the smart of his sufferings, yet there is
also a spiritual man, who strives against the weakness of nature, and
ouercometh it by the strength of grace, and that hid man of the heart tastes
the sweetness of God in the cup of bitterness, and sees the light of Gods
countenance through the thick cloud of temporal vexations. True it is that all
afflictions are just punishments of sin, and they are in their nature evil,
and it is unnatural to rejoice for them, because they are against us; but to
rejoice in them proceeds from a sense of that divine grace which sweeteneth
them, and makes them wholesome to us, for God is near us in the midst of
them, as S. Chrysostom. says.

Visitat Deus in carcere suos, et ibi plus est auxilij semper, ubi plus est
periculi.

Therefore if thou would have the will of God done by thee and upon thee;
thy duties are, knowledge of this will, remembrance of it, obedience to it, and
patience in it, and this patience must have a perfect work, even to long
suffering of, to ioyfulnesse in all our afflictions.

LVC. 11.3. Petition 4.
Give us day by day our daily bread, or,

Give us for the day our daily bread.


THe three former petitions are framed, as you have heard, to the glory of God,
which is the first and chiefest thing to be sought, and desired by us all; that
glory which is due to his name, that which is belonging to his kingdom in the
revelation of it, in the dilatation and stabiliation of it: and that glory
which is done to God in the knowledge and obedience of his holy will, and in
all godly patience of it.

Now in this fourth petition we crave a favor from God to support nature with
the necessaries of life, that we may be able for Gods service, for though we
do not live here propter corpus, yet we live in corpore; and God knows
whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust, and though to make
the best of our body, it be templum spiritus sancti, yet this temple must be
kept in good reparations lest it fall.

For the better understanding of this petition 1 We must enquire what is meant
by bread. 2 Why we do desire it to be given unto us. 3 Why it is called our
bread. 4 Why it is called daily bread. 5 Why we beg it for this day. 6 What
duties we learn from this petition.


1 Bread.
Bread, as you know, is called the staff of life, for by it the life is
supported, resembled therefore to the staff or pole that stands in the
midst of a tent which stays it up: so this earthly tabernacle of our body
is supported by bread: and therefore the taking away bread from us, is called
the breaking the staff of bread. Leu. 26.16. Ezekiel. 4. 16.5.16.
And so the Prophet Ezechiel calls it, I will break the staff of bread in
Jerusalem.

The reason why it is so called I take from David, who calls it Bread which
strengthens man's heart.

We read no mention of bread till the fall of man, Ps. 104.15.
neither should man, had he stayed in the state of his first innocence, have
needed to have tilled the ground for his food, but the earth had yielded him
fruits for his sustentation without any labor, no more but take and eat, and
the blessing of God upon that ready provision should have supported man.

In the rain of Manna and Quails, the most prepared food that we read of, the
favor of God to his people in the wilderness then was a tange of the curse of
God, for they were to go forth to gather the Manna and Quails, and after they
must dress it for food; and bread is not made without preparation of the earth
for the seed, semination of it in the ground, expectation of the grouth of it,
and the reaping, gathering into the barn, dressing of it for the mill,
grinding of it for the oven, moulding and making it fit for food.

This bread I understand here meant in this petition: da nobis panem. And
though some of the ancient of fathers have extended this name of bread to a
comprehension of the Eucharisticall bread, of which Christ says, I am the
bread which came down from heaven: yet I dare not follow them.

I must confess that I find great Authors divided in judgment concerning
this bread; some only understanding the spiritual bread of our souls,
susteining them to life everlasting; some only understanding the ordinary
necessaries of life.

The greatest show that is made for this interpretation is, that it is not
likely in this absolute form of prayer that Christ would comprehend any motion
for things temporal for the body, but at second hand, and by way of
implication, or consequence, seeing

1 Our Savior has said, Seek ye first the kingdom of God, etc. et caetera
adijcientur.

2 The Apostle says, He that has given us his son, how should he not
together with him give us all things?

And so no need to look after the necessities of the body, but cast that care
upon God.

But I answer with S. Bernard^

De Quadrag. Ser. 5.
Ne mireris quod bona corporis adeo dixerim quaerenda, quoniam eius sunt
corporalia omnia, sicut et spiritualia omnia dona: ab eo ergo petendum, et
sperandum nobis est vnde possimus in eius seruitio sustentari.

We may as probably conceive that Christ teaching mortal men to pray in
corpore, would not suppress their necessary desires for the body.

Others therefore of our ancients, as Saint Cyprian and S. Augustine, do much,
for they do better understand both the bodily, and the spiritual food: yet
Saint Cyprian does make the spiritual food chiefest meant here.

There is an English popish Catechism, Anno 1616:
which goes about in the dark, published of purpose to corrupt the young
beginners in the very beginnings of their learning, by one George Dowley a
Priest; he does understand this petition so, as meant of the bread of Christ's
body, and of our common bread, but principally of the spiritual bread.

I marvel that an ordinary Priest of that Church, dare add any thing to the
doctrine of the counsel of Trent, for in their Catechism set forth by the
authority of Pius 5. then Pope of Rome; this petition is understood and
interpreted of the corporeal food.

And Maldonate a learned Jesuit, does very iudiciously remove the objections
which are made against it.

It is thought, says Maldonate, Object.
that this bread is spiritual, not corporeal, because it is not likely that
Christ would teach us to ask food for the body, before the pardon of our
sins, and our deliverance from evil.

He answers it well.

1 That Christ does not regulate our petitions according to the worth and
dignity of the things therein desired, but rather according to our necessities,
for this is nature petition.

Et natura prius, vult viuere nos, tum been viuere.

2 That this supply does prevent a great many of sins, to which else we might
fall; for if once we have sufficient for nature, with the blessing of God upon
it, and our content with it, it is enough, and we have our hearts more free,
and our own to attend the holy worship and service of our God.

The Trent Catechism does give good proofs, that it is fit and necessary
that we do go to Almighty God for those things which belong to the
sustentation of the body.

Jn ser. Dom. in mont.
Non enim petimus temporalia haec tanquam bona nostra, sed tanquam necessaria
nostra, says Saint Augustine.

Genesis 28.20.
1 That alleges Jacobs prayer, If God will be with me, and will keep me in
the way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on.

Pro 30.8.
2 The prayer of Agur the son of Iakeh, feed me with food convenient for me.

The danger of want, lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain.

1 Reg. 8.
To these we may add Salomons prayer, in the dedication of the Temple, wherein
is mention of all sorts of temporal supplies to be sought in that house, or
toward it by prayer.

All the necessaries of life are here contained under the name of Bread; food,
raiment, health, peace, liberty, and bread being the chiefest of the
necessaries of life, is named for them all.

Deuteronomy 8.3.
So when Moses says, Man shall not live by bread only, all things necessary
for man's sustentation in this life are understood.

And this exposition of the word Bread, here does distinguish this petition
from the former, for all spiritual graces whatsoever, that may concern the
advancement of Gods glory, or the fitting of our souls to that, are
comprehended in the three former petitions, especially that which Saint Cyprian
and S. Augustine do make principal in this petition, that is, the Bread of
heaven, Christ, or, the bread of the Sacrament, or the obedience of the holy
will of God, which Christ calls his meat and drink, for these do all
belong to the hallowing of Gods name, the coming and establishing of his
kingdom, and the doing of his will.

2 Da nobis.
1 We ask this bread of God, which declares him to be the author of this
gift, and the bestower of it upon man.

2 We ask it to be given, not to me alone, every one for himself, but all of
us for all, nobis.

1 We must come to God for bread.
For though he has said in sudore vultus tui comedes panem tuum, which may
make some think, that the sweat of our faces does make this bread ours, and
that our claim to it is from the merit of our labor, which makes it rather
earnings and wages, then free gift: yet if we well consider, we do beg of
God herein, strength to labor for our livings in some honest vocation, and
Gods blessing upon our endeavors, without which we cannot sweat and take
pains for our living.

The eyes of all things look up to thee, O Lord, Psalm. 145.15.
thou give them meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, thou fillest all
things living with plenty.

He covers the heaven with clouds, Psalm. 147.8.
he prepares rain for the earth, he makes grass to grow upon the
mountains.

He gives to the Beast his food, and to the young Ravens that cry.

Man holds these things of God, by the title of obedience on his part, of
favor on Gods part: observe it in the sequence: first, we pray fiat voluntas
tua; then, Da nobis panem; for we have no plea to this favor, but in the way
of our obedience.

God only gives increase to the field, to bring forth corn for the use of
man, and when it is come up upon the ground, he ripeneth it, and when it is
come to an harvest, he disposes it to the use of man; therefore, Da nobis.

None of all the gods of the heathen could do this, he only crowns the
year with plenty.

A fruitful land he makes barren; abundance is from his full hand, and famine
or dearth of victuals, are his rods.

The heathens worshipped them for gods, that were the first ingenuous deuisers
of any profitable invention for the use of man.

Ceres that taught the husbanding of grounds for Corn, and Bacchus for Vines,
Vulcan, or rather Tubalcaine, that was the father of them that wrought in Iron.

Had they known the author of every good and perfect gift, and who it is that
gives bread, they would have gone no further, but Da nobis panem, and have
sought their bread from this father which is in heaven.

2 We ask da nobis, not mihi, this is communio charitatis. The extent of this
nobis is great: for as under the name of bread, all the necessaries of life are
contained:

The King observes it well, that we do esteem our years dear or cheap,
according to the price of corn: so under this personal note, nobis, we
comprehend all men, all creatures that are supported with food.

First, I say all men, even the wicked and reprobate, for though they be never
so ungodly, yet during life on earth, they must eat, and if their own means
and labors be not sufficient to sustain them, our charity must supply what is
wanting, we must not hide our selves from our own flesh: we have all one Our
father in heaven, the common father of our nature; therefore, Da nobis; we
pray to God to feed them also, this is, proximum tuum vt teipsum, though he be
but natura, not relgiione proximus.

I add, that nobis does also include our beasts and cattle that are created
for our use and service, by the feeding whereof we are relieved, who have the
service of their labor, and the flesh of their bodies to ease and feed us;
they must not be left out in this nobis, for these are appurtenances to us.

In the King of Niniuehs edict for a general fast, their beasts were forbidden
to eat or drink, for the sin of man they suffered, to augment their masters
sorrow; and to add comfort to their owners, they must also feed with them,
therefore da nobis does include them as a part of our selves, belonging to us.

The wise man says that

A righteous man regards the life of his beast: Pro 12.10.
we cannot show our care of those helpefull creatures to us better, then in
praying to him for them, who as David says, saves both man and beast.

And even amongst these beasts which are made for the use and service of man,
though some of them be noxious and offensive now to man, rebelling against his
domination, to punish his rebellion against God, yet there is also a good use
to be made of them for man, and to that they must be preserved, they must be
nourished in life, that may be helpful to man in their death.

Thus far do I think nobis in this petition extended.

Give us food, and all things necessary for our own persons, for our children
that are ex nobis; for our brethren that are pars nostri, for our neighbors,
circa nos, for our enemies that are contra nos, for our cattle, pro nobis.

3 Our bread.
1 This bread we are taught to call ours, and we learn it of God himself,
for in the very words of that curse which he put upon man for his disobedience,
he calls it so: for if we sweat for it, and then eat of it, nothing does
more assure it ours in the use of it.

And that is a legal right that we have to it by our labor in our vocation.
The Apostle thinking it just, that he which will not labor, should not eat;
does include it both fic and lawful, that he should eat that will labor.

2 It is called our bread, because it is necessary for supportation of life;
for though man do not live by bread only, yet not without bread, that is,
without fit food; and so all things that we have, are called ours, in respect
of their use for our service.

3 It is called our bread by right of donation, for when it is given, it is
ours; the giving of it to us, does make it so to be.

So Saint Gregory, Ecce and nostrum dicimus, and tamen dari petimus, noster
enim est qui accipitur, and tamen dei est, cum ab illo datur: for we have no
right to it, but by the gift of God, whose hand we open by this petition, that
he may fill us with his plenty.

4 That which we have in gift of God, and in present possession, yet is not
ours, till the blessing of God be upon it, for the possession without the use,
does not make it ours; therefore the miserable wretched man that has
possession of much, and starueth himself with denying the same to his own
use, cannot call his bread his own.

5 They that have and possess bread, that is, all things necessary for life,
have no hold thereof that they may call it theirs, except God keep it and
preserve it for them: it is subject to fire and water, to thieves and robbers;
except God make it ours we may sit to eat, and have the bread taken from our
table, even the morsells taken and plucked out of our mouths, therefore da
nostrum, we pray to God that it may be ours, lest it be taken away from us.

6 We call it ours, because though we have it and keep it, and it abide by
us, yet we may be smitten with sickness, and disabled to take use of it, or it
may be received even into our bodies and we not nourished by it, for that
judgment God also has in his treasures.

They shall eat and not be satisfied.

7 We call it our bread by a special right that only the faithful have to
this and all things that belong to us. Ye are Christ's, and all things are
yours, 1 Cor 3.22.
says the Apostle. They that hold things temporal by this right, have them in
the best tenure, for they have them with the fullness of Gods blessing: the
Lord is their shepherd, they shall want nothing.

8 We call it our bread that we pray for, to exclude panem alienum, for we beg
not away our brothers bread from him, we desire not the bread of fraud, or
oppression, or the bread of idleness, but desire of God that the sustentation
of our life may be with our own bread, without the prejudice of any other, and
that we may be able to live without the hurt of our neighbor, who dwells in
peace by us.

4 Daily bread. Here the word used in the original has bred a question,
(...), for some have rendered it of (...) super, and (...) substantia: panem
superstantialem: and that has put many into the fancy which before I declared,
and disclaimed that this petition is meant of spiritual and not of our
corporal bread.

Many have read it panem supersubstantialem: and even in this land Master
Cambden does give us the copy of the Lords prayer out of the Saxon translation
of the Evangelists 900 year old: in which this petition is thus put up: Vren
hlaf over wirtlic, which is our loaf supersubstantiall.

He produces another translation in the Saxon tongue some 200 years younger,
that is, 700 year ago, wherein this bread is called vrn daegthantican hlaf,
that is, daily bread.

In the reign of Henry the second, 160 years after that, Adrian, an
Englishman, then Pope of Rome, sent the Lords prayer in English translated into
meter, wherein this petition is thus rendered.

That holy bread that lasts ay
Thou send it us this ilk day.
In the time of Henry the third it is thus rendered.

Gif us all bread on this day. In the time of Richard the second, Wicliffe
translated it thus.

Gif us this day our bread over other substance. And this conceived opinion of
a spiritual food here desired comes from the word here used, (...), derived
from (...) and (...).

But Scaliger in his notes upon the new Testament does refuse this deriuation,
and brings it from (...), sequor, following bread, that is, from day to day
give us bread, which he understands bread sufficient, according to that of Agur
the son of Iakeh, which he prays for, panem dimensi, or, sufficientiae. So
that under this word two things are begged of God in this petition.

1 That God would give us the necessaries of our mortal life in a sufficiency.

2 That he would give his blessing with them, that they may serve us to that
purpose for which he gives them, to support nature.

For it is a great distress to want necessaries, but a greater to have them
without their proper use, to eat and not to be satisfied, to wear garments,
not to be kept warm with them.

Thus then we desire God daily to nourish and support us with our food, so long
as we live, that the temples of our bodies in which he is praised may be keept
in good repair, that we perish not either for want of his good creatures, or
of his blessing given to us with them.

So Iun. says that in the Syriake reading of Matthew, desunbanan, the word
here used, does signify panem necessitatis nostrae.

And so (...) may well signify bread added to our substance, and therefore not
to be omitted in our prayer, nor changed for a word of another signification,
quasi (...).

Surely the very life blood of this petition is contained in this word, therein
is the blessing desired, therefore Theophilact reading it panem nostrum
supersubstantialem da nobis, does interpret it, Panem dicit qui substantiae et
constitutioni nostrae sufficit. But he adds the spiritual bread withal;
Corpus aute^ Christi panis est supersubstantialis, cuius esse participes contra
condemnationem precamur.

Thus then I understand this petition, give us the ordinary food of our life,
both in a sufficient proportion to serve our turn, and with thy blessing upon
it that it may serve us to that use for which we desire it, and thou ordainest
it.

5 This day. Christ teaches us to desire this bread only for the present time:
for the body does need refection every day, and every day it must be sought
for of the gift of God, it is not his meaning that we should give over praying
unto God after this day: for he says, When you pray, say, Our father give us
bread for this day; and he supposes that we will pray every day, because all
these things which are here desired of God, are of absolute necessity for every
day of our life.

And therefore this particular notation of time may be annexed to every one of
the petitions.

Hallowed be thy name this day.

Let thy kingdom come this day.

Let thy will be done this day on earth, etc.

And so in the following petitions.

We pray against our sins this day, and for deliverance from evil thi^ day.

6 Let us now come to the duties which belong to those that pray thus.

1 From the word Bread, under which all the necessaries of life are
comprehended, we are taught: that our prayers have warrant to beg the
preservation of our life, and we are directed to esteem life the precious gift
of God, and it is our duty to seek by all good means to maintain it.

The reason is because life is our season for hallowing of the name of God, for
advancing the kingdom of God, for doing and suffering the will of God: They
that desire to do this, must desire to be preserved in life, that they may
do it. So that herein we beg of God life. He asked life of thee, says
David: and David himself does press this petition hard, and often, that God
would preserve his life, to this purpose, that he may glorify God. Ps. 6.4.
Return O Lord, deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercyes sake.

For in death there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give thee
thanks?

So Ezekiah. The grave cannot praise thee: death cannot celebrate thee: they
that go down into the pit, Isa. 38.18.
cannot hope for thy truth.

The living, the living, the living, he shall praise thee, 19.
as I do this day.

Therefore after those petitions that concern the glory of God, this is put,
to teach us to desire life, that we may spend it in the worship and service of
God, this then is David's prayer.

Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: Ps. 119 175.
give me bread, that I may live to serve thee.

This petition for the supportation of life does reprove all unreasonable
afflicting of the body, those that boast of their fastings, and watchings, and
selfe-whippings, as if God took delight in the torments and tortures of our
flesh, do glory in vain; God requires not these extremities, he will have
mercy and not sacrifice, they that destroy their life in zeal of Gods glory,
are called Martyrs of a foolish Philosophy: felons de se, they wilfully
demolish the temple in which God should be praised, and by unseasonable and
unacceptable violence of mortification, they turn this bread into a stone,
this fish into a serpent. Long life is the promise of God in the Law, the first
promise of the second table to such as honor superior authority.

They that destroy the temple of God, them shall God destroy.

Remember this so often as you eat bread, you ask it, and God gives it you of
purpose to strengthen your heart, that when he says, My son give me thy
heart; you may not present him with a dwindled, withered heart, weakened and
infirmed with untimely afflictions, but strong and able for his service.

And make a conscience to bestow the strength of your heart upon him that gives
you bread to strengthen your hearts, that he may think his bread well
bestowed: for he loves not the sacrifices of the lean, and lame, and blind,
and impotent of your flock; the best serves him best.

2 From this name of bread given to the necessaries of life, we are taught that
we have no warrant to pray to God for more then what is needful. The son of
Iakeh does pray against riches; give me not riches: yet many there be that
sell heaven for riches, and exchange God for Mammon, whose damnation sleeps
not.

Many there be who study the back, what shall I put on, not now only what
stuff, but in what fashion, that I may out shine my equals, my betters; they
make Idols of their bodies, and bestow such painting, guilding, and iewelling
of it, as if it were immortal, their back is their God.

Many study what they shall eat, all the inquisitions of rarities and
delicacies that the earth, the air, the sea can afford, are congested into
their catories and kitchins to please their various palates with change of
viands, epicuriously satiating themselves with the marrow and fatness of Gods
good creatures, cramming themselves for the Devils shambles, making their
bellies their Gods, and delighting in their shame.

I deny not but God does open his hand and gives great abundance of all good
things, crowning the year with his plenty, and making the earth not only to
bring forth bread to strengthen the heart of man, but wine also to make his
heart glad, and oil to make him a cheerful countenance, for who can control
him doing with his own as he please, and disposing of it where he will.

But still I say I find no warrant to ask of him any more then the needful
support of life, we may not pray beyond our proportion, food necessary for
life; for therefore do we ask bread of God: to show our desires limited to the
means ordained by him for our preservation.

If any shall dare to pass these bounds, let him remember the fearful
example of Israel in the way of their journey toward Canaan.

They lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, Ps. 10.14 6.
and tempted God in the desert.

And he gave them their request: 15.
but sent leanesse into their soul.

These over dainty palates that are ever longing for delicacies, may make fat
bodies, but they have lean souls, and when they pray beyond warrant, God may
hear them, and may grant their request, but they shall lose by it.

There was a rich man, who living was richly and softly arraied, delicately fed
every day, but he that hears him pitifully complaining out of hell, for a
little cold water, will scarce desire to be in his coat, or to be of his
mess.

1 This teaches us to be content with bread, and to thank God for it, for if
we have but sufficient for life, we have as much as we ask, and so much as
Christ our Master, who teaches us to pray, thinks fit to allow us to ask of
our father which art in heaven.

2 Seeing we find God so rich and plentiful as to open his hand so wide, to
give us more then we ask, exceeding abundantly to some more, to some less.
Let not us, like children, when we have any thing given us, measure the worth
of the gift, by comparing it with that which is given to others, but weigh the
gift in and by it self, and let us admire and praise the open hand of God, who
ouer-doeth our demands, and makes our cup run over.

But because this name of bread does so limit us to the demand only of things
necessary, let me admonish you that there is duplex necessitas.

1 Necessitas rei, which contains only the supportation of life.

2 Necessitas personae, which contains the maintenance of us in our estate of
life.

I conceive that this petition does extend to both these, for,

1 We crave of God all those things without which we cannot live.

2 We ask all those things that are convenient for our estate and rank, that
we may not want the means to support our persons and estate with moderate
decency befitting our degree: but so that if God who lifts us up, and
casts us down, shall think it meet to abase us, and stoop us below the
port and state of our place, that we now hold, we may abate also of our
desires, and be content with such things as are of absolute necessity for
subsistence in life; and therefore

3 We are taught to learn with the Apostle, both how to abound, and how to
want, and may not think much if there be mutatio dexitae excelsi. For in
these things, Jobs lesson is to be learnt, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away; in both, we must bless the name of the Lord.

2 Give.
Many duties are learnt from this word.

1 We are taught to understand and confess our poor and miserable condition,
who in creation, had all things put in subjection under our feet, as David
says, all sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field, the fowls of the
air, the fishes of the sea, etc. and now by sin have lost that right to
these things, which the grace of creation invested us in, and are now so poor
and needy, that we have not bread of our own to sustain us with.

God gave man all these things, upon condition of obedience, that failing, he
has cancelled that deed of gift, and resumed into his own hands, the
possession and power of distribution thereof to the sons of men.

Naked came I into the world, naked shall I return, says Job: we brought
nothing with us into the world, says the Apostle, and here we find nothing
that we can call ours.

The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, they that feel the want of
these things, do pray with appetite and fervor for them, and therefore all of
us, even such as have most, must learn to know their miserable wants and
necessities, they all lie at the gates of God, as Lazarus at the gates of the
rich man, desiring to be satisfied with the crumbs that fall from Gods table,
and except God do both give and bless his gifts to us, we must perish for
want of bread, even they whose Barnes are fullest crammed, whose Winepresses
break with plenty, whose Tables are ouercharged with provision, whose stomachs
are distent with their full feedings: such is our misery, that we all want both
what we have not, and what we have, if God give not our bread.

2 When we say to our father, give, which teaches us to know the right owner
of these things, even he whom Melchisedech calls The most high God, Gen
14.18.
possessour of heaven and earth.

To whom else should we say give, but to him of whom the Apostle says, every
good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, from the father of lights.

If thou go to the earth, and say to it, give me bread, it will answer thee as
Jacob answered Rahel, when she said, Genesis 30.2.
give me children; Am I in Gods stead?

If thou go to the King, and say, da mihi panem, will he not answer thee as
the King of Israel answered the poor petitioner in the famine of Samaria, If
the Lord do not help thee, 2 Reg. 6.27.
whence shall I help thee?

There is no fruit of our praying and crying, till our petition come to this
giver.

Hos. 2.21.22.
I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear
the earth, and the earth shall hear the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and
they shall hear Israel.

There is no giver but he, and all those who on earth do give, are but his
stewards, and give in his name, and for his sake.

When the heathen went to Jupiter for rain, to Aeolus for winds, to Neptune
for safety and good passage at sea, to Ceres for corn, to Bacchus for wine,
etc.

What did they worse, I may say they did not so ill as the Church of Rome now
in the invocation of Saints, for the heathen had not the way to the father by
Jesus Christ revealed to them: his name is now known to us, and the Church of
Rome pretends to know and confess, and honor it; they confess, vnum est
Orco poena, polo gloria, vita solo.

Yet having the knowledge, and of God in the face of Jesus Christ, in some
measure they seek out other benefactors, to whom they say, da nobis.

What difference is there between the heathen women in childbearing, crying
out,

Casta faue Lucina, and the Popish women calling upon the Virgin Mary to help
them in their throws and pangs, as the supreme Midwife of the Church.

So they invoke Saint Sebastian and Saint Roch in pestilence: Raphael in
dolor oculorum; Apollonia in dolor dentium; Michael in war, etc. Is not
this to turn God out of his place, and to give his power of giving all good
things away from him to creatures.

Indeed they have no reason to go to God for any thing, or to say to him da
nobis, because they give not him the honor due to his holy and undoubted
rights.

But Christ our Savior does direct us to whom we shall go for our bread, and
we have none in heaven to repair to, but to him, and none in earth that we
esteem with him, and to him only we say da nobis.

3 This prayer to God to give, does teach us to confess and to depend upon the
providence of God, not only his general providence by which he regards the
whole creature, but his particular providence by which every particular
creature is conserved and supported: it is he that cloatheth every Lily, it is
he that feeds every sparrow, it is he that numbreth all the hairs of our
head.

And though we must labor and sweat for our bread, though we have rich
revenues, and plentiful means for our relief, yet there is no trust to be
given to these outward helps, our help is in the name of the Lord, who has
made heaven and earth.

This providence of God has an eye to behold our wants, has a store of all
sorts of blessings to furnish him with fit gifts to bestow where he thinks
fit: has bowels of compassion to pity our wants, and has an open hand to
distribute his favors amongst the sons of men.

This providence of God is the Barn and Winepresse of the faithful to feed
them, it is their harbenger to lodge them, it is their Physician to heal all
their diseases.

4 This Da does teach us to love the goodness of God to us, of whom our bread
is to be had of gift: what a stir had he in the Gospel to get up his
neighbor at night to lend him some bread to entertain a stranger withal; but
we may come at all times to God, and to pray him to give.

Even they that will give nothing themselves, nor part with a bit of their
great loaf to their hungry brother, but like Na^al, grudge to part with any
thing from themselves, yet they cry upon God to have their bread given to them
by him.

They that sell and make prize of all offers in Church and Commonwealth, and
will not open their mouths in a charitable or just mediation for their
neighbor, but in Judas his tune, quid mihi dabis? yet they come to God for
their bread of gift: this is the cheapest and frankest vtterer of his favors
that ever was, to whom we pray: it is he that says, Isay. 55.1^
Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye buy, and eat, yea, come buy wine and milk without money, and without
price.

2
Wherefore do you spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor for
that which satisfies not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which
is good, and let your soul delight in fatness.



How are we said to buy, and yet to have all these things freely given? but
because we do give up our prayers for our bread, and we buy them with our
petitions, as Christ, petite, pulsate, quaerite. This is more then the holy
father of Rome will say for his indulgencies and pardons, praying will not
carry them, they that will have them, must pay for them; and many hard shifts
his agents are put to to vent his spiritual treasures, and to force them upon
the poor people, that had rather want them, then come to their price. But God
who is rich in mercy, and needs nothing of our goods, God who is good, and
does good, stands not upon such terms with us: his son who is in his
bosom, and best knows both his means and his mind, bids us call for our
bread of gift.

This should move us to a reverent regard of our duty of obedience to him, to
worship and serve him only, to have no other God but him, to defy idolatry,
to honor his name, to sanctify his Sabbath. He has not less himself without
witnesses, in that he does good, Acts 14.17.
and gives us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness.

5 Da, teaches us the necessity of prayer, we must ask of God. Christ in
our flesh would lose nothing for want of asking: Heb. 5.7.
who in the days of his flesh offered up prayers and supplications with strong
crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death.

And his father that loved him, as twice, from heaven he proclaimed, yet says
to him, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, Ps. 2 7.8.
ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, etc.

When he meant Solomon a good turn, the freest and greatest offer that was
ever made to man, yet he put him to it, ask what I shall give thee. 1 Reg 3.5.


When Herod would reward the daughter of Herodias for her dancing, he said.

Ask of me whatsoever thou will, Mar. 6.23.
and I will give it thee. Great persons love to be sued to for their favors,
and think it an accession to their honor, when they have many petitions.

Christ would have us know that prayer is the key which opens the full hand
of God, and that we have no right to the bread we eat, or to any thing we
possess, except we have first asked it of God by prayer, or sanctified it
thereby.

And therefore it is religion and good manners to bless our tables before we
eat, with prayer; when you read of Christ's eating, or feeding of others,
there, looking up to heaven, and blessing, goes before breaking, and eating,
or giving to eat.

As if he would have us know, that our bread is the gift of God, and we must
ask it of him, and they that have learnt no other grace before meat to bless
their table, and their food, if they can say from a devout heart, but this,

Our father which art in heaven, give us this day our daily bread; no doubt but
he that put that prayer into our hearts and mouths, will see that it shall
speed where it goes, for he only makes our prayers passable to God, and
acceptable with him.

^ Tim. 4.5.
Saint Paul tells us, that every creature of God is good: for it is sanctified
by the word of GOD, and prayer.

Therefore ancient is the practice of sanctifying the table before meat, which
we call, saying of grace. Saint Chrysostom mentions the grace used by the
Monks of Egypt; their manner was, before their meat was set upon the board, to
repeat over the whole Psalm. 145.

And when the meat was set on, one said, and he a Priest: Christ Deus noster
benedic cibo ac potui servorum tuorum, quoniam tu es sanctus, and nunc and
semper, in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

In the midst of the meal they stood all up, and one for the rest repeated
these words: Benedictus es Domine Deus, qui misereris nostri, and pascis nos a
iuventute nostra, qui das escam omni carni: reple gaudio and laetitia corda
nostra, ut semper habentes animum presentibus contentum, exuberemus in omne
opus bonum, in Christo Jesus Domino nostro.

In the Latin church ancient is this form of blessing the table.

The Priest, if any be present, or the Master of the family, if no Priest were
in company, standing with the guests about the table, said Sacerd. Oculi omnium
in te sperant Domine.


Conv. Et tu das escam illorum in tempore opportuno.


Sacerd. Aperis tu manum tu^m,

Conv. Et imples omne animal benedictione tua.


Sacerd. Gloria patri and filio, etc.


Conv. Sicut erat in principio, etc.


Sacerd. Benedic Domine nos and tua dona quae in tua largitate sumus sumpturi.

Mensae coelestis participes nos faciat rex aeternae gloriae.




And we may perceive that the ordinary manner of blessing our tables is taken
from these great, and good, and ancient examples of the servants of God in
times past.

Let me therefore admonish you in the fear of God, not to lay hands upon the
daily bread, till you have blessed it with prayer, that God may feed you, and
sustain you with his provisions: for unblessed bread is not wholesome.

6 Da teaches us the necessity of thanksgiving, for if we receive our food of
gift, and God does expect no other pay or reckoning but our thanks: David will
tell us that iustos decet laudare.

Therefore it was frequent also with those above named after their meal to
stand up and to render thanks to God for their food. The Latin Church.

Sac. Confiteantur tibi omnia opera tua.


Con. Sancti tui benedicant tibi.


Sac. Gloria patri and filio, etc.


Con. Sicut erat in principio, etc.


Sac. Agimus tibi gratias omnipotens Deus pre universis tuis beneficijs, qui
vivis and regnas in saecula saeculorum.


Sac. Benedicam Domino in omne tempus.


Con. Et semper laus ejus erit in ore meo.


Sac. In Domine gloriabitur anima mea.


Con. Audiant mansueti et laetentur.


Sac. Magnificate Dominum mecum.


Con. Et exultemus nomini eius in id ipsum.


Sac: Sit nomen Domini benedictum.


Con. Ex hoc nunc and usque in saecula.


Sac. Deus det nobis suam pacem.


And this is the form of blessing the table used according to the statutes of
the College where I had my breeding, even at this day.

In the Greek Church after meals.

Gloria tibi, sancte pater, gloria tibi rex, quoniam dedisti nobis escas ad
laetitiam: imple nos etiam spiritu sancto, ut in veniamur in conspectu tuo
accepti, and non confusi and pudefacti, quando reddes unicuique secundum opera
sua. To which they added Sicut in medio discipulorum tuorum coenantium adfuisti
Salvator, dicens, pax vobis, ita veni etiam ad nos, et salva nos.

I show you these ancient forms used in both the Churches, both Greek and
Latin, to stir you up to reverence and thanksgiving in the blessing of this
bread which you beg of God, that we do not, like brute beasts, receive our
food from God without imploration of his blessing, with recognition of his
favor.

7 The last duty is a sober use of our bread, let it not be the bread of
gluttony, or the wine of drunkenness.

We must take heed that the gift of God be not abused to his dishonor, lest
it turn unwholesome and unprofitable for us.

This is the fathers gift, and it is the childrens bread, it is no meat for
dogs, that is, for greedy and unthankful deuourers thereof. But a more
proper use of this point will follow upon the word Daily.

3 Da nobis.
1 We must herein consider our first respect, the beginning of our charity at
our own persons, Christ that taught us to pray, teaches us to have care of
our own maintenance, and to seek it of God, for it is a true rule, Qui sibi
nequam cui bonus? The Law makes us a president of love, ut teipsum.

This does reprove the Romish doctrine of voluntary poverty; for they taking
advantage of those words of Christ to the young man, Si vis perfectus esse,
Matthew. 19 21.
vende omnia, et da pauperibus; do count that a work of super-errogation to
do so, to give away all, and live upon alms.

Whereas that was not an evangelical counsel, as they suggest, but a
precept, and not a precept of obedience, but of probation, whereby God did
prove the heart of that young man, that himself might see how his soul did
cleave to the world and the things thereof.

Or at the most it was but a particular precept given to that man, and not a
general counsel extensiue to all persons, and all ages, and times, for God
would have us eat our own bread.

And that is called our own bread, as you have heard, which according to Gods
ordinance, we do labor and sweat for; and that is intended in this petition,
da nobis, that is, give it to our honest labors in a lawful calling.

Ephesians. 4 28.
The Apostle does so press this labor upon us, that thereby we many acquire
both a competency to relieve our own wants, and an overplus to give to such as
need: and this blessing upon our honest endeavors is here begged of God.

Prove. 30.8.
The son of Iakeh prays, feed me; approving it lawful for every particular
person to pray first for himself and his own sustentation.

This also reproves the idle and unthrifty, those that take no care for the
necessaries of life, and those that waste them: we say they are foes to none
but themselves, but such are friends to none, the Apostle calls them, evil
beasts, slowbellies: for with what face can they say, Tit. 1.12.
da nobis, that either refuse, or abuse, and waste the means that should give
them their bread.

It lost Esau his birthright, quia maluit victum accipere, quam acquirere.

Multitudes of these weeds grow up amongst us, who take no care for their own
bread, and cast themselves wilfully upon the charity of others, drinking the
sweat of others brows, and devouring the bread of idleness; the just laws of
this kingdom do shut up our charity against those who live upon the spoil,
and take no care for their own support.

Prove. 26.3.
Solomon says, rods be for the backs of fools; and our whipping posts are set
up for such: and S. Paul's rule is our warrant to let them that will not labor,
2 These. 3.10.
go without meat.

And from this head of carelessness to get their own bread, come those night
burglaries, and day pilferies, and highway insurrections, and cunny catching
conueyances to rob such as labor for our own bread.

2 Nobis includes their own families, which also teaches us every one to
have a care of wife and children, to provide for them: how shall we look for
the honor due to parents and masters of families, if we neglect our necessary
care of them.

The good woman in the Proverbs is noted for this care; She rises while it is
yet night, that is, Prove. 31.15.
before the Sun, and she gives meat to her household, and a portion to her
maidens: and after follows, verse. 2^
her household are clothed with double garments.

The Apostle says, If there be any that provides not for his own, and
namely, for them of his household, 1 Timothy 5.8.
he denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel.

The Apostle says, If there be any such, for it is presumed that none should
be such, but such infidels we have too many, that drink down the maintenance
of their families, at drunken sittings, that eat up their bread from them, at
gluttenous banquets and feasts; that play away the bread of their own houses
in unthrifty gamings; that waste the legacies and hereditary dimensions; and
the wages of their labor upon harlots.

The Apostle tells us how we should esteem them as infidels, that deny the
faith.

They have put out that light of nature which shines in the beasts of the
field, in the fowls of the air; for nature teaches them to take care of
their young, they build nests for them, they feed them till they can shift for
themselves.

The Hen gathers her young ones under her wings, but these wastfull consumers
of their means, pluck out the feathers from their own wings, that they can
neither fly themselves, nor shelter their young, without natural affection,
and of a reprobate sense: they stench the congregation where they live, with
their noisome and ungodly conversation. But thou man of God, fly these things,
and seek thy bread for thy self, for thy family, that they may bless thee.

3 This nobis does put us in mind that we do live in society, homo est animal
sociale, we must pray for bread for the commonwealth in which we live, non
est bonum nisi in communi bono, the state in which we live does exact this
common care of all the parts of the body thereof, that we suffer not the
society of men to suffer, partem patria. No states have ever thriued better,
then those that have most studied and labored the common good, and nothing
does sooner bring in an universal misery, then the overmuch retiring of our
care to every ones particular.

This has multiplied grieuances, when some particular persons have found out
proiects to heal themselves, by wounding of the commonwealth; and it is
generally prognosticated, that many of these grieuances will put forth this
spring in our state: God give wisdom, and courage, and skill to the
state-Physitians to heal these sores.

The King, the head of this body, must be supported, and bread is the care of
the state to supply it; for this cause, Romans 13.6.
pay ye tribute, says the Apostle: the necessities of state must be supported
for the honor thereof, and that the faculties of weldoing may not fail.

1 Cor. 13.5.
Charity seeks not her own things, so long as we labor and pray for the
good of our Commonwealth, we shall not want bread for in the plenty and peace
of our whole land, we shall have both peace and plenty.

Those that milk the Commonwealth, and draw the breasts of it till blood
come, are enemies of society, and the bread that is thus gotten, will be
gravel in their mouths.

God be merciful unto us to detect and confound all such proiections, and let
our Commonwealth that has been so glorious in the eye of all the world,
renew her glory thus blemished in late days.

4 This nobis does especially oblige our care to the members of the mystical
body of Christ: all those that are parts of the Church of God, that we labor
God in our prayers, for the prosperity of Sion, and for Ierusalems welfare,
that we may see the Church of God in prosperity all our life long, and that we
may procure her good.

The poor persecuted members of Christ in the bloody violence put upon them
in France, fled hither in multitudes to seek bread; God be ever blessed for
the piety and charity of our nation toward them, their loins bless us, and
their mouths testify for us, that the charitable and hospital entertainments
which they gave to our fathers in France, flying from the persecution of Queen
Mary, whose garments were dyed in the blood of Gods Saints, were not forgotten.

The Apostle commends this charity to us with a (...), especially to the
household of faith, O Lord, Gal 6.10.
let not them want bread that fear thee and call upon thy name.

5 Nobis does include our Ministers that break us the bread of life, it is our
care and duty to see to them that they want not bread.

God has resigned to us his own portion, and he that has set us a work,
has designed our wages, he would not have the Altar so lean, that he that
attends at the Altar, should not be able to live by the Altar, he would not
have us serve and sterue.

1 Cor. 9.9.
The mouth of the Ox (...) treads out the corn, must not be muzled.

They understand not this petition, that invade the goods of the Church, the
inheritance of God: they may say within themselves, as William Rufus the
Conquerours son said when he kept Church-liuings in his hands long void, and
took the revenues of them into his own coffers: Gods bread is sweet. But it
will be bitterness in the latter end, to him it was so, his end was untimely
and violent.

There be too many that invade the rights of the Church, and Religion suffers
for it, for if worthy maintenance fail, worthy service will hardly subsist.

If they that should apply their whole studies to the fitting of the souls of
men, are directed to the care for their bread, time must needs be lost from
the maine work of our ministry, which is to save souls.

What encouragement can a student have to apply his wits and industry to a
fitness for that calling, in which he cannot promise himself bread except he
buy it.

The complaint of Solomon shall end this point, though this gives us just
occasion to renew his complaint, which I doubt will never end.

Eccles. 9.11.
I returned, and saw under the sun, The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, nor bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor favor to men of skill.

We see which way all these things go, we may lament it, and pray God to
amend it, that they may not want the necessaries of this life, who show to us
the way of everlasting life.

Remember us in your prayers for bread, that we also may have our part with you.

6 Our duty to the poor is taught here also, for they are ex nobis, we must
not hide our selves, or restrain our prayers, or alms from our own flesh,
they are dug out of our pit, and hewn out of our rock. Job 31.17.
Job protests his charity this way; he did not eat his morsels alone, the
fatherless did eat with him.

For from my youth up he was brought up with me as with a father, I was a
guide to her from my mothers womb, he saw none perish for want of clothing,
nor any poor without covering: the loins of the poor blessed him, Job
31.17.18.19.20.
and his fleece kept them warm.

For he considered, verse 15.
Did not he that made me in the womb, make him, and did not one fashion us in
the womb?

These have as much right to bread, from the hand, and of the gift of God, as
we, and except God give it us, the poor shall no more feel the want of bread,
then the rich that have and possess it in fullness.

Therefore let us not put the needy off with our prayers, but be ye merciful
as your father in heaven: of him we say: Aperis tu manum and imples own animal
benedictionem tua.

Surely God gives us all the bread that we ask for necessity, as to owners of
it, but if he exceed our demand, and gives us above that he intends, that
we should be his stewards of it to dispense it to the necessities of our
brethren, and therefore he makes the cups of some to ouerflow, that their
abundance may fill such as are empty.

7 Nobis includes our enemies, we are also taught here to remember them, let
not malice drown our charity, and spite drink up our devotion and piety.

If thine enemy hunger, not only pray God to give him bread, but do thou feed
him, if he thirst, Romans 12.20.
do thou give him drink, forget not of what spirit thou art, of the spirit of
him who prayed for his transgressors, who had not a friend upon earth, but yet
came to us being his enemies, to seek our love, and to make our peace with his
father.

Be angry, but sin not, let not the sun go down upon thy wrath: bless
them that curse you, pray for them, do them good.

Anger is a dangerous inmate to harbor in us, for it hinders our devotion,
and makes us leave them all out of our Nobis, that we have any edge against,
and imperfect prayers cannot have a full prevailing; therefore Solomon says,
Eccles. 7.11.
anger rests in the bosom of a fool. Anger is a fire, and can thou carry
fire in thy bosom, and not be burnt, says he?

It is ignis alienus, if we offer up our prayers to the God of peace, with any
of our anger in them, that one ingredient puts death in the pot: we must come
to the God of peace in peace:

When Socrates his servant had done a fault that moved his Master to some
choler, one cried, whip him, whip him; Socrates answered, I had need whip my
anger first, for I find that more to blame, then my man.

It is our wisdom and patience, to bear injuries, and to let the seed of
them come up in us in benefits and prayers; the liker that we make our selves
to him, to whom we pray, the better will he like of us and our prayers;
therefore da nobis, must mean, feed us, and feed our enemies, let not them
that hate us, want bread.

This is an holy revenge, to recompense evil with good.

8 Nobis does include, as you have heard, our cattaile, and creatures given to
us for our use; we owe then a duty to pray to God for them to preserve them to
our use. Jobs first blow that he had, was in his cattaile, his Oxen and Asses;
the devil knew that that would be a smarting rod: the next in his servants,
and other cattaile.

The goodness of God the giver is to be inuocated for preservation, he
preserves man and beast.

They be beasts that are cruel to their own cattaile, that exact work of
them, and care not to feed them; their bowels are cruel, their labors, their
bodies are ours.

If our care must extend to the feeding and nourishing and praying for these
helpefull creatures made to our use; they do much offend God, that upon every
provocation, curse them, and smite and abuse them, as Balaam did his Ass, who
would have been content to have killed his beast in his fury: to who^ God gave
a speaking tongue to reprove him, and the record thereof is kept for our
instruction, to teach us to use our servant creatures, with all gentleness,
for the just man is merciful to his beast, as I told you from Solomon. Pro.
12.10.


4 Panem nostrum.
We gather the doctrine of our duties from the several reasons why the bread
that we do pray for, is called ours.

1 Seeing it is called ours, because we labor for it according to the
ordinance of God, in sudore vnltus tui comedes panem; we are here taught to
apply our selves to labor in some honest vocation to win our bread.

This is that we are borne to, as Eliphaz in Job, Job 5.7.
says truly. Man is borne to labor, as the sparks fly upward.

Therefore the Prophet calls this our bread, Psalm. 127.2.
The bread of sorrows, because it asks so much pains to purchase it.

Ephesians. 4.28.
Saint Paul enioyneth it, Let him that stole, steal no more, but let him
labor, working with his hands the thing that is good.

Math. 10.10.
The labourer is worthy of his meat, Christ says, and the Apostle says, when
we were with you, this we commanded you, 2 These. 3.10.
that if any would not work, neither should he eat.

Sweet and wholesome is the bread of honest and lawful labor, for in that
curse of God, there is sweetness of mercy: in sudore vultus tui is punishment,
comedes panem is blessing.

This reproues idleness in all callings, from the highest to the lowest, for
such as offend that way, do not eat their own bread, neither Kings, nor
their subordinate Magistrates, that labor not in government to manage all
things justly: nor Bishops and Ministers that labor not in the government and
teaching of the Church of God wisely, faithfully, and painefully, nor men of
inferior rank, that do not find something still to do to the common
benefit of Church or Commonwealth, or the particular good of their own souls
and bodies, that God may be glorified.

2 Seeing this bread is called ours, in regard of the necessity of our life,
which is such, that we cannot live by the ordinary providence of God without
it. We are taught to come to God in the full sense of this necessity: let not
the rich man say, I have bread enough, I have no need to pray for it; let not
the poor impotent man say, I cannot work, and the Parish must find me bread.

Let not the idle person say, there be workers enough, and there is bread
enough stirring, and I shall get a share amongst them.

Let not the cunning ungodly man say, I will make others provide me of bread.

Let not the thief say, I will steal bread: rather let every man know that
bread is the gift of God only, and let him consider how necessary it is for his
life, that he may daily prostrate this his want before God in his prayers: for
the full person that despises an honey comb, can scarce put any zeal or
feruency to this petition, but he that knows the necessity of bread, and how
his life depends upon it, will put this petition home.

They pray coldly and perfunctoriously, that do not feel and consider their
necessities, and such prayers go no further then their own lips, they have no
power to ascend so high as heaven, therefore let every one that calls upon
God for this bread, remember that he cannot live without it, that he may pray
fervently for it.

3 Seeing it is called our bread in respect of Gods donation, who only gives
it, as you have heard; we are taught to seek our bread no where else by
prayer, but from the open hand of God.

David tells us, that The eyes of all things look up to God, and he opens
his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousnesse.

The young lions, though they roar for their prey, Ps. 104.21.
yet they seek their meat of God.

As Cardinal Bellarmine well observes, because they seek it, Eo modo quo
providentia Dei statuit. For it is God that saues both man and beast.

And as we must go no whither else but to God for food, so we must go to him,
and seek it from his hand: as children go to their father for their bread,
this caseth us of our care and anxious sollicitudes for our bread: for the love
of a father is such, such is his tenderness, that a little praying will soon
prevail with him for any thing that is in his power to give, and they are
worthy to suffer hunger, that will not say to their father, Da nobis panem. In
our fathers house there is bread enough. And Christ says, Ask and you shall
receive.

Our Savior cannot put the easy purchase of our food better in sight, then in
the example of nature in our natural parents; for what father is there that if
his son do ask bread of him, will give him a stone. Observe it in the parable
of the prodigal, he called for stolam primam to cloth him, and he killed
vitulum illum to feed him.

4 Seeing it is called our bread by his blessing of it to our nourishment, we
must remember to pray, that Gods blessing may make our bread ours, for where
he gives it without his blessing, he gives it to hurt.

It is the blessing of God that makes rich, and there is no sorrow with it.
That blessing upon the earth crowns it with fatness: upon the barnes and
garners, with fullness: in our use, with wholsomnesse. A little with this
blessing goes far. The miserable rich man that has no power to eat of the
bread that God gives him, because God hat sent leanesse into his soul; has
no joy of his bread, because he wants the blessing of God with it.

The ungodly man that holds good things without the Sun of righteousness
shining upon his tabernacle, is unhappy in all that he has, cursed in his
fields, cursed in his barnes, cursed in his winepresses, in his cattle, in his
oven, in his table, in all that he possesses: for it is not earthly happiness
to have much, but to have the blessing of God upon that we have, be it much or
little.

Therefore learn from hence to bless your own endeavors, to bless your
seruans, your cattle that labor for you, your fields, your tables, that is,
to pray to God to give you his blessing in all these things.

Do not seize upon these things as infidels that know not God aright, as the
gifts of strange gods; nor, as bruit beasts, eat and are satisfied, and
consider not who makes their food theirs. Wrestle with God in your prayers, as
Jacob did, and give him not over till he leave his blessing upon all that you
have, upon all that you do, begin your day with prayer to God to bless you
in all your undertakings.

5 Seeing God preserves our food for us, and so it is called ours, we must
know that our bread will not keep without his blessing, if he do blow upon
it, the breath of his indignation blasteth it, and it mouldeth, and rotteth in
our hands, as the Israelites Manna gathered in undue time did; and if God do
not make it ours, a stranger shall come and eat our labors.

What a great provision had the army of the Syrians, that in the dearth and
famine of Samaria, when an Asses head was sold for 80 pieces of silver in the
city: 2 Reg. 7.1.
the next day, according to the word of the man of God, the plenty was such in
that famished city, that a measure of fine flower was sold for a shekell, and
two measures of barley for a shekell: and all this plenty came from the full
provision of the Syrians, they being driven away from their own bread.

If God keep not our bread for us, how soon is it gone, and a stranger comes
in upon all that we have, with, Haec mea sunt, veter^s migrate Coloni.

Therefore our duty is, herein, to come unto God in our prayers for the
keeping, as well as for the obteining of things necessary.

For we must as well depend upon the holy providence of God, for keeping that
we have, as for giving to us that we want.

6 It is called ours, because we desire that we may have the use of our food:
wherein we pray to God for health; for what is bread without a stomach: if
either we want appetite to it to desire it, or stomach to digest it, that
either we cannot eat it, or that it comes up again: therefore pray that God
by giving us the right use of our bread, would make it ours. So our bread will
strengthen our heart, our wine will comfort it, our clothes will keep us
warm, and all the necessaries of life will prosper to us in the lawful use of
them.

7 Seeing our best right to this bread is by Jesus Christ, let us labor first
for him, that he may dwell in our hearts by faith, that we be rooted and
grounded in him: for how can he not with him give us all things, who gives him
to us?

When God shall seek us, if we be found in him, as Christ is Gods, so shall
we be.

Let him therefore be in our ear; God says, Hear him. Let him be in our love
testified by obedience, If ye love me, keep my commandments.

There is no juice nor sap in any thing that God does give man, which he
does not give through him, and for his sake: all the nations of the world that
eat bread, and receive food from the hand of God without the mediation of
Jesus Christ, are under the general providence of God, as the young Lions, and
Bears, and beasts of prey are. But those that have the Sun, have with him
the special providence of God, which ministers these things to them with
favor, and for their good.

8 Lastly, seeing we pray for our bread, we are taught that we must use no
unlawful means for the supply of our wants, all is not ours that we may
invade; if by wicked means we get it, it is called The bread of wickedness;
if we earne it by ungodly works, it is called The wages of iniquity; if by
fraud, it is called The bread of deceit; if we labor not at all, it is called
The bread of idleness: if we have more then needs for our selves, it is The
bread of the poor. Let us take heed we neither take the bread of the poor
from them, as the Scribes and Pharisees did, who devoured widows houses; nor
keep and with hold from the poor their bread, as the rich man did, who gave
not the crummes of his table to the poor beggar.

That is our bread that our necessity craves, not that our sensuality
desires: the overplus is the poores.

5 Daily bread.
I showed in the exposition of this word, that two things are here desired of
God.

1 We ask panem sufficientiae, that we may not want things necessary for us.

2 Panem nutritionis, such food as may serve by the blessing of God for our
nourishment.

Therefore our duty is, to use the gifts of God wisely, and soberly, that is to
say, 1 With contentment. 2 Without waste.


We bear about us weak bodies, that need a daily sustentation, our stomachs
will call upon us every day for food, and so must we every day call upon God
for supply thereof; that debt our souls owe to our bodies, to seek their meat
from God by prayers.

1 We are taught a contented use of those things which we receive from God;
for if our bread be sufficient for us against want, if it be wholesome and
nourishing, we ought to be contented with it; for godliness only seeks the
means which may enable us to Gods service, and that is always joined with
contentedness, godliness is great riches thus joined with contentedness,
according to the Apostles rule.

If you have food, and cannot be therewith content; the sin of Israel, not
content with the bread of heaven, but still murmuring for change, destroyed
them with their meat in their mouths.

2 We are taught the sober and moderate use of bread, desiring of God, bread
and food for our health. Sodomes sin was fullness of bread, the insatiate
gluttonous abuse of Gods good creatures, which turns the bread of nourishment,
into the bread of surfeit, and wine that makes glad the heart of man, into
drunkenness.

This turns Gods blessings into rods, and makes our bread our disease, and
this is one of the crying sins of our sinful nation, which ouerchargeth us
with iniquity, and sometimes makes our fruitful land barren, to scourge our
excess and intemperancie.

6 This day.
1 This teaches us to come every day to God in our prayers, to demand the
necessaries of our life: God loves to be entreated often, and therefore
Christ has limited us to the present time, of purpose, that we may be still
sensible of our wants, and of Gods supply, that we may be ever praying, God may
be always giving, we always receiving: by which holy intercourse between God
and us, this part of Gods holy worship may still be kept a foot, which
consists in prayer and thanksgiving, prayer to obtain and sanctify the
gifts of God to us.

Thanksgiving to acknowledge the author of every good and perfect gift, to the
honor of the bountiful giver thereof.

Prayer, to show us mortal men, that we have many wants, which none but God
can supply.

Thanksgiving, to put us into the society of the Saints in glory, whose
continual exercise is to praise the holy name of God. So the Apostle joins
these two duties of piety and religion.

Pray without ceasing, in every thing give thanks, 1 These. 5.17.18
for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus, concerning you.

It is the joy of the faithful, that they may do this, and therefore the
Apostle does put this precept first. Rejoice evermore, then he bids to pray
and give thanks.

Let no man think it a grief or burden to him, to be put to it to come to
God, for every thing that he needs every day; rather let him rejoice that
Christ has made the way of access to his father so easy, that the oftener we
come, the better are we welcome to him, and the more we pray, the more we
give him cause to open his hand, and to declare his singular love to us: this
reciprocation of our asking, and Gods giving, of our receiving, and our
thanksgiving, does so please our God, and pleasure us, that no time is spent
more comfortably, more religiously; and thus we shall be ever creeping under
the wings of God for shelter, ever drawing near to God for his favor, ever
seeking his face for his blessings: and like the elder son in the Gospel, we
shall be ever with our father, and all that he has, shall be ours.

2 Praying only for This day, we shall honor the constant providence of God,
with faithful repose of our trust in him, for they who seek to ingrosse
things temporal, for fear of want, and had rather trust their own providence
then God, show great weakness of faith; and distrust in God.

If we observe it well, the greatest part of men upon earth, have small
certainty of their maintenance, certain charges, yet living in lawful
callings, though not sure of their employments, not always sure of the wages
they earne, of the vent of the commodities in which they trade, yet still God
supplyeth them from day to day, and supporteth them in their wants, which
shows that there is no such thrift and good husbandry, as to trust to the
providence of God for our maintenance, in the use of honest and lawful means:
he is Diespiter, and every day he looks upon the sons of men, and surueyeth
their wants, and he that will not let the fowls of the air, nor the beasts of
the field, want bread, will not suffer his own dear children to want the
necessaries of life, if they seek them from him.

Men might make their lives much more happy to themselves, much more quiet to
their neighbors, if they did wisely inform themselves in the doctrine of this
daily providence of God; for he that knows his duty to be labor in an honest
vocation, and prayer to God for his blessing upon his labor, needs do nothing
more, but cast all the rest of his care upon God, who cares for him.

But partly the fear of wants, and partly the desire of riches, do so
transport us, that we can neither be good children to God in devotion, nor good
neighbors to our brethren in charity, because we do not depend upon this
daily providence of our God.

If a man sit down, and cast up the charges of his family, and compare it with
the short reckonings of his commings in, he may say, I and my family shall want
bread: but if religiously he compare it with the rich revenue of Gods holy
providence, he will find a store there so furnished with plenty, and an hand
so open to give it away to them that ask it, that he will resolve with the
Prophet, No good thing will God with hold from them that walk uprightly. Psalm.
84 11.


I conclude this point, put thy self into an honest calling, do thy endeavor
in it conscionably, pray to God for his blessing upon it, and trust him with
the rest. If in this way I want bread, I will be bold to tell my God, as the
holy Prophet did, if I be deceived, thou Lord have deceived me. But that
imputation cannot fall on him.

They that have put him to it, have found him full and faithful in his
promises and performances, Psalm. 22.4.
Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

They trusted in thee, and were not confounded.

But you demand,

Is therefore all providence for the time to come, Object.
unlawful, and must our thoughts and desires be only confined to the
present, all for to day, and nothing for to morrow?

We answer, Sol.
that our desires must be limited to the present, but our endeavors must not be
so; let us labor honestly for the blessings of God with contentment in his
gifts for to day; but if our endeavors so bestowed, extend to a further
proportion of gettings, thrift is allowed where it is not joined with
distrustful carfulness.

Joseph may lay up in the seven years of plenty, for the famine of seven
years to succeed, when God reuealeth a dearth coming on, and warranteth the
provision.

The good man may have a treasure wherein is old and new, so this treasure be
filled for uses of piety and charity.

Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways, Pro. 6.6.
and be wise.

She provides her meat in summer, 8
and gathers her food in the harvest.

Prou. 10.5.
He that gathers in summer, is a wise son, but he that sleeps in
harvest, is a son that causes shame.

Prou. 20 4.
The sluggard will not plough by reason of the cold, therefore shall he beg
in harvest, and have nothing; and the Apostle says,

2 Cor. 12 14.
That Parents ought to lay up for their children. Religion does not make men
ill husbands, and the possession of good things must not hinder our daily
prayer to God for his blessing upon them.

LVC. 11.4. And forgive us our sins, for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us: In Saint Matthew, we read thus.

And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. But we commonly say, and
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.


IT is a consideration worthy to be continued, to observe the order and
composition of this prayer; the foundation of it is laid in the love and power
of God, in the preface to it. For when we call him our Father, we plead a
special interest in his love, and when we call him our father in heaven, we
acknowledge him of power to perform whatsoever his love intends to us.

Then in the first petition, we declare our selves the loyal and loving sons
to this father, in seeking the exaltation of his glorious name first: which we
do, 1 For his sake, whose name only is glorious. 2 For our sakes, for it is
not only to us, Turris fortissima, but it is oleum effusum.


Then in the second petition, we pray for the advancement, stabilitie, and
propagation of his kingdom, that he may only rule over us, only he may rule
in us.

In the third petition, we desire a conformity with that part of the Church
that is with God in heaven, by our obedience to the will of God.

And having made three petitions for the advancement of the knowledge and
worship of God, we come in the fourth petition to beg for our selves the
necessaries of life, that we may live to serve our God, by his giving and
blessing our bread to our use.

Now in that which remains, we pray against all impediments of this holy
worship and service.

That which hinders this service of God, is our sin past, present, and to
come, therefore here we pray against sin; and we desire 1 The gracious pardon
of past and present sins. 2 The free and full prevention of sins to come.


This petition has regard to the present guilt for sins past and present.
Saint Cyprian does say well, Post subsidium cibi sequitur venia delicti, vt qui
a Deo pascitur, in Deo viuat, nec tantum praesenti, De orat. Dominica.
and corporali vitae consulat, sed and aeternae, ad quam venire potest, si
peccata donantur.

For our better understanding of this petition, 1 We must know what it is that
we pray against. 2 What we request. 3 Of whom. 4 For whom: 5 The condition of
our request, or the manner of it. 6 The duties depending upon all this.


1 Against what we pray.
Saint Matthew calls them debts, figuratively, Saint Luke here calls them
sins literally, and we commonly call them trespasses, because by every sin
we trespass our God, and give him offense.

The name of debts does well express in what case we are, for all the service
which God requires from us, he exacteth as a due debt to him, to which we
stand obliged by the law of our creation, being made for it.

And this obligation of our duty has annexed to it a counterband of all Gods
favors, assured to the obedience of Gods laws, and it implies both a release
of God from all his promised mercies, and an engagement of us to the whole
wrath of God.

So debtors must either pay their debt, or the justice of the law sends them
to prison.

I tell thee, says Christ, thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid
the utmost farthing. Obedience then being due, every sin that we do, every
good duty that we omit, does increase our debt, call them therefore as they are
sins, or as they are like debts: against these we pray.

Again, in the indefinite, forgive our debts or sins, we comprehend all,
both of all sorts, and of all times, our original and natural sins, our
actual, our omissions of good duties, our commissions of evil, our sins of
thoughts, words and works, our secret, our open sins, known and unknown, our
sins which the Church of Rome calls venial, as well as those that they
call mortal: we must leave out none, for the least sin unpardoned, defiles,
and nothing unclean, shall enter into heaven, (...), errors.

Further, seeing our sins make us debtors, and thereby liable to Gods just
punishment, that obedience which we owe, and cannot pay to God, faciendo, by
performing what he does command, that ingageth us to satisfaction, patiendo, by
enduring the punishment due to our sin. So that therein we are Gods debtors,
owing to him the sufferance of his just punishment.

It was the state of Gods own Israel.

God gave them the lands of the heathen, Ps. 105.44.
and they inherited the labor of the people.

That they might observe his statutes and keep his laws. That was their debt.
45.


But then if they paid not that debt, Deuteronomy 28.1.
they should owe God a suffering of all his judgments: verse 15.
the undergoing of all the following curses, whereby God should chasten their
disobedience, and pay himself in their just punishment.

2 What we request: Forgive.

(...) is as much as, let them go, have nothing to say to them.

There be diverse phrases used in holy scripture to express this forgiveness
that is here desired.

Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, Ps. 32.1.
whose sin is covered.

Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose speech
there is no guile. 2


In which words of pardon, and covering, and not imputing sin, is intended
such an abolition both of the fault and punishment, as if neither the one had
been committed, nor the other deserved.

Ezechiah finding God favorable to him in this free pardon of his sins, does
confess it, and he expresses it thus; Thou have cast all my sins behind
thy back. Is. 38.17.


Micah has another phrase for it.

He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: Mic. 7.19.
he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the
depth of the seas.

These phrases meet in one expression of a full forgiveness, for what we cast
behind us as willing to see no more, what we cast away into the sea as willing
it should perish, that we desire to quit from any further thought. Therefore
David calls this forgiveness, a washing, and purging, Ps. 51 12.
and clensing from sin, blotting out of transgressions, putting them out of
the book of Gods remembrance for ever.

This forgiveness of all our sins, is an article of our Christian faith: so
that we may say with David, I believed, therefore I did speak.

We must first believe, then we must pray to God for the pardon of our sins.

Nehemiah puts this petition full into a double request: Neh. 13.27.
Remember me O Lord, and spare me. He desires that God would take notice of
all the good service he had done to him, and reward it, that he would spare
him for all the evil that he had done, to forgive and forget it.

3 Of whom this forgiveness is desired.

That is, of our father which is in heaven, of him only, whose name must be
hallowed, whose kingdom must rule all, and whose will must be obeyed, of him
only who alone gives us bread to nourish us, in whom we live, and move, and
have our being.

No question, but in a cast of so great danger as our sin does put us into,
Christ would direct us the right way out of them, to him that only has power
to forgive them.

4 For whom this request is made.

Forgive us, carries the same extent that give us does in the former petition,
to all that have done, or are now doing any evil: we pray for all that offend
God any way, that Gods gracious pardon may cancel all the obligations, and
forgive all the debts for payment, whereof we find our selves unable and
insufficient.

But under this word us we do not comprehend the dead, upon whom God has
past his sentence in their particular judgment at their death, which sentence
is not to be reuersed or altered: we find no warrant in Scripture to bear us
out in any such superstitious charity; but us includes the living, without
respect of persons, high or low, bond or free, Jew or Grecian.

Neither yet do we so include all in this general pardon, as if we had
opinion of universal grace: for when the Apostle says, The Lord knows who
are his, we may probably suppose, that all are not his: therefore we forget
not our former petition, Fiat voluntas tua: for so we desire God to forgive,
and so far to extend this his general pardon, as may stand with your
fulfilling of the will of God: yet because we know not how to put difference,
we pray, as the Apostle bids, for all men; declaring our charity to them,
and referring them to the will of our God.

5 The condition of the request: so S. Matthew repeateth it: Forgive as we
forgive.

Or the reason of the request.
Forgive us, for we forgive our debtors.

We must include both in our petition, and that help we have by comparing
text with text; for one gives light to another: and we professing our
forgiveness of our brethren trespassing us, are made the more capable of Gods
pardon of all our sins.

When before we pray, fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo, that sicut imports
our imitation of the heavenly spirits in their obedience: but we here say,
forgive as we forgive, this sicut does not stoop God to an imitation of us,
but implies only a condition, that God would forgive us, if we forgive our
brethren. For as one says, quilibet homo est debtor, habens debitorem: and so
resembled by Christ in the parable of one that was a debtor to his Lord, Mat
18.23. etc.
and a creditor to his fellow servant, in which parable the point is cleared,
for as his Lord forgave him, so should he have forgiven his fellow servant.

The odds is great, for that servant did owe his Lord 10000 talents, which in
the margent of the Kings Bible is estimated in our account at 750 ounces of
silver to a talent, which amounts to a huge mass of wealth.

But his fellow servant did owe him 100 pence, and there every Roman denarius
is valued but at 7 d. ob. which difference is put to express the great debt
that we owe to our God, and the small debts that our neighbors do owe us; so
that we, who pray for the pardon of our great debts at the hand of God, might
not think much to forgive the small debts owing us.

Though indeed there be nulla proportio finiti ad infinitum: and our debt to
our God for infinite sins is infinite; and Christ would not have us seek the
pardon hereof, but in the way of charity, measuring the same measure to our
brethren, which we desire for our selves.

6 The duties required from hence.

1 From the consideration of our sins against which we pray.

1 We are taught before we pray, to search our hearts and our ways for
sin, to examine our reins, and to see if there be any way of wickedness in
us: for so did David; I know mine own wickedness, and my sin is ever before
me. Ps. 51.3.
This general confession of our sins in the lump, will not serve without a
particular recognition of so many as we can call to our remembrance; and
therefore he that would solicit God for this gracious pardon, it behooves
him to examine himself by every commandment of the law, and to see how much,
how often he has offended God in the breach of every one of these
commandments, in thought, word, and deed.

Let him consider what amends he can make to his God for these sins, that
finding himself a debtor, and knowing how much he owes, he may see that he
is no ways able to satisfy the debt; and then he will pray heartily for
forgiveness of it.

This is well expressed in the forementioned parable where the King took account
of his servants; and there it is set down how much one of them did owe him,
the whole debt was 10000 talents.

Let no man discourage him to do this, because all our sins, laid by
themselves, do swell to so great a bulk, as when we take them into
consideration, we cannot take up. This was David's case.

Innumerable evils have compassed me about, Ps. 40.121
mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up,
they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me.

David does well express these sins of ours in their burden oppressing us,
in their number, not to be reckoned. He says, more then the hayres of our
head. S. Aug. says, Minima sunt, sed multa sunt. But our sins are multa and
magna: we cannot account them, for, who can tell how often he has offended?

These be those builders that set up a wall of separation between God and us:
these be those mists which gather into thick clouds to eclipse the light of
Gods countenance, and to hinder the cheerful shining thereof upon us.

It is the Churches pitiful complaint.

Lam. 3.44.
Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass
through:

We have made this thick cloud with the rising vapors of our many sins, which
hinder the passage of our prayers.

Therefore we must peruse the book of our conscience, and hear the
accusations of Satan, we must put our selves in our own eyes, and lay our
whole life open, like a roll that is spread, before the law of God, and every
man must say, quid feci?

In this account we must examine our debtor and creditor, as strictly as we
use to do in the survey of our estate.

And here we shall find our God a great creditor, for what have we that we
have not received? the life that quickens us, the clothes that cover us, the
bread that feeds us, the houses that harbor us, the fruit of the womb, of the
earth, of the seas, health, liberty, peace, and before all, our religion, these
are all of him, and through him, and by him, and from him.

We shall find our selves debtors to him, the full obedience of the whole law.

Let us save God a labor herein, for if we do not search our ways our
selves, he will do it for us, but aagainst us, as he has said.

But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.

This searching of our wounds to the bottom, is the way of our recovery: this
reuealeth us to our selves, and shows us what it is we pray against: for when
we come to behold all our sins together, and find them innumerable, and
intolerable, we shall see cause for this petition, to desire of God the pardon
of them.

2 Our second duty is, confession of them, which does put them into the eye of
God: this is employed in the petition, forgive us our sins, Psalm. 32.5.
for therein we confess our selves sinners. So David.

I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid.

Satan, the accuser of the brethren, the great Promooter, will inform against
us, and make the worst of every thing we have said or done.

Our brethren whom we have wronged, will complain of us, our own works will
join with them in the information, all these things are against us; therefore
David does well to be his own accuser, saying, peccaui and stulte egi. Job
does well to cry peccaui; quid faciam tibi custos hominum! The Prodigal
bethought him of the best course to go to his father, and say unto him,
peccaui contra coelum and contrate, etc.

Saint Bernard directs us in confession of sins.

1 It must be humilis, against all opinion of setting of some of our sins,
with some of our righteousness.

2 It must be pura, without concealing, excusing, or defending our sins.

3 It must be fidelis, with confidence in the healing mercies of God.

There must be confossio cordis, the heart must ache for it.

There must be confusio facici, the face must be ashamed of it.

There must then be confessio oris, the tongue must tell the heavy tale of our
abberrations.

But here arises a fear.

David says, who can tell how often he offends? Psalm. 19.21.
who then has searched the neast of concupiscence within him so narrowly, as
to find out all the young ones? we have committed many sins that we have
forgotten, we have done much evil that we are not aware of, many secret
sins, secret to the world, and to the eyes of others, many also secret, even
to our selves.

Against this fear let us oppose,

1 Consilium.
1 A counsel. 2 Comfort.

The counsel is, let no day escape thee wherein thou do not survey thy
ways, and before thou sleep, even the reckoning with thy God by a contrite
confession of thy sins, for often and even reckonings, make long friends.

Solution.
The comfort is, that where particular confession cannot perfect the account, it
be there supplied with a general, of all our sins, both remembered and
forgotten, known and unknown. This was David's course, for having said, who
can tell how often he has offended? he adds, cleanse me, O Lord, from my
secret sins; in which general request there is ingrost a full confession of
all.

If this general confession auailed, not to this purpose, the rule could not
hold, that at what time so ever a sinner repents him of his sins, from the
bottom of his heart, all his sins should be put out of remembrance:

Math. 27.44
The converted thief on the Cross had many sins to repent, even after he was
nailed to the Cross, he reproached Christ, and whilst he was blaspheming,
his heart smote him, and he reproved his fellow, and confessed that they
suffered justly, therefore he sought, and found grace.

It were most unhappy for man, and would make the way of salvation impossible,
impassable, if a general contrition for the whole body of sin, did not ease
the conscience, when the shortness of time, and forgetfulness do hinder a
particular enumeration of all the several prouocations of the wrath of God
against sin: for ignorantly we offend often.

3 A third duty joined with this confession of the mouth, is confession of the
heart, unfeignedly touched with remorse of sin; for sin must be first
discerned, and discovered, before it can put us into shame, and fear, and
grief for it.

This yields us guilty into the power of justice, and says like the sons
of Jacob, when the cup was found in Beniamins sack; What shall I say unto my
Lord, what shall I speak, or how shall I clear my self? God has found out
mine iniquity.

But the tender conscience fears lest this compunction come short of the
sorrow that is due and proportionable to the trespass: for we should have as
great a measure and proportion of hatred to the sin wherein we offend, as
there has been in us love of evil.

But the delectation of the sin remembered, does often take out the sting of
fit remorse.

The comfort is, that as a father has compassion of his children, so the Lord,
etc.

For he knows whereof we be made, etc.

We cannot brush off this dust, but it will still foul us, and make us
unclean; the law of our members, during the union of our soul with our body,
cannot be repealed: therefore the most sanctified man that lives, does find

1 That either he does not find the heinous condition of his sin to fit it
with proportionable remorse.

2 Or he does not sufficiently regard the due punishment, to fit it with
proportionable fear, for according as a man fears, such is Gods displeasure.

3 Or not enough consider the foulness of the fact, to fit it with due shame
and hatred of it.

Therefore considering our imperfections, and knowing that our old man is not,
cannot be utterly destroyed in us, let it be our comfort yet that we do the
evil which we would not, if we had a measure of grace sufficient to resist it:
and David will tell us that our God hears the desires of the poor.

4 A fourth duty implied here, is, renouation of our life, for when we ask
God forgiveness of sins, we must take heed that we do not turn it into a
practice to do evil, and cry God mercy for it when we have done, as if that
were all that we desired, to have leave to sin, to wipe off the old score, and
to run again into Gods debt, still pleading for pardon, and still offending.

Therefore that which God requires of this petitioner, is, that he be (...),
that we be renewed in the spirits of our minds, to walk from henceforth in
newness of life.

For neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature, and as many as walk according to this rule, peace is upon them, and
upon the Israel of God.

So that this petitioner must have a care to his walk, that it be secundum
hanc regulam, of holiness and piety.

Here the tender conscience fears much.

1 Because we find not the image of God repaired in us, for we are nothing
like him.

Against this, comfort thy self, for that is not to be hoped for in this life.

Saint John says of us all, comprehending therein all the elect of God.

1 Ioh. 3.1.
We are the sons of God, but it does not appear what we shall be, but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is.

So that till he appear, we cannot be like him.

But Saint Paul says of the Thessalonians, even here, ye are the children of
the light, and of the day, 1 These. 5.5.
and as peremptorily he says, not of the night, nor of darkness.

But I say I do not find my life amended, Object.
how then can I say, dimitte mihi?

Indeed I confess that our time is best spent, Sol.
in the reformation of our lives, and here is work enough to take up all the
time of our life, and our whole measure of grace.

They that study this well, see so much weakness in themselves, to undergo
this work, that they cry out for help. It is time for thee Lord to put to
thine helping hand.

Our comfort against this grief is,

Thou also have wrought all our works in us: we that are the (...) the shop in
which God works, cannot suddenly discern the operations of God within us,
for who knows his own heart? And the more we strive toward perfection, the
more we discern the length of the voyage, and the weakness and defects both
in our skill and provisions, to accomplish the same, wherefore we mistrust our
selves, and the better we grow, the worse estimation we still have of our
selves.

God works much good in us, that we are not aware of, we are dust and ashes,
and in these ashes are many embers of grace raked up; the time will come when
God will reveal us to our selves, himself to us, and then we shall find our
selves much better then our opinion.

This does God a while conceal, that we may both work out our salvation with
fear and trembling in a godly mortification of the deeds of the flesh,
passing the time of our dwelling here in fear.

God who brings good out of evil, by miraculous extraction, and who makes
light to arise out of darkness, does make two good uses, even of that remain
of sin which suruiueth our repentance, and of that propension which
procliueth us to evil.

1 As the law is called the strength of sin, so these sins that remain in
us, and corruption which escapes our repentance, may be called the strength
of grace.

For the elect of God, the more sensible they be of their own, both pollution
by sin, and weakness to resist it, and impotencie to reform it, so much
the more fervent is their zeal of the glory of God against it.

Seeing the conscience of our frailties does awake us to a more watchful
custody of our heart, and observation of our ways,

Therefore as some sharp fits of an ague, in the spring, prove medicinal to
our bodies.

So in our spring of grace, our infirmities well considered, prove physic to
our souls, because they make us remember whereof we are made, and show us the
use of those means which God has ordained for our recovery: such are hearing
of the Word, meditation in it, prayer to God for his blessing upon us, and such
like holy munitions against Satan.

2 These remains of sin do show us what need we have of a Jesus to save us
from them, that we may cry with Saint Bernard, O Jesus esto mihi Jesus.

For if any thing will cast us down at the feet of God, and open our hearts
and mouths, to say, Our father which art in heaven, forgive us our trespasses,
this will do it, when we behold these remains of evil disposition after our
repentance.

But it is observed, that all this labor which we put upon men, for search of
their conscience, for confession and compunction for sin, and newness of
life, needs not.

Seeing God sees no sins in his elect, Object.
and they are so reconciled to God, that they cannot fall from grace. For if
they be the sheep of Christ, no man or devil can take them out of his hand.

This is a flattering heresy, Sol.
which under a color of establishing the decree of Gods election of grace,
does destroy the truth of Gods word, and nourishes sin.

The Apostle says, If we say we have no sin, 1 Io. 1.8.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

If we confess our sins, 9
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, 10.
and his word is not in us:

They object from the same Apostle, he says, Object.
we know that he which is borne of God, sins not, 1 Ioh. 5.18.
but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches
him not. Whosoever is borne of God, 1 Ioh. 3.9.
does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is borne of God.

Is the Apostle contrary to himself?

Not so, for he declares what sin it is of which he speaks, that he which
is borne of God, cannot commit. All unrighteousness is sin. 1 Ioh. 5.17.
And there is a sin not unto death.

In which words he distinguishes sin from sin: for in the former verse he
says,

There is a sin unto death: 16.
I say not that he shall pray for it.

This distinction clears the point, for sin is of two sorts.

1 Not unto death. 2 Unto death.
When the Apostle says, We make God a liar, and deceive our selves, if we say
we have no sin; he means that of the sins of infirmity, which are not
unto death; because these the elect of God do confess to God penitently, and
he is faithful and just to forgive them upon their repentance.

And when he says, Whosoever is borne of God, sins not, neither can sin;
he means that sin that is unto death. The elect cannot sin unto death.

Cap. 3. v. 8.
But when he says, He that commits sin, is of the Devil; he means such
as sin obstinately, and with an high hand, and a stiff neck, impenitently;
which is to death.

So then to the point of their tenet; God does not see sin in his elect, is a
true position, cum grano salis, if we understand it thus.

God sees no sin in them unto death, no such sin as either they will
conceal from him, but they will, by confession, lay open before him: no such
sin as he will punish with aeternall death, but he will forgive it them.

But what is the way of their peace?

1 Ioh. 3.3.
Every man that has this hope, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

The manner of our purifying our selves is also expressed. I will take it as I
find it in the text.

6
Whosoever abides in him, sins not.

7
He that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. Not in
aequality, as righteous as he, but in imitation and by imputation of his
righteousness.

This doing of righeeousnesse he distributeth into the love of God, whom we
have not seen, and the love of our neighbor whom we have seen. This he
calls Keeping of the commandments, Verse 22.
and doing those things that are pleasing in his fight.

And this commandment is double.

1 Of faith, to believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ.

2 Of love one to another.

There is also before required on our part, our confession; on Gods part, his
absolution.

Gods absolution consists of two parts.

1 His pardon of our sins, that is, his releasing us from the punishment of
them.

2 His purging and clensing us from the pollution of them.

As you have heard, if we confess our sins, 1 Ioh. 1.9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

He adds hereunto prayer.

Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him. 1 Ioh. 3.22.


So that to gather up all into a short compendium, thus it is with us:

The elect of God are all sinners. The way to help it is, 1 Search and
confession. 2 Faith in the son of God. 3 Obedience to the Law of God. 4
Prayer to God for pardon of our sins.


And therefore when Christ's holy disciples desired him to teach them to pray,
he bade them say, dimitte nobis debita nostra: showing that they were debtors,
and not able to pay the debt, but needed to desire of God to pardon it.

And from hence the whole doctrine of repentance from dead works comes, which
needed not if the elect had no sin.

But it is objected,

Object.
1 That Christ has satisfied his father for the sins of all the elect, for so
says Isaiah; Is. 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgression, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed.

6.
And God laid on him the iniquity of us all.



What need we then pray for the forgiveness of our sins, which are already
forgiven?

2 Remission of our sins is one the articles of our faith: if we believe that
our sin are forgiven already, why do we yet pray to have them forgiven?

Sol.
To both we answer;

That Christ has indeed answered for all the sins of his Church, and the
elect of God do believe it.

But this satisfaction of Christ is performed to none but such as both search
their heart for sin, and find it, and confess it, and come to him by prayer
to ask it.

Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you:

This coming is by repentance of sins, by says of the remission of them, and
by prayer for the remission of them:

I confess that there needs no more deprecation of the wrath of God to
establish the decree of Gods mercy to us, for the foundation of God is sure,
and sealed with this seal; Dominus novit qui sunt sui.

But we are admonished by the Apostle to make our calling and election sure:
not in the decree of God, but in our own persuasion. And it cannot be sure,
except we use the means ordained to assure us.

But if we have truly discovered in our selves the body of sin, and have
opened into God in a contrite confession, and have bewailed them with tears of
unfeigned contrition, which S. Augustine calls Sanguine^ vulnerati cordis: and
have asked God forgiveness, and cried him mercy from them.

This is applicatio remedij, that there is a ground for our says to believe
the pardon of them sealed to us, and not before.

God testified of David that he was a man after his own heart, yet he sinned
soulely; and till he had made confession of his sin, and had deplored it
penitentially, he was not absolved from it.

Christ told Peter that Satan desired to sift him, but he had prayed that his
faith should not fail him.

That did not make his threefold denial of his Master, no sin, he knew it,
and remembering himself, he went forth from the place where he had done the
fault, and wept bitterly.

The rule therefore is, that

All the promises of God, and our faith in those promises, have reference to
the holy use of the means ordained by God, for establishing our peace with him.

Therefore in the name of God, go the way that he has ordained for you to
walk in; follow the holy example of all the faithful servants of God, who
have gone to Gilead for balm, when they have had any soarenes; and have humbly
prostrated their diseases before the Physician, who came to comfort them that
mourn, and to bind up the broken hearted, and say, Domine dimitte nobis
debita nostra.

Another duty is, to pray only to God for pardon of our sins.

When Christ said to the sick of the palsy, Son be of good cheer, Math.
9.2.
thy sins be forgiven thee. The Scribes said within themselves; This man
blasphemeth. Our Savior defends himself by lawful authority; The son of
man has power on earth to forgive sins.

Math. 2.7.
S. Mark is more express in this relation, for these Scribes gave a reason why
they charged Christ with blasphemy, saying, Who can forgive sins but God only?

They were in the right for that general rule, that none but God can forgive
sins, but they mistook Christ, not knowing him to be God.

God lays claim to this authority.

Isa. 43.25.
I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake,
and will not remember thy sins. And again, Isa. 44.22.
I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions; and, as a cloud, thy
sins, return unto me, for I have redeemed thee.

Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord has done it.



Ezech. 36.25.
So by the Prophet Ezechiel he says, I will sprinckle clean water upon you,
and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness.

26.
A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you.

David stirs up himself to bless the Lord for this.

Psalm. 103.2.3.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiueth
all thy iniquities.

Therefore our Savior sends his disciples to our father in heaven, to
forgive them their sins.

Contrary to this doctrine is the precept of the Church of Rome, which imposes
on the consciences of men a necessity of auricular confession of all mortal
sins to the Priest, for obteining pardon thereof. For if only God must
forgive, only to God must confession of sins be made.

The doctrine and practice of auricular confession in the Church, howsoever
pretended by the Council of Trent, to be the institution of Christ, yet did it
come in, when partly humane policy, partly superstition, corrupted the Church
in the doctrine and discipline thereof.

For in Saint Augustines time it was not heard of, who protests against it as
a thing unreasonable, and thus he disclaimeth it.

Quid mihi est cum hominibus vt audiant confessiones meas, quasi ipsi sanaturi
sint omnes languores meos. Confess. 10.3^
Curiosum genus ad cognoscendam vitam alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam.

Quid a me quaerunt audire qui sim, qui nolunt a te audire qui sint?

The power of forgiving sins is only in God, but he has left in his Church
a ministerial dispensation of that power by application to true penitents, and
they that press it further, invade the rights of God.

Therefore to rectify your judgments in this point, concerning men forgiving
of sins, know that this belongs to men two ways:

1 In Church discipline, it belongs to the Minister to absolve penitents: for
as God has left in the Church the ministry of exhortation, of doctrine, of
conviction, and of reprehension, so has he left the ministry of absolution
to pronounce his pardon to them that truly repent them of their sins.

If you object that any private layman may assure him that truly repents,
that his sins are forgiven, Object.
from the certain warrant of the word of God; or a man may assure himself
hereof by reading and meditation in holy Scriptures.

I answer, Sol.
that nothing is well done that has not the warrant of a lawful calling to
authorize it, for that is transgression of the ordinance of God.

The Apostle does impose it on all sorts of men promiscuously, to exhort and
instruct one another, but none may perform this duty publicly, but they who
are called to it. For how shall he preach, except he be sent?

He that gave his Apostles authority to go into all nations, Ioh 20.23.
to preach and baptize, said also to them, whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are
remitted, and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained.

And though the Church of Rome does reserve certain cases of absolution only
to the Pope, as in the right of Peter; under color of whose succession, he
usurps, yet the text is clear, that what Christ spoke to Peter, he spoke to
the rest, and Saint Basil did so understand him, who says, Jn Ascet. c. 13.
Christus omnibus pastoribus and doctoribus ecclesiae (...), and omnes ex aequo
soluunt et ligant.

And their own Thomas of Aquine, says, quilibet sacerdos (quantum est ex
virtute clauium) habet potestatem indifferenter in omnes.

And the very phrase of Christ, not saying, to whomsoever you declare remission
of sins, they are remitted, but whosoeuers sins ye remit; showing that
Christ in our ministry does this: for nos legatione fungimur pro Jesus Christo:
even as if Christ did beseech you by us.

Therefore as the waters of Damascus might be as clear, and as sweet, and as
wholesome, as the waters of Jordan, yet not so effectual to wash off the
leprosy of Naaman, because the word of the Lord sent Naaman to that River: So
though any other man in respect of his knowledge, and zeal, and good life, may
be fit to minister comfort to souls sick of the leprosy of sin, yet none
can purge this leprosy by forgiving the sins, and absoluing the sinner from
the guilt and punishment of them, but the ministers who are called and
separated by the voice of God to that office.

It is well expressed in the words of Christ; for when he speaks of this power
of absolution, and gives it to his Apostles, he uses the same word to them,
which he uses in the Lords prayer; for in my Text he teaches us to say,
(...), and to them he says, (...).

For as God has reconciled the world to himself by Jesus Christ, so has he
given to us the ministry of reconciliation.

So that the Ministers forgiving of sins is no intrusion upon the rights of
God, no impeachment of the honor of God, but it is his own act, declared by
his own ordinance, and by his appointment particularly applied.

Yet have we no warrant to say to our Minister, forgive us our sins, but
having declared to him our repentance, we may pray to God for his pardon, and
desire our Minister by the power given to him by Jesus Christ, to pronounce it
to us.

This power was in the Church long before the coming of Christ into the world,
as it may appear by the words of Elihu to Job.

For he speaking of the remedy which God has ordained for the restoring of
sinners, says, If there be with him an Angel, an Interpreter, Job 33.23.
one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness.

Then he is gracious unto him, and says, 24.
Deliver him from going down into the pit: I have found a ransom.



Observe Gods ordinance in calling a Minister to be his Angel or messenger:
every man is not fit for this service, such a one is one of a thousand, to him
God commits the office of an interpreter, to declare to man his
uprightness, that is, to comfort him against the terrors of his sin, by
preaching to him the doctrine of Justification by the righteousness of Christ.

To him is committed the office of delivering a sinner from the pit, that is,
from hell, and that is by absoluing him from his sins: this is the greatest
power that is left unto any creature upon earth. For to use the words of the
holy Ghost to which of the Angels did God say at any time, that he should
deliver a soul from going down into the pit?

To the King is committed the civil government of us in policy; to the
Lawyer, the care of our goods and good name; to the Physician, the care of our
health of body; to the Soldier, the care of our goods and lives; but our
souls are committed to the care of the Minister to save them. So says the
Apostle: Thou shall be able to save thy self, and those that hear thee: which
made Saint Ambrose say, Nihil in hoc saeculo excellentius Sacerdotibus.

Our power is to deliver men up to Satan, by binding, and to save them from
going down to the pit, by loosing of them from their sins.

Justit^^ 4.12.
Master Calvin is judicious and moderate in this point, for he advises sinners
that are burdened in their consciences for sin, rather to seek the remedy
in the means ordained, and settled by God in the Church, then any other way,
which is to exonerate their conscience of the burden of sin, to some godly,
learned, and discreet Minister of the word.

Cuius officium est public and priuatim pop. dei euangelica doctrina
consolari.

But such an even course must be held herein, vt tyrannidem abesse velint a se,
a populo superstitionem.

Therefore let me admonish you in the holy fear of God to seek the
forgiveness of sins, and the peace of your consciences in the holy and good
way which God has ordained, and especially upon your sick beds, when you are
enditing your whole life to God, neglect not the establishing of your hearts in
the remission of sins, by confession and absolution.

Let not a jealousy of Popish superstition, discourage you from this: for what
is there in christian religion, which they have not corrupted? but do you
separate the clean from, the vile, and forsake not the holy direction of Gods
word?

It is again objected: Object. 2.
if I must only ask forgiveness of God for my sin, why is there mention
here of my forgiving such as do trespass against me? Is it lawful for me to
ask man forgiveness of any sin?

I answer, that every sin that we commit, Sol.
does trespass God, being the preuarication of his law, but if that sin do
trespass our brother also, we must go and be reconciled to our brother: for
if it be possible, so much as lies in us, we must have peace with all men.

Man may forgive the offense done by his brother to him, but the offense done
to the law of God, none but God can forgive.

I will speak a bold word, it is a truth,

God may forgive a sin committed against man, so far as it is a breach of
the law of duty and obedience to him, without man, but God cannot forgive a
sin done by one man against another, except the man trespassed do forgive
it: for there can be no reconciliation between God and us, so long as there is
war between our brother and us.

Our Savior has expressed as much, When thou come to offer thy gift upon the
Altar, and remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
gift, go and be reconciled, etc.

It may appear also in the very case of debt, he that is a debtor to his
neighbor, and refuses to make him satisfaction, does break the law of the
kingdom, and is an offender against the King, and therefore is the kings
prisoner for breach of the Kings law: the King may forgive his prisoner the
breach of his law, wherein he is trespassed, but he cannot forgive the debt
which he owes to his subject.

If we would have a full forgiveness of our sins, wheresoever they offend,
let us labor to give satisfaction: but if we meet with harsh natures, to whom
no reasonable satisfaction is answerable, they beg their own judgment in
this petition, for so shall they be forgiven, as they forgive; and they shall
find God as inexorable, and as implacable, as themselves are.

6 Another duty we learn here in the word nobis, for we are taught charitably
to pray for the forgiveness of one another sins, not of our own only.

We do not pray God for the pardon of the sins of the Angels that fell, they
kept not their first estate, and the holy Ghost has revealed to us, that there
is no possibility of their reconciliation to God: for Saint Peter says.

2 Pet. 2.4.
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment.

The God of spirits spared not the spirits that transgressed, but the Prophet
David says,

Psalm. 63.2.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. Upon which words
Saint Augustine, quare omnis caro? quia carnem assumpsit.

Heb. 2.14.
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part of the same: but, Verily he took not on him the
nature of Angels, verse 16.
but he took on him the seed of Abraham.

The sin of Angels, for many reasons is an unpardonable sin, a sin unto
death, and Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 5.16.
I say not that thou pray for it.

1 Because all men derive themselves from one Adam, he stood or fell for the
whole species.

If God should have been extreme to mark and punish all that was amiss, who
could have stood? the Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men,
and found not one that did good, not one; and if God had not in judgment,
thought upon mercy, all mankind must needs have perished in their sins. But
God at once creating innumerable Angels, every one stood or fell to his own
proper good or evil.

2 The evil Angels corrupted themselves, but man was by their suggestion and
temptation, corrupted, and sins selfe-growing, selfe-sowne, are more
provoking then such as come by iniection and insinuation from without.

3 The Angels ambition was to be like God in his omnipotency, which is an
incommunicable property of divine essence, and cannot be imparted to any
creature: but man desired only to be like God in his omniscience, which we
knost was committed to the soul of Christ in our nature.

4 The Angels being intellectual spirits, and dwelling in the presence of God,
and enjoying the full light of glory, next to God, would not offend by error
or ignorance, but their transgression must needs be damnable apostacy from
God, and malicious opposition against God, which is the sin against the holy
Ghost, not to be (...)

The school says there be three sorts of will.

1 Of God who never turns.

2 Of Angels which may turn, but cannot return.

3 Of men, who turn and return.

But the Angels obstinacy is without return.

Therefore those Misericordes, as Augustine does call them, who deem a
possibility of the recovery of devils to the favor of God, and of their
salvation, do deceive themselves, and abuse the patience, and ouerweene the
mercy of God.

But we ought to pray one for another, so Saint James admonishes, Iam. 5.16.
pray one for another, that you may be healed, for the effectual fervent
prayer of the righteous man, avails much. It is not improbable that the
prayer of Christ, Luke 23.34. Act. 7.60.
father forgive them, served effectually to the conversion of the Centurion:
and the prayer of Stephen for the conversion of Saul, who kept the garments of
them that stoned him.

Job 42 8.
God himself declared to the friends of Job, that Job should pray for them to
him, and he promised to accept his face.

Or if you will look higher, God in a dream reproved Abimelech, for Sarah,
Abraham's wife, and he said to him. Genesis 20.7.
Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray
for thee, and thou shall live.

There is great reason why we should pray for the pardoning of one another
sins:

1 Out of the zeal of piety to God, that his name may be hallowed, that his
kingdom may be revealed and established, that his will may be done.
Unrighteousness and sin do hinder the glory of God in all these. So that if
it were possible to root out all sin, nothing were more to be desired, that
God might not be eclipsed in any of his glory.

2 Out of charity to them that sin, that we may so bear one another
burdens, and endeavor the healing of their soars: they be devils, and not
men, that would have their brethren perish in their sins.

3 Out of charity to our selves, that

1 We may add to our own glory in heaven, and increase our own joy in the
full society of the communion of Saints.

2 That we may make our own lives on earth more happy, living amongst such as
do fear the Lord, and having our conversation amongst such as are purified,
which remoueth the two dangerous infections of evil counsel, and evil
example, which corrupt many.

4 Out of an holy indignation against sin, as being a thing of it self
hateful and abominable, and extremely dangerous to both lives.

5 Out of a sanctified malice against Satan, who reigns in all the sons of
disobedience, whose pardon if we could obtain of God by our prayers, he
should have no subjects.

6 Out of faith in the sufficient sacrifice of Christ, for when all of us pray
for the forgiveness of all men's sins, we show that the fountain which God
has opened to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Israel, for sin,
and for uncleanness, can never be drawn dry, that there is water enough
therein to wash us all thoroughly, to wash us all clean, and to purge us all
from all sins.

This including all men in our prayers for the pardon of sins, does blame all
those, who by their evil example, or by their counsel, do provoke or entice
others to sin. How can thou say to God, dimitte nobis, when thou give thy
neighbor strong drink ^^ll (...)

When thou tellest him tales in the whisper of secrecy to enfire him against
his brother?

When thou by secret detraction, do make him appear worse then he is?

When thou reioycest in his sins, that they are the occasion of his ruin?

When thou make thy self sport with the sins of thy brother: all such
rejoicing is contrary to this petition, and God will tell thee that thou art
not in good earnest with him, when thou prayest to have him pardoned with thee,
and in good earnest, he that hears thy prayers, will not pardon thee the
sin of this petition. I conclude this point of our duty, 1 Search thy ways
for sin. 2 Confess, 3 Be contrite. 4 Amend thy life. 5 Seek this pardon
only from God. Psalm. 20.4.
6 Pray in charity, and the Lord give thee thy hearts desire, and fulfill all
thy counsel.


2 From the condition, annexed to this petition, as we forgive them that are
our debtors: or if we read it as a reason or motive to put home the petition
for pardon: for we forgive.

1 We are taught to take notice of our natural corruption, which is such, as
we cannot live in society one with another, but one way or other we shall be
offensive one to another.

Our Savior therefore teaches us in this petition, not to seek the pardon of
our own sins to God, but in the way of peace. If we find continual need of
Gods mercy to us, we must be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful, for
that is his law, proximum vt teipsum.

It is a great inducement to God, to persuade our prevailing with him in this
suite, if we see our hearts do freely forgive injuries done to us: therefore
when Christ taught us this prayer, this petition above all the rest, is
resumed, and more pressed then the rest, both in the affirmative, and in the
negative.

1 In the affirmative; Math. 6.14.15.
for if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you.

2 In the negative; But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your father forgive you your trespasses.

The reason is, because this pardoning of wrongs done to us, is a supernatural
grace, and does testify of us, that we have the image of God in us, for
naturally we return evil for evil, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, one evil
word, one evil work for another.

Therefore to fix this holy duty in us, our Savior binds us to it by this
petition, to look for no more mercy in heaven, then we do show to our
brethren here on earth with whom we live.

The parable of our Savior does make this reasonable: our debt to God is
10000. Talents, Math. 18.23.
our neighbors debt to us 100. pence, the odds is great: if we would be
forgiven this great sum, should not we forgive that small debt?

We are apt to aggrauate the wrongs we suffer one from another, Si patimur.
1 In fama.
and to extenuate the offense that we do to God. But be it that from our
neighbor we suffer in our good name; let us consider how much the glorious
name does suffer from us in our swearing and blaspheming, in our evil
conversation, which causes the name of God to be evil spoken of, amongst
those that are without: yet we would make God believe, that nothing is so dear
to us, as his holy name, because we make it our first petition, Hallowed be thy
name.

2 In bonis.
Be it that our neighbor offend us in our goods, by taking unjustly from us,
that which belongs to us; let us consider, that we have nothing but from the
hand of God, and all that we possess, is his, and we can call no more ours,
then what he gives, and we use to his glory, and the maintenance of our life
in soberness and honesty.

In all that we spend from these uses, we our selves are not owners, but
usurpers of all that we so misemploy, and for 100. pence that we lose of our
right, by the injury of men, we mis-spend of Gods treasure 10000. Talents,
lewdly and dishonourably to him, offensiuely to our own souls, and
injuriously to our brethren.

Compare all that pride, and gluttony, and drunkenness, and vanity, and
wantonness, and contention, spends prodigally; all that covetousness
congesteth and hides from the use of thy brother wretchedly, with that which
either thine own necessities, or thy christian charity do demand of thee,
thou shall find, that the wrong thou do, does more exceed the wrong thou
suffer in thy goods, then 10000. talents do exceed 100. pence.

3 Jn amicis.
Be it that thy brother wrong thee in thy friends, by seeking to distaste them to
thee, do not thou by evil conversation, corrupt the affections of thy
brother, to alienate his heart from the holy service of thy God?

4 Jn vita.
If thy brother seek thy life, do not thou in thy rebellion against God,
offend thy God in a more high degree, vngodding of him, and taking away his
honor which is his life, and destroying in thy self, and in thy brother, the
image of God?

Therefore consider thy self, and mayor parcas insane minori.

The God to whom thou prayest, is the God of peace, the Gospel which thou
professest, is the Gospel of peace, the kingdom that thou seek, is the
kingdom of peace; the way to it is via pacis. It was a good observation of
King Henry 7. that the proclamation of Christ coming into the world, was peace
upon earth, and the legacy of Christ's going out of the world, was, pacem meam
do vobis, and thence he concluded, that the life of a Christian man should be a
prosecution of peace.

The Apostle does press it earnestly.

If it be possible, as much as lies in you, Romans 12.18.
live peaceably with all men.

The soul of man does not animate and quicken the members that are cut off
from the body, Aug.
neither does the holy Ghost quicken the members of the Church that are not
united to the Church.

Therefore peacemakers are called the sons of God, for so does God love
peace, that he gave his only Son. By him to reconcile all things unto
himself, Col. 1.20.
and to set at peace through the blood of his cross, both the things on earth,
and the things in heaven.

The Apostle says, (...), for it is one of the hardest lessons that is taught
in the school of Christ, to forgive our enemies, and most contrary it is to
flesh and blood:

Saint Peter thought he had offered fair, when he asked Christ, quoties, how
often he should do it; and then added, vsque ad septies, but Christ made
nothing of it, non dico vsque ad septies. Therefore as when we have a work to
do that requires force, we put our whole strength to it: so the Apostle
bids, as much as in us lies, to strive for peace.

Our Savior by this petition does tell us plainly, that his care in this
precept is not all for our neighbor, that he may be forgiven his trespass: It
concerns us our selves so near, as the forgiving of our own sins does
import; for if we cannot plead our active pardon, we cannot desire this passive
pardon; we must be pardoners, if we will be pardoned. It is true, that in the
parable, the Master pardoned his servant his debt to him first, but when after
he heard complaint that his servant would not forgive his fellow his small
debt, he revoked the pardon, and redemanded the debt.

Therefore our Savior would have us work sure, first to forgive trespasses
done to us, then to pray for forgiveness of our trespasses.

2 Where we say, forgive us as we forgive, we do make profession of our
forgiveness of our debtors, that is, of such as have trespassed us.

Which admonishes us to be sincere in our forgiveness, as Christ says, if ye
from your heart forgive, for we pray to him who is called (...), a seer, who
sees our hearts, and knows whether we deal faithfully and sincerely with
him or not: therefore let us consider how we would be forgiven of God, that we
may so forgive.

1 We would be forgiven presently.

2 We would be forgiven heartily.

3 We would be forgiven totally.

4 We would be forgiven so, as there should remain no root of bitterness in
stock, to make a new quarrel, which we call forgiving and forgetting: it is
not forgiveness, if all that meet not so.

1 Some delay the pardon of their brethren, and so live in prosecution of
revenge, and in retribution of evil for evil, and when they have either
failed of their revenge, or effected it, then they forgive.

When God sent Nathan to reprove David for his double sin, David charged with
this debt, confessed it at the first voice of reprehension, and Nathan replied
to him, The Lord also has put away thy sin, 1 Samuel 12 13.
thou shall not dye.

Be ye merciful as your heavenly father is merciful, to forgive presently,
seek peace, much more give and yield it to them that seek it of thee; the
sooner, the better. Who will not stop a little leake in his ship, and make
his house theight, although it be but a small drippe that drinks in the rain?
David says, I labor for peace.

The forgiveness that is put off to the deathbed, when all hope of revenge
lies as sick as the diseased person, and as near to deaths door, is feared to
be rather the extortion of necessity, then the free work of piety and charity.

As he that gives, so he that forgiueth, does it twice, if he do it quickly.

2 Some forgive, but not heartily, they make fair weather, and heal the
sores, and bind up the broken bones of friendship and peace, with good
countenances, fair outward addresses, and sweet words: but their inward parts
are all gall and wormwood, their bowels are cruel:

Such hypocrites there be, whose kiss of reconciliation, is the seal of
treason, and their next imbracement is death, they say, as Ioab to Amasa, Art
thou well my brother, when they mean them a present death.

Saint Cyprian comparing Caine and Abel in their service of godly sacrifice,
says of them, neque in sacrificijs quae Abel and Cain primi obtulerunt, De
oratione domin.
munera eorum Deus, sed corda intuebatur, vt ille placeret in munere qui
placebat in cord, and therefore of Abel.

Merito ille dum in sacrificio dei talis esset, postmodum sacrificium deo
factus est.

3 Some forgive, but not totally, there remains yet some root of bitterness
for a day of requital, if it may come: if God should forgive us all the sins
of our whole life, and should retain but one, even the least of all for his
just revenge that one were enough to shut the gates of mercy and glory against
us.

Our Savior says, si quid habet aduersumte frater: though it be never so
little, go and be reconciled. Long and sincere friendship, does follow even
reckonings.

The Master says in the parable, I forgive thee all the debt.

4 Some forgive, but they cannot forget, Gods law is peremptorily against it:
Leuit. 19.18.
Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge: the original says, Thou shall
not avenge, nor keep; that is, remember: for, seruare intends seruare iram.
So Nahum says.

Nah 1.2.
The Lord reserueth wrath for his enemies: so that not only vltio, but
retentio is forbidden. The Hebrews have thus exemplified it, a man would
borrow an Axe of his neighbor, who will not lend him, he comes another time
to his neighbor to borrow, and he answers, thou would not lend me,
ergo, nor will I lend to thee, this is vltio.

Reuben would borrow money of Simeon, Simeon would not lend: Simeon after would
borrow of Reuben, he answers, I will not, I deny thee as thou did me; this
is retentio, both forbidden in the law.

Therefore as thou would be forgiven, so forgive, for thou shall be forgiven
as thou forgiuest. Forgive presently, that peace may not be neglected. Forgive
heartily, that peace may not be falsehearted. Forgive totally, that there be no
after-reckonings. Forgive and forget, that there may be an end of strife, and
then pray, sicut nos.

You see in this petition, how God has put an hook in our nosthrils, and
holds us to it, either we must have peace with men, or we shall have no
peace with him.

The uncharitable man does never pray this petition, but he beggeth judgment
at the hands of God, and desires Gods anger.

I find a complaint of Saint Chrysostom, that multi nolentes dare veniam
peccatoribus in se, fugiunt istam orationem orare.

I remember that once I was asked this question, by one troubled in his mind
for this: for having a desire, as he professed, to forgive great injuries done to
him, he yet suspected himself that his forgiveness was not so complete, as
it is here required, such as he sought at the hands of God, and he trembled to
think of asking a judgment against himself, therefore he demanded whether
he might not omit that clause in this petition: Sicut nos dimittimus. I
answered him with Saint Chrysostomes answer, 1 Qui non sic orat vt Christus
docuit, non est Christi Discipulus.

2 Non exaudit pater orationem, nisi quam filius dictauerit.



And further I added, that there is in flesh and blood, a reluctation against
all good, and therefore we may as well make question of the whole prayer, as of
that one clause.

For we pray that the name of God may be sanctified: yet we do not give the
honor due to that name.

We pray that the kingdom of God may come, yet we live out of the rule and awe
of it.

We pray that the will of God may be done here, as in heaven, yet we give way
continually to our own wills.

We pray for bread, yet we are not contented with Gods allowance.

We pray for pardon of our sins, and sin on.

We would not be led into temptation, yet every one is tempted by his own
concupiscence.

We would be delivered from evil, yet the corruptions of our nature do carry
us headlong, into all sorts of evil.

Our comfort is, that we send up these our prayers to our Father, who knows
both our natural infirmities, and our good desires proceeding from his spirit,
and what measure of grace he has given us, according to which he accepts our
prayers for Christ his sake.

And if I sin against that corruption in my self, which makes my forgiving
of my neighbor, defective and imperfect, doing my best to perform this act of
charity, according to the law of peace, though I come short of accomplishing
the same, I may safely desire that God to the uttermost of his perfect mercy,
would so forgive me, as I to the uttermost of that measure of grace which he
has given me, do the best to obey his law in forgiving my brother.

Enchirid. cap. 73.
Saint Augustine is comfortable and conformable in this, Sed quoniam perfectorum
sunt ista filiorum dei, huc se debet omnis fidelis extendere and humanum animum
ad hunc affectum orando deum secumque agendo luctandoque perducere. But I am
not of his mind in that which follows.

Procul dubio verba sponsionis huius implentur si homo rogatus vt dimittat,
dimittat ex cord: sicut rogans a deo petit dimitti.

For I resolve, that whether our enemy do ask us forgiveness or not, we are
bound by the law of charity, unasked to forgive him.

I conclude this point, pray as thou art taught, and do thy best to be like
that which thou pretendest to affect, even in mercy and love, like thy heavenly
father, lege Ecclus. 28.

3 We must have respect in this petition to trespasses committed against us,
for we must take heed that we intermeddle not with any other forgiveness,
then of such offenses are properly against our selves.

Sworn men are bound by virtue of their oath, to enquire after such as do not
live in the obedience of the laws of the Church, and of the Commonwealth,
their oath is faithful, to present such delinquents to superior authority,
that the ecclesiastical or civil Magistrate may proceed against such
delinquents to punish them according to law.

This is the oath of Church officers, and of the Sworne-men of the Iewry: let
me admonish such, that they make conscience of that oath, for the wisdom of
the State has put them in trust to give intelligence of law-breakers for the
common good, that by punishing of offenders, the law may stand in full strength.

In this case, let no Sworne-man take upon him to forgive an offender, by
suppressing this sworn intelligence: for the faults detected, are not
personal trespasses done to them, but of an higher nature, preuarications of
the laws of God, of the Church, or of the Commonwealth, and therefore out of
our power to remit them, against their oath to conceal them.

Mercy here is cruel to such as does deceive the trust. committed to them, and
break the oath sworn by the holy name of God, for God will not hold such
innocent: and it is cruelly to society, which is best preserved by inquisition
and delation of offenders.

This resolution of this case of conscience, does also clear another; for a
Magistrate, to whom the supreme and sovereign authority does give subordinate
regencie for administration of equal justice, though as a private person he
ought to remit offenses done to him, as he would have God forgive him; yet in
offenses done against the law, he has rules set him, from which he must not
swerve.

The sovereign Magistrate does commit to the subordinate, the dispensation of
his justice, and to this he is sworn: but he reserueth to himself, the
dispensation of mercy, to qualify and mitigate the rigor of law: so that
remission of offenses in that case, is out of the power of deputed Judges.

Quest.
Concerning cases of difference between man and man, the question is, whether
those that solicit God in this petition, may prosecute suits of law one
against another, seeing we stand so strictly obliged to forgiveness.

Our answer is, that in regard of the many differences which grow between men
here, God has ordained Magistracy, and political government, to set all to
rights, and to assign suum cuique. Therefore in all cases of variance, we
ought to resort to our Judges, and by men experienced in the laws, to allege
what we pretend for our right, and to submit our selves to their judicature.

So as children go to a father to judge between them, and this may be done in
charity of them who seek for nothing but equal justice.

They that mingle tricks of wit, untrue suggestions, cunning suppressions of
truth, corruption of Judges, or witnesses, or any other indirect conueyances
with their just cause, or bumbast an evil and lean cause with this unjust
addition, do highly offend God, and abuse the remedy which God has ordained
to establish peace.

They that maliciously pursue rightful cases, or cunningly color unrightful,
with the false dye of seeming pretenses, strive against charity and peace.

They that reinduce suits of molestation, making just laws, unjust rods to
scourge those whom God would have spared, trespass love.

But in a case of personal injury, by deprauation of our good name, by hurt to
our persons, or to any thing belonging to us: we may charitably forgive the
wrong done to us, and justly pursue the offender, ad dignam emendationem.

LVC. 11.4. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.


THis Petition is commonly by our late Writers, called the sixth and last
Petition of the Lords prayer. But the Fathers heretofore have divided it into
two, making seven petitions, whom I follow.

These four last petitions are chained together, with a conjunction copulative.

Give us our daily bread, that we may live, and forgive us all our sins past
and present, that we may be reconciled to thee.

And lead us not into temptation, that we may live in all godliness and
honesty hereafter. But deliver us from the evil one, that is, from Satan,
that he may have no power to corrupt our understandings, or affections.

This conjunction is doctrinall.

1 It teaches that we have no warrant to pray to God for the necessaries of
life, except our desire be to live well: for why should we desire life of God,
but that we may live to good works, which God has ordained for us, that we
should walk in them.

2 To live in our sins unrepented of us, unpardoned of God, is to live most
unhappily, therefore the former petition is to reconcile us to God for all
things past amiss, and these following petitions serve for preuentions of
offenses to come. O let me live, and I will praise thy name. Sin no more,
said Christ, lest some greater evil fall upon thee.

2 Reg. 1.
In the story of the poor widow that was much indebted, whom the creditor
threatened to take her two sons for bondmen, in satisfaction of the debt; when
she made her moan to Elisha that he would take compassion of her: Elisha
demanded what she had in the house, she answered, nothing but a pot of oil; he
willed her to borrow many empty vessels, and she did so, and poured out of her
pot, and filled them all, then said the Prophet, verse 7.
Go and sell the oil, pay the debt, and live thou and thy children of the
rest.

In this miracle of Gods mercy, our sins be our debts, justice is the
creditor which exacteth satisfaction, the oil that must pay the debt, is the
grace of God which brings salvation to all men. My grace (says Christ to
Paul) is sufficient for thee. Sufficient it is to pay the debt of all our
sins past: sufficient for us to live on in the time to come: for this oil we
pray in these petitions; forgive us our sins, demands so much as will pay
the debt; and lead us not into temptation, desires enough to maintain us for
the time to come, that we may not run again upon the score in a new
reckoning.

These two cares must not be parted, Christ has put them together, Ecce sanus
factus es, then follows, Noli amplius peccare.

For without this, nothing that we hear from God, nothing that we ask of God,
speedeth with him or us: for David says, If I regard wickedness in my heart,
Dominus nom ex audit, we must not be like dogs and swine, returning, etc. Psalm.
66.18. 2 Pet. 2.22.


We must, as Saint Peter advises, consider that the time past of our life may
suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, 1 Pet. 4.3.
lusts, excess of wine, reuellings, banquettings, etc.

There must be a forsaking of sin, before there can be a partaking of mercy,
as Solomon says, Pro. 28.13.
who so confesses and forsakes sins, shall have mercy.

There be two things which do endanger us.

1 A natural propension in us to sin, which makes us like tinder, apt to
take fire from a little spark; conceived and borne in sin and iniquity.

2 There is in temptation, a deceitful appearance of good, that tendreth to us
a sensual delight, which flesh and blood do soon relish and taste.

This petition does put off both these, when we desire the preventing grace of
God to sanctify our understanding and affections, so that temptation may not
fasten upon us.

The coherence and scope of this petition thus cleared, let us proceed in this
order.

1 To enquire what temptation is.

2 How God leads into it, against which we pray.

3 What duties are here required to be done of us that make this petition.

1 What temptation we pray against.

There is a temptation whereof often mention is made in Scripture, whereby God
does make trial of the wisdom, faith, hope and love of his children, of
their patience, and other virtues, both to make them better acquainted with
themselves, and to make use of their good example abroad, for confirming such
as are in the Church, and for recovering such as are departed from the Church,
and for bringing in such as are without the Church.

This is a fan by which God does divide the chafe from the wheat: it is the
fire which purges the metal, and refineth it.

God ever uses this for the good of his holy ones, this kind of temptation,
Aquin. describes thus, it is

Probatio alicuiu^, an sciat, an passit, an velit. And let no man suppose that
God uses this temptation to inform himself concerning the knowledge, power,
or will of his servants, for he knows all that is in man, better then the
spirit that is in him, for his hands made man, and fashioned him, and his
spirit searches all things, even arcana dei.

Genesis 22 1.
Thus was Abraham tempted, when God commanded him to offer his son.

And it came to pass after these thing, God did tempt Abraham.

It is noted, that the word rendered to tempt in that place, signifies a
lifting up of a thing for a sign; which expresses both what God did, and why
he did it.

1 What he did in this trial, he did lift up Abraham above former examples of
obedience and faith.

2 Why he did it, even for a sign, that the eyes of all posterity might be
fixed upon him* as a memorable president.

The author to the Hebrews, proclaims this amongst the great examples of
faith and obedience. By faith, Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac,
etc. Heb 11 17.


So Job was tried, and made an example of patience, so well known in the
Church, that Saint James says, ye have heard of the patience of Job. Iam 5.11.


But of this trial no more, because that is not the temptation here meant.

This is a provocation to evil, against which we pray, lest after God has
pardoned our former sins, we either relapse into the old, or fall into new
sins.

The word here used is significant, and expresses the thing meant, very fully;
for,

(...) is from (...), which signifies an undertaking of any thing by strength
and fraud, for (...) signifies both force and deceit; thence Pirates take
their name. And we pray against that malice and cunning wherewith the old
Serpent assaulteth us.

This kind of temptation is double.

1 From without us by Satan, whose deceiueablenesse too often mis-carryes us
to evil, and therefore he in his attempt against Christ in the wilderness,
is called (...).

2 From within us, and that is from the corruption of nature, and that seed of
evil which we derive by seminall traduction from our first transgressing and
faulty Parents, of which the Apostle says, Every man is tempted when he is
drawn away by his own lust, and intised: James 1.14.


In which words, the Apostle well describes this temptation, against which we
pray, for it consists of two parts,

1 Our concupiscence draws us away from the rule of Gods law, and the
obedience of it, as in the first of the Angels that sinned, they were drawn
away from that content that should have established them in the liking of their
high and glorious creation, by entertaining an aspiring sublimation of
themselves to an equality with God: whereas the condition of their creation
should have been a law to them, to have reposed them on the providence of
their maker.

So in the temptation of Euah, the Serpent began with her to question the law
of the forbidden fruit, and to move doubts concerning the equity of that law.

And ever since, our concupiscence corrupted with original impurity, resists
the law of God so far, as the law against sin does become an occasion of
sinning.

2 This concupiscence enticeth to do evil, for so the Angels being diuerted
from the content in the law of their creation, were entised to that sin of
rebellion, which lost them heaven.

And our Mother Euah seeing the fruit was fair, good to eat, and to be
desired for the knowledge of good and evil, was enticed to eat thereof.

And ever since, after we are once drawn away from God, and the obedience of
his law, we are enticed by our own concupiscence to obey the law of our
members, giving our concupiscence leave to neast in us, to conceive, and breed,
and bring forth, and hatch sin.

Against both these we pray, that we may neither be carried away from the
obedience that we owe to the law of God, nor caused to affect or do those
things which are contrary to this holy law, the rule of our life:

Object.
2 How we say to God, Ne nos inducas.

Some object, what need this petition, when S. James says, let no man say when
he is tempted, I am tempted of God, James 1.13.
for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man.

Sol.
To tempt* there as the scope of the place does declare, is to draw from God,
and to entise to do evil, for so the Apostle does express himself, and in
that sense God does tempt no man, for he that

Would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his truth, cannot
be suspected of unfaithfulness to his creature, to betray him to his ruin,
for he is called a faithful Creator: but as Saint Cyprian says.

Dat potestatem aduersum nos, 1 Vel ad poenam cum delinquimus

2 Vel ad gloriam cum probamur.



Both these ways God tries us, sometime by withdrawing his grace from us, and
leaving of us to our selves, that we may know by our yielding to the
temptations of Satan, how weak we are in our own strength, that we may not
presume upon our selves, but depend wholly upon him, for he is our rock and
strong hold.

Sometime by expressing us with sundry trials of our faith, to see if any thing
will support us from the love that we bear to God.

Against this we pray not wholly, James 1.2.
for the Apostle does bid us to count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, this is probatio fidei. David beggeth this of God, prove me O
Lord, and try me: Saint Augustine, Hic ure, hic seca: this is ever meant to
Gods glory and for our good, we deprecate it not wholly: we pray against the
first of these, which is Gods leading us into temptation, ad poenam cum
delinquimus: for this is Gods act for the punishment of some former, to leave
us to Satan's power for a time.

3 Desertio in poena.

So Job was by God led into temptation, when God gave Satan leave to vex him
with many afflictions, wherein God did so hide and conceal his protection,
that the faith and patience of Job were staggered, and suffered a very hard
assault.

And in like manner was Jeremiah led into temptation, when his passion brake
forth into some extremities.

And Saint Paul knew that it was God who led him into that great temptation,
when the Angel of Satan buffeted him, and he therefore did thrice beseech
the Lord that he might depart from him: this was one of Gods desertions,
wherein he left his faithful servants for a time, of which himself speaks
by his holy Prophet.

Isa. 54.7.
For a moment in mine anger, I hid my face from thee, for a little season.

During the fit, the servants of God wanting the light of this countenance of
God, discover great weakness, as you have heard in the former examples, and
it will better appear if you hear themselves utter their own passions.

David felt this desertion strongly, when he complained, Psalm. 71.7.
Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more?

8
Is his mercy clean gone for ever, does his promise fail for evermore?

9
Has God forgotten to be gracious, has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?



Here Gods desertion led David into temptation.

This kind of desertion in punishment, the Son of God himself felt on the
Cross, which brake forth into that bitter complaint, when he said,

Mat. 24.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Here was no doubt of the love of
God, but here the plaintiue smarted, and in the anguish of his pain,
complained of what he suffered, being for the time, engulfed in afflictions.

This was Gedeons case, the Angel of the Lord said to him, The Lord is with
thee, he replied, O my Lord, Judge 6.13.
if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? where be all his
miracles which our Fathers told us of; saying, Did not the Lord bring us out of
Egypt, but now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of
the Midianites.

Many of Gods faithful servants find and feel in themselves a decay of
faith, an unwillingness and unableness to pray, a fear and almost a despair
of the presence and favor of God, a quenching of the spirit in them.

Some are so far gone in this desertion, as to apprehend the disfavor of God
so deeply, as to see no way out of it for the time, and therefore they judge
themselves unworthy to live any longer, and are tempted by Satan to destroy
themselves.

Some are left in their sins, as David and Peter were, and many of Gods
Saints, who do many things amiss.

All these cases are full of danger, and require of us to be importunate
suitors to our God for his favor, that he would not lead us into any of
these temptations: that he would not be a looker on, or stand far off when we
are thus assaulted: that he would not keep in the influence of his grace, from
working effectually in us first, ne veniant, secondly, ne vincant.

And here for comfort of the faithful in these kind of temptations, we are
taught,

1 That there is danger in these temptations, but God has in mercy directed us
where to seek help, and remedy, even from our father which is in heaven, and
he that bids us ask his help, has promised to give to them that ask,
and to open to them that knock at the gates of his mercy; therefore Christ
bids us pray ne nos inducas.

2 That it is God that leads his servants into these temptations, from whence
we may comfortably conclude.

1 That they shall not prevail totally and finally against us: for God will
suffer no man to be tempted beyond his strength, but will give issue to the
temptation, though they do not suddenly find the way out of them, and though
they press, and oppress us for the time with great violence, for his
compassions fail not.

2 That he which taught us this prayer, the son of God was man, and himself
endured temptation, and was in all things tempted like to us, and overcame
these temptations for us.

3 That Christ our Savior does assist us in our temptations with his prayers
to the Father, as he said to Peter: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
may not fail.

4 That God in these spiritual and temporal desertions does give us grace for
grace, that if he hide himself from us, by withholding one necessary grace,
the want whereof does disquiet us, and put us in fear, yet he graciously
supplieth us otherwise, with some other favor, wherein he secretly signifies
to us that he has not quite forsaken us.

So when David by the treasonable insurrection of his son, saw a curtain
drawn between him and the face of his God, yet God in favor gave him an
humble and patient heart, to cast himself at his foot, and to tarry in
expectation of his will.

2 Samuel 15.26.
If the Lord thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do
to me as seems good in his eyes:

Though he give not the grace of taking away from us the Angel of Satan that
buffereth us as he did Paul: he says, my grace is sufficient for thee, he
armeth us with such fortification and munition, as shall safeguard us from
Satan's victory.

Or if he gives not the grace of remove of our temptations from us, in stead
thereof, he remoueth us in grace and good favor from them. The righteous is
taken away from the evil to come: so to Josiah. Behold, Isa 57.1. 2 Reg. 22.20.
I will gather thee to thy fathers in peace, and thine eyes shall not see the
evil that I will bring upon this place.

Or if he take away from us the sense of his love, and feeling of the comforts
of his spirit, in stead thereof, he gives us an holy desire and longing after
him, which the Apostle calls sighs and groans which cannot be expressed, as
in David, I cried unto God with my voice, Psalm. 77.1.
even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear unto me.

2 In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my soar ^^nne in the night, and
ceased not, my soul refused to be comforted.

Read on, and you shall find that God did not leave him comfortless, but when
he could not feel the favor of God, he found the grace of prayer, and
perceived that God heard him.

By this that has been said, it is plain, how God leads into temptation,
and that it is a malicious slander that is put upon the Protestants by the
shauelings of Rome, that we maintain God to be the author and suggestor of
sin.

Campian in his paradoxes of the Protestants, Rea. 8.
charge Master Calvin with this, and shamelesly cites a chapter in his
institutions, which bears this title, and makes it good by learned proofs.

Deumita impiorum opera vti and animos flectere ad exequenda sua iudicia vt
purus ipse ab omni labe maneat.

Wherein he maintains, that no evil is or can be done against the will of
God; for where were his providence, if any thing could be done whether he will
or no? so that there is not a bare permission of God, but there is the hand of
action in all evils; for seeing in him, all live, move and have their being,
there can be nothing done but by his power.

And Thomas of Aquine has put a difference between these two, Actio and
Actionis vitium: we cannot exclude the will and power of God, from the action,
we cannot include his approbation of the evil in the action.

Yet Maldonate the Jesuit, upon this petition, demands, quomodo nos deus in
tentationem inducitur, he answers, facile Caluinistae respondent; quia nos ad
peccandum impellit, he adds, facile est hareticum esse.

We reply facile est mendacem esse; Master Caluins book is in many hands, and
they that will read him upon this point, shall convince his accusers of
malicious calumniation, and shall find the truth of God clearly, and
learnedly, and unanswerably maintained against all contradiction and strife of
tongues.

3 What duties are required of those that move God in this petition.

1 We are admonished to know the danger that we are in of being tempted to
evil.

2 Of Gods justice in leaving many in their temptations for their punishment.

3 Of our easiness in yielding, of our impotencie in resisting temptations.

4 Of the necessity of faith to apprehend the remedy of this temptation.

5 Of the use and application of this remedy.

1 The danger.
The danger, as you have heard, is double.

1 From within us by our concupiscence.

2 From without us by Satan.

1 The danger from within us is by the Apostle Saint James well set forth, Iam.
1.14.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and
enticed.

Against this the Apostle instructs us.

Dearly beloved, I beseech you as pilgrims and strangers, abstain from
fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11.
which war against the soul. The way to put them off at the first breeding
of them, is to meet with them in their conception, and to kill them upon the
neast, according to the old rule, principijs obstat, Rom 8.13.
If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
But then sin is grown to a full stature when it comes to deeds of the
body, yet even then not invincible.

But it is not safe suffering of lust to hatch her yonglings, and to send them
abroad in deeds of the body, it is a surer way to begin sooner.

Blessed shall he be that takes and dasheth the little ones against the
stones: for it is a true rule, Psalm. 137.9.
that primi motus ad peccata sunt peccata.

We kill whole neasts of young vermin, not for any hurt that they have done
yet, but because they are ex genere noxio, they are inuisam genus: so must we
break the eggs of concupiscence, for as the Prophet says, Out of the
Serpents root, shall come forth a Cockatrice, Isa. 14.29.
and his fruit shall be a fiery flying Serpent.

Therefore the surest way is to lay our Axe to this root. And let no man
excuse himself of being overtaken with a temptation, for it is a man's own
fault, and not his excuse, if he be so miscarried, for this I dare say,

The unregenerate man by the light of the law written in his heart by the
finger of God, has understanding to distinguish between good and evil, and
though humane appetite do approve evil, yet humane reason does defy it.
Therefore to the natural man I say.

If he desire to lead a moral and civil life in the society of men, let him
rather be directed by his reason, then his appetite, and let reason doubt of
all the fair tenders of appetite, and prove all things, and hold only what is
good.

In the regenerate man, there is the spirit of God, and the will of man, these
the Apostle says, are contrary the one to the other, for the flesh, that is,
the will of man, lusts against the spirit, so that except by this spirit we
mortify those lusts, we shall suffer sin to reign in our mortal bodies, to
our obedience of it in the lusts thereof.

But he that desires to lead a christian and a holy life, Prou. 4.23.
is admonished, omnicustodia custodire cor suum, and when his own corruption
is kindling a fire in him, to give way to the spirit of God to blow it out: for
the spirit of God is not either idle or impotent in the children of God to
resist concupiscence if we do hearken to it, and embrace the good motions
thereof.

Here is the safety of a christian in this spiritual combat, for if we incline
to the better part, and rather suffer our selves to be led and guided by the
spirit of God, then by our own spirits; temptation to evil is soon put off,
and we overcome evil with goodness, therefore our rest must be that of
Joseph.

How shall I do this great evil, and so sin against God? If there be a
voice before us, wasting us to evil, God has told us, Isa. 30:21.
Thine ear shall hear a word behind thee, this is the way, walk ye in it,
when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.

If the natural man cannot do evil against his own reason, but that will
rise up against it to resist it, surely the regenerate man cannot do evil
against the conscience, and the secret check of the spirit of God, but he
shall be sure to hear of it.

This is a work of grace in the faithful servants of God, that they take
timely notice of these spawning lusts, and muster the graces of the spirit of
God, and array them against their first appearing, calling for help from him
that is mighty, in this petition: Lead us not into temptation.

2 Our second danger is from without us by Satan, who goes about sometimes,
as to Euah, with an apple of temptation, like a subtle Serpent, sometimes with
fire and tempests, and instruments of violence, as to Job.

In Jobs story we find how he comes into the presence of God, how he seeks
for leave to afflict, and how he spares not the uttermost of malice, so far
as his power and leave extends.

In Saint Peter's story we see how he desires to sift and winnow him.

In Saint Paul's story, we read how the angel of Satan buffeted him.

But especially in Christ's story, we behold him in his full strength, forty
days and forty nights, tempting him in the wilderness.

In all these, God himself had an hand; for having furnished our first Parents
with all graces belonging to a complete creation, he gave them an uncontrolled
freewill to do good or evil, and left them to Satan to prove them.

In Jobs story it is plain, that he hindered Satan to tempt the wisdom,
holiness, and patience of Job: In Saint Peter's story, Christ said that Satan
desired to sift him, and Christ gave him leave so to do.

And of Saint Paul it is expressly professed by himself, There was given to me a
thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7.
the messenger of Satan to buffet me.

And Christ himself was led by the spirit of God to his temptation.

1 Pet. 5 9.
Therefore our duty is taught by the Apostle, whom resist, steadfast in the faith.

2 Cor. 2.11.
Lest Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not ignorant of his
devices.

It is comfort to us that the Apostle does intimate, that Satan may be
resisted.

Therefore it is our own fault if Satan do prevail against us, seeing there
is in us a power to resist him.

This power, though it be not of our selves, yet it is within our selves in
that seed remaining in us, which is the grace of election, of which Saint John
speaks, and he that is with us, is greater then he that is against us: for
though our enemy be called Legion, because there are many, our Elohim, our one
Gods three and one, is able to tread Satan under our feet quickly.

Iam. 4. verse 7.
Submit your selves therefore to God, resist the devil, and he will fly from
you.

True it is of him, Non tam fortis est fortitudine sua, quam infirmitate nostra.

Let us therefore stoop as low as we can to him that made us, our faithful
Creator, custos hominum is his name, but let us rise up against Satan to
resist him. Christ gave us example, for when he by the word and spirit of God
resisted him, at last he drove him away for a season, sent away with an (...);
So when he came after closely conueying himself in the semblance of love, and
speaking in the mouth of Peter, dissuading the passion of Christ, yet he
discovered him there, and sent him packing with another (...).

And thus must we do, if we will avoid his temptations, remembering how Euah
lost her innocence, and Paradise with it, because she endured the treaty with
Satan, and stood out the disputation with him.

But thou man of God, fly those things.

Fly to this petition, and ask of God that he would not lead thee into
temptation, but that he would give thee both wisdom to discover it, and grace
to dislike it, and strength to resist it.

Satan's darts are fiery, and strongly shot, and cunningly aimed, the servants
of God have much ado to quench them.

When Satan had suggested to David to number the people, he propounded the
matter to Ioab, Ioab discerned the temptation, and dissuaded it, saying to
David, 2 Samuel 24.3.
Why does my Lord the King delight in this thing? But Satan had moved David to
this, and his temptation had taken so deep an impression in him, that he would
not hearken to good counsel.

So though Peter had warning of him by Christ, telling him how Satan desired
to sift him, telling him that that night he would attempt it, and that he would
yield: though he had engaged himself by solemn protestation against it,
though the temptation was to deny his Master, and that thrice, which seemed to
Peter a thing impossible to be wrought in him, yet because he resisted not
Satan in the very act of temptation, Satan prevailed, and Peter was foiled,
and till his fall, he remembered not the words of Jesus, then he did, and rose
up against Satan, and rained so many tears from his eyes, which in Saint
Augustine are called sanguis vulnerati cordis: that with those penitential
waters he both purged his defiled soul from the sin that he had committed,
and he quenched the fiery darts of Satan, who had polluted him.

This resistance must be constant, for Satan is called Beelzebub, the god of
flies: flies if they be beaten off, will come on again, so will Satan, for if
he be driven off from us once, he will not so give us over, but as Balak
brought Balaam from place to place, to try if any where he would curse Israel,
so will Satan do, leave no place, no time free from his assaults to do
mischief.

2 We find that God does sometimes in his justice leave men a while in
temptation for their punishment.

De sermon. Dom. in Mat l. 2. c. 14
Saint Augustine, Multi precando ita dicunt, ne patiaris nos induci in
tentationem, exponentes quomodo dictum est ne inducas, non enim per seipsum
inducit deus, sed induci patitur eum quem sine auxilio deseruerit, ordine
occultissimo and meritis.

The duty required of us here, is double.

1 That we take care, not to provoke God by our sins to this desertion of us.

Sometimes when God discerns us negligent in our duties of piety, cooling in
our zeal or charity, swelling in presumption of his favor, ouer-ioyed with
prosperity, better fed then taught, boasting of our knowledge, ouer-weening our
strength of grace, restie in idleness, or any other way ouergrowne with
self-love, he sends the Angel of Satan to cuffe and buffet us, till we know
him and our selves better.

Was not David sick of prosperity, when God left him to Satan to tempt him to
adultery, was he not sick of honor, when he would needs have his people
numbered, that he might know how great a King he was?

Was not Ezechiah sick of peace, when he showed his treasure to a strange
Ambassador?

Was not Peter sick of his faith, when he durst challenge Satan to a duel in
the protestation of his true loyalty to his Master?

Therefore God left them for a time to temptation, and taught us, that to fall
off from God never so little, puts us into the danger of Satan, therefore
tempt not God by sin, lest he lead thee into temptation.

2 We are taught our several duties to God, to our selves, and to our
brethren, from the consideration of this divine justice.

1 To God, that we must not think much when any such trial by temptation come
upon us, to murmr and repine at him, or to resist his right hand: for he
does this in his justice to punish our former sins, or by way of prevention,
to keep us from sins to come, or for our trial of faith, to establish us
the more in his grace, and to make use of our example: therefore let us rest
upon this, it is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do with me as it pleases him.

If he say, I have no delight in thee, lo here I am, etc. 2 Samuel 15.26. Is.
39.8.
good is the word of the Lord.

2 To our selves, if we feel temptations both coming thicker, and lying
heavier, and smarting more sharply upon us then before, let us consider this
to be done in the equal justice of God, whose judgments are saepe occulta,
but nunquam iniusta.

And remember that of Saint Paul, Romans 8.28.
All things work together for the good of them that love God: and Saint
Augustine, Aug.
Sine tentatione probatus esse nullus potest.

This is the Lords fire, and though it burn and scorch, it prevails not but
upon our dross, the gold is safe.

It is the Lords fan, it prevails only against the chafe, the good wheat
is the purer for it, and the fitter for the garner.

3 To our brethren, when we see them shaken with a temptation, and struggling
with sin, wrestling with Satan, and almost foiled: let us not judge them
forsaken of the Lord, but visited in his justice for their good, and you that
are spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering
your selves, lest you also be tempted.

Ply them with all spiritual consolations, even those especially wherewith God
has in like trials comforted you, and expect their happy coming forth of the
furnace of this probation with victory.

Pray for them with your selves, Lead not us O Lord into temptation, let not
the enemy prevail against us. This charity runs in every vein of this
prayer, no petition is without it, and every petitioner must be as hearty and
zealous in the cause of his brethren, as for himself, for we are members one
of another, and the law commands to love our neighbor as our self.

3 We must consider our facility in yielding, our impotency in resisting
temptations.

It is Saint Cyprians note upon this petition, Quando hoc rogamus, admonemur
infirmitatis and imbecillitatis nostrae, neque se insolenter extollat neque
sibi superbe atque arroganter aliquid assumat: neque aut confessionis aut
passionis gloriam suam ducat.

In temptations, the faithful are hardly distinguished from the reprobate,
which makes many of Gods beloved servants doubt whether they be in the state of
grace or no.

Yea, the elect of God have commonly a deep impression both of the conscience
of their sin, and of the sense of Gods wrath, and of fear, and of the
vengeance to come.

1 Therefore our duty in this case is to renounce our selves utterly, and to
lay down all confidence of our own strength, for by his own strength, none
can prevail.

Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes: this will cast us
upon the mercy of God, Job. 42.6.
and put us under the shadow of his wings.

2 In regard of our infirmity to resist temptations, our duty is as much as we
can to decline the battle, which is here desired: for Christ has not taught
us to petition God, to assist us in temptation, or to deliver us out of it, but
rather to keep us altogether from it.

Lead us not into temptation.

For he knows whereof we are made.

Never did any of the Saints of God come off so fair from temptations, but
that they had some very deep wound, and the scarre of it remained after the
healing.

Adam and Solomon had their falls, and the scarre remaining is, that to this day
many are unsatisfied concerning their salvation, and though there be no just
cause of such doubt, yet it may pass for a punishment, that their fall well
deserved.

Noah and Lot had their drunken fits, and the holy story has recorded them;
Josephus. David carries that blemish upon record, and his praise has that
exception, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite.

Job and Jeremy have their passions and pangs of impatience registered.

The pusillanimity of the Apostles, the special incredulity of Thomas, the
renegation of Peter, and his oblique treading reproved by Saint Paul: all these
are blemishes in their stories, and trophies in Satan's. Therefore O Lord lead
us not into temptation.

4 We must consider the necessity of faith, to apprehend this favor.

He that prays lead us not, must believe that,

1 We cannot be led by any opposite arm against his protection, it cannot be
done without him.

2 That he is able to divert all temptations from us, vt ne in ficiant, if he
please, vt ne interficiant, if they do their worst.

1 It is Cyprians note, qua in part ostenditur nihil contra aduersarium posse
nos, nisi Deus ante permiserit. He teaches us the duty arising hence, vt omnis
timor noster atque deuotio ad deum conuertatur. There is nothing to be feared
in a subordinate power, if we keep the supreme to friend; who regards the
frowns of any subject power, upon whom the face of his Sovereign shines
clear: from whence all inferior greatness does borrow light.

Who knows not that the power of Satan is all borrowed and limited,,
therefore no cause of fear from him if we cleave to the rock of our defense,
who is the holy one of Israel.

2 Seeing he in whom we trust, can divert temptations from us, we have warning
whither to go to prevent them, and this petition in our mouth, from a fervent
spirit, is the charm that puts them off, with this we go so defenced
against them, that Joseph's Mistress may solicit, day by day, her unchaste suit
for his dishonest welcome of her unlawful desires, and loose all her labor.

5 Concerning the right use and application of this remedy.

Seeing we find temptation so dangerous, and our God so just to punish by it,
our selves so apt to yield to it, so weak to resist it, seeing we know where
we may have help, I conclude this point:

Let every one that desires to escape this danger, and who would not fall in
the trial of his faith, labor to avoid temptations all that we can, and to
pray continually against them, that we may have Gods preventing grace to keep
us out of them, his subuecting grace to assist us in them, his filial grace,
delivering us always from them.

To this purpose let us take a learned fathers good counsel. Semper inueniat
te inimicus occupatum: pray continually, in all things, give thanks, be
hearing, or reading, or meditating on thy duty to God and thy neighbor,
remembering and confessing thy sins, deploring them, deprecating Gods wrath,
striving against thine own corruptions, indeuouring to amend thy life,
laboring always to have a good conscience before God and men, walking with
God.

It is Saint Augustines note upon this petition.

Cum sancti petant ne nos inferas in tentationem, De bona perse. c 7
quid aliud petunt? nisi vt in sanctitate perseuerent? ask of God wisdom
from above, to discern temptations, strength to resist them, faith to overcome
them.

And for those instruments of Satan that tempt thee to evil, know the voice
of Satan speaking in them, as Christ did when Peter tempted him, and say unto
them as Ahab did Eliah, have I found thee, O mine enemy?

If any tempt thee to wantonness, to drunkenness, to breach of the Sabbath,
to contention, enflaming thee against thy neighbor: say as Rhode did in the
acts of the Apostles, It is Peter's voice, it is the voice of Satan, Nec vox
hominem sonat, and put him off with an (...).

Let no Pelagian, selfe-opiniond, betray thee that thou should think, nulla
dei gratia adi^tos omnia peccata posse vitare.

There be two great dangers that we are yet subject to after God has in mercy
forgiven all our trespasses past.

1 Falling into new sins, for if Satan cannot prevail against us in one
temptation, he will assault us in another; it is said of him, that he has
Nomina mill, Mill nocendi arts: as David, though we never read him again
tempted either to adultery or murder, yet he was led into a new temptation,
to number the people.

And Peter though he never faulted more in denying his Master, yet Saint Paul
took him in the manner, for not walking pede recto.

For our original corruption has in it the seed of all kind of sins, and
many baits being at once in sight, it is an hard escape to quite them all.

2 The other danger is of relapse, for after repentance and pardon obtained, we
may fall again into the same sin, with much more danger then before,
especially such sins as custom has assiduated: as a common liar, a common
swearer, a common drunkard, a common breaker of the Sabbath.

How can we say that any of these sinners that live in the daily practice of
these sins, do repent them, or how dare they say, Lead us not into
temptation, when they love the works they do so well, as not to part with
them.

Relapses have so small comfort in holy Scripture, as it is observed by some
learned, that there is not one example of Scripture in either testament of
grace, after relapse, whereupon some of the ancient Fathers have gone too far
in denying possibility of grace, after recidiuation. I dare not go so far:
it is breaking of a bruised reed. Master Perkins in his book of the nature
and practice of repentance, does say,

We find no example in Scripture of recovery after relapse, yet in his book
of the conflicts of Satan with a Christian, names two examples, one of
Abraham, who twice said that Sarah was his sister: and of Joseph, who twice
swear by the life of Pharaoh.

He also charge David with more adulteries also in maintaining many wives.
But as in the body, so in the soul, relapses are full of danger.

LVC. 11.4. But deliver us from evil.


I Follow the most ancient, who make this the seventh Petition of this prayer;
for temptation and evil are not all one, every evil is not temptation, nor
every temptation evil.

I distinguish them thus!

In the former petition we pray that we may do no evil, in this, that we may
suffer none, in the former is malum culpae, in this malum poenae is deprecated.

Both against the devil.

1 Ne doceat malum.

2 Ne noceat malo.

1 That he seduce us not, against Massah.

2 That he torment us not, against Meribah.

This is like David's prayer.

Deliver me out of the mire, let me not sink, Psalm. 69.14.
let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

Let not the water flood ouerflow me, 15
neither let the deep swallow me up, let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

To proceed in this, as in the former petitions, let us 1 Consider what is
meant by evil. 2 What we desire under the name of deliverance. 3 What duties
this petition teaches us.


1 What we mean by evil.
Saint Cyprian, Post ista omnia in consummationem orationis venit clausula
vniuersas petitiones and preces nostras collecta breuitate concludens.

He understands this evil here deprecated to reprehend, aduersa cuncta quae
contra nos in hoc mundo molitur inimicus.

Quando dicimus liberanos a malo, nihil remanet quod vltra debeat, a nobis
postulari, cum semel protectionem dei aduersus malum petamus, qua impetrata
contra omnia quae diabolus and mundus operantur securi stamus and tuti.

Quis enim ei de saeculo metus est, cui in saeculo deus tutor est.

Saint Augustine says, A malo in quod inducti sumus, a malo in quod induci
possumus.

Ludolph. a malo praesenti, praeterito, futuro.

Augustine again, ab inimico, and a peccato.

Saint Ambrose before him understood it so.

I embrace my former exposition as most consonant to the course of our prayer,
and fitted to our necessities.

1 Give us bread that we may live.

2 Forgive us all our sins past and present, that we may live well.

3 Lead us not into temptation, that we may prevent sin to come.

4 Deliver us from all evils that may afflict and punish us in the time to
come: that is, 1 A malo quod sumus.

2 A malo: i. a diabolo.

3 A malo quod meriti sumus.



1 A malo quod sumus.
1 We are so corrupt by nature, being borne filij irae that we had need to pray
to be delivered from it, not only as it is our pollution, defiling us, but as
it is our rod scourging, rather our Scorpion stinging us.

Sin is a burden, David complains of it, too heavy for him to bear, and
as we desire to be washed from the filth and pollution of it, so desire we to
be eased from the importable burden of it: from the terrors of a guilty
conscience, from the fear of the wages of it; for, stipendium peccati mors,
from the shame of it in the world, from the grief of it in the heart; for they
that hide sin in the bosom, carry all these rods about them. There is no
vexation comparable to that of a guilty conscience, it makes the inward man
like the furious rage of the sea, foaming out froth and filth.

Isidore tells us as we shall find it, Conscientia rei semper in poena est.

This evil is best declared and revealed to us, if we do consider,

1 That the holy word of truth has plainly affirmed, that all the elect of
God are washed in the blood of Christ, and have the free and full forgiveness
of all their sins sealed to them by the oracle of truth, by God who cannot
lie, by two immutable things: his word and oath.

2 That notwithstanding this certain sealed pardon given by God, obtained by
Jesus Christ, yet God for the punishment of sin, does in his severe justice,
leave his faithful servants to the carke and torment of a guilty conscience,
which for want of faith to sue out this pardon, and to plead it at the court of
justice, does almost lead the distressed guilty person to the gates of hell.

1 The evil that here we deprecate, is the terror of the conscience, wanting
faith to make a comfortable application of all the gracious promises of God to
the elect, taking them home to our selves.

2 Another evil is presumption, laying hold upon these promises without faith.

1 For the want of faith.

It is true that the faith of the elect cannot fail finally or totally.

1 For the foundation of God is sealed with this seal, the Lord knows who
are his.

2 The grace of election is the gift and calling of God, and his gifts and
calling are without repentance.

3 Whom, he loves, to the end he loves them:

4 His promise, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.

5 His gift, he has given the elect to his son, and no man shall take them
out of his hands.

6 Christ prays for them; I pray for those whom thou have given me.

But the evil that we may suffer herein, is our want of faith to believe that
we are of that number, for the conscience accuses us, and lays our sins in
order before us, and shows us the wages of this sin to be death:

Job 13.23.
Job was in this distress when he complained, How many are mine iniquities and
sins? make me to know my transgressions and my sin.

24.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy?

In this distress was David, when he said in the bitterness of expostulation,

Psalm. 77.7.
Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more?

8.
Is his mercy clean gone for ever, does his promise fail for evermore?

Has God forgotten to be gracious, 9
has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?

What greater evil can there be then this? it is vinum furoris, a cup of
vinegar and gall.

David was in the very pit when he prayed.

Let not the deep swallow me up, Psalm. 69.15.
and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

This evil we pray God to divert from us, that our faith may not fail us,
though our feeling do; and because the best of Gods servants on earth may have
some of these cold shaking fits of fear, Christ has put this petition in our
mouths, libera nos a malo.

2 Another evil in the state of a Christian is, presumption, when we make too
bold with our God; this is not faith, but the corruption of it: corruption
optimi pessima: O keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, so shall I be
innocent from the great offenses.

1 As presumption is a sin in act, we pray against it in Dimitte nobis debita
nostra.

As it is a sin that we fear to be coming on by our corrupt nature
inclining us to it, so we pray against it in ne nos inducas.

3 But we must consider presumption as it may be a punishment, a rod of God
to scourge us for some other sin, and so we pray to be delivered from it in
this petition.

This presumption whether it build too much upon the experience of Gods former
favor, as David, dixi in cord meo, nunquam mouebor: tu domine etc.

Or if it let go the hold that it has upon God, and rest it self upon some
way of our own, as in our Paradise Parents, who found a trick to better their
own creation, by being like to God; poena est.

Generally it pleases God to punish one sin by another, as we have great
and full examples: Saint Paul says, that the people falling into idolatry,
Therefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, Romans 1.24.
through the lusts of their own hearts to dishonor their own bodies between
themselves: and again, 26
For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections.

So when David waxed wanton of his peace and prosperity, and begun to forget
God, God gave him up to uncleanness, to defile his body with adultery, and
after that to hide it with murder: so did he Peter, for sinning in presumption
of the strength of his faith to resist Satan: God gave him up to the denial
of his Master, and to maintain that with swearing and protestation.

Against this we pray, deliver us from evil, that evil of sinning, which
draws on and increases sin, till it make it out of measure sinful: for
there is such a concatenation of sins, that if God leave us in one sin, and
heal not our souls, he whose name is Legion, because they are many, will
soon bring in seven spirits worse then the former.

2 A malo, i. a diabolo.
He is (...). He compasses the earth to and fro, as he confesses in Job: and
he goes about says Saint Peter, like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour, and
Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, I fear lest by any means, 2 Cor. 11.3.
as the Scripture beguiled Euah through his subtilty, so your mind should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.

1 The fury of this violent enemy is to be feared, for though his power be so
limited, that without leave, he cannot hurt us: yet his malice is such to us,
that he will never give over his provocation of us to ill by his temptations,
and his accusation of us to God for our offenses, therefore he is called The
accuser of the brethren. The Apostle does express him formidable, when he
puts a Christian to it, to put on the whole armor of God to defend us
against him. For the power of Satan is to flesh and blood invincible, it
cannot resist him, whereas the greatest force of flesh and blood has been by
flesh and blood resisted and subdued. The great sons of Anak, the mighty
Goliath, and his brethren, whole armies of valiant men, have been put to the
worst, but Satan was never conquered by mere man.

2 The malice of Satan to mankind is implacable, for he hates God, and the
image of God in man, makes matter of unreconcilable malignity, there is no
safety in yielding to him; whom he kisseth, he betrayeth, for he is a murderer
from the beginning.

3 The cunning of Satan is unmatchable for man, he is the old Serpent, and he
has his wiles as the Apostle calls them, (...), fraudulent circumuentions
pretensed to be the ways wherein we ought to walk: flesh and blood cannot
ouer-reach him. And to advance his cunning, he is

1 Invisible, for he is about us unseen.

2 He is privy to all our words and works.

3 He is unwearied in his watch.

4 Not hindered in his passage to and fro, being a spirit quick of motion.

5 Assisted with innumerable angels of darkness, nimble mormies to negotiate
for him.

Who would have suspected the devil in the bosom of Judas Iscariot, or in the
mouth of Peter? yet Adam met with him in the faire-spoken tongue of Euah, and
was beguiled by him.

Therefore we have cause to pray heartily and continually, deliver us from the
evil one.

3 Deliver us a malo quod meriti sumus, we have deserved punishments of our
sins here in our bodies, in our souls, in our goods, in our good name, in
our life, the second death, even the nethermost hell: against all these we
pray, Libera nos Domine.

Generally we deprecate all afflictions of body and mind, which follow sin
as the punishment of it; for there is no punishment in it self good, it is
called Malum poenae. Is there any evil in the city, and I have not done it.

Object.
Among the many exceptions that are taken against our book of Common prayer,
this is quarrelled by some Ministers of Devonshire, and Cornwall, because in
the Collect for the 22. Sunday after Trinity, our Church prays thus, Lord we
beseech thee to keep thy household the Church in continual godliness, that
through thy protection it may be free from all adversities.

Again, this they object,

That this petition is against the manifest word of God, and against his decree
and true faith, for it is written, Acts 14.21.
We must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God: and,

2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecutions: and,



Ioh. 16.33.
In the world ye shall have tribulation. God has promised that we shall not be
swallowed up of adversity, but no promise that we shall be free from all: ergo,

To pray for that whereof we have no proof, is against faith, and so sin.

Sol.
To this our answer is,

1 That it is no sin to pray against the decree of God concerning our
punishment by adversities.

1 Because this decree of God is reuocable, as appears by the example of the
Ninevites, to whom Jonah preached, threatening them destruction withing forty
days; and God defended his truth and justice against Jonah, who took the
reuocation thereof impatiently: which example proves these decrees of God to
be conditional, with exception of true repentance.

And Zephany, Zeph 2.2
preaching repentance to Judah and Jerusalem, admonishes them to hasten their
repentance, before the decree bring forth. And though the decree pass, yet he
comfort them. It may be ye shall be hid in the day of she Lords anger.

Therefore the word of God is our warrant to pray against the decree of God,
and our possibility is double:

Either in the auersment of the decree.

Or in our occultation from the force of it:

Did not Christ, who says, in the world you shall have afflictions, pray
against this decree.

I pray not that thou should take them out of the world; but that thou
should keep them from evil. Io. 17.15.
Where he uses the same word that is here used in this petition.

What evil does he mean there, but both Satan the evil one, and all evils
both of sin and punishment, even all adversities.

2 Christ himself who came into the world to be made a sacrifice for our
sin by his death on the cross, who foreknew, and foretold what he should
suffer at Jerusalem, and went thither of purpose to undergo that bitter
passion, and to drink of that cup, yet he prayed three times to his father to
let that cup pass from him.

If our wisdom allege that that prayer was with reservation of his fathers
will, let our charity plead the same for our Church prayer, that we desire of
God to be free from all adversities with that reservation, as in this prayer,
fiat voluntas tua; then, libera a nos a malo.

3 Here they allege that we have no promise to secure us against all
adversities, what say they to the promises made by Moses to them that keep the
law: there is no evil to them that have those blessings. Deuteronomy. 28.
And what say they to the promise of David. There shall no evil happen unto
thee, Ps. 51 10.
neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. May not we say,

Blessed are the people that are in such a case?

May we not pray to be in such a case?

Sure we may pray for the protection of God that includes a deliverance from
all adversity.

Again: the Psalmist says, Ps. 121.7.
The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall preserve thy soul.

This is that we pray for in libera nos a malo.

4 In our Church Collect we pray to be free from all adversities. And if we
come to take a full weight of the word adversities, does it not signify such
things only as are against us?

This word will not bear the stresse to include all afflictions and
tribulations whatsoever, for in the afflictions of the just there is bonum.

Ps. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted.

This bonum is no adversity, it is not against us; but as Physic which is
against the disease.

Our prayer is, libera nos, not morbis nostris.

There is malum in affliction, in poverty, in losses, in defamation, etc.

There evil is in all that we have, in all that we suffer, not in the nature,
but in the use of them; vermis divitiarum: against this we pray.

The wise son of Iakeh saw this evil in poverty and in riches, and prayed
against it: the evil of riches is, Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who
is the Lord?

The evil of poverty is, Lest I be poor, and steal, Pro. 30.9.
and take the name, of my God in vain.

The evil of honor is pride, Lest thy heart be exalted above thy brethren.

The evil of power and authority, is oppression.

The evil of a low degree is envy: against all these we pray; these are
adversities. Libera nos.

Therefore our Church Letany, like a comment upon this text, like a descant
upon this plainsong, does express this petition more at large.

2 Declaring from what we desire to be delivered: from all evil and
mischief, etc. in four several eiaculations.

2 By what we desire to be delivered, that is, by that which Christ was, by
that he did, and by that he suffered, in two. By the mystery of his holy
incarnation, etc.

3 In what times specially of danger we desire to be delivered: that is, in
all times of tribulation, in all times of prosperity, in the hour of death and
at the day of judgment.

Which prayer of the Church though it has not pleased all, yet is it
warantable by this last petition of the Lords prayer, and sober judgments may
make an holy use of it.

There is a particular enumeration of many evils to which we are here subject,
especially our sin, which breeds and spawneth them all: let our holy
thoughts comprehend them all in this one full petition. Deliver us from evil.

Sed libera nos a malo. We may also include in this petition, all the present
and incumbent calamities of life; all present pains in our bodies, or griefs
in our minds, all wants of things necessary for life, and whatsoever present
affliction distresseth our own persons, or any member of the Church of God.

All evils personal, or popular.

For our Savior says, Mat. 6.34.
Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

Every day then has it evil, and brings with it sundry inconveniences,
which we desire God to put off from us.

And as we beg bread for the food of this day, and pardon of sins for this
day, and deprecate this days temptations to evil; so we pray against this
days vexations, that nothing may disquiet or molest us, to hinder the service
of our God, or the labors in our several callings.

For Job also tells us by his experience.

Io. 14.1.
Man that is borne of woman is of few days, and full of trouble.

The best of Gods servants commonly smart most in these daily grieuances, for
judgment begins at Gods house.

David makes great moan, often in his Psalms, griefs in his body,
unquietness in his soul, persecutions from his enemies, and innumerable
vexations.

2 Cor 11.23.
S. Paul complains of labors, stripes, imprisonments, shipwreck, many perils
by land, and by sea, weariness, painfulnesse, watching, fasting, hunger,
thirst, cold, nakedness.

And who is he that walks conscionably in the fear of God, that has not
cause to complain with David, Innumerable troubles have compassed me about.

2 The remedy of this. Pater noster libera nos.

The deliverance here desired of our father, is that copiosa redemptio,
plentiful redemption which David does speak of, which is

By grace of prevention to keep them off from us, ne ingruant:

2 By grace of subuention to support us in these evils, ne opprimant.

3 By grace of full deliverance to remove them utterly from us, ne destruant.

1 For the grace of prevention.
David was very near a shrewd turn when Saul the king threw his iauelin at
him. 1 Samuel 29.9.


So was he when Michall conveyed him away through a window, 12.
that he might escape the messengers which Saul sent of purpose to kill him.

S. Paul had such a deliverance.

In Damascus the Governor under Aretas the king kept the city with a garrison,
desirous to apprehend me. 2 Cor. 11*32.


And through the windows in a basket I was let down by the wall, and escaped.

The Scripture is full of examples of this kind, and he that observes well the
course of his own life, will find many of these gracious preuentions of evil,
wherewith the hand of our great deliverer has kept off many evils from him.

Destruction was come even to the very gates of Nineveh, and within forty days
all had perished, had not mercy interposed.

In 88. when Spain girded on her harness against this land, and came
hitherward with purpose to invade, with the Popes promise to conquer, and
possess this kingdom, here was the Devil suggesting, the Pope abetting, and
the Spaniard attempting, and God preventing.

In 1605 the machination of the powder treason by the sons of Belial, men of
blood, the corroboration of the plot by the agents for the Pope: the secret
abetment of it from Spain: the prosecution of it to the day of destruction,
lost all their strength, and spit their venom upon themselves, in the defeat
of their treason, the destruction of the traitors, and in the perpetual
reproach of Popish religion, to all the ends of the world, and to the last
period of time. All this by this preventing goodness of God, who kept us from
the evil, and would not suffer us to fall into the pit that they had dug
for our souls.

For this Christ prayed his father.

Pater, si possibile est, transeat hic calix.

And this is that which is promised to the faithful.

Ps. 91.10.
There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.

11
He shall give his Angels charge, ne offendas.

This is the chiefest of Gods deliverances, and the fullest of Gods temporal
mercies: this also is a common and usual tenderness of God to us, to preserve
us from danger, but this is neither so sensibly perceived, nor received so
thankfully as it deserves. It may be we may report our strange escapes with
wonder, and tell them for news: but we do not commonly give God the honor due
to his name for them, by praising him for them as we ought.

2 The grace of subuention in evils.
This was the favor that the father did to the son, in the agony that he
suffered in the garden; for he sent to him then.

Luke 22 43.
And there appeared to him an Angel from heaven strengthening him.

Christ our loving Savior chose rather to be comforted in his sorrows, then
to be kept quite from them, for he did undergo them for us, as S. Ambrose
sweetly says.

Suscepit tristitiam meam, vt mihi largiretur laetitiam suam: and again.

Debuit dolorem suscipere vt vinceret. And God sent to him his Angel to
comfort him in this distress, as Beda says.

Sicut propter nos tristis est, and propter nos confortatur: that we might know
that so many as are by faith united to Christ, have interest in Gods spiritual
consolations in the midst of all troubles.

Thus Saint Paul was comforted aboard the ship in his dangerous voyage to Rome,
Acts 27.23.
the Angel of the Lord appeared to him, and promised him his own life, and
all their lives that sailed with him.

Thus was Noah supported in the deluge of the whole world: Lot in the
conflagration of Sodom: Daniel in the den of Lions: the three Children in the
fiery furnace: Joseph in the prison: Peter also being in ward.

Our Father to whom we pray, 2 Cor. 2.3.4.
even as Jonah from the belly of hell, is called the father of mercies, and the
God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulations, that we may be
able to comfort you which be in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God.

So he himself is a comforter, and he would have us comforters one to another,
and his Angels be comforters.

Yet for all this, to make up a full consolation, Christ says, I will give you
another comforter, and he promises his abode with us for ever.

This grace of subuention, though it do not quit the afflictions, yet it
takes away the evil of them, so that the Saints of God are expressed, rejoicing
in tribulations; which they could not do, if the evil thereof were not
removed.

This mercy of subuention, if neither charity nor zeal desire it, yet smart
and pain will extort it from men, for who suffers pain or grief, or loss,
or infamy, but in the pang of the fit, he cries God help me?

3 The grace of full deliverance.

Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
them all.

The snare is broken, we are delivered.

This favor Noah and Lot had, so had Daniel and the three Children: first
comforted in tribulations, then delivered from them; and Joseph, of whom it is
said, that they put his feet in the stocks, the iron entered into his soul.

He had the innocence of his cause to comfort him, and though for a time he did
suffer this affliction in the prison as a malefactor, (for so we must
understand the story) yet after some time of suffering, God did give him
favor in the sight of the Keeper, and then he had comfort in his captivity.

Psalm 105.19.
And as the Psalmist says, he abode there until the time that his word came:
the word of the Lord tried him.

20
The King sent, and loosed him, the ruler of the people, and let him go free.

The time when his word came, was the time when he interpreted to Pharaoh his
double dream, then the word of the Lord tried him, and approved him innocent
of the great offense for which he lay bound.

We can cry loud in the smart of pain and grief, for this full deliverance,
as Saint Paul, when he had as he says, a Thorn in the flesh, the messenger
of Satan to buffet him.

Which I conceive to be some sharp bodily sickness, accompanied with some
strong and dangerous temptations.

But in that affliction, as David says, when his sore ran and ceased not, he
confesses, for this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart
from me. 2 Cor. ^2.8.


Here he craves deliverance from evil, a full riddance, such as may amount to
a final departure of it from him.

This kind of deliverance God does esteem meritorious, and therefore he
puts it in the front of the law: I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the house of bondage: this was but a figure of our deliverance from the
devil: for which he exacteth a strict obedience of his whole law.

And we are delivered still from evils, for that being delivered from the hand
of our enemies, etc. liberati de manu inimicorum serntamus ei:

2 Next follows the deliverer.

We have warrant here to ask deliverance of none, to seek deliverance no
where, but from God: for as David says, Our help is in the name of the Lord
who made heaven and earth.

The heathens had their two sorts of gods.

1 Their white gods, to whom they went for all good turns.

2 Their black gods, which were depulsores malorum, they resorted to them
against evils.

We know but one God, and of him we say, Isa. 25.9.
Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the
Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

This agrees with the title that Job gives to God: O thou preserver of men.

Job 7.20. 1 Pet 4.19.
And that which Saint Peter gives him, who calls him a faithful Creator.

God himself tells us so.

Isa. 45.21.22.
There is no God beside me, a just God and a Savior, there is none beside me.

Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and
there is none else.

Three times together in two verses he has excluded all other: there is none
else.

Let us see how they have sped that sought deliverance any other way, and not
from God.

In the great famine of Samaria, a woman sues to the King, ^ Reg. 6.26.27.
crying, Help my Lord, O King, but the King answered her, If the Lord do not
help thee, whence should I help thee? out of the barn floor or out of the
winepresse?

And therefore David says, Trust not in Princes, nor in any son of man, for
there is no help in them.

In the danger of war, Israel sought help from Egypt, and they had this
thank for their labor.

Is 32.1.
Woe be to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and
trust in Chariots, and in horsemen, because they are many, and very strong, but
they look not to the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord.

3 Here is their error: the Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses
flesh and not spirit, when the Lord shall stretch forth his hand, he that
helps shall fall, and he that is helped, shall fall down, and they shall all
fail together.

2 Chronicles. 16.12
In disease, Asa King of Judah, committed that error recorded to his infamy.

In the 39. year of his reign, he was diseased in his feet, until his
disease was exceeding great, yet in his disease he sought not to the Lord, but
to the Physicians.

To the Lord, and not to the Physicians, to the Physicians, and not to the
Lord, both wrong. To both the author and means he should have sought.

4 Saul wanting help in case of intelligence, Witches* 2 Samuel 28.7^
went to consult Almighty God as he had used to do in his serious affairs
often with good success. But the Lord answered him not.

Therefore in that distress he went to the woman the Witch of Endor, that had
a familiar spirit, and she presented to him a representation of Samuel, who was
dead, from whom he received a true prediction of his future sorrows.

Whether the success of this example, or the natural itch that is in our
desire to know future events, or whatsoever other heathenish rapture does
transport many, so it is, that Witches and Wizards are yet frequented, both for
intelligence and health, in griefs and loss, as if he that is evil in
abstract and concrete, could be author of any good to men.

This hangs not well together, to pray to God to deliver us from evil, and
crave help of him who is of all evils the worst: to demand the truth of a
liar, to seek health of a murderer, to procure deliverance, or desire help
from the devil.

David says well, that God made man pure, but he sought many inventions.

Some in evils either feared or prement, 5 Jesus.
fly to the name of Jesus, not religiously trusting in him that carries
salvation in his name, but superstitiously ouer-weening the letters, syllables,
and sound of that name, as if the devil were afraid of that word.

And the cunning Serpent has not spared sometimes to pretend a fear of it, of
purpose to nourish that superstition, which has made it passible in the Church
of Rome. But Satan dares show himself against that name, as we see.

Acts 19.13.
Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over
them that had unclean spirits, the name of the Lord Jesus: saying, we adjure
you by Jesus, whom Paul preached.

But observe the success.

16.
The man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt upon them, and overcame them, and
prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

Did this abate any thing of the honor or power of that name amongst the
faithful? the next verse says no.

17.
And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus, and
fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

For they did rightly conceive that the name of Jesus was profaned by those
exorcists, seeing not that name, but the faith in it, was the rod of Satan,
for the faith of Gods people has power not from the syllables of that name,
but from the efficacy of his power, who carries that name to scourge Satan.

Signum crucis.
6 Others for prevention or subuention in evils, have reforted to the sign of
the Cross, and it is in the Church of Rome an ordinary munition against all
evils.

The Popish Legends are full of pretty tales of the great wonders that the
sign of the Cross has effected in depulsion of evils.

Dialog. lib. 3 c. 7.
Gregory the great tells a true story: quia pene tanti de eo testes sunt quanti
babitatores eiusdem loci existunt.

Yet none could testify it but upon one man's credit, a Jew belated and wanting
lodging, reposed himself near to Apolloes Temple in Rome, qui quam^is fidem
crucis non haberet, signo tamen crucis samuniri curabat.

To that place came a congregation of evil spirits, declaring to their chief
an account of the evil they had suggested that day.

One of them told how he had tempted one Andreas a Bishop, to some loose
desires; the chief of them, and all the rest urged his further proceeding
therein.

After espying themselves over heard by the Jew which lay quietly by them, they
thought to have done him a mischief, but he was so fenced with the sign of
the Cross, that they could not, but left him, and disappeared.

The next day the Jew told the Bishop what he had heard, what he had done, and
the Bishop was by him preserved against Satan, he by the Bishop catechized and
baptized.

Thomas Cantipratanus a suffragan Bishop, Lib. 1. c. 25. parag. 6.
a great collectour and register of miracles, reports from his own eyes: he
says,

Proprijs oculis vidi: he travailed 40. miles of purpose, and there laet is
oculis vidit.

One Voluandus, a Prior of the Predicants, used ever in life, often to sign
his breast with the sign of the Cross; his bones after being taken up to be
deposited in another place, they saw upon his breast bone, the sign of the
Cross, of a massy and bony substance, quasi scutum cordis.

I should surfeit your christian patience, if I should recount to you the legend
of Saint Francis and the Wolf, how he saved himself, and overcame the cruelty
of the Wolf, only by the sign of the Cross, and after by gentle
persuasions, made the Wolf as tame as any Lamb, and made the Wolf promise
him never to use any cruelty again.

For why should it not be as possible for a Wolf to speak, as an Ass.

These things the Roman faith does follow, as Esau did the red potage that lost
him the blessing.

And such lying Legends as these do beget such an opinion of the sign of the
cross, that many simple ignorants think themselves sufficiently fortified
against all evil by that sign.

George Dowley a Priest set forth a Catechism in English in An. 1616.

1 Chapter of the sign of the Cross.
Where he persuades this manner of blessing our selves against all evil.

Making with the thumb a cross upon the forehead against all evil thoughts.
Another upon the mouth against evil words. The third upon the breast against
evil works, which proceed from the heart, saying,

By the sign of the holy Cross, from all our enemies deliver us good Lord.

This is modest blasphemy compared with that in the Breuiary of the Church of
Rome, where, upon the feast of the Invent. of the cross, the people are
required to prostrate themselves before the cross, and to say these words, O
crux splendidior astris, salva catervam in tuis laudibus congregatam.

Is not this a flying from our father which is in heaven, to seek help
against evils from a creature, the work of man's hands? thus does the
idolatrous Church of Rome dishonor God with highest contumely and blasphemy.

In like manner their desertion of God is further declared in their inuocations
of the virgin Mary, of Angels, and Saints, and their images, their Agni Dei,
hallowed grains, and Medailes, which the superstitious papists do bear about
them, as their munition and defense against evils; that God may renew his old
complaint, My people have committed two evils, Ier 2.13.
they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out
Cisternes that can hold no water.

Against this damnable error and practice let us learn of him that teaches us
here to pray, of whom we may seek for deliverance from all evils; let us
observe the way of the faithful in all ages of the Church, and see who gave
them deliverance, and whither they resorted in all fears and pressures: and we
shall find, that all the faithful have sought and found deliverance no where
but in the arm of our father which is in heaven.

3 The duties of such as move God in this petition.

Let us see where this petition is placed: for it is the last request that we
make to God in this prayer, teaching us that none are capable of deliverance
from the power and fury of the Devil, but such as desire of God heartily and
zealously,

1 That the name of God may have right done to it by him; by hallowing of it.

2 That the kingdom of God may rule him.

3 That he may live in obedience of the holy will of God all his life.

4 That he may live under the providence of God, seeking his meat from him; and
receiving it with his blessing thankfully and contentedly.

5 That he may be pardoned all his sins in the mercy of God, and show mercy
himself to such as offend him.

6 That he may be free from new defections or relapses.

He that faithfully believes, and fervently desires, and heartily prays for
these spiritual graces, may safely pray it out Libera nos a malo.

Therefore all the duties of zeal and piety, of knowledge, obedience, charity,
temperance, mercy, repentance, godly life, are required of him that sollicites
this suit to God, to be delivered from all evil: for he that would not suffer
ill, must take heed, as much as he can, to do none.

The first caution directs us how to compose our selves for this petition,
that we may prevail with our God for deliverance, that is, by seeking first
the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, by desiring to live in the
sober and thankful use of his creatures, and maintaining a good conscience
toward God, and men.

2 Seeing we pray for deliverance from all evil, we are admonished to decline
and avoid all the occasions of evil: he that would not have his teeth set on
edge, let him not taste of sour grapes; it is the forbidden fruit that
embroileth us in all the calamities of life, that vnparadiseth us, and turns
us over to labor and sorrow.

It is a certain sign of our regeneration, if we have a care to keep our
selves from these evils. As S. John says, 1 Io. 5.18.
We know that he that is borne of God sins not, but he that is begotten of
God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not.

Which words do show that there is a seed of grace in the elect, whereby they
may keep themselves from the touch of Satan:

The way to keep our selves from this danger, is by Saint Paul thus opened.

1 Timothy 1.19.
Holding faith and a good conscience:

1 Holding faith; that is, depending only upon God for our safety, loving him,
and cleaving to him, trusting him, and resting upon him, desiring the constant
course of his unchangeable love to us in Christ Jesus.

For nothing does more establish our hearts in faith, then the sweet experience
that we have had of Gods former mercies and love to us, from which we conclude
the undoubted assurance of his future providence.

This was David's plea.

By thee have I been holden up from the womb: Ps. 71 6.
thou art he that took me out of my mothers bowels, and therefore he prays,
Cast me not off in the time of old age, O forsake me not when my strength
fails.

To establish this faith and to make it fruitful of obedience, God himself,
giving his law to his people, says, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

And we may say, God has sed and clothed me, and preserved me hitherto,
therefore my trust is in him, for he never forsakes those that trust in his
mercy.

This made David confident against Goliath, when Saul the king discouraged him
saying,

Thou art not able to go against this Philistin to fight with him, for thou
art but a youth, 1 Samuel 17.33.
and he a man of war from his youth. But David called to mind how God had
enabled him against a Boar, and a Lion that attempted one of his Lambs which
he kept, and he slew them: and he resolved.

This uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them. Faith builds upon
this rock, and trusts not to any self abilility. And is strong only in the
strength of Gods might: keep faith then, and keep thy self.

This is the mercy of the Church, Gods gracious protection; Jonah calls it so.

They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy,

God is ever prior in amore, he reserueth mercy for thousands of them that
fear him. So that the mercy of protection from evils is our own, if we
forsake it not: this is the patrimony and birthright of the Church, for mercy
imbraceth them on every side: for if God be ours, as we call him here our
Father: His mercy is to them that fear him, throughout all generations:

David describing his safety under this protecting and supporting mercy of God;
The Lord is my shepherd, etc. concludes from this proof and experience of
Gods good favor.

Psalm. 23.^.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.

They have not this faith, and so forfeit their interest in this mercy, who
having grown up like young Plants, watered with Gods early and later rain, to
whom God has been a sun to enlighten and warm them, a shield to defend
them; the more they receive from God, the more they fear, and cruciate
themselves with the sollicitous and anxious jealousy of loss and want.

The faith here meant to be holden in the whole course of life, is a constant
and equal dependence upon God, casting all our care upon him, because he has
declared that he cares for us.

2 Another thing to ensure Gods protection from evils, is the holding fast of a
good conscience, this makes our life a continual feast: that is, when we have
the secret testimony of our heart, that 2 Cor. 1.12.
In simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God we have had our conversation in the world.

This godly sincerity I conceive to be best expressed.

1 In our general vocation to the Church of God; for therein we must labor
to be sound in our knowledge of the truth and will of God, without those
crotchets and fancies which commonly possess the phanaticall brains of such as
study new ways, as heretics and schismatiques do. Without that dead and
dull ignorance which implicit faith-founders do cast and mould into devotion.

And without hypocrisy, the leaven of Scribes and Pharisees, which turns all
religion into a formal outside of pretense, and has no heart; this is
rottenness at the core.

2 Sincerity in our private callings, which keeps from idleness, the moath
and rust that corrupts the whole conversation, and exposes us to Satan's
temptations.

Herein we must walk, as in our ways, and we may promise our selves a guard
of Angels to protect us, and we need not to waste and consume our selves with
cares of the world, but cast the success of all upon God.

3 In sincerity of godly conversation, not giving, not taking evil counsel,
not defiling, not defiled with evil example, eschuing ill words and corrupt
communications, vain delights, and wicked and ungodly company, having no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reproving them.

They that go in this way may not promise themselves any privilege from the
calamities of life, for if the devil or the Pope can do such a shrewd turn,
he will; but they may boldly and faithfully put themselves under the wings of
Gods saving protection, and pray to him, Libera nos a malo.

3 This as the rest, imposes on us all the duty of charity, for we pray not
every one for himself, but each for all, libera nos; that law, proximum vt
teipsum, does make us as much obliged to procure the good of our neigbbour, as
our own good: which reproves,

1 Those whose care begins and ends with themselves; the lash of calamity does
not smart upon them, if it fall not upon their own particular; these make
themselves entire bodies, they are not members of the whole body of Christ, the
Church; and they had need of a particular Mediator, for cutting themselves
from the body, they are no members of Christ, neither can they have any
interest in the common salvation.

2 These are much more to be reproved, who work their own good out of the
common evil, and heal themselves with the wounds and soars of the
Commonwealth: for if the procuration of common good be an incumbent care on
every member, both of Church and Commonwealth: when we pray libera nos a malo,
we pray to be delivered from all those proiectours and deuisers of new rods to
scourge their brethren.

3 This reproves them that curse and banne their brethren with all bitterness
of imprecation, that by secret or open means, do practice the vexation and
molestation, the impouerishing or defamation of their brethren. Christ teaches
us to pray one for another, that we may be all delivered from ill. David
bids,

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: he promises, They shall prosper that love
thee: he directs them in a form of blessing, Peace be within thy walls.

He puts them on by his own example, For my brethren and companions sake I
will wish thee now prosperity.

For the house of Gods sake I will seek to do thee good. It was Cains voice.

Am I my brothers keeper? we may answer, thou art, to the utmost of thy power.
To thee belongs the care and custody of thy brother, to save and keep him
from hurt, if thou may: if any evil come to him, which thou might have
diuerted, thou art answerable to him before God for it: but if thou procure his
hurt, or but wish it in thy heart, or if thou joy in his grief, this petition
is thy accusation.

4 This last petition does teach us the Apostles doctrine, pray continually, in
all things give thanks.

For there be so many evils toward us, by reason of our continual trespasses,
that we are ever in danger, Judge peccatum, Judge periculum, so that there is not
a moment of our life, but it had need be fenced and armed with this petition.

And so much time as escapes us free from these evils, is gained in the
patience and long suffering of God to us, to offer up to God the due tribute of
our thanks.

There should then be no vacation from this double service of prayer and
praise; for not only one day tells another, but one hour and minute tells
another, of Gods great deliverances of us from evil.

Satan is our professed adversary; you may see in Jobs history what he did,
what he would do if the power of God did not restrain him, if the protection
of God did not defend us: neither should our bodies, nor our goods, nor our
cattaile, nor our fruits of the earth, nor our children, be safe, if his hand
might be stretched out, but the preserver of men keeps us, resists him.

5 Observe the course of this whole prayer, for why do we desire the honor of
Gods holy name, but for this, that we may fly to it as our tower of strength,
to defend and deliver us from all evil, for our help is in the name of the
Lord.

They that know thy name, will trust in thee, Psalm. 9 10.
for thou never failest them that seek thee.

And why do we desire the coming of the kingdom of God, but that we may be
safe from evil, being under his holy regiment, who is able to tread Satan
under our feet.

And why do we desire that the will of God may be done, but that we may live
in holy obedience to him, that we that be his servants, and the sheep of his
pasture, may walk without fear in the valley of the shadow of death.

Why do we desire life of God, to be fed by his hand, and blessing with our
daily bread, but that we may be preserved by his providence from all things
that may hurt and annoy us.

Why do we desire forgiveness of sins past and present, but to assure his
protection, and to establish our hearts with grace, that we may serve him in
holiness and righteousness.

Why do we desire preservation from temptation, but to secure our lives
against the pollution and infection of sin.

So that these petitions, mutuo se generant; we desire to obtain of God all
that we ask in the six former petitions, that we may be delivered from evil:
and we desire to be delivered from evil, that we may do all the duties
required in those former requests. And let him that desires to speed in this
last supplication, cast back his eye upon the rest, that he may rectify
himself in primo, medio, and imo, to the pleasing of God in his prayer.

6 Let us have faith to believe a good success of our prayers, and to
apprehend the loving kindness of God to us in Jesus Christ; for he is the
Angel of the covenant of this mercy. Acts 10.42. Ioh. 8.36.
He went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; if
the son therefore make you free, you shall be free indeed.

He gives perfect liberty from the hands of all our enemies, that we may serve
him without fear, Luke 1.74.
in holiness and righteousness before him. We cannot have this deliverance
without faith to apprehend and apply it, therefore let us remember the former
mercies of God to strengthen our faith: as David.

Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted in thee, Psalm. 22.4.
and thou did deliver them.

They cried unto thee, and were delivered: 5
they trusted in thee, and were not confounded.

He is the rock of our safety, let us build our neasts, and lay out young ones
in the holes of this rock, for they that trust in him, can want nothing that
is good for them.

MATH. 6.13. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever.


IT is plain in the story of the Gospel, that Christ did twice teach to pray
this prayer: once privately, which Saint Luke relates, and that at the request
of his Disciples.

Another time publicly in his sermon preached upon the Mount, reported here by
Saint Matthew.

These words which are the close and conclusion of the Lords prayer, are
omitted in Saint Luke.

But in his public sermon they are added, as you read here, therefore from
hence we borrow them to supply the prayer in Saint Luke.

The Disciples obtained what they desired in Saint Luke, for Christ taught them
to pray, and the prayer does extend no further then these seven petitions: for
nothing is desired of God in these words of the conclusion added in Saint
Matthew.

And here let me show you a great want of judgment and charity in some of our
brethren, who have tendered to his Majesty some exceptions against our book
of Common Prayer, by the way of Question, whereof this is one.

Quest. 32.
Whether it be an acceptable serving of God, rather to follow the masse-booke in
omitting these words, then the scripture in using of them.



Beza who took great pains to search all the old coppies of the new Testament
to perfect his edition thereof, by comparing them together, does confess, that
in many coppies he found these words wanting both in Saint Matthew and Saint
Luke.

He adds also, that many interpreters have thought them put into the text, as
being the common conclusion used by the Christians in their prayers.

Further he alleges, that three of the ancient Fathers of purpose expounding
the Lords prayer, have omitted this conclusion, and have not so much as
mentioned it, that is, Cyprian, Augustine, and Jerome.

So that this uncharitable construction of leaving out these words in the book
of common Prayer, will light as heavy upon Saint Luke, and these holy Fathers
of the Church, as upon our book, through whose sides these are pierced with
this dart of false witness, to the manifest preuarication of that holy
commandment.

But let them charge it upon us; does any Minister in quod necessario
subintelligitur, non deest.

Else they might also quarrel the book, for only beginning the Lords prayer,
as in many places.

Zeal is madness, if it be not guided by a right understanding, and tempered
with charity. I could not omit the answering for our Church against this unjust
imputation, both to stop the mouth of slander, and to fasten shame on the
foreheads that blush not at these picked quarrels.

And also to settle your judgments in a sober construction of those things
which the Church has established and done for us.

Arias Montanus gives this note upon these words in Saint Matthew.

Animaduerte lector, hanc clausulam non esse de textu: he adds also that in
the Greek Church, the congregation does never repeat this clause, but when
they have with the Minister said, libera nos a malo.

The Priest only pronounces these words, quia tuum est regnum, etc.

And learned Erasmus thinks that these words might be added to the Lords
prayer, by the use of the Church, as at the end of the Psalms we added that
holy acclamation of, Gloria patri and filio and spiritui sancto; yet neither of
these Apocryphicall or without divine authority: for,

David is said to bless the Lord before all the congregation, saying, 1 Chro.
22.11.
Thine O Lord is the greatness, power, and glory, and the majesty, and the
victory, for all that is in the heaven and earth is thine.

12.
Thine is the kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.

Therefore approving the use of this conclusion of the Lords prayer, we proceed
in it.

1 And call it by the name which is given to it by the holy Ghost, our Blessing
of God after prayer, this is (...).

2 We will consider it as a motive to God, to grant us the requests made in the
seven petitions.

(...).
3 As it is a strengthening of our faith, to ask all these things at the hands
of God:

1 This is a blessing of God.

We are said to bless God when we do praise him, and give him the honor due
to his name: So Saint Paul meant it.

2 Cor. 1.3.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort. And it agrees well with our duty, that we
petitioning this father in this prayer for all mercies and all comfort, and
wrestling with him in our prayer, as Jacob did for his blessing upon us, should
also bless him, and praise his name.

Sicut in coelo and in terra* Reu 5.13.
for John heard every creature which is in heaven and in earth, and under the
earth, and such as are in the sea, saying, Blessing, honor, glory, and power
be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever.

David says, Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised. Psalm 48.1.


We pray in our first petition, Hallowed be thy name, for the name of God is
great, and David says, According to thy name O God, so is thy praise unto the
ends of the earth: thy hand is full of righteousness. verse 10.


We labor to open that hand by our prayers, that we may partake of his
righteousness, therefore to him belongs praise for his names sake.

We are created to this end, to glorify God in our bodies, and this is the way
to honor him, ipse dixit.

Who so offers praise, glorifieth me; Psalm. 50.23.
David often calls it Sacrificium laudis. And he calls these kind of
sacrifices, the sacrifices of righteousness.

These be called vituli labiorum in Hose, they are called fructus labiorum
confitentium nomini eius, by the author to the Hebrews.

The Saints of God have used to cast themselves down at his feet, that in
their humiliation he may be exalted: when we kneel or prostrate our selves to
one that stands by us, we make him show high over us, therefore when the
Lords faithful servants come to him to worship, they fall low on their knees
before him.

They euacuate themselves, This is lingua angel.
and put off all honor and estimation from themselves, to give it all to him:
this is blessing of God. So do we in this prayer, all petition, then
confession.

2 Consider this as a motive to God to grant the petitions herein contained.

1 Wherein observe that we have no arguments to induce God to goodness toward
us, but such only as are drawn from himself and his own holy and great
attributes.

Therefore Daniel renounceth all respects drawn from himself, as vnpleadable:
D^n 9. 18.
We do not present our supplications before thee, for our own
righteousness, but for thy great mercies: therefore he prays, 19
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not for thine
own sake O my God.

Neh 1.6.7.8.
So Nehemiah in his prayer does make a contrite confession of his sins to God,
and the sins of all the people, and his plea for mercy and forgiveness, and
for further grace and favor of God, is the promise of God. Remember the word
that thou commandedst by thy servant Moses.

So we pray, remember thine own kingdom, thy power and thy glory, when we
ask of thee these petitions, for we have nothing of our own worth the
remembering, for whose sake thou should grant our requests.

2 Let us consider how these may be motives to persuade our God to hear our
prayers; we do herein acknowledge and ascribe to God,

1 Kingdom, as David says, The Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof:
he is no tyrant, but a King to whom belongs the procuration of the good of
his Subjects. He is our King of old, says David, (...). He is therefore the
breath of our nostrils: he is the common father of us all, ruling us with
authority and love.

And because thou art our King, we pray thee to glorify thine own name in thy
Church, to let thy kingdom come to it.

To advance thy will in it.

To sustain us thy subjects with all the necessaries and conueniences of life.

To seal thy pardon of all our sins.

To keep us from the infection of new sins, from relapses into our old ones.

To defend us from the power of the devil, and to save us from any thing that
may offend and hurt us.

2 Power is ascribed to God.

Wherein we appeal to the omnipotency of our Father, we acknowledge him able
to do whatsoever he will in heaven and earth.

So Nehemiah begins his prayer.

O Lord God of heaven, the great and terrible God. Neh. 1.5.
So began Daniel.

O Lord, the great and dreadful God. Dan. 9.4.


This confession of Gods power does incline the greatness and might of God to
stoop it self to us, for power takes no joy in advancing it self against
weakness.

Amongst men, there be of those barbarous and inhumane natures, which abuse
power to unmerciful tyranny and oppression, but when we confess the power of
God, we submit to it, and thereby move the God of power to declare the same to
our good.

He has power in spiritual graces to bestow them on us, that we may serve him
in the hallowing of his name: his power can extend his kingdom over all, his
power only can make us able to do his will: this power commands heaven and
earth to minister to our necessities.

He has power to pardon all sins, and to preserve us from temptation and
evil.

Therefore the consideration of our confession of his power, moves him to
grant our requests in all these things.

3 We ascribe unto him glory.

A great argument to move him to do all these things for his own glory, for
this is his praise, that he hears our prayers, therefore to him does all
flesh come: and that is it we seek in this prayer: the three first petitions
are addressed to the glory of his name, of his kingdom and will, we desire
bread that we may live here to praise and serve him.

We desire pardon of all sins past, and release from our iniquities present,
and strength against all ensuing temptations, and deliverance from all deserved
evils, that we may be able to live in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our life.

3 Our faith in this prayer is confirmed by these 3, reg. potentia: glor.

Psalm. 146.1.
1 A regno, true that of earthly Kings the Prophet says, Trust not in Princes,
nor in any son of man, for there is no help, etc. But the Lord is a King
that may be trusted. Mal. 1.14.
I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords
is his name, Revel. 19.16* and he says, Per me reges regnant.

We begin at Our father, whence we have audaciam petendi, we end at tuum est
regnum, whence we have fiduciam impetrandi, he rules over all: all things
serve him, fear not thou little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to
give you a kingdom.

The Apostle calls this kingdom the inheritance of them that are sanctified,
and he calls all the faithful heirs and coheires with Christ.

This King sent the heir of his kingdom in the similitude of sinful flesh
amongst the sons of men, of purpose to expiate their faults, to reconcile
them to his favor, and to inuest them in the rights of this inheritance. Faith
is the ground of these things which we hope for: and this King is the giver of
every good and perfect gift, whom we call our father.

What can we want, wherein can our faith stagger, if it cleave to him, and that
we may once say cheerfully with the Apostle, Scio cui credidi.

All the elect of God are not only the subjects of this kingdom, but
favorites also of this King, his darlings, his delight is in them; David makes
so bold with God, as to pray.

Keep me as the Apple of thine eye, Psalm. 17.8.
hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

The Hebrew word signifies the black of the Apple, the very sight of the eye.

He that touches you, touches the Apple of his eye: Zech. ^.8.
God holds them so precious, that men had need to handle his children as
tenderly as they would handle the Apples of their own eyes: aliqui intelligunt
de oculis dei.

2 A potentia: there be many titulary Kings here on earth, swollen with titles
of great dominions, wherein they have neither foot of land in possession, nor
the obedience of any subject: it may be that there is ius dominij annexed to
their Crowns, for which they retain the titles, as our Sovereigns do in
France; or they may be pretenders to some rights, as the Kings of Spain are to
Jerusalem.

There be Kings that have supremacy of dignity, and possession of regalitie,
but their wings are clipped, they are limited how far they may fly.

Such a King was Achish in Gath, who approved David well, but he could not
keep him with him, 1 Samuel 29.6.7.
for says he, Thou art not good in the eyes of the Lords, wherefore now
return and go in peace, that you displease not the Lords of the Philistims.

Whether Princes be ouerawed by their Magnats, or in their own facility, do
diuest themselves of their power, both ways here is kingdom without power or
glory.

But thine is the power; Genesis 14 19.
for God is the high creator and possessour of heaven and earth, as
Melchizedech called him.

And as he holds possession vndenied, so he maintains dominion unresisted,
He does whatsoever he will.

Power is never fearful when it is in a Father, rather here is firm
foundation to build faith on: the Leper in the Gospel built upon this rock:
Thou can make me clean.

The sister of Lazarus confessed the power that Christ had with the Father,
quicquid petieris.

Our God is caput potentiae. The powers that be, are ordained of God, they are
but so many rays or beams of this glorious sun, or if we esteem them as
stars for glory, yet they borrow their light from this sun.

God would have this known and confessed.

Psalm. 145.11.
Thy Saints shall bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom,
and talk of thy power.

This power is the strong rock, and the high place, the wall of defense to the
Church.

The powers and principalities which are against us, may shake our faith with
some terrors, they cannot make it fail. As the mountains compass about
Jerusalem, so is the Lord round about them that fear him and put their trust
in his mercy.

3 A gloria, vbi regnum and potentia, ibi gloria.

The glory of God is threefold.

1 In his own glorious nature and essence. 2 In his works. 3 In his word.
1 Naturae.
The glory of his nature is a light that no man can attain to, we conceive it
best by that which is revealed to us in the two great volumes of his works,
which our eyes behold, and of his word which he has left in his Church for our
learning, that we may know him, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ.

There is that which the Apostle calls (...), and we have no outward means
to know it, but by the works and word of God, within us; the spirit also
helps our infirmities.

This glory of divine nature does consist in the holy attributes of God.

1 His simplicity: for he is ens simplicissimum, without permission, a
selfe-bearer.

2 His eternity: for he is a and o, without beginning and end.

3 His life: for he is called deus viuens ita viuit vt sit sua vita, ita est vt
sit sua essentia.

4 His immensity and infinity, whereby he comprehends all things, fills all
things, and is in every place:

5 His authority, perfection, and selfe-sufficiency which extends not only
to the complement of his own essence, but is the original of all perfection
that is in his works.

6 His blessedness: for he is God blessed for ever, blessed in being so, and
blessed in knowing himself so to be, and blessed in the communication of his
blessings to his creatures, according to their capacity and use.

7 His omnipotency, for he always works both in himself in actions
immanent, and without himself in actions transient: in both he does what he
will.

8 His wisdom, for he knows, and foreknoweth, and decrees, makes and
governs, and preserves all things, by infinite wisdom (...).

9 His truth, for his wisdom does both apprehend all truth, his operations be
all in truth, his only is the revelation of truth.

10 His will secret, done in and upon all things revealed, done by all that
love and conscionably serve him.

11 His goodness, in himself, and toward all things that have being of him.

12 His grace, by which he declares himself in Jesus Christ, the father of us
all.

13 His mercy, in which he covers our sins, and pardons all our
iniquities.

14 His righteousness, by which he justifies his elect, and condemns the
ungodly.

In all these, God is glorious in his Church, and his Church confesses it.

2 He is glorious in his works.

Psalm. 92.
It is a work for the Sabbath to think of them. David makes two good uses of
them.

Psalm. 8.
1 To debase himself. 2 To exalt God.
O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth.

3 He is glorious in his word.

1 In veritate, it is called verbum veritatis.

2 In aeternitate: durat in saeculum*

Truth makes us free, and eternity crowns us with indesinent perpetuity:

Our faith is hereby supported, that seeing our God is the King of glory, and
all our prayers are directed to his glory, that he will therefore hear us from
heaven, and when he hears, he will have mercy. And in that faith, we all say
Amen, to these our holy devotions.

MATH. 6.13. Amen.


THis is the last gasp of this heavenly prayer.

1 Consider we what Amen is. 2 To what it is said. 3 By whom it must be said: 4
How we must say it.
1 What Amen is.
It is one of those Hebrew words which is retained in the use of the Church in
all languages, and Gabriel Gerson says it is used in Scripture, three ways.

1 Nominaliter. 2 Aduerbialiter: 3 Verbaliter.
1 Nominaliter, and that
1 Personaliter.

2 Realiter.

Thus it signifies the truth of the person, 1 Personaliter:
and so it is the appellation of Christ.

These things says Amen, the faithful and true witness, only proper to
Christ. Ego veritas, Reu. 3.14.
omnis homo mendax.

Thus it signifies the truth of things so called: 2 Realiter.
all the promises of God in him are yea and Amen: 2 Cor. 1.20.
that is perfect truth.

2 Aduerbialiter.
So it signifies verily, a word of earnest asseueration, sometimes used
single, sometimes double, Amen, Amen.

Our Savior uses it much in the Gospel, always in serious matters.

Ioh. 3.5.
1 In doctrina Baptism. Verily I say unto you, nisi quis renatus fuerit, etc.

Ioh 6.53.
2 In doctrina Euchar. Amen Amen, dico vobis. Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you.

Ioh. 16.23.
3 In doctrina orationis; Amen, Amen, dico vobis quaecunque petieritis patrem in
nomin^ meo, dabit vobis.

Ioh. 16.20.
4 In the doctrine of comfort in afflictions.

Verily, verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall
rejoice, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

So it is used in many other important passages in holy Scripture.

In Romans 16.
Origin: per quod verbum vernaculo Hebraeorum sermon vera and fidelia esse
quae scripta sunt and dicta consignatur.

Therefore where you find that word begin the sentence, expect some thing of
great moment to follow. Attendite, credit.

3 Verbaliter.
And thus it is equivalent to So be it, and is used in the close of 1
Thanksgiving. 2 Praise. 3 And prayer.


1 Of thanksgiving.
1 Cor. 14.16.
The Apostle takes care that this service be performed lingua familiari,
Idiomate noto, that Amen may be said to it.

2 Of praise or blessing of God.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, Psalm. 41.13.
from everlasting and to everlasting. Amen and Amen.

Blessed be the Lord for evermore, Amen and Amen. Psalm 80.52. Numb. 6.23.


God teaches his Levites to bless his people when they dismiss the
congregation.

He adds, 27.
They shall put my name upon the children of Israel. Amen is his name, and the
seal of that blessing.

3 Of prayer.
So our prayers end generally, and it has a double use, which I learn of two
Fathers.

1 Signaculum consensus nostri. 2 Votum desiderij nostri.
1 It shows our understanding well informed.

2 Our affections fervently inflamed.

2 To what it is said.
1 To the Preface.

2 To the seven petitions.

3 To the Conclusion.

1 To the Preface.
Here are three things of import.

1 That we challenge interest in God, and call him ours.

2 That we seek his face as his children, and call him Father.

3 That we lift up our hearts to him as being in heaven. 1 The Preface.
1 Aduerbi.


In all these we use Amen, both aduerbialiter and verbaliter.

1 Amen, verily he is ours, it is vox fidei, we believe him so to be.

1 We believe our right in him, noster.

2 His love to us, in Pater.

3 His provident power over us, by reason his dwelling is in heaven, from whom
every good and perfect gift comes.

Amen, verily, as Aquila; fideliter, as Origene, ad confirmationem omnium quae
dicta suut: all this is true.

This is signaculum fidei.

He that seals to his conscience a full persuasion, that God dwelling in
heaven, is his father, may be bold to go on with all the seven petitions.

Iam. 1.6.
He that will pray, let him ask in faith and waver not.

Hear the Church prayer.

Isa. 63.15.
Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and
glory, where is thy zeal and strength, and the multitude of thy bowels, and of
thy mercies toward me, are they restrained?

16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, though
Israel acknowledge us not, thou O Lord art our Father, our redeemer, etc.

Say Amen to this, and pray on.

2 Verbal.
There is also another use of Amen, by way of blessing our selves in the name of
the Lord. Amen, So be it: for this is votum desiderij nostri.

1 That he may own us and call us his.

2 That he may love us, and call us children.

3 That he may possess the place.

From whence every good gift comes.

That his providence may be our storehouse to supply all our wants.

That his love may be our banner.

That his power may be our fenced city. So be it.

2 Amen to the petitions.
Amen to the whole body of the prayer. 2. The petitions.
Amen to every part of it, not only to every petition, but to every member
thereof.

2 Aduerbiabiter.
1 For our hearts must be established with a full persuasion, that it cannot
go well with us by any means, except all this be done that we pray for.

1 The name of God which is our tower and refuge, must be hallowed, else quo
fugiemus?

2 The kingdom of God must come, else who shall reign over us?

3 The will of God must be obeyed by us, and fulfilled upon us, for it is his
will to save us.

4 And if this will of God be not obeyed on earth, according to the pattern of
heavenly obedience, performed by the Angels and Saints of God, it will not be
accepted in his sight.

5 If he give us not bread, and his blessing with it, we shall not live in his
sight.

6 If he forgive us not, we shall dye in our sins: who then shall have pity
on us?

7 If we forgive not as we would be forgiven, will he not say to us,

Ought not thou to have forgiven thy fellow servant, as I forgave thee? and
he will require the utmost farthing of our debt of us.

8 If he lead us into temptation, and suffer our own corruptions to guide us,
or Satan's temptations to prevail against us, how shall we be able to keep
faith and a good conscience?

9 If he do not either prevent evils coming, or support in evils incumbent,
or deliver us out of them, how can we subsist in them?

Therefore our double Amen is requisite in all these.

1 Signaculum sidci, that we believe a necessity of obtaining all these for
Gods glory and our good.

2 Votum desiderij, that we express an earnest and fervent desire to prevail
with God in all these.

1 We must pray that his name may be hallowed, that

2 We may be partakers of his kingdom.

3 We must desire that his will may be done, that we may eat of his bread.

4 We must desire forgiveness of sins past, and protection against all after
temptations, that we may be delivered from all evils of punishment, and that
Satan may not touch us.

Leave out nothing, he is our father of whom we ask, and he has a full
hand, and our prayers will open it.

They whose hearts do say Amen to some part of this prayer, and their zeal
tooleth in the rest, obtain nothing of God: but pro corona fidei, they have
poenam perfidiae.

How many be there in the world that cry heartily, panem nostrum quotidianum,
and libera nos a malo, who neither care for the name, the kingdom, nor the
will of God, they neither feel any inconvenience in sin, nor fear, rather
like temptations, which have a pleasing relish.

Like those that dye with tickling.

Others press the first petition slightly, concerning the name of God, because
they are profane, and swear by it.

They will allow God a kingdom, and take it away by disobeying his will.

Bread they would have, but they think much to be limited to ask for the day.

They like the forgiveness of their own sins, but not the sicut and nos.

They fear not temptation: evils they deprecate. But Amen to all is our lesson.

3 Amen to the conclusion, i.
In faith, believing kingdom, power, and glory to be his. Amen. So is it.

In zeal, desiring that God may ever have all due ascriptions. Amen. So be it.

3 By whom it must be said.
All that pray, must say Amen, for as we pray one for another, so one with
another.

We have one God, one faith, in that God, one Baptism into that faith, one
Eucharist, the seal of the covenant, one word the rule of faith and manners,
one prayer, and one Amen.

They that bring their bodies without their hearts, do increase the company,
but they do not mend the quire.

Cardinal Bellarmine confesses vsum respondendi Amen, antiquissimum in
ecclesia.

But to come to Church only to hear prayers, and not to pray, to pray and not
to seal it with an Amen, is to profane the service and worship of God.

We are, or should be an holy Priesthood to offer up unto God, the sacrifice
of praise, and the incense of prayers with one voice, one heart, as Zeph.
says, with one shoulder.

Multorum preces impossible est contemni So all the congregation, and every
part of it, must say Amen to all the prayers, and to every petition of them.

And that was the reason why our holy Church did so dispose of the common
prayers, that the people should have their part in sundry short eiaculations,
that their devotions might be set a work to join with the Minister, whereas
in other reformed Churches, the congregation has nothing to say, but Amen.

This was so well observed in the Church in Saint Ieromes time, that the people
made the Church ring again with the loud voice of their joint Amen: he says
ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui reboauit.

And the Jews of old in their Synagogues, did redouble it, Amen, Amen.

4 How we must say Amen.
Caninius in voces novi testamenti, says there is 1 Amen pupillum, a non
intelligentibus. 2 Surreptum, spoken in have before the prayer ended. 3
Otiosum, of them that mind it not. 4 Iustorum, and that must be said.


1 With knowledge.
They that know thy name will trust in thee.

If we know what we pray for.

Who is the giver of it.

For whose sake we ask it.

For what use.

What need we have, say Amen heartily.

They that pray in a strange tongue, pray without knowledge, therefore God will
say to the Church of Rome, Math 20.22.
nescitis quid petatis.

They that say this prayer, and understand it not, sin as much in Our Father,
as they in Pater noster.

If God should say to them, as Philip to the Eunuch, intelligis quid dicis,
would they not say: how can I without a teacher?

You have been taught, take heed that you learn; for,

All ignorant devotion, is no better then taking the name of God in vain.

2 Amen must be said with the spirit.
These two, understanding and the spirit must not be parted in our prayers.

I will pray with the spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15.
and I will pray with the understanding also.

As the Heart pants after the water brooks, Psalm 42.1.
so pants my soul after thee O God: So, O God thou art my God, early will I
seek thee, Psalm. 63.1.
my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty
land where no water is.

This spirit is willing, though the flesh be weak.

Our prayer is directed to him who is called the God of spirits, who is also a
spirit, and to be served in spirit and in truth.

This is the holy fire from Gods Altar, which inflameth devotion, even the
zeal of this spirit, this fireth the incense of our prayers, and makes them
ascend. The Amen of the lips is thus welcome to God.

Populus hic honorat me labijs. But let our souls, and all that is within us
say Amen, even the hid man of the heart, and God will answer us with his Amen.

3 Amen with faith.
Three things there are in God for faith to fasten on.

1 Quia fidelis.
David urges him upon that point.

Hear my prayer O Lord, give ear to my supplications, Psalm. 143.1.
in thy faithfulness answer me.

We pray in confidence of Gods promise, Heb. 10.20.
for he is faithful that promised.

1 Pet. 4.19.
Saint Peter calls him a faithful Creator; Commit the keeping of your souls
to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

2 Quia potens.
We may say boldly with the paralitike, Domine si vis potes me mundum facere.

Apud deum nihil est impossible.

Omnia tibi seruiunt.



Amen may rest in that power which rules over all, and does quicquid vult.

3 Quia volens.
The first compellation in this prayer is proof enough of this, quia pater
noster.

Whatsoever we ask according to his will, we obtain, all those petitions are
according to his will; he that is in his bosom, has taught us this prayer.
Attributa dei hoc volunt.

1 His holiness affects the hallowing of his name.

2 His glory, the coming of his kingdom.

3 His justice, the doing of his will.

4 His bounty, the giving of bread.

5 His mercy forgiving of sins.

6 His wisdom in preventing temptations.

7 His power in delivering from evil

He is willing to magnify his own glorious attributes, in all these, therefore
we may safely say, Amen to all these petitions, seeing we ask them all
according to his holy will.

To conclude in this prayer, we cast our selves at the feet of our Father, we
seek his kingdom first, and the righteousness thereof, in the three first
petitions.

Then we plead our own cause in the four last.

We begin in confession of his goodness, we end in confession of his
greatness, he is our a, he is our (...).

In the first we plead our interest in him, in the last we acknowledge his
interest in us; we seal all with one Amen.

And even that Amen of ours is petitorie, and begges his Amen, that as we, so
he would say to our whole prayer. So be it.

He that bids us pray, prayed himself with supplications and strong cries
in the days of his flesh.

As Bernard, Sic gessit, sic iussit: and he has taught us how and what to pray.

Would not one of us that had a suit to the King, persuade himself that he
should prevail if the Prince should pen his petition for him with his own
hand, and put it into his to deliver?

Would not the King know his own sons hand? would not his very Character
commend the cause to gracious hearing?

It is our case, GOD is our King of old, we are his humble suppliants and poor
creatures, Christ the Son of God, the Prince, has endighted here our
Petition, we pray coldly, and offend very foully in the delivery of our
petition, if we speed not.

For his drawing our petition is GODS Amen to it.

Much wrong has this holy prayer done to it in the Church of Rome, often
repeated in a strange tongue.

Much wrong generally done, even where the light of the Gospel shines, when
it is only said, and not understood. I have done my best to help your
understandings in the exposition of it, and God give his blessing to my
faithful labors herein.

To whose sufficient grace I recommend you, for he is able to build you up
further in knowledge and faith, and zeal, and obedience, and to give you an
inheritance amongst those that are sanctified.

FJNJS.

