The meditato^ns of saint Bernard*


FVll prouffytable ben to us trauaylynge pilgrims and freyll sinners the
fruytfull works and treatyses of holy faders. The which call us fro the way
of derkenesse. of syn^e to the way of ryghtwysnesse. And teache us the
streyghte way to the end of our pylgremage. theuerlastynge bliss of heaven.
Wherefore among those said works and treatyses. I have to thonoure of god and
prouffyte of his people / chose to translate fro latin in to englys the one
sweet and devout treatise. much prouffytable / both to the lovers of this
trowblous / short. and unsure life. And also to ye lovers of ye everlasting
blessydfull life in the kingdom of heaven. Called the Meditacions of saint
Bernarde* whereof I forbede to unlearned presumptuous correccion. And mekely
submytte me and my work to charytable correccyon. Besechynge the reders to
vouchesauf pray for me and the enprynter or writer hereof to do their devour
dylygently. And by cause I would have so good and so prouffytable a thing
common to many. and also by cause that hastly after ye translacyon hereof before
it was duly correct and ordered. it was by devout persons transu^pte and
copyed I wot not how often aeynste my will / Therefore have I now the year of of
our lord Jesus Christ. M.CCCC.lxxxxv. and the.xij. day of the month of
September. for to avoid and eschew the Ieopardye and hurt yt may come by
that yt was not duly corrected. put it more dylygently corrected and ordered
to the enprynter. In lettyng and dystruccyon of all other copyed after the
forsayde uncorrected tra^slacion. And I counsel and exhort all yt have those
same / to leave them as doutfull and Ieoperdous: And take this more dylygently
ordered and corrected. It is not hard to know the one fro the other. For they
dyfferre both in nombre of chapytrees and in rubrysshes of the same. The
uncorrected was dyuyded in to.xxv. chapytres. Whereof ye first had no special
rubryshes. The second chapter of the same began thus. Our mind sothly is
the image of god / or else thus The mind sothly is ye image of god. And his
rubryshe was this. That the mind of god is called the image of god / But this
that is corrected more dylygently is dyuyded and parted in to.xviij. chapytres
only. whereof the rubryches follow. her in order.

How man by knowledge and understanding of him self may know god. And how
the soul of man is the image of god. cao. primo Of wretchydnesse of body* and
of the dredful Judgment. cao. secundo How a sinful soul is vexed and
troubled after her departing fro the body. cao..iijo. Of the dygnyte and
noblesse of mannys soul. Of the wretchydnesse of the body. And how wretchyd
the soul is made by the body. cao..iiijo. Of the myserye and wredchydnesse of
man in his conceyuynge / his birth / his life and his death. Of the nobles of the
soul. And of the sudden myschyef of wicked men. cao. vo. Of death and also of
the pains of wicked men after their death. cao..vio. Of the reward of blessed
souls. And of the Joys of heaven. cao..vijo. Who is able to have the Joys of
heaven. viijo. Of charytable love of thy neighbor. cao..ixo. How we should pery
love and worship god / and think on him. cao..xo. Of mannys heart. And of
prouffyte in redynge holy things. cao. xio. Of wauerynge and unstableness of
ye mind and thoughts. cao..xijo. The cause and the remedy also of wauerynge
of ye mind. And of confession cao..xiijo. Accusynge by co^fessyon of diverse
sins. xiiij. Of three goostly enmyes. ye flesh / the world / and the devil.
And also of their temptacyons and resystence against them. cao..xvo. Of the
malice of the devil. And how he temptyd man by the flesh cao..xvio. Of the
bliss of heaven. cao..xvijo. Of dyspysynge of worldly thynges^ Of the old man.
And of the pity. gentylnesse and mercy of god Capytulo..xviijo.
The medytacyens of saint Bernarde
How man by knowledge and understanding of himself: may know god. And how
the soul of man is the image of god.
MAny there ben yt know and understand many other things. and yet they know
not their own self. They take much head to other. but they look not well to
themself. They leave their inward and goostly things. and seek god among
outward things. the which is within them. Therefore I shall torn fro those
things yt ben outward to inward things. and from inward things I shall
lift my mind to things above / that I may know whereof I came. and whether I
go what I am. and whereof I am. And so by knowledge of myself. I may ascend
and come to the knowledge of god. For the more I proyffyte in knowledge of my
self. the more nygh I draw to the knowledge of of god On the inward mannys
behalf I find three things in my soul whereby I remember / behold and desire
my lord god The which ben. ye mind. ye understanding / and will or love. By
the mind I remember him. By the understanding I behold him goostly. And by
will or love I love and desire him. When I remember god I find in him in my
mind. and feel therein in him swetnesse and plesyre of him. like as he
vouchesaufe to give me. By ye understanding I behold in him what he is in
himself. what in holy angellys / and what in his blessed saints. what in his
creatures. and what in mankind. In himself he is incomprehensyble for he is
both beginning and end: Beginning without beginning / and end without end
By myself I understood how he is comprehensyble when I may not atteyne to
understanding and knowledge of my self whom he has made. In holy angellys he
is plesaunt and desyderable. For their desire is always to behold him. In
saints he is delectable. For they happy and blessed delight them in him
contynually. In creatures he is marvelous. For by his might and power he
creates all things the which he governs most wisely / and dystrybutyth
most benyngnely: In mankind he is amyable and lovely. For he is their god^
and they ben his people. And he dwells with them as in his own temple and
they ben the temple of him. Who someuer has mind and thinks on him /
understands him and loves him. he is with him. Sothely we owe to love him
much. sith he has loved us so much / and made us after his own image and
lyknes and so has he done to none erthly creature. Sothly it behooves that ye
thing that is made after an image to be according and like to the image or
symylytude that it is fourmed after / and not to have unworthily the name of an
image in vain. Therefore let us show in us thymage of him in desiring of
peace and regarding of troth. Let us hold and keep him by perfyte love and
charity in our mind. Let us bear him in our conscience and to him present in
every place let us do due reverence and worship.

Our soul sothly is the image of god / for asmoche as it is apt and mete to
take and receive him and may be partener of him. It is the image of him. not
only that it remembers itself vnderstondyth or loves itself. But by cause
it may remember / understand. and love him. which made it. And when it so
does. then it is wise. For sothly there is no thing more like to the high
wisdom of almighty god. than is a reasonable soul / which by mind
understanding and love rests in the blessed Trynyte. In which she may not
rest and abide. but if she remember him / understand and also love him. But
if she think dylygently on her lord god. after thymage of whom she is
created and made. And understand / love honor. and worship him. with whom
she may eternally abide and rest in perfyghte Joy and bliss. Sothly that
soul is right happy and blessed in whom our lord fyndeth resting. And in
whoos tabernacle he dwells and rests. That is an happy soul that may
say. My lord and maker has restyd in my tabernacle. Soothly he shall not deny
to such a soul the everlasting rest of heaven. O why then^e look we not in
our self: but seek our lord among outward things: the which is with us /
if we will be with him. Sothly he is both in us and in us. but yt as yet is by
faith: unto such time as we may deserve to see him clerly We know (says the
apostle) that by faith Christ abides in our hertes. By faith I remember my
maker / I worship my merciful redemer. and abide my sauyoure. I believe that he
lives in all creatures / that he dwells within me. And also I trust to
know him in himself: the which is much more blysfull and Joyful than all
these ben. For sothly to know perfytely the fader / ye sone / and ye holy
ghost is everlasting life / perfyte bliss and exceeding plesyre. For the
mortal eye has not seen / ne eere herd ne mannys heart understood clerly
and perfytly how much clernesse. how much Joy. how much swetnes we shall
have in that blessed syghte when we shall behold face to face him yt is the
light of all bryghte thing. the refuge and rest of trauelers and laborers
the receyuer and keeper of them yt torn to him / the very life to all that
live. And the crown of them that overcome their goostly enmyes. Thus I find
in my soul the image of the high and glorious Trynyte. to the which most
high and glorious Trynyte: I owe to refer and orther all my life. that I
may remember him and put my playsyre and co^templacyon in him. The soul is
the image of almighty god yt which conteyneth three things. the mind. ye
understanding: and will. To ye mind we attrybute and put all thing that we
learn or know though we think not always thereon. To the understanding we
attrybute all that we know is true. the which also we commend and put to
our mind. By the mind we ben resemblyd and like to the fader / by
understanding. to ye sone / and by will or love to the holy ghost. for there
is no thing in us more like to the holy ghost. than is the will or true love.
For true love is the yefte of god more nor so precious that there is no yefte
of god. and it is ble and excellent than it is. For true love that comes of
god. and is god himself: is properly called the holy ghost: by whom ye love of
god is diffused and sprad in our hertes. And by whom all the holy and blessed
trynyte dwells and abides in us.

Of wretchydnes of the body and of the dreadful Judgment. cao. secundo
ON the outward mannys behalf I am comen of my faders. the which have made
me the child of dampnacyon before they have made me the child of natyuyte.
Sinners in their sin have begotten a synnarr. whom they have norysshed of
their sin. Wretches have brought forth a wretch in to wretchydnesse of this
world. I have not of them but wretchydnesse and sin and this corruptyble and
rotlewe body that I carye about. And soothly I haste toward them the which
by bodily death be passed out of this world: When I behold their sepulcre and
graves I find not else in them but powder. worms / stenche and lothsomnesse.
Such as I am now they were but lately and such as they be I shall be hastily.
What am I A man made of lothsom and fylthy matere turned in to flesh /
weeping and waylynge put in to exyle of this world. And loo now I dye full of
wyckednes / abhomynacyon and fylthe. And hastly I shall be presented before the
streyte Judge to give a count and reckoning of my works. Woo shall be to me
wretch when the day of dreadful Judgment shall come. and the books shall be
opened wherein all my purposes desires and thoughts shall be rehearsed in ye
presence of almighty god. Then^e shall I stand quakynge and trembling in ye
Judgment before our lord. casting down mine head as greatly abashed in my
conscience when I remember mine unkindness and trespaces. and when it shall
be said of me. behold this man and his works. Then shall I have in mind
all my duties and sins. For by the prouyde^ce and virtue of almighty god it
shall be so ordained that every mannis good deeds and evil. shall be reducyd
and called ayene to his mind and they shall be showed with a marvelous
swyftnesse: that his knowledge may accuse and excuse his conscience. And thus
shall every man be Iuged For every man shall be Iuged of his deeds. and every
man^ys secretis and preuytees shall be showed to every man. Such as we woll
not for shame confess. shall be showed to all men. And all yt ever we color
here by dyssymulacyon: shall be brennyd there with the vengable flamme of fire.
For the cruel and wode fire shall be let lose and reyne at lyberte. And ye
longer yt our merciful lord abides us. and of his great gentylnesse yeueth
us space to amend our life. the more streyter shall he punysshe us by
ryghtwysnesse / if we will not amend. wherefore love we then somoche and
coueyte ye life of this world. in the which life y^ longer we co^tynue and
abide / the more evil we do and sin. And ye longer yt we live. ye more blame
we deserve. For evil things and shrewdnes increase and grow daily. and good
things ben withdrawn. Man is in co^tynuall variacion and change / now in
prosperity now in aduersyte: and wot not when by death he shall be put therfro.
For like as a sterre with bright bemes moves swyftly / and suddenly vanysshed
away and as a spercle of fire is quenched and turned to ashes So does this
bodyly life. as we may well see if we take heed: For when a man lives merely
this world. And trusts so long to endure. dysposed and ordeyneth many
things to be done in prosesse of long time. suddenly he is rauysshed with
death / and unware without prouisyon he is take fro the body

How a sinful soul is vexed and trowbled after her departing fro the body.
cao..iijo.
When the soul with great fere and much sorrow is departed fro the body.
angels come to take her and to present her tofore the ferdfull Judge. And
then^e she remembrynge her evil and wicked works ye which she did by night
or day trembles quaketh / and looks how she might escape or flee. and
desires truesse saying. O give me space. though it be but an hour. Then
shall the works as in manner of spekyng say. Thou have wroughte us. we ben thy
werkis / We shall not lose the. but abide still with the and go with the to the
Judgment And they shall accuse her of many sins and trespaces. and sholl
find many falls witness ayenste her al though true wytnes were suffycyent to
her dampnacion.

The evil fendes with ferdfull look and terryble countenance shall feere her
and purswe her with great cruelte and woodnesse and shall catch her with
great dread and feere. and hold her still if she be not delivered from them
by ye help and socoure of our lord. Then^e the soul beholdynge the eyes ye
mouth and other bodily wits closed and spered: by whom she was wont to pass
forth to take her sportes and playsyre in worldly things: shall return to
herself. And when she sees herself alone left naked without body: smytten
with great fere and dread. she shall fail in herself by dyspeyre. And by cause
she folysshly left the love of god for the love of the world and flesshly
plesyre: she shall be forsake of our lord like a wretch in that time of so
great need of help. And shall be delivered to the deuylles to be punysshed and
tormented cruelly for her misdeeds.

On this wise is the soul of a sinner not knowing ye day ne ye hour of his
passing. rauysshed we death: and spared and departed fro ye body. and
trembling and quakynge she passes of her Iourneye full of sorrow and
wretchydnesse. And having none excuse to allege and show for her sins: she
trembles for dread to appear before almighty god. She is smyten with great and
wonderful fere: and vexed with many troublous thoughts when at her departing
fro the body (all other things set a side) she co^sydereth only herself:
and him to whom the time draws nyghe yt she must give accomptes and rekenyng
And knows yt he may never be declyned ne changed from ryghtwysnes. she
consydereth well how straight a Judge shall sytte on her. and what reasons she
shall allege and put for her dyscharge in cou^tynge of her life at so
streyghte a Judgment. and of so precyouse Justice. And though it be so yt she
remember no thing / ne find in her self any offense whereof she should be
ferde and dreadful. Yet when she shall come before that streyghte Judge she
fereth there be somewhat that is not in her remembrance Her fere and dread
increases and wexeth ye more. when she thinks that she could not escape yt
time of this life without sin. And also such werkis as she thinks be good
and commendable that she has done in her life. yet they be not all fawtles if
they should be streyghtly Iugyd. pity and mercy set a side who can co^sydre and
call to mind how many evil werkys we do by process of little time. And what
good things we by our neclygence leave undo / Sothely like as i^ is sin and
trespaas to do evil. so it is a mysse and defawte to leave good things undo
And so it is great hurt and peril to us when we another do well ne thy^ke
well. But suffer our mind to be occupied abowte tryfles and things yt ben
varyaunt and vnprouffytable. Sothly is is full hard to keep our mind surly
from evil thoughts. it is also very hard to be much occupied in worldely
things without sin. And therefore there can no man Judge and rebuke himself
perfytly^ For he is so much occupied and troubly with so many thoughts yt
he in manner knows not himself. so that he knows not well what he does or
suffers. Wherefore he is smite with sodeyne fere and dread in his conscience at
his passage out of this world. For though he find no thing to his knowelege
yt greueth his conscience. yet he dredyth such things as he knows not ne
has in his remembrance.

Of the dygnyte and noblesse of mannys soul. Of the wretchydnesse of the body.
And how wretchyd the soul is made by the body. cao..iiijo.
O Thou soul of man aourned with thymage of god / made fair and bewteuous
with his symylytude / spoused and wedded to him by faith. endoured with his
holy spyryte / redeemed with his precious blood. deputed and put to be kept
with his blessed angellys / pertener of his Joy and bliss / ye Inherytoure of
his goodness / induyd with reason and understanding. What plesyre have thou to
be so co^uersaunte with the vile body. whereby thou suffrest so much greuau^ce.
tribulacion and pain. By ye body you art punysshed for ye sins of other. and
thou art brought to naught and repute a thing in vain and of little valor.
That carcas that thou love and cheryseste so much and with whom thou art so
co^uersau^t is foul and lothsom matere turned in to flesh covered with
freyll and unsure bewte / and hastily shall be stynkynge and roten caryon and
meet to worms For though man exalte and magnefye himself never so much: yet
he abides still a foul and unclean carcas / Certeynly if thou consider well
what fylth auoydeth by thy mouth / thy nose and other parts of thy body. thou
saw never a fowler dounghyll. If thou woll nombre and count all his
wretchydnes how grievous it is oppressyd with the heavy burden of sin bound
and fretyd with vices. moved and sty^ed with concupicence. trauayled and
troubled with diverse passions and affeccions / defowled with Illusions. ever
p^^oe and ready to evil. and hasty to every vice thou shalt find it full of
shame and confusyon. Thorugh the flesh man is made like unto vanyte For
thorugh it he is enfecte with the vice of concupycsence and unlawful desire.
Whereby he is kept as thral in bondage / and made so crockyd that he loves
vanyte. and werked wyckydnesse

Of the myserye and wretchydnes of man in his conceyuynge. his birth / his
life. and his death. Of ye noblesse of the soul. And of the sudden myschyef of
wicked men. cao..vo.
MAn takehede what you were before thy natyuyte. What thou art fro the
beginning unto thine ending. And what thou thalte be after this life. O man
first fylth and lothsom matere / Afterward a stynkynge sackefull of dounge /
And at ye last mete to worms to gnawe on in the ground. How sholdest thou be
proud / Sothly thou was first as naught. then^e thou made and brought forth
of vyse and fylthy matere / wrapped in unclean clothing and garments in thy
moders womb / where thou was fed and nuorysshed with a foul loathsome matere.
And thy cote was not very honest ne pleasant. thus cladde and nourysshed came
you to us / And yet thou haste not in mind. how vile and wretched thy
beginning was. For bewty / favor of people youth. and riches / make ye yt
thou know not what man is. The which is not else but foul and stynkynge
matere / A sack of dou^ge. and finally worms meet / Whereof then is man
proud that is conceived in sin and brought forth with pain. living in
much labor and vexacion / and finably must needs deye. Thus is man turned in
to vermyn. stenche / and abhominacion. And every man is turned in to no man.
Wherefore then art thou proud man considering yt thou was sometime vile and
foul sede and blood coagulate in thy moders womb / Afterward brought forth.
Ieoparded and put to. wretchydnesse of this life and to sin. and finally
shall become worms and mete to worms in thy grave. O thou duste and powdre.
wherefore art thou proud that art conceived in sin / brought forth with
wretchydnes. lyuest in pain and trybulacion. and shall deye with angwysshe and
vexacyon. Whereto fedeste yt thy carcas so delycyously with precious meetes^
and adurnest it with so gaye and precious garments. yt which within few
days shall feed worms in ye sepulcre / and leuest thy soul naked and bare of
virtues and good works. yt is to be presented tofore almighty god and his
blessed angellys in heaven. O why set thou so little price by thy soul.
and cheryssheste more thy body than it. Sothly it is great abusion yt
maystresse lady to serve and to be kept in subieccyon and the hondmen to rule
and have domynacyon. For sothely all the world may not be esteemed and reputed
ryghtfully to ye value and price of one soul. For our lord would not give his
life for all the world. the which he gave for mannis soul. therefore the
price of ye soul is great. what co^mutacyon and change then shall thou give
for thy soul. yt gyuest it for naught. Did not the sone of god restyng in ye
bosom of his fader desce^de from his regal sete to deliver her fro ye power
of ye devil. the which when he saw teyed and fettred with snares of sin.
and in point to be lost and devoured with fendes / and damned to perpetuell
death. he had pety on her and wept / for her that could not weep for her self.
And not oonly wept. but suffered himself to be slain to redeem her with the
raunson of his precious blood. O thou man mortal. behold how precyouse an
oblacion was yeuen for the. Take heed man and understand how much noble thy
soul is. And how grievous her wou^des were / for whoos health it behouyd Christ
that was god and man to be so grievously wounded. If they had not ben mortal
wou^des and of death euerlastyyge. the sone of god should never have suffered
death to hele them. Beware therefore that thou vylupende not and set at little
the hurt and pain of thy soul. of whom thou seeste yt high mageste of god
have so great compassyon. He morned and wept for the. Weep thou. and wasshe
thy bed every night with co^punccion of heart and plente of teerys He shed his
precious blood for the / shed you thine for him by daily punysshemente of thy
body. Which sith you may not spend at ones by martyrdom or death for love of
him. At the leest wise spend it by more ease. but by more longer mardyrdome.
Take no head ne regard to yt vnleefull concupyscence of thy flesh. but by
the goostly desire of thy soul. O how gloryouse shall ye soul be when it shall
torn to his lord / if it be not defoyled with the flesh but has washed
away all fylthe. and is made pure and clean. Perauenture thou will say that
this is an hard thing. I can not despise the world. and hate mine own body
/ I pray the tell me where be the lovers of the world that sometime dwelled
among us. of whom there remains not but powdre and worms. Take good head
what they be now and what they were sometime. They were men as thou art. ete.
drink. and made merry. And spended their days in playsyre. And in a momente
they be descended to the pytte of helll And here their bodies ben deputed to
worms. and thyer souls to hot fire unto such time as they felsshypped and
Joined together ayene in an unhappy company. be put to everlasting fire / The
which were fellows in sin and wyckydnesse. for like as they were knytte
together in one will and playsyre in sin. So shall they be punysshed with
like pain. What has prouffyted them vayn glory. short mirth / worldly
power: or domynacyon. flesshely pleasyre / false and unsure richesse. great
household and wicked concupys^^nce. Where is their mirth. where is their play
and sportes. where is their boste. where is their pride. Behold what sorrow
and wretchydnesse. comes of so great mirth and gladness: What pain
follows ^o (...) / They ben fallen from Joy and mirth in to great myschyef
and high tormentynges. And like as it befell to them. so it may befall to
the. For thou art a man. earth made of earth. Man comes of earth. of earth thou
art / Of earth thou lyuest. and in to earth thou shalt be turned when thy
last day comes. The which shall come hastily. And perauenture it shall come
this day. O sith we ben but fylth and dunge and earth the which shall ^orne
to earth / How or where of may we be proud.

Of the death. and also of the pains of wicked men after death. cao. vio.
Certain it is that thou shalt deye / but it is uncertain / when / how or.
where. For death makyth him ready ayenste ye in every place. and if thou be wise
thou will always make the ready against him whersoeuer thou be. Of all things
yt ben uncertain. there is no more uncertain than is the hour of death. And there
is none thing more certain than death is. For death is sure and undoubted. but ye
hour of death is preuy and unknown. If thou live after ye flesh. thou
shalt be punysshed in the flesh If you desire precious clothing. vermyn
shall be strewed under ye for fresshnes of thyn array. and thy coueryng shall be
worms. He yt loves better worldly things than god. gloteny beter than
abstynence / follows the devil. and shall goo with him in to everlasting
pain / but if he amend. What morning trowest you what sorrow and heaviness
shall be. when wicked people shall be departed fro the blessed company of
saints fro the syghte of god / and shall be taken in to the hondes of
deuylles. and goo with them in to everlasting fire. where they shall abide
ever* without end in sorrow and waylynge. Sothly they banysshed and outlawed
far fro the blessed country of paradyse. shall be tormented in perpetuell
pains of hell They shall never see light. Never have socoure / ne
refresshyng: but by thousands thousands years they shall be crucyat and
cruelly tormented in hell / and shall never be delyuerd fro thens. Where ye
tormentour is never weary. and he yt is tormentyd shall never deye. The fire
wastyth and punysshyth there on such manner. yt it ever reserueth da^pnyd
people. The tormentynges ben done on such wise: that they are ever renewed /
For every man yt is dampened shall suffer pain in hell according to his
sins. And those sins yt be like: shall be punysshyd with like pain. No
thing shall be herd there but weeping syghyng: sorowynge / wayllynge. morning:
and gnasshynge of teeth. There shall naught be seen but vermyn: lothely and
feerfull facys of tormentours / and the fowlest and most ugly felyshypp of
fendes. Cruel worms shall gnawe within the heart. There is exceeding sorrow:
abhomynable stenche / waylyng confusion wondre and huge feere. and wretches
shall bre^ne in everlasting fire always without end. They shall be crucyat and
tormentyd in body with fire: and in soul with the worm of conscience. There
shall be sorrow intolerable: incomparable stenche / and horrible dread. Death
both of body and soul: without hope of meecy. and forgeuenes: But they shall
so deye that they may ever live. and they shall so live yt they may ever
deye. Thus mannys soul is tormented evermore in hell for his sins: or else
put in paradys: for his merytys and good deeds. Chese we then^ one of these
tweyne* other to be tormented evermore with wicked people / or ever to Joy and
make merry with holy saints. Sothly both good and evil. life and death be put
before us. yt we may extend and put forth our hondes whether we woll. And if
it be so that that dredful tormentynges make us not ferde: At the leyst way
let the great rewards of Joy excyte and styre us to goodness.

Of the rewards of blessed souls. And of the Joys of heaven. cao..vijo.
THe rewards of blessed men ben to behold god: to live with god / and to live of
god. To be with god: to be in god / and to have god that is most noble and
sovereign goodness. There is perfyte felycyte: perfyte mirth and Joy / very
lyberte. perfyte charity: perpetuell suretee / and sure perpetuyte There is
very and true gladness: of cunning plenteuousnes / all bewte and fayrnes. and
all beatitude and blisfulnes. There is contynuall peace: truth / and charity
everlasting light: virtue / and honest: Inestimable Joy and myrthe:
exceeding swetnesse / and life without end. etnall glory: lawde / quyete. rest:
love / sweet concord. and unity. In this bliss shall he abide evermore with
our lord: in whose conscience shall be found no sin. He shall behold him at
his own lyberte. He shall have him to his great playsure and swetnesse. And he
shall be knytte to him in love. to his great myrthe and gladness. He shall live
in eternyte. shine in truth / and Joy in gladness. And like as he shall have
in abiding perpetuyte. so he shall have cunning and knowledge without
diffyculte or hardens. and in perpetuell rest everlasting felycyte. Sothely he
shall be the cytezyn of that holy cite. where angels ben cyteyzins. where
almighty god ye fader is the temple. and his sone the light / and the holy
ghost is the love and charyte^ O heavenly cite / a sure mansyon. a country
conteynyng eury thing. playsaunt and delectable. Whereof the people live
without stryf or grutchynge / the dwellers live in quietness and rest / where
men suffer none Indygence ne scarsnesse. O thou cite of god. how glorious
things are spoken of the. All that ever dwell in the. dwell in perpetuell Joy
and felycyte. All ben Joyful of our lord whose countenance and chere is
meke / whose face is fair and bewteuous and speech very sweet and delycyous.
He is pleasant to see. sweet to have and keep. and delycyous to love. He is
enough of himself fully to please and content us. And also of him self is a
suffycyent reward for our merytes: There is no thing desired beside him / For
what some ever is desired. is found in him. It is great liking and pleasyre
evermore to behold him. ever more to have him. And evermore to delight in him.
And to be Joined and knytte to him ever more in perfyte love. The understanding
is made clear in him And the desire is purefyed to know and love truth. And
is all the good and wealth of man. That is to know and love his maker.

What great folly then and madness causes us to desire the bytternesse of
vices. and to follow perils of this world / to suffer the vnfortunes of this
unstable life. And to be subgette of the wicked tyranny of the devil. and
coueyte not rather to flee to the blessed company of saints and felycyte of
angellis. to ye solemnyte and feast of heavenly gladness / and to ye Joy and
swetnes of co^templatyf life. yt we may enter in to the kyngnome of our lord.
and see thabu^dau^t ryhces of his goodness. There we shall rest in ase. and
we shall see how sweet our lord is / and ho^ plenteuous the multitude of his
swetnesse is. We shall see the bewte of eternal glory. the bryghtnes of
saints / the honor and worship of the regal mageste. we shall know the
power of ye fader ye wisdom of ye sone / and the most benyngne goodness of the
holy good. And so we shall have knowledge of you holy trynyte. We see now bodily
things by ye body / Also we know the symylytude of bodily things by our
soul. But then we shall se yt soth fast truth with clear syghte of our
soul. O blessed and happy sight to see almighty god verily in himself to see
him in us. And to see us in him in blessydful Joy and Ioyefull bliss. We
shall have all yt ever we shall desire. so that we shall not list to desire
any more. We shall be blessed with swetnesse and love of him and delyciousnes
of beholdinge him. The nobleness of the high felycyte shall be when the clear
god head shall be known in his pure being. and then^e shall be comprehendyd and
known clerly the blessed trynyte. yt is incomprehensyble. The preuytees of ye
godhede shall be showed openly. very god shall be seen and love. And yt syghte and
love fulfyllynge all the heart of man: shall be the hole perfeccyon of ye felycyte
and bliss. One tongue shall be common to all. mirth with out werynesse / one
desire and eurlastynge love. Truth shall be showed clerly / Charity shall
replenysshe and both ye body and the soul shall be fully sacyat. man head
glorefyed shall shine as the son^e. There shall be restfull health. concord of
body and soul. Angels and men shall Joy to gyder in one Joy. speak together
one speech. And be fested all in one feast. The love shall not fail. ne be
made less. There shall be no sorrow ne pain for dyfferryng of things desired
but all good things be present. for the blessed presence of the mageste of
almighty god is al things to them all. and conteyneth them fully in all yt
they desire. His power. yt is almity. wisdom. peace. right wysnesse / and
vnderstondyng^ shall be common to al. In that perpetuell peace shall be no dyuersyte
of tongues or langage. but a peasyble and a greable concord of manners and
desires. In the flood of that playsure the appetyte heepyd and sacyat with
plenteuousnes shall desire no more. There shall be so much felycyte and
bliss. For there shall be the hepe or mough of felycyte and bliss: exceeding
Joy and myrthe / and plenteuouse gladness.

Who is able to have ye Joys of heaven. viijo.
But who is he that is apt and conuenyent to these Joys / sothely he that is a
true penytent: A good obedyent: a lovely fellow and a faithful servant. A true
and perfyte penytent is ever in sorrow and labor. He sorowith for his sins
that been present and also that been paste. And labouryth dylygently that he
may beware and shone sins to come. For very true and parfyte penance: is to
sorrow for sins without sessynge. He sorowyth for his sins that he has
done: that he do ne co^myse no more such sins as he ought to sorrow and
bewail fore. For he is not very penytent ne sorrowful: which does and
co^mysyth contynually such offenses as he ought to be penytent and sorrowful
fore. Therefore if thou wolt be verily and perfytly penytent: cease of sin.
And be in will and purpoos no more for to sin.

A good obedyent submyttyth his will: and is refusing for leyff or for loathe.
And geuyth him holy ly to our lord god. That he may say: Mine heart is ready
good lord* mine heart is ready / It is ready to do what so ever thou co^mau^dest
it. It is ready with a beckenynge to obey redely at thy bidding And so it is
ready good lord to serve the to mynystre and help mine neighbors / to keep
well myself and to rest in contemplacyon of heavenly things. A good and an
amyable or a lovely fellow is dylygent and seruysable to all. and noyous or
grievous to none. He is dylygent and seruesable / For he is devout to god.
benygne and gentle to his neighbor / and sobre to ye world. He is the
servant of our lord god / fellow of his neighbor. and lord of the world.
He has heavenly things that been about him to Joy in. things yt ben equal
to him to felysshyp and company with. And things underneath him to serve him.
He is noyous or grievous to none. but he dressyth and ordenyth low things to
the prouffyte of mydwarde things. and to the honor and worship of things
above / subdued and following heavenly things. subduynge and rulynge erthly
things.

A faithful servant is besy in contemplacion of god. and keeping of himself.
Therefore put all thy dylygence to keep thyselfe well / Then^e knowing yt thine
own dylygence may never be suffycyent to keep the without the help of god.
call for the help of our lord. Then ask with devout prayer the defense
and keeping of holy angels to behold in the ye good. the plesaunte and
perfyte will of thy maker. Purchase also with devout prayer the help of all
that reyneth with Christ. Run by each one syngulerly. Make thy supplicacion
to them every one syngulerly. And cry to them and saye^ Have mercy on me /
have mercy on me. Specially ye that been my friends have ruth and pity on me.
Receive a banysshed creature* Nevertheless I would feign be your seruaunte^
Receive your brother and servant that flees to you for socour / Your brother
and kynnesman in the blood of our merciful redemer Behold a beggar stondynge
at the door cryenge and knocking Open ye. and led him to the king / that I
protestate and cowchyng low at his fete may show to him all my wretchydnesse
and necessytees that I suffer. At the last show thy heart with all the
progenye and kynred thereof to thy prelate / And let no sin abide in the that
is not put away by pure and clean confession. Also put Ihesu Christ upon thy
heart as a seal. and the lock and keeper of thy life. whom christ keeps the
door of the heart and is the porter thereof. that all the housmenye of the heart
go in and forth by him / consequently there shall be thousands upon thousands
of angels watchynge and keeping at the gates of thine outward wits. And
there is no alyante and stranger so bold to break those terryble and ferdful
hosts for reverence of the keeper and vssher / and for dyffence and keeping of
angellys.

A pasynge good lesson for to increase in virtue and goodness. And of
charytable love of thy neighbor. cao.: ixo.
SE that you be a curyous and a dylygent tetcher of thy health and dysposycyon
Dyscusse and examyne well thy life every day. Take good head how much thou
profytest. and how much thou lackeste / and how far thou art from pure
perfeccyon How thou art in manners and co^dycyons. How in deeds in thy desires
/ And how like thou art to god. or how unlike. How nygh or how far you art
fro him. Not in long dystau^ce of places. but in manners and dysposycyon.
Study besely to know thyself. for if you know thyselfe well. thou art better
and more commendable / than if thyself unknown you knew ye course of the
sterres / the virtues of herbs. the complexyons of men. ye nature of bestys /
and had knowledge of all things in heaven. in earth / and in hell. And therefore
render the to thyself / and if it be not always. at the leest wise sometime
among. Rule and govern wisely thyn affeccions and desires. Dress well thy
deeds. And correct thine excess and misdeeds Let no thing abide within the
untamed and vntaughte. Put all thy transgressyons and misdeeds before thine
eyes. and ordeyne thyselfe before thyself as thou were a another. And so wayle
and sorrow thyselfe: Weep for thy wyckydnesse and syn^e wherein thou haste
offended almighty god. and show to him thy wretchydnesse. Show to him also the
malice of thy adversaries and enmyes. And when thou offrest and presentest
thyself tofore him in teeres I pray the remember me / For sothely sith I had
knowledge of the in Christ. I love the / and desire and beer with me the
mencyon and remembrance of the thither were unlawful thoughts deserve
tourmentynge / and holy and honest thoughts deserve reward and mede. When I
pray. I stand as a priest at the awter of god. and there have mind on the.
Sothely thou quytest me if thou love me. and make me partener of thy prayers
and devout orysons / I pray the let me be present with the in remembrance.
there as that thou byddeste devout prayers before our lord for the and thy
famylyer and homely friends. Merueyle not though I said. let me be present /
For if thou love me by cause I am ye image of god. I am as present to the as
thine own person / For the same thing yt thou art. I am: Sothely every
reasonable soul is the image of god Therefore he that seeks the image of god in
himself. sekyth as well his neighbor as his own self And he that fyndethe it
in seeking in himself. perceyueth and knows it in every man /

Sothely the syghte and perseueraunce of the soul is the understanding and
knowledge. Therefore if that thou see thine own person. Then thou see me
that am the same thing that thou art. And if you love god. thou lonest me / yt
am the image of god. And I in loving god. love the. And so while we seek oo
thing and goo toward oo thing. Let us always be present together in our
self. that is to say. in god in whom we love to gyder.

How we should pray love / and whrshyp god. and think on him. cao..xo.
When thou entrest in to the church to pray and to worship god / leave
without the heepe of flowynge thoughts. and forgete utterly cure and charge
of all outward things. yt thou may take heed to god only. For it may not be
yt a man speak any time with god. yt talks or chatteth softly with all the
world. Therefore give attendau^ce and take heed to him that gives attendau^ce
and takes head to the. Here when he speaks to y^. that he may gracyously
here when thou spekeste to him Thus it shall be if thou apply thy self besely
to the loving of our lord with due reverence and dylygence. If thou attend
and take heed dylygently to every word of holy scripture / I say not that I
do these things myself. but I would feyne do them. and I am sorry yt I have not
done them in times past / And it greueth me yt I do them not now. But you to
whom is granted more grace. be ye meke eeres of our lord to the with devout
prayers: Pray to hy^ lowely and devoutly with teeres and syghynges for
remyssyon and foryeuenes of thy sins. And love and glorefye him in all his
works with spyrytuall and goostly songs. For there is no present or gift
more liking and plesau^te to the high cytezyns of heaven. Also there is no
gift more acceptable and Joyful to the high king of heaven. as himself bears
witness saying: The sacrefyce of laud and praysynge shall honor and
worship me. O how happy sholdest thou be if thou might ones se with thy goostly
eyes the plesaunte order of the heavenly company* how princes Joined with the
holy felyshyp of blessed vyrgynes: come the praysyng and worshyppynge of
almighty god with most sweet melodye. Thou sholdest se without doubt with
how much dylygence / and with how much mirth they abide among us. when we
love god Assyste and help vs^ when we pray be nyghe to us in our meditacion
watch and keep us when we rest Defend and help us in our prouysyons and
good labors Sothly the heavenly potestates love their brederen and neighbors.
They Joy besely together for them that receive the heritage of health. and
comfort them: teache them / and defend them. And they provide to euerychone
in all things. Sothly they desire our comy^ge to them: For they look after to
have the hurt and loss of the country restored of us And they search
dylygently and ben very glad to here good of us. They run besely between god
and us / faithfully and truly berynge our co^trycyon and sorrow to him. They
dysdeyne not to be our felawes. For they ben now made mynystres to us. we make
them Joyful and glad when we ben converted to penance. Therefore late us haste
us to fulfill them with Joy of us. Woo to y^ who someuer thou art: that
desyrest to torn ayene to thy stynky^ge synes and fylty living. wenest you to
have their frendshyp at ye dreadful Iugemete fro whom thou will reeue so
much and so verily trusted Joy. They made much Joy when we came to
relygyon. as of them whom they saw drawn and revoked fro the gate of hell.
How shall it be now if they see them depart out of ye gate of paradys and go
bacwarde yt have the one foot in heaven. for though our bodies ben bynethe. yet
let us have our hertes above: Therefore let us run / not with bodily
steps. but with hertly affeccions and desires: For not only angels. but also
ye maker of angels abides us: Almighty god ye fader abides us and his
children and heir to give us possessyon of all his goods. The sone of god
abides us as his brede^en and Inherytours to gyder. yt he may offer up to
almighty god his fader ye fruit of his natyuyte. and the price of his precious
blood The holy ghost abides us / Sothly he is charity wherein we ben
predestynat and ordained to perpetuell bliss fro the beginning. And no doubt
but he will that his predestynacion and ordenauce be fulfilled. Then sithe all the hole court of heaven abides and desires us. let us desire with as
feruente desire as we may. For who someuer desires not greatly to see it. shall
come thereto with great co^fusyon and shamfastnes. Therefore who someuer is
conuersaunt dwells and abides in it with besy prayer and besy medytacion and
thought. shall go from hens in surete And shall be received in it with great
gladness. Therefore where someuer thou be. pray with in thyself. if thou be
far from an Oratory trouble the not to seek a place / for you thyfelf art a
place co^uenyent. of you be in thy business or in any other place / pray. and
there is a temple. Sothly the mind owes often times to be lift up to god with
besy prayer and bodily obeysaunce. For like as there is no moment of time
wherein man occupyeth not and nideth the goodness and mercy of our lord. so
there owes to be no moment wherein he has not him present in his mind. But
perauenture you woll say. I pray daily. but I see no fruit of my prayer / but
even as I go to it. so I go from it. For there is none yt answers me / none
yt speaks to me. none that gives me oughe. but me seems yt I have labored
in vain. O this is ye folysshe speaking of man: taking no head what very
sothfastnes promyseth for prayer. saying on this wise. Sothly I say to you
what someuer ye desire by prayer. belyue ye steadfastly yt ye shall have it. and
it shall be done to you. Therefore set not at little thy prayer. for he yt thou
prayest to sets it not at little but he commanded it to be wreten in the
book of life before it go forth of thy mouth. And we ought to trust without
doubt one of ij: things. for he shall give us yt we desire. or else yt he
knows more prouffytable to us. think therefore of god the best yt thou
may. and of thyself the worste. and yet you should hope worse of thyself than
you may think. Al ye time that you think not on god count it as lost fro
the. Other things belong to other than us* but time is ours only: therefore
watch well and whersomeuer you be / be thine own. and spend time well. and
thou shall be there in surete. Give not thyself to worldly things but use
them to the prouffyte of the soul. What place someuer you be in dress well
thy thoughts / and reuolue some wholesome things in thy soul. For sothly every
place is apt and convenient to good thoughts and medytacions Therefore gadre
togider thy soul with an hole felycyte and Joy. and abide at lyberte in thin
inward habitacyon. and walking in ye largess of thine heart. Make ready
therein to Christ a resting place and a large chamber. For the mind of a wise
man is always to god. We should always have him before our eyes. by whom we have
our beyenge. our life and understanding. For like as we in our being have him
as auctour and maker. so if we shall profit in wisdom. we must have him a
doctor and a techer^ and so we shall be blessed. we must have him ye yeuer of
everlasting bliss And in yt we know yt the image of him (yt is to say that
high and glorious trynyte) is in us. For like as he is. and is both wise and
good. so we in our manner have a beyenge / and know yt we have a being. and
are glad that we have yt knowledge. Therefore use thyselfe as the temple of god.
for that yt is in the like to god / Sothly cheyef honor and worship to god:
is to worsyp and follow him. If you be meke. thou folowest him. For sothly the
mind of a meke man is an holy temple to our lord. and his heart is a chyef
awter to him. Thou worship peste him if you be merciful like as he is merciful
to al. Sothly it is an acceptable host and oblacyon to god to do well to all
men for the love of Christ. do all things even as the child of god. that you
may be acceptable to him yt has vouchesauf to call the his child. In all
thing yt thou do know well and have in mind. yt almighty god is present
/ therefore beware yt another thy syghte ne thy thought abide or tarry in unlawful
delectacyon or plesyre or^ and be well ware yt thou another say ne do thing yt
is unlawful for no manner of plesyre or liking / leest thou offend god in any
deed or in any token thereto. The which is present in every place. and
beholds what someuer thou do Sothly thou haste need to be kept well. For
thou art always before the eyes of a Judge that sees all things: Thou art
always with him in surete if thou rule thy self / so yt he vouchesauf to be
with the. If he be not with ye by grace he is nyghe to the by vengaunce / but
woo to the if it be so with the. Ye but woo to the if it he be not so with the.
For almighty god is wroth with him yt he chastyseth not when he synneth. For him
that he amendeth not by correccion. he suffers perysh in everlasting
dampnacyon.

Of man's heart. And of prouffyte in redynge holy things. cao. ixo.
Certain it is that death tretyth the in every place. the devil lays watch
to take thy soul when it is departed fro the body. but for all that be thou
not aferde. For almighty god if thou be his servant shall deliver the both
fro death and fro the devil God is a true and a faithful fellow. He forsakes
not them yt trust in him. but if he be forsaken before. Sothly he is left and
forsaken when the heart renneth with a wauerynge and unstable mind by shrewde
and vnprouffytable thoughts Therefore we ought to keep it well. to hold it
and rule it well with great business and dylygence. that almighty god may
rest therein. For among all creatures under heaven that been occupied with
worldly vanytees there is no thing found more high / and noble / and more
like to god than is the heart of man. Wherefore our lord seeks or desires
none other thing of the but a clean heart. Therefore make it pure / and clean
by pure and clean confession and besy prayer / that thou may see god with a
clean heart. by contynuell beholdynge of him. So that thou be subget
cyrcumspecte. and attendaunt to him in every place. Dress well thy manners and
condycyons that thou may be quyete and restfull in thyself Love all men And
behave the amyable and goodly to all men. that thou may be pesyble and
restfull and the child of god: Thus thou shalt be a good and a holy. meke and
a true monk. And when you art such one / I pray ye remember me. Woo is me /
for I say these thing. and I do them not And if I do them sometime. I perceuer
not and abide in them. I have these in mind. and keep them not in my life. I
have them in words and sermons. but in manners I show ye law of god alday in
my heart and mouth but I do contrary thereto. I read in it both of relygyon and
prayer. and I love more redynge than prayer. never ye less ye scripture of god
techeth no thing but to keep relygyon. to love unity / and to have charity:
but I wretch run rather to redynge than to pray ^^. I have more plesyre to
read than to here mass. Some time some man taryeth for me desiring to speak
with me for his necessytees. and I take a book that he or he would have and
read thereon. and in redynge therein left ye fruit of charity. the affection of
pety / the teeres of co^puncyon. the prouffyte of masses / and the
co^templacyon of heavenly things Nevertheless there is no thing in this life
that sauoureth swetter / No thing is more gredyly taken. No thing spares
so the mind from the world. No thing strengtheth the soul so against
themptacyons. No thing exyteth and helps a man so to good work and good
labor: as redynge and prayer.

Of wauerynge and unstableness of the mind and thoughts. cao..xijo.
Good lord have mercy of me / for I sin there most were I should make
amendys for my sins. Often times when I pray in the church: I take not head
what I say. Sothly I pray with my mouth. but while my mind is wauerynge
without I lose the fruit of my prayer. My body is within. but my heart is
without: And therefore I lose that I say. For it prouffyteth little to sing
oonly with voys. without thentencyon of heart. And therefore it is great
peruersyte and frowardness / Ye and much folly. and greatly to be lothed. when
we presume to speak with the lord of mageste in prayer. And like as we had no
wit or understanding we torn away our ceres / and torn our heart and
mind to vncouenable fables and tryfles / For it is outrageous folly and
grievously to be punysshed. when most vile and fylthy duste disdeyneth to here
the maker of heaven and earth speaking to him / Sothly there can no tongue
express the suffraunce and gentylnes of our maker and merciful lord* yt
daily beholds us wretches tornynge away our eres closing our hard hertes:
And yet for all yt he cries to us saying. O ye syn^ers torn again and
remember yourself. take heed and see. for I am god. God speaks to me in
psalmody and I to him. And yet when I say the psalm I take none head of whom
the psalm is. Therefore I do great Injury and wrong to god. when I pray him
to here thy prayer / yt which I myself yt bid it here not. I pray him to take heed to me. and sothly I myself take another head to myself ne to him. But I
do that that is much worse / for I lay tofore his sight abhomynable stenche
and fylth. while I reuolue in my heart foul things and vnprouffytable. There
is no thing in me more unstable and more fleing than is mine heart. yt which
as often as it leuyth me and rennyth fro me by evil thought. so often it
offends god. Mine heart is a vain heart an unstable and unsearchable when it
is laid by his own abytrement and lacks ye help of god. it may not be
steadfast in itself. but of all mouable things is most mouable. of all
vyolable things most vyolable. It is destracte and with drawn by Infynyte
things. And rennyth hither and thither by innumerable ways. And when it
seeks rest among diverse things it fyndeth none but bydyth still like a
wretch in labor. void of rest. It concordyth not with it self. but
discordeth from itself. It skyppeth from itself. it alters and changes the
will: It changes cou^seylle. it edyfyeth and builded new things / distroyed
old things. builded again that it has dystroyed And yet it chau^geth ayene
and eftsoone / and ordreth afterward ye same things often times on other
faccyons. For it woll and woll not. and so it taryeth never in one astate But
like as a mylle renneth about swyftly and forsakes no thing but gryndeth
what someuer is put therein. And if there be naught put therein. it co^sumeth
and wastes itself. So is mine heart always meuynge and never rests. but
wether I sleep or wake it is always dremynge and thinking what someuer comes
thereto. And like as gravel or sonde if it be put in to a mylle. hurts and
wastes it / and pyt^he makes it foul. and chafe occupyeth in vain. so
bitter thoughts trouble mine heart. makes it foul and unclean. change it.
inquyete it / and make it weary. Thus mine heart whiles it hydeth not Joy to
come and seeks not the help of our lord. it is drawn far fro the love of
heavenly things. and is occupied with the love of erthly things. when it
slyppeth fro them and is wrapped in these. vanyte receives it. curyosyte
ledeth it / couetyse tyllyth it. pleyly ^e dysceyueth it. flesshly lust
defoyleth it / envy vexes it. wrath trowbleth it. heaviness tormenteth it. and
thus by unhappy falls it is drowned in all vices / For it has leest on god*
yt which might have suffysed it. It wandreth in many things. and seeks here
and there where it may rest. but it finds no thing yt may suffyse it till
it torn ayene to hy^. it is co^duyted fro thought in to thought. and changed
by diverse desires / yt at the leest way it may be fulfilled with ye varyacion
and change of things by whose qualyte it may not be suffysed. Thus unstable
is ye wretchydnesse of mannys heart when ye grace of god is withdrawn. And
wha^ it turned ayene to it self. and discusseth all that it has thought. it
fyndeth naught: For it was no work but thought. yt makes many things of
naught.

The cause. and also the remedy of wauerynge of ye mind. And of confession.
IN this wise sothly dysceyueth the ymagynacyon caused by dysceytes of
deuylles. Almighty god byddeth me give him mine heart. and by cause I am not
obedyente to him when he commands. I am rebel to myself / and therefore I
may not subdue me to myself. till I be subget to hy^ and serve myself against my
will. the which will not serve him with my will. My heart makes more in one
momente than all men in the world may make perfyte in one year. I am not
united and onyd with god. and therefore I am divided in myself. I may not be
united and made one with him but by charity / ne subdued to him but by humylyte.
Ne I can not be very meke but be truth. Then it is expedyente yt I dyscusse
and examyn my self in truth. yt I may know how vile. how freyle: and how
slypper and unstable I am. And when I know all my wretchydnes. it is
necessary yt I cleue to him that has made me / without whom I may naught /
and without whom I may do naught. And by cause I went fro god by synnynge.
I may not torn ayene to him but by true confession: Therefore it behooves to
confess that yt is to be confessyd. For I never confessid my sins by the
same manner and the same entente yt I sinned. Ne I remember not all. what for
oldenes / and what for multitude of them. And those yt I co^fessyd. I confessyd
not clean for fowlnes of them Also I have divided my confession that I might
show diverse sins to diverse preestys. And so I lacked soryeuenesse yt I
hoped to have comen to by parties. For it is a cursed feynynge to deuyde
sins. and pare them above / and pulle them not up by the rotes. Sothly
confession is not prouffytable but if it be in truth of mouth and clennesse of
heart. And yt there may be three to bear us witness in heaven. the fader ye
sone / and ye holy ghost. Let us make preestys wytnes of our hertes and
mouths that every word may stand in the mouth of two or three wytnes If you
say it is enough to me to confess my sins to god only. For the priest may
not absolve me fro my sins. To this / not I. but saint James answers
saying. Confess your sins one to a another For it is according yt we which
by sin have be sturdy and froward to god. meke ourself by confession to his
prestys and mynystres. And man yt was made after thymage of god nedyd no
medyatoure and mean to keep him in grace. now he may not recover it when it is
lost but by a man a medyatour and mean. Therefore every sinner sorrow and
syghe and take feere and dread for his sins. Let him labor besyly and seek
helpers. intercessours / means to pray for him. Let him fall down low and
mekely to man yt would not stand mekely nyghe to his maker. for yt is most
helthfull. that he be penytente and sorry in his heart / and confess his sins
and trespace with his mouth yt god the which before is nyghe him by grace to
prycke his heart to penance. then^e be nigh by mercy yt he may give the
co^fessyon man foryeuenes of his sin. And if it be so yt perauenture the
sinner be penytente / and in the article of need may not have co^fessyon. we
ought to believe faithfully yt the high priest fulsfylleth in him yt the
mortal might not. And in this caas it is done and fulfilled without doubt
against god yt that the man truly would have fulfilled but he might not. for
compe^ce or dyspysynge lettyd and wythdrewe not his confession. but necessyte.

Accusynge by co^fessyon of diverse sins. xiiijo.
IN the chapter where I ought to have amended my sins. I have addyd and put
sins to sins. When I accused or complained of for them have other excused
them by some mean. or else I have al together denied them. Or else I have
defended them. and answered vnpacyently and without reason and that is worste
of all. Sith there is no sin wherwyth I am not somewhat fylyd. or might be
fylyd / it is right yt all occasyon remened and put away I promise mekely
tamende how someuer and of whom someuer I be accused or co^playned of yt I
may thereby be delivered fro sin done and to come. Take heed here in as well
to the order as to the nombre / for we go comynly fro less evil to the more.
I ferynge the multitude of mine own sins. have drade to repreue
transgressyons and trespasses of other. And therefore I have be an auctoure of
death. for I have not expelled and thruste out venym. yt I by due calling on
might have put out. I have had indygnacion ayenste them yt repreuyd me of
vices. and I have hated those yt I ought to have loved. Those things yt noyed
me or dyspleysed I have desired their distruccion. and yet I knew that they
were good in their nature and kind. and made of a good maker. but they were
noysom to me by cause I was evil and used them evil. For there is no thing
contrary to me but I myself It is mine what someuer may noye me. and I am a
burden to myself. Also I have desired yt god should not know my sins.: or
yt he would not. or that he might not punysshe them. And so I would god to
have be unwise. vnryghtwys / and impotent yt which if we were he should not be
god. There is no pride above my pride. Therefore the words of my trespasses
ben far fro my health. Sothly my pride is suspecte to god / and it may not be
yt I with it be turned ayene to grace. For their lodging is diverse And they
may not dwell both together in one soul the which would not dwell to gyder
in heaven. Sothly pride began in heaven. but it is as unmindful of ye way yt it
fell by. might not torn thither afterward. When thayr was trowbled with reyne
or great cold. of great heete I grutchyd wyckedly ayenste god. For soth all
things that we receive to the use of life. we torn to the use of syn^e. And
therefore right is yt we the which sin in all things be smyten and punysshed
in all things. I have often times at divine service broken my voys that I
might sing the swetter. Often times I had more playsyre in mesurynge of the
voice. then in compunccion of ye heart. Sothly almighty god fro whom none
unlawful deed is hyd. desires no clernesse of voys. but clennes of heart. For
when the synger is about to please the people with his voys. he provoke our
Lord to wrath with his shrewde manners I have often time by great importunyte
and subtylte or wylnes of mind gooth license of my prelate to speak or to do
some other thing like a wretch. taking no head that he dysceyueth and
begyleth himself / that other openly or preuely is aboutwarde yt his goostly
fader may enjoin him that yt he desires. I have often times desired to greatly
an edle or a knyfe. or some such thing of lytyl valor / and have not
confessed it. for I hoped not it had be sin by cause of the little valor.
But sothly it is little dyffrence whether a vile or a precious thing be desired
when thaffeccion or desire is ylyke corrupt For the knyfe is not vice. but the
unlawful appetyte of ye knyfe. Ne gold is not vice* but the unlawful desire of
gold. I have not trauayled in labor somoche as I might or should have done.
I have be so idle in scylence that in that ydelnesse I thought no prouffyte of
mine neighbor. I sought not ye co^templacion of god. Sothly he prouffyteth
little to himself that prouffyteth not other when he may I have bosted me of
ryghtwysnesse / wenynge there had been a right great virtue where was a great
fall of sin. Also I made vices of virtues. For ryghtwysnesse when he
excedyth and passes his dute and manner or mesure engenders the vice of
cruelte. And over much pety and pacyence brings for the brekynge of
dyscyplyne and wantonness. And so often times yt is vice. the which some men
wene is virtue. As a remysse. vnquyknesse / some men wene be mekenes. And ye
vice of slougth. falsely feyneth to be the virtue of quietness and rest. I
feyned me to be that yt I was not. I said yt I would yt I would not. I said one
thing with my mouth. and I thought a another with my heart. And so I held my
wulffysshe conscience under a shepys skin. For a wulffyshe conscience is a
slake and slow conuersacyon. beestly cogytacyon / feyned co^fessyon. short and
seldom compu^ccion. obedience without devotion / prayer without intencion.
redynge without edyfyeng. and prouffyte / A seruau^te without cyrcu^speccion
and taking head. O how hard ben these to me yt I speak. for in speaking of
them I stryke mine own selfe^ Nevertheless by cause I deny not myself to be a
sinner. but know my sin. perauenture against god yt meke Judge. this
knowledge of sin shall purchaas me foryeuenes. I shall tell therefore. I shall
tell my wretchydnes. if peraue^ture his great pety meue him. I shall tell the
my sin: for ye co^fessyon of sin is the beginning of health. I have a
great crown and round clothing. I keep the rule of fasting. I keep ye
hour of service. but mine heart is far fro my god. I beholdy^ge yt outward
things. deem yt all things ben sauf and well in me / not feeling the inward
worm that gnaweth within. Strangers have eten and wasted my strength. and I
have not known. and therefore I walking altogyder in those things yt ben
outward. and unknowing mine inward things. am effused and spylte as water /
and am brought to naught. forgetyng things paste. Neglygent of things present
/ not preuydy^g things to come. I am unkind to benefyces and good deeds.
Prone and ready to evil things / and slow to good things. If I behold
myself inly I see yt I am unclean. And if I behold not myself inly. I know
not my self. And when I behold myself. I may not suffer myself / I find so
much in me that is worthy rebuke and confusyon. And the ofter and more
suptylly yt I dyscusse my self. the more abhomynacion I find in corners of
mine heart. For sith I began to sin. I could never escape one day with out
sin. but I add and put to sins to sins. and I have them before mine eyes
/ and yet I sorrow not I see things yt I should be ashamed of. and yet I am
not ashamed. I behold things to be sorowed. but I sorrow not yt is a sign of
death and token of dampnacion. For a membre or lyme^ yt felyth no pain is deed.
And an vnsensyble soore yt is without feeling is incurable. I am light and
wanton, and I correct not myself: but I torn ayene daily to sins yt I have
confessed and be shryuen of. And I kept me not fro the dyche where in to other
I myself have fall or else I have seen other fall in. And when I should weep
and pray for evil that I have done. and for good deeds that I have be
neglygent to do. Alas for sorrow it torneth me contrary. For I have be slack
and cold from the feruoure of prayer. Ane now I abide ^olde without helynge.
And therefore I may not weep myself. for the grace of teeres is gone fro me I
may not layne my sins For where someuer I goo my co^cyence gooth with me.
berynge with it what someuer I have put there in wheter. it be good or evil. It
keeps her while I live. And when I am deed it shall yield ayene that yt it
took to keep. If I do well it is ready at the hand. And if me think I do well
and exalte myself thereof it is not absent but present. It is present to the
living. it follows the deed / And where as my Joy is. there is cofusyon
inseperable after the qualyte of that that is put and betaken to the
conscience. Thus in mine own house and in mine own household I have accusers.
Iuges / and tourmentours. My conscience accuses me. Mind is witness / Reason
/ the Judge. Playsyre the prison / Dread the tormentour. The froward delight ye
tourmentynge / Soothly as many evil pleysyres as there ben. there shall be as
many tormentynges. For the rewyth we be punyssheth whereof we have plesyre.

Of three goostly enmyes. the flesh / the world. and the devil. And also of
their temptacyon / and resystence ayenste them. cao. xvo.
Help me my lord god for mine enmyes / yt is to say. the body / the world.
and the devil have byseged and vnbylapped my soul. I may not flee fro my
body. ne chase it from me / I must needs carry it abowte. for it is tied to me.
It is not lefull to dystroye it. I am constreyned to systeyne it. When I feed
it I nourysshe mine enmye ayenste me. If I ete enough and it be strong. the
health of it is aduersarye to me. Sothly the world has vmbylapped and
besyeged me on every side. and woundyth me with his arowes by.v. gates / yt is
to say v. bodily wits. The eye beholds and torneth the wit of the mind.
the eere hereth and boweth thereto the intent of the heart. Smelling lets
cogytacion and thought. the mouth speaks and often time disceyueth. Thardoure
and hete of lust for a little occasyon is excyted and styred. And but it be
soon left and ouercomen. anon it occupyeth and heteth / brenneth / and
kyndleth all the body. For first it prycketh and tyckleth the flesh a little
with thought. Then it defoyleth ye mind with foul deletacyon. And at the
last it subdueth the mind to it by consenting to shrewdnes. The devil also
whom I may not se (and therefore I should rather be the more ware of him for
he has bended his bow wyttely and preuely. has put therein his arowes to
shote at me / Has thret to hyde gylders and snares for me And has said who
shall espy them. He has put a gylder in gold and silver. and in all things
that we mysuse. when we ben delyted evil in them we ben snared. And he has
not only laid a snare. but also lyme. Lyme is love of possessyon. desire of
cogytacion and thought / coueytynge of worship. and playsyre of the flesh.
with the which ye soul is snared lymed / and tied yt it may not flee by the
ways of heavenly Syon with the feathers af contemplacyon. The arowes of the
devil ben. Ire. wrath. envy. lechery. and other wherwyth the soul is
wounded. and who is he that may quench his fyry darts. Alas for sorrow A
faithful man is often times overcome with these darts. Woo is me For bataylles
ben on every side. Darts flee on every side. On eury side ben temptacions and
perils. What way someuer I torn there is no surete to me. And I dread
both those things yt ben plesaunt and that been dysplesaunt. Both hungre and
refeccion. sleep and watch / labor and rest fight against me. Bowrde is no
less suspect to me than wrath. For I have sclaundred many in bourdynge. And I
dread no less prosperyte than aduersyte. for prosperous things deceive me
unware with their swetnesse. But things that been unprosperous by cause they
have some bytternes. as bitter pocion and drink / make me suspecte and feryd.
I feere more evil that I do preuely. than that I do openly. For that evil
that no man sees. no man repreueth. And where there is no dread of a rebuke.
the tempter the devil is much bold. and wyckydnesse is lyghtlyer done. No
merueyle. for there is battle on eueryche part. and peril and dread on every
side. And like as they done that dwell where war is. So must we look
hither and thither. and torn the head about to look at every cragge or
stronde. The flesh tempts me with things of lust and pleysyre. The world
with vain things. And the devil with bitter things As often as flesshly
cogytacyon mouyth my mind vnportunely with mete. drink or sleep / and other
carnal things perteynynge to ye body: the flesh speaks to me. And when the
heart is occupied with vain thoughts / as with ambucyon and desire of worldly
worshyppes. with bostynge and pride. it comes of the world. And when I am
provoked vnportunely to Ire. to wrath / and bytternesse of the soul. it is
suggestyon of the devil. the which behooves to be resysteth and withstonde.
as it were ye devil himself and to shon and flee as fro the pains of hell.
It is the properte of deuylles and fendes to offer to us evil suggestyons. And
our dewty is. not to consent to them. Sothely as often as we resyste. we
overcome y^ devil. we glad angellys. and honor god. Our lord himself
exhortyth us to fight: and helpyth us to get the vyctory. He beholdyth how we
fight / and helpyth when we faylle. And crownyth us when we get the vyctory.

Of the devil. And how he temptyth man by the flesh / cao. xvio.
MY carcas made of claye holdyth the condicyons thereof. and therefore I have of
it thoughts of uncleanness and foul playsures. Of the world thoughts of
curyosyte and vanyte And of the devil of bytternesse and malice. These three
enmyes fight against me and pursue me: sometime pryuely and sometime openly: but
always malycyously. Sothely the devil trustyth cheyfly in help of the flesh
/ For an enmy of household noyeth most. And it has made covenant with him to
distroye me / For it was brought forth of sin: nourisshyd in sin: Corrupt
greatly at his beginning: but much more corrupt by evil custom. And that is
the cause that it is so contrary to the soul That it grutchyth somoche / and
is so vnpacyente to be taught: And entycyth unlawful things: and obeys not
to reason / and will not be refreyned with any dread. That crokyd serpent enmy
of mankind helpyth it: and vsyth it. For he has no other desire labor ne
study: but to lose our souls. This is he yt besyly werketh evil. speaks
subtylly / entyseth craftily. deceyueth wylyly. excyteth unlawful meuynges And
sets on fire venomous cogitacions moves battle and strife / nourysshed
hatred incyteth and styreth to gloteny. moves to letchery. Excyteh the desire
of the flesh. makes ready occasyon of sin And cessyth not to tempte the
hertes of men with a thousand crafts of hurt and noyenge. This is he that
smyteth us with our staff. and byndeth our hondes with our own gyrdell. that
our body the which is yeuen to us to our help. may be to our hurt and
sclaunder. It is a grievous stryffe and great peril to fight ayenste an enmye
of household. namely sith we be strangers. and he a cytezyn. He dwells in his
regyon. and we ben outlawes and pilgrims. It is also great Ieopardye to
sustene so often so contynuall and daily conflyctes and batayles against the
watches and subtyltees of dysceyte of the devil the which is very subtle:
both by nature and also by long excersye and use of his malice.

Of the bliss of heaven. cao..xvijo.
MY lord god deliver me from mine enmyes. and from them that have hatyd me
/ For they have been comforted against me / Forsoch I that have lived against
myself unto this hour. shall begin now by thy grace to live to myself we
should live. so that when the body begins to be devoured with worms. the
soul may make merry with saints in heaven. The spyryte should be dressyd toward
ye place that he should go to. We should haste thither where we should always
live and where we shall never dread to deye ayene. Wherefore love we so much
this slyppy and faylynge life. where we live with somoche labor / Where we
uneath content and satysfye our body of that yt is necessary in ety^ge drinking
/ and slepynge. We ought much more to love everlasting life. where we shall
suffer no labor. where is chyef mirth / chyef felicyte and bliss Happy
lyberte and happy bliss. Where men shall be like to the angels of god. And
ryghtwys men shall shine as the son in the kingdom of their fader Of what
manner trowest thou shall be then the bryghtnes of souls. when the light of
bodies shall have the bryghtnesse of the son. There is no heaviness. no
trowble / no sorrow. ne dread / no labor no death. But perpetuell health
always perseruaraunt and abiding. There shall be no malice ne mysery of the
flesh. There is no sekenesse^ no necessyte. no hunger. no thirst. no
cold. no hete no faintness of fast. ne other temptacyon of the enmye. No
will to sin. no leysyre to trespace. but all thing shall be in gladness and
Joy. And men felyshypt to angels shall flouryshe evermore without infyrmyte of
body. There shall be inyfnyte mirth everlasting bliss / wherein that yt is ones
purchaced shall always be possessyd. There is rest fro labor peace of enmyes.
mirth of noueltees / sykernesse of eternyte. swetnesse and delectacion of the
everlasting vysyon and syghte of god. And who is he that desires not greatly
to dwell there. both for rest / peace and mirth. eternyte. and the blessed
syghte of god. There is no pilgrim: but who someuer may deserve to come
thither. shall dwell sekerly in yt perpetuell country. always glad and always
sacyate of the glorious syghte of god. And the more that one is obedyent to a
another for god. the more reward shall he receive there. And the more yt he
loved god. the more clerly he shall se him. For the end of man is to behold
god.

Of the dyspysynge of worldly things Of the old man. And of the pity.
gentylnesse / and mercy of god cao. xviijo.
THe days ben of man as a shadow upon the earth. and he has none abiding.
but when he weneth that he stondeth surly. he is nyghe naught. Wherefore then
gaderest thou the trsoures in earth. sith both that yt is gadered and the
gaderer pass away without love. And thou man what fruit lokest after to have
of the world. whose fruit is hurt and lost / the end of whom is death.
Would god thou woldeste savor and understand. and provide for thy last
ending. I know one that has lived with the homely many years sytten at thy
table. And taken mete of thy hand / slepte in thy bosom. and spoken with the
when he would He should be thy servant by right heritage But by cause thou
have nourysshed him dylycatly from his chyldhode. and spared the rod / he is
made obstynate. And has lift his foot above thine head. And has brought the
to seruytude and bondage: and rules the cruelly. But perauenture thou wolte
ask who this is / It is thyn old man that tredeth down and makes foul thy
soul. that sytteth at naught the country that we should desire. For he
sauoureth not. but seeks things only that be flesshely. This man is blind.
deef / and dombe from his natyuyte. Wicked in his aege. rebel to virtue and
troth. And enmye to the cross of Christ. He mocketh an Innocente and a simple
man. He walks in high things and meruyllous^ that been above his degree. His
boste and his pride is more than his strength. He dredeth none. He
worsshyppeth none / He says in his folysshnes that there is no god. He wexyth
weary and slack in good things. And is glad with other mennys euylles. He is
nourysshed with unclean thoughts. and perseuertth in them without werynesse.
He scatters and wastes his own gods as a reuelar and a waster. He
coueytyth and reuyth other mennys as a neg on. He gadreth to him shame and
sclaundre Feynynge. and dysceytfull / and provoking the wrath of god. This man
is borne all in sin. And so he is nourysshed the friend of wyckydnesse. the
sone of death / the vessel of wrath and rebuke and ready to perysshe. And yet he
presumes to tell and show the ryghtwysnesse and laws of god. And speaks the
Testamente of god. He hates dyscyplyne. He casts our lord behind his
back. When he sees a thief. he renneth with him. and puts his portion and
part with aduoulterers. He puts sclaundre ayenste the children of his
mother. and tresoreth the ire of god up on him. And will take thine heritage
from yt in the day of ire. and reave it from the upon the earth And thou
vengest not so great Iniurye. but dyssymylynge spekeste not one hard ne
greuouse word to him. Ne sheweste no wrath ne angry countenance of him. but
fauoureste him that flatereth the. Thou playest with a mocker. Knoweste thou
not that it is Ismael. that aplyeth with ye This is no play of chyldhode ne
of symplenes or Innocence. But it is the mocking. the hurt and death of the
soul. Now has he thrown the down hedlynge in to the dyche that he has
made. Now art thou wounded. now art thou effemynate / now art thou oppressyd
with the yocke of wretchydnesse and thraldom. and thou art trodden foul under
his fete / O thou wretchyd and miserable man. who shall deliver the fro the
bonds of this rebuke. Rise up god. And fall down this armyd man. fall he
down and be he all to broken. Also he is a wicked man the dyspyser of god. the
inordynat lover of himself The friend of the world. and servant of the
devil. How seems the / If thou understand right thou wolte say with me /
he is worthy death / Put him on the cross. Dyfferre no longer Dyfferre no
longer. Spare no longer. But hastily and instantly boldly Crucefye this man.
But let it be upon the cross of Christ. in whom is health and life. to whom
if thy man crucefyed cry. he shall here him benygnely answering and saying.
Thou shalt be with me this day in paradyce. O how great is the pity of
Christ. The wretch was without hope of health. But the love of god is so
great and so tender and free. His gentylnesse so ready. his meekness so
merueylous / his suffraunce so pacyent. that he heryth him gracyously that
cries to him / For he is merciful. O how great is the mercy of god. How
ineffable and unspeakable is the right hand of almighty god. Yesterdaye he was
in derkenesse. and to day in shynynge of light / Yesterdaye in the mouth of
the lion. And to day in the hondes of our savior. Yesterday in the gates of
hell. and to day in the delyces of Paradyce. But what prouffyten these letters
of monycion. but if thou put ye letters of death fro the conscience. what
prouffyte these things written and understand but if thou read and understand
thyselfe. Therefore give dylygence to Inward redynge. And read and understand
thyn own self: that thou may read and love god: That thou may fight and
overcome the world: and all thy enmyes. That thy labor may be tournyd in to
rest: and sorrow in to Joy. And after the derknes of this life: thou may se
the spryngynge of ye bryghte morning. And after these thou may se the myddaye
and heyghte of the son of ryghtwysnesse. In whom thou shall behold the
spouse with his spouses / one lord of everlasting glory: that lyuyth and
regneth ever more. Amen.

Here we make an end of this right prouffytable treatise: the Medytacyons of
saint Barnard / Which for very favor and charytable love of all such
persons as have not understanding in lattyn: has be translatyd fro latin in
to english b^ a devout student of the University of Cambrydge And has put
it to be Enpry^ted at Westmester: by Wynkyn the Word the.ix. day of March.
the year of our lord M.CCCC.lxxxxvi.

