Palmerin D'Oliua.

The Mirror of nobility, Map of honor, Anotamie of rare fortunes, Heroycall
president of Love: VVonder for Chivalry, and most accomplished Knight in all
perfections.

Presenting to noble minds, their Courtly desires, to Gentles, their choice
expectations, and to the inferior sort, how to imitate their virtues:
handled with modesty, to shun offense, yet all delightful, for recreation.

Written in the Spanish, Italian and French, and from them turned into English
by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Majesty's Chamber.

Patere aut abstine.

At London, Printed by I. Charlewoode, for William Wright, and are to be
sold at his Shop, adjoining to S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrie, the
middle Shop in the row. 1588.



To the right noble, learned, and worthy minded Lord, Edward de Ve^e, Earl of
Oxenford, Viscount Bulbeck, Lord Sanford, and of Badelsmere, and Lord high
Chamberlain of England: A. M. wishes continual happiness in this life, and in
the world to come.
AMong the Spartanes right noble Lord, and sometime my honorable Master,
nothing was accounted more odious, then the forgetfulness of the servant
toward his Master: which made Mucronius, who had been servant to Hagarbus
a poor Arte^an, and for his virtues afterward called to the office of a
Senatou^, in all assemblies to reverence his poor Master, so that he would
often say: It was honor to Mucronius, that he had been servant to Hagarbus.

Though this example (my good Lord) be unfit for me, in what respect, beseemes
me not to speak: Yet that excel^lent opinion of the Spartanes, I count it
religion for me to immitate. For if this vice was so despised among such famous
persons, what reproach would it be to so poor an abject as my self, being once
so happy as to serve a Master so noble: to forget his precious virtues, which
makes him generally belooued* but cheerf^ly mine own duty, which nothing but
death can discharge, In remembrance therefore of my officious zeal, I present
your Honor the willing endeavors of your late servant: how simple soever
they be, right perfect shall you make them by your favorable acceptaunce, this
being added, that were I equal in ability with the best, all should be offered
to my noble Master.

If Palmerin has sustained any wrong by my bad translation, being so worthily
set down in other languages: Your Honor having such special knowledge in
them, I hope will let slip any fault escaped, in respect I have done my good
will, the largest talent I have to bestow.

And seeing the time affordes me such opportunity, that with ending this first
part, the old year is expired: I present it my noble Lord as your servants
New years gift, and therewithal deliver my most affectionate duty, evermore
ready at your Honors commandment.

Needelesse were it, by tediousnes to grow troublesome, when a word suffiseth
to so sound judgment: I submit my self and my Book to your gracious conceit,
and the second part, now on the press, and well near finished I will shortly
present my worthy Patron.

In mean while, I wish your Honor so many New years of happiness, as may stand
with the heavenly appointment, and my modesty to desire.

Sometime your Honors servant, yet continuing in all humble duty. Anthony
Monday.
To the courteous Readers.
WHen I finished my second part of Palmerin of England, I promised this work
of Palmerin D'Oliua, because it depended so especially on the other: to
discharge that debt, for promise is no less accounted, with the new year I
send him abroad, a freendly companion for the long euenings, and a fit
recreation for other vacant times.

But because some (perhaps) will make exceptions against me, that being but one
Book in other languages, I now divide it twain: my answer is, that to glut
men with delight, may make them surfeit, and so in expecting thanks for my
pains, I should remain condemned by general misliking. Beside, a Book
growing too big in quantity, is profitable neither to the mind nor the
pursse: for that men are now so wise, and the world so hard, as they love not
to buie pleasure at unreasonable price. And yet the first part will entice
them to have the second, when (it may be alleged) the cost is as great, as
though it had come altogether: yet I^am of the mind, that a man grutcheth not
so much at a little money, paid at several times, as he does at once, for this
advantage he has, in mean time he may employ half his money on more needful
occasions, and raise some benefit toward buying the second part. Again, the
other part will be new at the coming forth, where now it would be stale: for
such are affections now a days, that a book a sennight old, is scant worth
the reading. Thus no injury is offered by dividing my Book* but profitte both
to you and me: yours I have rehearsed, and mine is, that a little pause does
well in so long a labor, beside, this advantage would I take, that if my
first part deserved no liking* you should never be offended by me with the
second.

Yet herein I am encouraged* that what has past with so great applause in
diverse languages, can hardly merit to be despised in England, being matter
altogether of delight, and no way offensive: for noble and Gentle minds, are
far from iniuri^g the History, that has so highly pleased Emperors, Kings
and mighty potentates, if then the inferior sort mislike, it is because they
are not capable of so especial deseruinges.

And yet I am persuaded, that both one and other will freendly entertain
Palmerin D'Oliua, because his History i^ so plentifully stored with choice
conceit, variety of matter and exquisit conueyaunce: as nothing can be
reproved but my simple translation, yet that I hope will be pardoned too, in
that to translate, allows little occasion of fine pen work.

The second part goes forward on the Printers press, and I hope shall be with
you sooner then you expect: In the mean while let this have favorable
acceptaunce, and that will be a spur to hasten the other.

Yours to his uttermost. A. Monday.
The first part of the ancient and honorable History, of the valiant Prince
Palmerin D'Oliua, Emperor of Constantinople, Son to the King Florendos of
Maccdon, and the fair Griana, Daughter to Remicius, Emperor of
Constantinople: a History full of singular and Courtly recreation etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the secret love which the Prince Tarisius bare to the young Princess
Griana: and the arrival of the Prince Florendos at Constantinople.

THe ancient Histories, of the famous Emperors of Constantinople do record,
that the eight Emperor succeeding Constantine, the founder of that ancient and
famous City, was named Remicius, who governed so justly, and with such
exceeding honor: as not only his Subjects entirely looued him, but of the
kingdoms about him he was so feared and reverenced, that his Empire increased
more large then in the time of his Predecessors. This Remicius was of such a
princely and munificent mind, that no Knight whatsoever came into his Court,
without very honorable receite and bountiful rewards: expressing the good
nature of a virtuous Prince, whose deeds were held of no small reckoning
amongst his very enemies. He married with the King of Hungarias Daughter, a
Princess for wit and beauty, equal with any of her time, which caused her
to be so especially loved of her Lord the Emperor, as he altogether gave
over y^ exercise of Arms: notwithstanding, his Court did not diminishe one
lote of the former glory for good and hardle Knights, but daily increased in
such sort, as he took great delight to have young Princes, Knights and
Gentlemen, nurtured and educated from their very infancy in his Palace,
especially after the Empress had brought him a Son, which was named
Caniano, at whose birth was no little rejoicing through the whole Empire.
Within two years after, she was likewise delivered of a goodly Daughter,
named Griana, who growing to fourteen years of age, was of such rare beauty
and singular good grace, as those that beheld her, esteemed her for the
chiefest piece of workmanshippe that ever nature framed.

Hereupon it chanced, that Tarisius Son to the King of Hungaria (who had
been brought up in company with the young Prince Caniano) fell into such
amorous conceit of the young Princess, as he devoted him self only to her
service, being unable to conceal ye object of his affections, but that time
made her acquainted with the cause of his alteration. Many means he found to
entise her good opinion toward him, but she carrying a religious zeal to love
in some other climate, made no reckoning of his imporunate and dilligent
service, which drew a Hell of tormentinge thoughts upon Tarisius, seeing his
suit and service so deeply despised. Nevertheless, (to compass his intent)
he desired his Cousin Caniano, to cause a Tryumphe be published, whereunto all
Knights might be summoned, as well strangers as others: not doubting but he
should speed so well in deeds of Arms, as thereby he might deserve the love
of the fair Griana, and so afterward make means by the Empress to demand
her in marriage, all which he concealed from his Cousin Caniano: who very
gladly did consent to what Tarisius had requested, watching opportunity to
find the Emperor his Father at leisure, when he made his highness acquainted
with the whole enterprise, of himself and his Cousin Tarisius, desiring him
that all Knights might have warning for preparation, against a day the next
Month appointed for the purpose. The Emperor was very well pleased with his
Sons request, accounting himself highly honored by his demand:
whereupon he caused Heralds of Arms presently to be dispatched, to
signify his intended Tournament through al Countries far and near. In the
mean while Tarisius could not rest day nor night, but still endeavored to
do what he judged might please the Princess Griana, to who^ as yet he had not
uttered the effect of his longing desire, albeit, by exterior actions he
daily made show sufficient of his tormenting passions. But it so fell out not
long after, that one day in her walking he had sorted her alone from all the
other Ladies and Gentlewomen, in a place commodious for a Lovers discourses,
where falling from one argument to another, the fury of his oppressions
imboldened him so far, that at length he brake with her in manner following.

Madame, you are not ignorant of the honorable assembly, that is appointed at
the feast ensuing, when I hope to receive the order of Knighthoode, and if it
shall like you to think so well of me, as to grant me one request, easy
enough for you to affoorde me, persuade your self that I shall imagine my
fortune equal with the happiest Knights that ever lived, in that it may be the
only mean, whereby I shall enjoy the prize and honor of the Triumph.
Griana knowing assuredly that Tarisius bare her great affection, as I have
before rehearsed, returned him this answer. In sooth Cousin, it would please
me marvelous well, to be the mean of so good fortune as you promise your
self. Nevertheless, I have not learned so little modesty, as to grant any
thing, before I know what is desired. When Tarisius understood her modest
excuse, he persuaded himself that he should now obtain that of her, whereof
until that instant he had lived in despair: whereupon, the tears standing
in his eyes, he began in this manner. I humbly beseech you good Madame, to
take in worth what I am to acquaint you with, for when I determined to smoother
my grief in secret, the extremity of my affection grew to such a surplusage,
as it brake the stringes of my thoughts almost vowed for ever silent, to
reveal that to you which my self dare but reverently think, such is my
fear to displease you: otherwise, I know no mean can warrant me from
sudden and cruel death, so settled is y^ unspotted love I bare you, which
when I strive to overcome; and my self also, the more I would decrease it, the
more it augmenteth, and that so strangely, as while you are in presence, my
spirit forsakes every part of me, to live in you only. For which cause I
have determined (if you think it good) to request you of the Emperor your
Father for my Wife, and if he regard me with so much honor: the Realm of
Hungaria may well challenge, and my self likewise, the highest room in
earthly felicity, having a Mistress of such unspeakable quality. In the
mean time, if you please to bestow on me any Jewel or favor, commanding
me to wear it as your Knight and Servant: you shall well perceive how
aduenturous love will be in defense of my right, by the advantage I shall
recover in the virtue of a gift so acceptable.

Griana, who made but slender account of his passions, and being not well
pleased that he held her with such vain discourses: modestly returned him
this answer. If you had such regard of me as I well deserve, you would not
attempt me with speeches so unfitting my hearing: for if your desire be such as
you give me to understand, you ought to make it known to the Emperor or
Empress, who have greater authority over me then I have my self. Therefore I
desire you henceforth not to adventure the like on peril of your life,
otherwise I shall let you know how highly you offend me: on which condition
I am content for this time to pardon your want of discretion, in that I
perceive my self to be the only cause thereof, in granting you time and
leisure thus priuatlie to assail me, for which oversight I repent me at the
very heart. With which words she floong away and left him alone, declaring
by her countenance to be offended with his request, in that she desired
rather to die then accept him for her Husband, or to allow him the name of her
freende. If then Tarisius was driven into a quandarie, we need not marvel:
wherefore troubled as he was, and not caring greatly whether he went, he
entered the Empress Chamber, where she and her Son Caniano stood conferring
together, without saluting the one or other, he satte down in a Chair, and
gave such bitter sighs, as the Empress hearing, was somewhat moved
therewith, doubting he had either received some great injury, or else could
not provide himself so sufficiently as he would for the Triumph, whereupon
she left her Son, and calling Tarisius aside, thus began with him. Nephewe, I
see you very melancholy, which makes me to judge, that you want some
needful thing for the Tournament, which my Son has caused to be published.
With which words she beheld Tarisius more wishlie then she had done before,
and perceived the tears to trickle down his cheeks, which made her more
desirous to know the cause of his grief, but his heart was so confounded and
shut up in anguish, as he could not speak one word to her. Nevertheless,
the Empress, who loved him as her own Son, found so many means to
persuade him, as in the end he disclosed ye love he bare to Griana, and the
answer likewise which she made him: whereby I am assured (quoth he) that
nothing but death can cease my torments. The Empress (who of her self did
many times determine to make that marriage) perceiving now how fitly the
occasion offered it self, began to resolve on the consumation thereof: and to
content her Nephewe, in excusing the Princess Griana, spoke as follows. Do
you Nephewe mislike the answer of my Daughter? believe me therein she did
but her duty: for she cannot dispose of her self being young and under
control, but the Emperor and I, whom you ought first to make acquainted
with your request. But since I perceive how you are affected, I promise you I
will confer with my Lord the Emperor, and hope to prevail so well in the
cause, as you shall speed of that you most desire. As they continued these
discourses, they were given to understand by a Messenger, that the Prince
Florendos the Kings son of Macedon was newly arrived, with a brave company
of Knights. But his coming to the Emperor was not as his vassaile or Subject,
because the kingdom of Macedon was at that time no way beholding to the
Empire, but only to see the fair young Princess Griana, the renown of whose
beauty and virtues had so peirced his thoughts, as before he saw her, he
loved and honored her, so that for this cause only he iournied to
Constantinople, where he was very honorably entertained both of the
Emperor and his Son Caniano as also of the Empress and fair Griana, who
oftentimes heard him reckoned and esteemed amongst the most honorable and
gracious Princes, that lived at that day.

CHAP. II.
How the Empress conferred with the Emperor, as concerning the marriage of
their Daughter Griana with Tarisius, Son to the King of Hungaria, whereof
they both determined, and of that which happened in the mean time.

THe Empress was not forgetful of her promise made to her Nephewe Tarisius,
but endeavored by all means possible to find the Emperor at such leisure, as
she might impart the whole to him: and because she had so hardilie taken the
matter upon her, she would gladly it should sort to effect, as commonly
Women are covetous of their own desires, therefore no marvel if she were
earnest in following her intent. Soon after, walking alone with the Emperor,
and smoothly covering the bait she was desirous he should swallowe, she
desired him to grant her one request, whereof she would not willingly be
denied. The Emperor never before hearing her so importunate, consented at the
first to whatsoever she demanded: now persuading her self sure to speed,
thus she began.

My Lord, having often considered with my self, that our Daughter Griana is of
years and discretion able for a Husband, I am the more desirous to see her
honorably bestowed. And for that the young Prince Tarisius has been trained
up in your Court, and (which I little thought) some good will appears to be
between them: I should think if not amiss to unite them in marriage
together, for hardly shall we find ((...)) a Lord of greater blood and birth
then he, being heir apparent to the Crown and kingdom of Hungaria, besides
they having been so long time conversant together in their younger years,
will entertain a more special regard of love between them, then can be in
any other that may move y^ question to her. Madame (answered the Emperor)
she is your Child, and I do not think but you would her good: therefore I
like the motion well, for that indeed I esteem so well of Tarisius, as of
mine own Son, and since we have so happily fallen into these discourses,
we will forthwith certify y^ King his Father by our Ambassadors, that we may
understand his opinion herein. The Empress gratified her Lord with very
hearty thanks, being not a little glad she had so well prevailed, wherefore
immediately she advertised (...). But for Griana, her affection was else where,
for she bare a certain secret good liking to Florendos so soon as she
beheld him, hearing so great report of his knightly bounty and prowess, so
that beholding them together, and their eyes delivering the good conceit of
each other: one might easily judge, that Love had so mightily maistered
her thoughts, as (if he consented) she had set down her rest for her
choice, and he on the other side was drawn into the same compass,
notwithstanding each of them (for the time) concealed, what they rather
desired should be known between them. Yet this hidden fire strove to gain
place of issue, for diverse times ye Princess Griana being amongst her Ladies,
talking of such Knights as would show themselves at the Tournament: the
Prince Florendos was co^monlie first spoken of, and so highly would the Ladies
commend him beyond all the other, as Griana could not refrain from changing
color, so that ye alteration she found in her spirit might be evidently
perceived, howbeit none of the Ladies as then noted it, and thus she continued
till the feast of Saint Maria d' Augusta, which was the day appointed for the
Tournament, on which day the Emperor knighted his Son Caniano, and Tarisius
Nephewe to the Empress, in honor whereof, he held a greater and more
magnificent Court, then before time he had done, for he suffered the Ladies
to accompany the Knights at the Table, albeit they were not wont to do so
often at y^ time, yet full well it pleased the Prince Florendos, who satte
opposite to the Princess Griana, during which time of Dinner, though many
piercing looks, and smothered sighs were sent from each other, as messengers
of their s^m^lable opinions, yet cunningly they shaddowed all from being
discerned. But after the Tables were withdrawn, and each one preparing for
the Tourney: Florendos so well behaved himself, as he found the means to
speak priuatlie with his new Freende, and thus he began.

Madame, the Heavens have not a little favored me, in sorting us so
commodiouslie together, that I may show you before I enter the Lystes royal,
the occasion why I left the Realm of Macedon, to visit my Lord the Emperor. I
swear to you upon my knightly faith, that your gracious self was the only
cause of my journey, and while I live, I shall evermore adventure my self, in
ought that may stand with your favor and liking: and the first argument of my
happiness I should account, if you would command me this day to arm my
self for your Knight: otherwise, I must be content to absent my self, being
assured that with out your regard, it is impossible for me to do any thing
that can return me estimation or honor. And albeit I have not as yet done
any service to you, whereby I should deserve to be so accepted: yet such is
the hope I repose in your virtuous nature, as you will not refuse my honest
request, being the first I ever desired of you, and not the last (I trust)
shall do you honor. Now (as you have heard before) Griana earnestly
affected Florendos: nevertheless, as a modest and well advised Princess,
doubting least he feigned those speeches of course, dissembling her self to
be somewhat displeased, returned this answer.

I did not think (my Lord Florendos) that you would so far forget your
self, to hold me with speeches not beseeming the Daughter of so great an
Emperor as I am: nevertheless, knowing you are a Stranger, and ignorant (it
may be) of the modesty which should defend Knights devising with Ladies, I
will not use such rigor toward you as I ought, yet must I tell you that I
find my self offended. You desire that as my Knight you may enter ye Tourney:
for that I grant ye, to the end I may perceive the effect of the prowess,
which each one so much commends in you, the rest, it is my pleasure that you
forbear. Madame (quoth he) if I have used any such speeches as agree not with
your patience: for Gods sake (in my excuse) accuse my small compass of
liberty, which remains only at your disposition. What (quoth she) think
you that I will love any but he that must and ought be my Husband? Ah sweet
Lady (said Florendos) that is it I so earnestly desire, and think not that I
solicit you with any other kind of love, but only to make you the
Mistress of my self, and altogether to dispose of me and mine: for proof
whereof, I will hereafter employ my self in the Emperors service, in such
sort as (if you like it) I hope to purchase his consent. Truly Sir (quoth
she) that only appertains to the Emperor and not to me, to whom you are to
make known what you intend: for he has authority to command, and I am
bound by duty to obey. At which words the Empress called her away, when
Florendos making her courteous reverence, departed to his Chamber to arm him
self, for many Knights were entered the Lystes, and he in short space came
thither for company: where he behaved himself with such valor, as he not
only got ye honor of the first day, but of the four days following while
ye Tourneie endured, and won the prize which Caniano had prepared for him
that best deserved it, which made him be greatly esteemed of the Emperor,
and of the whole Court ingenerall, espe^iallie of the fair Griana, whose heart
by little and little Love brought in subjection, to the no small content of
Florendos, which doubtless had the Prince Tarisius beheld^, I imagine he
would have hardly liked it. But now during the time of these great Feasts,
and Triumphs, Fortune the sworn enemy to all quietness, presented the Emperor
with other occasions* to cut off these pastimes and courtly devises: for after
many of ye Knights assembled at his Court, had taken leave to return into
their Countries, Gamezio Son to the Soldane of Babylon, who was on the Seas
with a mighty Army, intending to conquer Alexandria, was by extreamitie of
wind and weather, driven into the straights before Constantinople. Which when
the Pilots and Mariners perceived, not on^ amongst the^ but greatly rejoiced
at this good fortune, but chiefly Gamezio, who persuaded himself y^ his Gods
had sent him thither, that the most noble and flourishing City of the world
might fall into his hands: whereupon the winds somewhat appeased, and the
Seas calmed, he assembled the chief and principal Captains of his Army, and
thus began.

My good friends, I believe assuredly, y^ our great Gods would not suffer us
to arrive in Alexandria, because we went against them of our own Law and
Religion, but rather it liked them better, that we should address our selves
to this Country of Christians, either to ruinate it altogether, or at least
to bring it under our obeisance. Therefore I am determined for this time, to
defer the revenge of the injury, which the King Calameno did to the Soldane,
and as much as in me lies employ my forces in conquest of this Country: for
which cause, I desire that each of you would particularly encourage your
people, assuring them (if we can conquer this City) the riches thereof will
counteruaile their pain and travail. The Captains failed not to accomplish
their charge to the uttermost, summoning every one presently to Arms: so
providing their Ships, their Ensigns and all things else needful for their
defense, they hoysed their sails, making toward y^ Shore, where with such
provision as they had they took landing, making such a noise with their
Drums, Trumpets, and Clamors, as was heard with no small fear in every part
of the City. Nevertheless, they were received with better resistance then they
looked for, as following the discourse of the History, you shall at large
understand.

CHAP. III.
Of the battle fought before the City of Constantinople, between the
Emperors power, and the Army of Gamezio.

Immediately was this huge Army on the Sea, discovered by the Sent^rnelles of
the City, whereupon the rumor arose so great, as the people ran on heaps
to defend the Haven, where the Moors thought to have made their first entry.
In the mean while, Caniano, Tarisius, and the other principal Knights, with
their men of Arms, put themselves in equipage, doraynning their Army in such
warlike manner, as now they march forth of the City, to succor those places
where the Moors gave most eager assault. The Prince Florendos being left
behind, made no little haste to gather his company, and as he galloped with
them by ye Emperors Palace, he espied the Princess Griana standing at her
Chamber window, casting many a ruefull look toward the (...) of the
City, which so deeply peirced the gentle Princes heart, as immediately he
said within himself. By Heaven (sweet Lady) either will I die this day, or
remove the grief that seems so near to touch you. And with this
resolution he gave the spurs to his Horse, when it was not long before he
got among ye thickest of the Moors, where he beheld the enemy so strong, and
the Christians so weak, as the day was like to prove dangerous and dismal.
For the Prince Gamezio, was esteemed one of the best Knights through all Asia,
and that day he behaved himself so roughly amongst the Christians: as sooth
to say, they were enforced to retire toward the City. Which when the
Emperor beheld, who remained with no great strength to defend the City, he
was not a little grieved to see his men turn their backs on their enemies, and
disperse themselves in such fearful and dysmaying sort. But Florendos, and
the Prince Caniano used such means, as they got them soon in array again, and
returned on the enemy with a fresh and hardy charge. Tarisius showed himself
very valiant and aduenturous, stryuing by all the means he could to equal
the Prince Florendos, who that day gave testimony of most rare exploits so
these three noble Gentlemen past from rank to rank, sending all to the earth
that durst withstand them. Gamezio seeing his men so bloodilie slaughtered
on every side, meeting with Tarisius would take revenge on him, deliue^ring
him such a cruel stroke on the head with his sword, as down he fell to the
ground so astonished, as his enemy might even then have slain him: and so
he had done but for the Prince Florendos, who seeing the Moore auauncing
himself on his Styrrops, to reach a full stroke at Tarisius on the ground,
lifted him quite out of his saddle with his Lance, and bare him so rudely
therewith to the earth, as breaking his neck with the fall, he gave up the
ghost. When the Moors beheld Gamez^o their General slain, and the Christians
make such (...) hearts failing them to make further resist, (...) toward their
Ships, when had not the (...) them, not one had escaped death or taken (...)*
notwithstanding, the greatest part were put to the sword, diverse making have
to get away by boats, were drowned in the Sea, and many of account brought
back prisoners, thus with victory returned the Emperors power to the City.
So many of the Moors as escaped to their shyps, being not a little glad they
were so far from their enemies: set sail and returned toward the
Soldane, to whom they declared the sum of their misfortune, as also the
death of his Son Gamezio, which ^idinges made him well nigh mad with rage and
anger. But being old and crazed with sickness, he could not go in person to
revenge his death, which made him vow and swear, that so soon as his other
Son came to years to bear Arms, he would send him with such a puissant
strength, as easily he should destroy the Emperor and his Country: in the
mean time, he sent the ransom to redeem them that were taken prisoners,
where we will leave the Soldane, and return to Caniano and the other Princes,
who being now come again to the City, the Emperor having heard the
worthy service Florendos had done that same day (and how he had received some
few dangerous wounds in ye battle) sent for him in all haste that might
be to his Palace, because his own Chirurgions and Physicians should have
care of him. So was Florendos brought very honorably to the Palace, and
conducted to a Chamber beseeming his estate, where the Empress and Griana came
presently to visit him. to whom the Prince Caniano recounted, how Tarisius
had been slain by Gamezio, but that Florendos stepped between his death and
him, but (quoth he) the Moore excused Tarisius, for in my presence he gave his
last farewell to this world, so that now we may say the victory is ours,
albeit before it hunge in hard suspense. While Caniano continued these and such
like speeches, Griana cast many a sweet look on the Prince Florendos, and
he answered his object with the self same messengers of his heart: thus
contented they their several passions with such modest and virtuous regard,
as none present could suspect their secret meaning. The Empress and her
Daughter courteously taking their leave, Florendos and his Chirurgions we
leave a while together, they to apply medicines to his wounds, and he the
remembrance of his Mistress to his heart. On the morrow the Emperor with his
nobility rode forth of the City, to see the slaughtered bodies, among whom
they found Gamezio, who was easily known by the richnes of his Armor, which
Caniano caused to be taken from the dead body, and brought to Florendos as
the deserte of his travail: when the Emperor himself, (the more to honor
him) made present thereof to Florendos at his return, with these speeches. My
noble Cousin, by your valor and Knightly prowess, have I had the upper hand
of nune enemies, may I but live to requite thy good deserts, I shall account my
self happy and fortunate: notwithstanding, account of me as thy Kinsman and
continual freende, and be there ought in my power shall like thee to demand,
on the faith of a King I vow to give it thee.

Florendos most humbly thanked the Emperor, as well for the great honor he
did him, as also for his large and bountiful promise, whereon he builded so
assuredly, as he almost accounted fair Griana for his own: who with the
Empress her Mother came daily to visit him, by which means their mutual
love increased more and more, and Florendos recovered his health in the shorter
time, when he solicited the Emperor with this suit following.

CHAP. IIII
How Florendos entreated the Emperor, to give him in marriage his Daughter
Griana, and what answer the Emperor made him.

AFter y^ Florendos was thoroughly healed of the wounds, which he had
received in fight against the Moors: finding the Emperor one day at leisure,
and alone in his Chamber, he began to salute him as after follows. My dread
and sovereign Lord, so princely and gracious have your favors been toward
me, since first I entered your royal Court, as the King my Father and I shall
never answer such exceeding courtesy. And to the end this kindness may
rather increase then any way diminish, I beseech your highness not to deny
me one request, which among the infinite number of your princely graces
toward me, I shall account it to exceed all other. In brief, it is the
Princess Griana your Daughter, whose love and honorable fame, made me forsake
the Realm of Macedon, only to desire her in marriage, if either any desert
in me, or your own princely good conceit, might repute me worthy so high a
favor. And for I would not your highness should any way misconceiue of me,
as that the motion proceeds from a youthful and vn^aduised head, or that I
have enterprised it, without the good liking of the King my Father: I humbly
desire your Majesty to rest satis-fied both in these and all other opinions,
in that my Fathers consent, brought me with no little speed hither, and the
hope of yours during my aboade here, has taught me to place my love with
discretion, and continue it with honorable unspotted loyalty. With this
addition (under your highness correction) that were she mine as I am wholly
hers: the faithful service of a thankful Son, should answer the
gen^lenes of so good a Father, and the irreuocable vows of holy love, assure
Griana of her Florendos. Right dearly did the Emperor love the Prince
Florendos, as had he been his own Son Caniano, his knightly valor and
manifold other virtues justly inducing him thereto: and gladly he would have
consented to his request, if his promise made unto Tarisius did not bind him
to the contrary, whereupon he returned him this answer. Believe me good
Cousin, I am not a little agreeued that I cannot satis-fie your gentle request,
for that Tarisius Nephewe to the Empress has already prevented me: to him
have I past my promise for my Daughter, and daily I expect the Ambassadors
coming from Hungaria to finishe the marriage, so that I had rather loose the
best of my Cities, then it should be said I falsified my word.
Notwithstanding, of one thing I can assure you, that you are far higher in my
grace and favor then he: yet necessity is without law, and the regard of
mine honor must entreat you to hold me excused.

Greatly abashed was the Prince Florendos, seeing in one instant that hope
strooken dead, that had maintained his life since his coming to
Constantinople: and so nypt in the head was he with the Emperors answer, as
he stood a good while in a study not speaking a word, at last he began
thus. God forbid that so great a Prince should break his promise by my
occasion: nevertheless, my truth and loyalty to your highness shall not any
way diminishe, but I shall remain the most forward in duty, of any that owe
service and alleageaunce to your Majesty. Neither will I (said the Emperor)
imagine the worse of you, but love you rather better then I did before. Then
entered diverse Noble men and Gentlemen, which made them break off from further
speeches, and Florendos taking his leave, went to his Chamber, so full of
grief and extreme heaviness, as easily he could have been induced to commit
some violence upon himself: but casting himself upon his bed, he thus began
to breath forth the fury of his passions, to ease the heavy burden of his
oppressed spirit.

Unhappy wretch that I am beyond all other, what hope of life can thou
flatter thy self withal, seeing ye mean that should maintain the continuance
thereof, forbiddes thee (sonde man) to hope any longer. What angry Planet
governed thy nativity, that he to whom thou gave life, should this day be
the cause to end thine own. Believe (...) Tarisius, had I made trial of this
inconvenience before, hardly should I have put my person in such danger
amongst the Moors, to sheelde thy life: but in defending the sword out of thy
throat, I have deservedly thrust it in mine own, so that by lengthning thy
days, I have expyred mine own date, and that with a death so miserable and
cruel, as no enemy whatsoever would wish to another. But were it not that my
duty to the good Emperor countermaundeth me, thou could not with such
ease either outbraue me in my love, or thus usurp the gracious favor of my
Mistress Griana, were affection balanced with desert, or love measured by
virtue as it is by opinion. Notwithstanding, to die for her love I shall
account my self happy, in that she cannot but pity my unlucky death, and
my spirit should pass with greater quiet to his end, if she knew with what
content I take my destenie: but fair Griana, would God I had either not seen
thee at al, or Fortune had been favorable to me in choice. At which words the
extremity of his passions took away the liberty of his speech, so that he
could not finish what he would gladly have spoken, but falling from his
bed to the ground in a swoune, amazed one of his Esquires that was in the
next Chamber, who hearing the fall, ran in immediately, where seeing his
Master lying dead [in his iudgement] ran and called Frenato, who was Cousin to
Florendos, and one that knew most of his private affairs, notwithstanding,
he was ignorant in the cause of this accident, who taking him up in his
arms, with cold water and vinagre cast in his face, at length he got life
into him again, when Florendos opening his eyes, and seeing his Cousin so busy
about him, breathing forth two or three bitter sighs, said. My dear freende
and Cousin, I beseech you hinder not the end and issue of my life, for being
out of all hope to recover my Lady Griana, there is no mean left to maintain
my life. When Frenato heard these words, he doubted that the Prince had
received some contrary answer from y^ Emperor, as concerning the marriage
between him and his Daughter, for whose love only he left the kingdom of
Macedon: wherefore, he perceiving that she must be the only mean to ease his
torment, he began thus roundly to answer the Prince. And what of this? must
you therefore despair? Alas (said Florendos,) what would ye have me do? the
Emperor has long since past his promise for her to Tarisius, as his highness
assured me by his own words. Uerie well Sir (answered Frenato) but do you
know if she have given her consent? I promise you I am persuaded that she loves
him not, but that her favorable regard is much more toward you then him:
and for you say so much, to morrow will I sound the bottom of this matter,
so that (if I can) I will frustrate the Emperors intent toward Tarisius. Do
you in the mean time but learn to dissemble your grief, and show not your
self mal content for any thing that has been said: but be of good cheer,
and refer your fortune in this case to the success of mine endeavors. These
and such like persuasions Frenato used to the Prince, whom he thus left in his
Chamber, and returned to the Palace as was his manner. All this while the
Emperor bethought himself, on the speeches that had passed between him and
Florendos, which made him the night following, to discourse thereon with the
Empress, persuading her, that he could more willingly accept of him for his
Son then Tarisius. But she who highly favored her Nephewe, reproved his
opinion with many answers, so that by importunate entreaties, tears, and
other subtle fetches, which Women are wont to use to accomplish their desires,
she so far dissuaded the Emperor, as he promised her again not to give her
to any other, then to him to whom he first past his word. Of which words the
Empress was not a little glad, and therefore all that night she devised, by
what means she might from that time forward so much as in her lay, hinder
Florendos from speaking to her Daughter: whereupon, she daily kept the Chamber
of presence, and held a more strickt look on Griana then before she had
done, which greatly increased the passions of Florendos, and brought him into
so weak estate, as the learned Physicians could not deliver ye cause of his
sickness, to the no small grief of the Emperor, but especially of Caniano,
yet for all this would not the Empress at any time visit him, because she
would hinder the occasion of her Daughters seeing him, remembering what
speeches had past between him and the Emperor. And albeit Griana made no
outward show thereof, yet in her heart she was greatly displeased at her
Mothers dealings, so that one day when her Brother Caniano came to see her, to
recount unto her in what extreamitie he had left his friendly companion, and
what grief it would be to him if he died, as he greatly doubted: What my Lord
(quoth she) it is not so I hope? Yes certainly (quoth he) and I fear he will
very hardly escape this day. At which words the water stood in her eyes, yet
so well as she could she dissembled her passions: nevertheless, she could
not hold it in, but said. I marvel much that the Empress my Mother makes so
slender account of him, as since his sickness she would not vouchsafe once to
visit him: I fear she has forgotten what good he (...) for us, that day
when he valiantly slew the Turk Gamezio. Believe me (my good Lord and Brother)
I am har^^lie sorr^e for his sickness, for if he die [as heaven forbid quoth
she secretlie] the Emperor my Father shall loose more then he thinks on,
the great service he has done for him already, may give instaunce of my
words, and more he being the Son of so great a Prince as he is. By this time
had such extreme grief ouerburdened her heart, as she was constrained
(feigning to go to the Empress Chamber) to leave her Brother, that she might
alone by her self bemoane her friends hard fortune.

CHAP. V.
How Griana sent a Ring to the Prince Florendos by Cardina her Maid, desiring
him (as he loved her) to comfort himself, and of the answer he sent her.

SO soon as Griana had left her Brother, she went into her chamber, where
more and more she lamented for the sickness of Florendos, and with her tears
she coupled these discourses. May it be that any living creature, can deserve
so grievous punishment as I do, that endaunger the life of the woorthiest
Knight in the world? Unhappy that I am, that love, yea the love he bears to
me, should bring so brave a Gentleman to so hard an exigent: but if he die,
such just vengeance will I take upon my self, as I will not remain one hour
alive after him, and let our ghostes seek their own quiet in death, that
Fortune would not affoorde us in life. Yet will I thus far first adventure,
and that before any sleep enter these eyes of mine, try if it consist in my
power to ease his extreamitie, that buys my love at too dear a price. And in
this anguish of mind she called one of her Damoselles, the Daughter of her
Nurse named Cardina, whom above the rest she trusted most, and to her she began
in manner following. Cardina, thou know the love I always bare thy Mother,
and for her sake how well I have thought of thee, I have known thee long time
a true and faithful Servant: but now Cardina is a time beyond all other, to
make trial of thy truth, and to witness thy loyalty to me, only as thou
art sure, so to be secret, and so secret as I must put my life and honor
into thy secrecy. Cardina, who was wise, and of good government, hearing
Griana use such earnest speeches: imagined that she would commit no common
matter to her trust with such coniuration, whereupon she modestly returned
this answer. Madame, rather had I be torn peecemeale in sunder, then any
thing you command for secret, should by me be revealed without your
license: and so assure your self, that while I live, you shall find me as
faithful in deed, as I promise in word. I never hitherto (quoth the
Princess) had other opinion of thee, listen now therefore what I shall
command thee. I have understood for certain Cardina, that the grievous
sickness of the Prince Florendos, is caused by very earnest love which he
bears to me, and for I account it great pity to loose so good a Knight, do
so much as take the pains to go to him from me: and say I desire him to be
of good cheer, and if there be any thing in my power may do him good, I will
gladly accomplish it, as she that loves him as her own self, and to assure
him thereof, say I send him this Ring, which I will him to keep as a pledge
of my love. Madame (answered Cardina) Fortune speed me so well, as my pains
may give ease to both your passions: and might my sentence like you Madame, I
know no Knight so worthy your love as Florendos. Go then (said Griana) and
return again so soon as thou can. So went Cardina strait to the lodging
of the Prince Florendos, at the entrance whereof, she met the Prince Caniano
so heavy and pensive as might be, because he perceived his Friend to consume
away every day more and more. But Cardina, who had well learned her lesson,
stepped aside, and would not be seen of Caniano: who being gone, she went up
to the Chamber, where when she was ready to enter, she heard the Prince
complain in this sort. Ah poor wretch, must thou needs die without any hope
of remedy? And as he would have proceeded on, Cardina stepped to him, and
after she had saluted him, said to him secretelie, that the Princess Griana
had sent her to him, to understand of his health, and believe me good Prince
(quoth she) I never saw Lady so sorrowful for your sickness, as she is. She
commends her self to your honor most heartily, and has sent you this Ring,
as an earnest of the love she bears you, desiring you to be of good cheer
and comfort your self, because she desires to see you, to confer with you of
matters that concern you both neerelie. These words so ravished the spirit
of Florendos, as a good while he doubted, whether he dreamed, or that he might
give credit to what he heard: for albeit he knew the messenger so well as
any in the Court, yet could he not persuade himself that he was so
fortunate. At length (between hope and despair) he took the Ring, which he
entertained with many devout kysses, and embracing Cardina so well as he
could, thus answered. Alas my sweet freende, may it be possible that my
Lady has such regard of him, who never was able to do her any service?
Doubt not thereof my Lord (answered Cardina) and if you will declare your
love answerable to hers in virtue, you must give testimony thereof by
comforting your person, that she may see you so soon as may be. Ah fair
Uirgin (quoth he) let my whole life be employed, in what shall like her divine
nature to command me: and I assure you, that these tidings has breathed such
new life into my very soul, as already I find my self wonderfully
changed, yea, and that in such sort, as before three days be past, I shall
attend her gracious will with serviceable diligence. In the mean while, I
shall desire you fair Friend, to let my sovereign Mistress understand, that I
kiss her highness hand in humble duty, and had ere this given farewell to
this life, had not her sweet regard called me again from death. Thus parted
Cardina from the Prince, taking her way speedily toward Griana, who longed not
a little to hear from Florendos, whom she had made Lord of her gentle
affections.

CHAP. VI.
How Cardina recited to the Princess Griana, what speeches had past between
her and Florendos, and of the counsel she gave her Mistress, to confer
with him in the Garden so soon as he was recovered.

CArdina thus dispatched from Florendos, made no little haste toward the
Princess, who remained all this while silent in her Chamber, and no sooner
perceived she Cardina to enter, but she demanded if Florendos received her
token in good part or no. Believe me Madame (answered Cardina) I think you
never did any thing in all your life, whereby you could obtain more honor
and applause, then by that you vouchsafed to do at this instant, for in my
judgment you have performed a miracle, in giving him life that was in the very
jaws of death. Then from point to point she recounted the talk passed
between them, first how she found him in y^ midst of his regrets, and
lastly what message he had sent by her. Thus while Cardina continued her
discourse, every word took hold on the gentle heart of the Princess, and
wounded her with such pitiful regard of the Prince his torments: as what she
desired inwardly, she shaddowed with modesty, as loathe to receive shame in
her love, having carried her self with such honor all her life, quoth she to
Cardina. How might I (good Servant) ease this weighty oppression? Uerie well
(said Cardina) when Fortune allows opportunity. But thou know (quoth
Griana) a Princess as I am, to be seen secret with so brave a Gallant, does
greatly hazard my life and honor. As for that Madame, (said Cardina) my
Sister can better advise you then I, or any that I know, by her means may you
speak with your Knight, the brauest Gentleman in the world, and one who^ I
know is so far devoted yours, as he will rather loose his life, then
impeache your honor any way: and otherwise then in loyalty to make you his
Lady and wife, I am well assured he loves not, which love (Madame) you may
well entertain. Return then Cardina (quoth the Princess) to my Lord
Florendos, and assure him that so soon as he is recovered, I will come and
speak with him, in such place where we may well adventure: and desire him as
he loves me, that it may be with all convenient speed. Cardina without any
further delay, went with this message to the Prince Florendos: who hartened
himself so well upon these speeches, as within six days he found himself
thorowlie amended, whereof the Emperor and Caniano his Son, was not a little
glad: but Tarisius was scant well pleased thereat, for he had conceived a
secret jealousy, because he was so earnest in affection toward Griana, who
by her Maid Cardina had warned Florendos, that y^ night following he should
come into the Garden, where^nto her Chamber had a secret entrance, and there
would he and she confer of their love, without suspicion of any. Florendos
seeing these affairs sort to so good end, purposed what ever happened, not to
fail the time and place: which made him think this day a year in length, so
long he looked and desired for the night. But now the wished hour is come,
when Florendos with his Cousin ^renato (who was privy to the Princes secret
love) departed from their lodginges, and coming to the Garden, they saw the
wall was very high and hard to climb, notwithstanding, greater things are
possible to Lovers, cheefely when a cause of such weight is in hand, so that in
short time Florendos had got the top of the Wall, and afterward went to the
place where Griana ^tayed his coming, who had no body with her but Lerina,
Sister to Cardina, to whom likewise she thoroughly bewrayed her secrets. He
having espied them, came and fell on his knee before the Princess, but she
took him up in her arms, embracing him so sweetly: as Lerina withdrew her
self amongst the Trees, not with any intent of fear to displease them, but
with a certain kind of grief which overcame her, that she wanted a Freende
to participate with her in love, as her Mistress had, before wh^m Florendos
being on his knee, said. Mad^me, by virtue of your commandment I am thus
bold to enter your presence, yielding my whole ability to you, as to the
divine Goddess that has sheelded me from death, which grace seeing your
princely nature has affoorded me, my life for ever hereafter remains at
your sovereign pleasure: the unfeigned promise whereof, I bind to you by
irr^uocable vows, but especially by my faith, y^ only ornament of a true
Knight, that I desire no longer to breathe this air, then to honor your name
with my continual service, for life without your grace and favor, is more
yrkesome to me then a thousand deaths. But by your favor my Lord (answered
Griana) how or from whence has this hot love sprunge, let me know I desire
you? Madame (quod he) as I have heretofore, so at this time I assure you, that
in my nature Country of Macedon, I heard the renown of your excelling
beauty, at which very instant I dedicated my self only yours: and ever
since continuing in this religious service, I have so confidentlie set down my
rest, in gracious regard of your sweet self, as being yours in service, I
live, if otherwise, I die. In sooth said (said the Princess) I see the^ you
have given your self wholly mine, and so I am well centented to accept you.
Then Madame (quoth he) to seal y^ assurance of this divine favor you have
done me, (...) entreat to kiss those sweet lips, that delivered the (...)
I have long looked for. Which to grant, though (for modesties sake) at first
she seemed dainty, yet at length love had so suppr^zed her, as he needed not
strive when no resistaunce was offered. Thus with fears and solemn kysses,
they breathed into each others soul, the mute arguments of their love, and
fair Cynthia amiablie favoring this delicate encounter, added such courage to
the mind of this lou^lie Champion: as breaking his Lance in the face of
Venus, he bequeathed the success of his d^uoire to the gracious aspect of
that Planet. And among a number of soft and sweet love speeches, he discoursed
to her his talk with the Emperor her Father, how he had requested her in
marriage, and how he excused his consent by the promise he had made before to
Tarisius, through the daily and earnest persuasions of the Empress.
Notwithstanding (quoth he) in respect you have not consented thereto, I hope
they shall find themselves far beyond their reckoning. Now for the
Princess, she never knew that Tarisius had labored to have her to his Wife,
because she made so light account of him, as she would rather die then consent
thereto, whereupon she returned Florendos this answer. The Emperor my
Father has reason to think hardly of my Mother, and great discredit will it
be to her, to procure my marriage against my will, for never shall I consent
thereto: and therefore my Lord I desire your advise, how I may prevent this
ensuing danger* Madame (answered Florendos) my devise is laid already, so
please you to accept thereof: I will convey you hence secretly, and before the
Emperor or any one know of it, into my Country of Macedon, where I and mine
shall entertain you with great and reverend honor, and you shall be our
gracious Lady and Princess. Believe me (said she) it is doubtful in such a
journey what dangers may happen, notwithstanding, having vowed my self only
yours: be it to the lyking or dislyking of my Father and Mother, I had rather
break through the straights of a greater hazard, then be, forced to marry
him, whom while I live I can not like, therefore do you expecte the
advantage of the time, and I will adventure with you whether you please.
Madame (answered Florendos) continue you this resolution, and refer the rest
to my charge, which you shall see effected ere three days be past: in the
mean while I entend to take my leave of the Emperor your Father, with this
excuse, that the King my Father commands my return home, for which cause I
will send my train before, reserving only but ten of my best Knights to
accompany me. For that (quoth Griana) do what you think best, and without
any further expecting me in this place, certify me how things happen by your
Cousin Frenate, or my Maid Cardina. But now you see the day begins to
break, wherefore let me desire you to depart, that no s^andall or suspicion
arise of our meeting. Florendos kissing the Princess hand, though longer he
would have stayde) humbly took his leave, and by the help of Lerina, he got
over the Wall again, where F^enato stayed his coming, to wh^m when he was
entered his lodging, he imparted the appointment between him and the
Princess, desiring him to discharge his train, except ten of his best
approved Knights, to help him if any hinderance prevented his intent: as for
the rest, they should be going on before, and stay his c^mming at an appointed
place, three days journey from Constantinople. In the morning he awaited the
Emperors c^mming abroad, to whom he said, that he had received Letters from y^
King his Father, with express commandment to make speedy return home:
therefore my good Lord (said he) I desire to depart with your favorable
lyking, and in respect I may not contrary where I am bound to obey, I intend
to morrow to set forward on my journey, assuring your highness, that in what
place I shall chance to come, I am yours in loyal and faithful service. My
good Cousin (answered the Emperor) I give you thanks with all my heart, for y^
honor you have done me with your gentle presence: and if you have occasion to
use m^e in ought, you shall perceive how highly I love and esteem of you. My
Lord (said Florendos) I desire to deserve the great kindness I have found
already: so taking his leave, the Emperor embraced him, and as he issued
forth of the Chamber, he met the Prince Caniano, of whom he took his leave
likewise, who desired him to stay three or four days longer. In which time
there came to the Court certain Ambassadors, which y^ King of Hungaria had
sent to the Emperor, to conclude the marriage between his Son Ta^^sius and
the Princess Griana, the Duke of Gramay being chief in this Embassade, who
was accompanied with many Knights and Gentlemen of name and account, to whom
the Empress gave very gracious welcome, in that she had priuatlie procured
this their coming. As these Ambassadors entered ye great Chamber, Caniano and
Tarisius who accompanied them, perceived Griana to withdraw her self aside
very sad and mellanchollie: whereupon Caniano came unto her (greatly abashed
at her angry countenance) and thus he began. Fair Sister, at this time when
you ought to show the most cheerful countenance, you are more sad then
of long time I have seen you: me thinks you have good occasion to be merry,
seeing the Emperor my Father has provided you so brave a Husband, as is my
Cousin the Prince Tarisius, who I am sure loves you as his own life. Ah brother
(quoth she) I know not what should move him so to do, seeing I never thought
so well of him: and more gladly could I entertain mine own death, then be
constrained to love where I cannot. These words did Tarisius easily understand,
notwithstanding he made show as though he did not: but going to the Empress
he desired her to stay there with the Emperor, seeing the Ambassadors were
come from the King his Father, that what was begun as concerning him and
Griana, might now be finished according to her promise. Upon this occasion,
the Empress called Griana aside, and with smoothe and sweet speeches began to
break with her, how for her good she had induced the Emperor, to give her
in marriage to her Cousin Tarisius, and what honorable advantage she should
receive thereby: wherefore fair Daughter (said she) resolve your self with
childlike obedience, to think well of that your Parents have determined. All
these persuasions could not draw one pleasing word from the Princess, but
she excused her self still, by the desire she had to remain as s^ee was,
and rather then to marry she would take a religious life upon her: with which
words she brake into such tears as the Empress was constrained to leave her
alone, not doubting to find her the next time in better tune. Griana then
considering with her self, how she should be enforced at length to yield,
whether she would or no, if Florendos did not the sooner accomplish his
enterprise: called Cardina unto her, and sent her with this charge to
Florendos, that that present night he should not fail to meet her in the
Garden, where she would be ready to depart with him, otherwise he should never
gain the like opportunity, with which message Cardina departed.

CHAP. VII.
How Florendos came that night to the Garden, to conclude what he and Griana
had intended, and what happened to them.

FLorendos understanding the will of his Mistress, with great diligence
labored to execute what they had intended, and taking his leave at y^ Court,
feigned he would return no more, but take his way straight toward Macedon.
Tarisius, whose jealousy increased every day more and more, set pri^ie
spies to watch every night, who went in and out at the Princess Chamber, and
albeit of long time his labors were frustrate, yet at length he and his spies
perceived, how he whom he most envied, mounted the Garden Wall where the
Princess lay: for Florendos having left his company without the City,
accompanied with Frenato, and both of the^ well armed, he privily returned
again to the Palace, thinking about midnight to carry her away, for whose
love he had thrust himself into this dangerous hazard. Thus having left
their Horses without the City with their Pages, and being come to the Garden
Wall, Frenato helping the Prince to get up, Tarisius and his men, who
unhappily lay there in ambush, ran violently upon him, crying all aloude,
kill, kill these villains that would dishonor the Emperors Palace. At
which words, Florendos and Frenato seeing themselves discovered, presently
drew their swords, and began to lay about them very valiantly, Florendos
giving Tarisius so cruel a stroke on the head, that he fell down to the
ground as he had been dead, and two or three of his company with him: which
when the rest beheld, they got over the Wall, and running with great clamor
into the City, cried, help help Tarisius, who^ Florendos (seeking to rob
the Emperors Palace) has cruelly murdered. This noise was heard by Griana,
Lerina, and Cardina, who were in the Garden staying for Florendos, which did so
amaze the hardiest of the three, as they knew not what countenance to set on
y^ matter: especially Griana, whom this fear had strooken into a dead
trance, but Lerina and her Sister taking her up in their arms, conveyed her
into her Chamber, and soon after into her bed, when recovering her self, in
extreme weeping thus spoke. Alas miserable wretch y^ I am, does Fortune
employ al means she can for my destruction? Well, let her do the vttermoste
spite she can, for I am well assured before it be long, that death shall
tryumphe above all her discourtesies. Cardina seeing her so weep and wring her
hands, and as it were ready to fall into despair, began to persuade her in
this sort. Madame, it is no time now to use these extremeties, for Gods sake
learn to cover your passions: to the end the Emperor may not detect us,
being assured that as yet we were not perceived, and if you can but content
your self, all this tumult will soon be overcome. I pray thee (quoth Griana)
leave me alone, and go see (if thou can) what is become of Florendos, that I
may know whether he be taken or slain. So went Cardina, and standing among
others, as one that knew nothing, beheld all. During this hot tumult,
Fren^to seeing trouble increasing more and more, followed the matter with such
diligence, as he got Florendos forth of the throng, and the darkness of the
night was such, as they easily compassed to get out of the City, where their
Pages stayed with their Horses, whereon they mounted and set on away. But the
Prince Florendos would many times have returned back again, so loathe was he
to leave her whom he loved so dearly, for being out of all hope to see her
again, he esteemed his life of no value or account. In which impatience, he
rent his comely locks of hair, and haled his flesh with great violence,
whereupon Frenato thus spoke to him. Why how now my Lord? will you in
seeking honor wound your self with shame, or in arguing your love to your
Lady, endaunger her life? desire you to loose your self, and her also for
ever? Believe me Cousin, this very hardly beseemes you, that the subtle
dealing of a cowardly Knight, should make you thus to forget your self. No no
good Cousin, it is now no time to declare these shows let us therefore make
speed to our company, and if you think good, we will send one secretly
back to the City, to understand the end of this troublesome broyle, and we
in y^ mean time may set forward toward Macedon. Ah sweet Cousin (quoth
Florendos) you speak as the man that cannot comprehend my torments, think
you it is possible for me to live, leaving that rare creature in such perrill,
for whose love a Hell of greefes has martired my soul? By my knightly faith
I swear, that death is a thousand times more welcome to me, then to be
maistered by this one conceit, that I should live an hour out of her gracious
service. Well well Sir (said Frenato) what you may not do now, refer till
better conuenience, and let us set on before the day light descry us:
otherwise, in seeking to defend Griana, your self shall be witness of her
reproach and condemnation. Florendos perceiving his Cousin did advise him for
the best, was well contented to be ruled by him, so giving the spurs to their
Horses, stayed not till they ouertooke y^ rest of their company: when he
dispatched an Esquire presently back to the City, commanding him
straightly to direct soon to the King his Fathers Court, the success of
every thing that happened in his absence.

But now to return where before we left, Cardina had not long staide in this
hurly burley, but she perceived the Emperor was risen, who in all have
caused his Guarde to arm themselves to help Tarisius: for by this time had
the two Knights which escaped, advertised in the Court, that they took
Florendos as he was climbing the Garden wall, to go to dishonor the Princess
Griana. At which report the Emperor was so moved, as he went in great fury
to his Daughters Chamber, whom he found in her bed, more likely to die then
live: but necessity (whereof many do often make a virtue) made her cover her
weakness with a fair show of courage, so that when she see him enter, she
wrapped her self in her might Mantle, and came before him, to whom he began
in this furious manner. Thou leude Gyrle, dare thou conceive the thought to
do me this dishonor? by my Crown for this thy presumption, I shall make
thee such an example to all other, as thy head from thy shoulders will scant
quite thy fault. Griana hearing him speak so roughly, answered him again
thus mildly. My Lord and Father, I beseech you to pardon me, you accuse me,
and I know not whereof: if I have done evil, it is in you to chastise me as
you shall please, and if I be innocent, vouchsafe good Father not to condemn
me. Ah varlet (quoth he) this excuse shall little profit thee. So taking her
very rudely, he locked her in a strong Tower, whereof he carried the Keye
himself: then went he to Tarisius his lodging to see how he did, for it was
told him that he was in danger of his life, where he found the Empress
heavily weeping, but he caused her to go to her Chamber, and commanded his
Chirurgions to look dilligentlie to his Nephewe, and not to spare any cost to
purchase his health. Now because they which searched for Florendos, could not
find him, the brute and rumor was qualified, and the Emperor went again to
his Chamber till the morning, when the Empress hearing y^ her daughter was in
prison, took it very heavily, and kneeling bebefore the Emperor, desired
him that she might fetch her forth: but he was so angry, as her words could
do nothing with him, yet he granted that she should go see her, and took
her the Key, when she entering the Tower, found her sitting on the ground so
blubred with tears, as was lamentable to behold, but when she beheld her
Mother, she arose, and doing her reverence, could not speak her tears so
overcame her. The Empress that loved her dearly, seeing her in this grievous
estate, had much a do to dissemble what she thought, how beit after a few
light words passed between them, she said. I am ^orie daughter that you have
so lightly thrown your affection upon a Stranger, and that you forget your
duty, in following your Fathers counsel and mine, who well kn^we the love
Tarisius bears you, and no otherwise Daughter, then to take you to his wife.
But you (carried away with y^ loosenes, which ill agrees with your credit and
calling) have rather thought best, to grant Florendos entrance by your Garden,
at such a suspected hour, as while you live, your honor will be hardly
thought on: for two of Tarisius his Knights, who thought to take the Traitor,
are slain, and my Nephew himself dangerously escaped. Griana hearing him
called Traitor whom she so highly looued, and that she herself was
accused, by that which ought to excuse her, answered. Madame, and my gracious
Mother, as yet I am ignorant of the cause, that has moved the Emperor in
such choler against me, and be it for this you speak of, in soothe I am
offered very great injury, for I know not whether Florendos or any other
have entered my Garden, well I am assured he came not where I was. These are
strange news to me Madame, I ^old rather have thought him on his way toward
Macedon, in respect of the solemn leave he took in the Court^. For my part, I
would that the Traitor which was ye cause hereof, had long since been buried
in the bottom of the Sea, then he should so abuse the honor of Florendo^, with
a matter of such villainy, wherein I cannot judge him faulty: but were it he
Madame, I am at a point, let him die y^ death, as he has well deserved, for my
duty to you my Parents has taught me better nurture, and love can be no
privilege to me to offend. Then good Mother, twit not me with impeache of
honor in so innocent a cause, for defense whereof, were the death present
before mine eyes, I have sorrowed as much as I would, and am more ready to
embrace then live in suspecte, so shall my Father and you be eased of
providing me a Husband. As for the prison wherein I am, I will not deny his
favor when it shall please him to deliver me: but I could take it far more
contentedlie, to spend the remainder of my following days thus solitary,
then to live abroad misdeemed on by any. Fair Daughter (said the Empress)
do not discomfort your self in this sort, the Emperor had some reason (in
regard of the love he bears you, and the outrageous tumult which happened) to
do as he has done: but I hope in the end all will sort to the best, and that
you your self shall remain contented. Many other speeches passed between
them, till at length ye Empress left her and departed, for she thought long
till she was with the Emperor, to let him know the talk between her and
Griana: which she did without omitting any thing, notwithstanding he was
more severe to his Daughter every day after. Then sent he for the
Ambassadors, and thus he began with them. My Lords, at this time I am
advised, that you shall return to your King my Brother, for in respect of the
accidents which you have seen to happen: I will crave pardon for this time,
referring matters over till some other time, when things shall fall in better
disposition. The Ambassadors understanding the Emperors pleasure, the next
day took their leave toward the King their Master, to whom they declared
the whole in general: whereat he conceived such dyspleasure, as he presently
sent for his Son Tarisius, who had not as yet recovered his health. But he
was so enamered on y^ young Princess, as he would not obey his Fathers
command, but so soon as he was indifferently amended, he entreated the
Emperor to pardon his Daughter, accusing his own men, who vndiscreetlie had
raised this false rumor of her and Florendos. By this means, the Empress and
her Ladies obtained liberty daily to accompany Griana: but all the night
time he caused her to be locked up as closely as before, committing her to
the charge of an aged Gentlewoman named Tolomestra, whom he commanded on
pain of death, not to be a minute of an hour forth of her company.

CHAP. VIII.
How Florendos arriving on the frontiers of Macedon, made many sorrowful
complaints, for not bringing Griana away, according to his enterprise.

NO sooner had Florendos and Frenato ouertane their company, but they rid on
in such have (fearing to be followed) as at length they got the Frontiers of
Macedon. And because Florendos imagined himself without life, not hearing any
tydinges from his Mistress Griana, he concluded to rest at the first Town he
came too, there to expect the return of the Esquire he sent to Constantinople:
who returned toward his Master sooner then he looked for, by reason of the
little abode he made in the Emperors Court, for he stayed not when he heard
that Griana was imprisoned, and that Tarisius was not slain as his Master was
persuaded. These news did wonderfully afflict the Prince, as well for the
hard usage of his sweet Freende, as that he had failed in killing him, by
whose death he well hoped to recover his loss: all the whole day would he
receive no sustenance, but locked himself close in his Chamber, and tombled on
his bed as a man half desperate. But Frenato who would not be long absent
from him, fearing least his fury would cause him work some violence on
himself, made such means y^ he got into the Chamber, at what time the Prince
was thus lamenting. Alas sweet Madame, was I borne in such an unhappy hour,
that without desert you must endure imprisonment for me? What satis-faction
may your Florendos live to make, in requital of this injury? When did you
ever merit to be so hardly entreated for him? Believe me, could you be
discharged so soon as I could wyshe it, bolts, locks nor walls could hold
you a thought while, yet wyshing is no action, every thing is contrary to me,
al helps refuse me, and death likewise denies me: but by my sword (and
therewith he started up) in spite of whatsoever I will deliver you. Frenato
seeing him rise in such a fury, came and took him by the arm, demanding
what he would have. Death (quoth he) if I could, for it greeues me to live
any longer. You speak very wisely (quoth he in mockage) is all this for
the imprisonment of Griana? is it not better she should be there, then in the
custody of Tarisius? her captivity you know cannot long endure, but were she
married she could never be recovered. Therefore let good hope persuade you, and
now send an other Messenger with speed to Constantinople, to know what
accidents have happened since, and to practice the mean to speak with
Cardina, who will certify you from Griana, what is or may be done in these
affairs. This counsel liked well Florendos, whereupon he presently
dispatched a Gentleman of trust, who with all diligence did execute the
command of his Master, for in good time he arrived at Constantinople, when
Griana had liberty to speak with her Gentlewomen: which when he heard, he
was not a little glad, whereupon he searched earnestly till he had found
Cardina, to whom he delivered his Masters mind, as also in what sad and
heavy plight he left him, desiring her with all speed to certify the
Princess thereof, and what service she would command him to his Master.
Cardina knowing how glad the Princess would be, to hear these tidings from
Florendos, went to seek her Sister Lerina, to whom she imparted what you have
heard, and she well advised of the time and place, discoursed the same to the
Princess, unseen, and not suspected of old Tolomestra. How joyful she was of
this message, I cannot utter, nor you conceive, but she was resolved, never to
have any Husband but Florendos, and therefore to comfort him, she devised to
write to him that he might hope as well as she did: but well she knew not how to
accomplish her intent, by reason she wanted pen, ink and paper, and she was
forbidden to have any. Notwithstanding, she so well pe^swaded her woman
Tolomestra, as (feigning to write to the Emperor her Father) she recovered the
mean to execute her desire. The^ withdrawing her self apart, first she wrote
a Letter to the Emperor, and afterward one to Florendos, wherein she desired
him not to be offended, albeit things fell out not to his lyking: for (with the
favor of Fortune) the end would be as pleasant to him, as the beginning had
been unhappy to them both, withal, that as he desired to prolong her life,
he should do nothing to the prejudice of his own person. These two Letters
thus written and sealed, she called Tolomestra, and gave her that she had
written to the Emperor, desiring her to carry it presently to his Majesty,
by whose departing, she had opportunity to confer with Lerina: in brief she
desired her to go seek the Esquire, that he might return to his Master with
the Letter she sent him, which she did effectually, and the gentle Esquire
made no little have to his Master. Who receiving the Letter from his Mistress
Griana, was not content alone to read it, but kissed and rekist it a hundred
times, saying. Ah sweet Letter, writ ten with ye hand of ye only Princess
this day living: for her sake will I keep thee, as ye best token a true Knight
can receive from his Mistress.

CHAP. IX.
How the Emperor promised Tarisius, that he should marry Griana, whether
she would or no: and how she was delivered of a fair Son, without the
knowledge of any, but old Tolomestra who had her in guarde.

WHen the Emperor had received the Letter, which Tolomestra presented him from
his Daughter, albeit he found nothing therein might provoke him to anger, saving
that she earnestly desired him to pity her estate, being innocent of any
thing was laid to her charge: yet he showed him self more discontented then
before, sending Tolomestra back with this answer. Say to Griana, that seeing
she was so aduenturous to incur my displeasure, she shall well know that I
will not spare to punish her offense: and let her assure her self, that I will
never look on her while I live, if she match not with Tarisius to whom I have
given her. All this Tolomestra told to Griana, which rather then to obey, she
desired to die, wherefore when any came to visit her, she would show her
self more pleasant in their company then she had done, in respect of
unexpected heaviness that secretlye touched her, feeling herself so far
conceived with Child, as she knew no means to save it and her honor, if it
should happen to be perceived. One only help she had in this extreamitie,
that being so weak and sickly, the Physicians could not discern her
disease: but reputed her likely to die, which she with all her heart desired,
yet do what injury to her self she could, she had better health then she
desired to have. In the end, feeling her self so gross and unwieldy, she
durst not leave her bed, but kept it daily, till her time drew very near at
hand, when the Emperor (by y^ earnest importunity of the Empress) happened
to come and see her, bringing with him the Prince Tarisius: who being thus
entered ye Tower, they found her in such grievous and dangerous estate, as for
all the anger the Emperor had against her, it moved the tears to stand in
his eyes, which he shaddowed so well as he could, framing his speeches to her
in this sort. Well Daughter, it likes you to contrary me, in that which
concerns your honor and profit, and without any fear (as is thy duty)
thou have boldly refused the Husband which I have appointed thee: but (by mine
honor) I will cause thee know that thou have displeased me, for will thou or
not (before I leave thee) I will give thee to him whom I have promised. Then
taking her by the hand, and causing Tarisius to come near, he said. My
Son, in regard of my word, which I will keep inuiolalablie, I give thee
here Griana, from henceforth account of her as thy Wife: and hold thee, here
is the Key of the Tower, keep her in thine own custody, and hereafter
think of her as thou find occasion. Well saw Griana that perforce she must
obey her Fathers will: wherefore with great wisdom covering her secret
thoughts, with extreme tears delivered this answer. Alas my good Lord and
Father, I never thought y^ your highness would use such cruelty toward me,
as to enforce me take a Husband contrary to my liking, not (my good Lord) but
y^ Tarisius has much better deserved: but that which touches me most in
opinion is, that our near alliance in kindred, is sufficient to continue the
love between the King his father and you, without any such needelesse seeking
of new uniting. And moreover good Father, his education in your Court with my
Brother Caniano and me, since our very youngest years to this present, has
been of such equal and familiar condition: as it seems to me impossible to
reverence him with that entire duty, which women must and ought use to their
Husbands. Wherefore my good Lord and Father, I persuade my self (under your
correction) that you should support me in this just request: the rather in
respect of my present estate, which may induce you somewhat to conceive: that
the obsequies of my burial is more likely to be solemnized, then those holy
ceremonies y^ should be used at my marriage. And with these words she powered
forth such abundance of tears, as the Emperor knew not what to answer:
but overcome with pity withdrew himself, leaving Tarisius with her, who
hoping to have better words of her, said. Madame, I beseech you not to offend
your self, for any thing the Emperor has said concerning me, for I will not
any thing to your discontent, and rather would I suffer all my life, then
cause the least doubt to encurre your dislike: hoping y^ in time to come you
will take such pity on me, as being persuaded of the love I hear you, and
the reverend desire I have to do you service you will grant that with good
will, which the Emperor strives to gain perforce, assuring you y^ nothing can
be more grievous to me, then the hard dealing which hitherto has been used
toward you. And to the end you may resolve your self of that I say, your
Father having delivered me the Keye of your prison, and ye guarde of your
person, I here commit both to your gentle pleasure. So kissing the Keie, he
laid it by her, and without expecting any answer, with great reverence he
departed, leaving her with Tolomestra, so rapt into a slumber or trance, as
her Keeper would not for pity trouble her. The Princess in this silent
passion, thought that she saw a fierce Lion before her, with open throat
ready to devour her, and near at hand she espied an armed Knight, to whom
she labored for her defense, crying, that for Gods sake he would sheeld her
from the beast, but the Knight with stearne and angry countenance thus
answered. I will not defend thee, but with my Sword will take thy life from
thee. Thou have so much offended the heavenly powers in disobedience to thy
Father, as I ought rather to divide thy head from thy shoulders, then to hinder
this beast from devouring thee. Think thou to contrary their divine
pleasures? Suffiseth not the fault thou have committed with Florendos? content
thee, and shroude thy shame, in regard of the fruit in thy womb, whose
worthiness thou shall know more of hereafter. If y^ dooest not, thou die
an everlasting death, from which thou can have no mean to defend thee. The
Knight did so affright Griana, as she promised him to accomplish the Emperors
commandment without fail: whereupon the Knight and the Lion vanished away,
leaving her (as she thought) by a fair Fountain, environed with Trees and
diversity of flowers, the sweet sent whereof was so pleasant and
odori^^erous, as made the cheereful blood to revive again in the Princess,
and with breathing forth a vehement sigh, she awaked, inuocating on the powers
to pardon her transgressions, and promising to obey the will of her Father,
albeit she could hardly forget Florendos so soon. Within two or three days
after, the Prince Tarisius came to visit her, to whom she showed better
countenance then she had done, and as they were devising together in amorous
talk, she said. Believe me Sir Tarisius, you have used such honest and gentle
courtesy toward me, as henceforth I give my self wholly yours: therefore
being sorry for my long disobedience to my Parents and you, tryumphe now
Tarisius in the honor of my love. If these words pleased Tarisius, it is not
to be doubted, for joy whereof he went presently to the Emperor, and made
him acquainted with these happy tydinges: so that (to make short) after many
promises and solemn oaths to y^ Princess, not only to accept her as his
spouse and wife, but as his sovereign Lady and Mistress, he brought her
with him to the Emperor, who hearing the resolution of his Daughter, embraced
her, and took her into as good conceit as ever he did.

Notwithstanding, Tolomestra was commanded to attend on her still, wherefore
Griana knewing her time to draw near, and hardly could she conceal her
fortune: after many difficult doubts and fears debated in her thoughts, at
last she imparted the whole to Tolomestra. The old Gentlewoman after many
motherlie rebukes, for the fault committed as the danger imminent, thought
better yet to cover this misaduenture, then to publish that which would
displease many, and profit none: so leaving to reprehende, when care and
comfort was more required, at that instant the Princess was delivered of a
goodly man child. Thus in the ninth Month, after the return of Florendos
toward Macedon, on Mondaie at night about eight of the clock, the Princess
had her hour of deliverance: when Tolomestra receiving the Child, saw it so
beautiful and well fourmed, as it grieved her meruailouslie, to think what hard
fortune it brought with the birth. For the honor of the Mother could not be
defended, but by the price of ye infants life: wherefore having wrapped it in
swaddling clothes which the Princess had prepared of some value, she brought
it to the sorrowful Mother, saying. Trust me Madame, it much displeases me
that we must thus loose this lovely child, whom I could have esteemed happy,
and the Mother likewise, if it might live without displeasure: but he sweet
babe must suffer the punishment for the offense, whereof he is not any way
culpable. Alas (said the Princess) what shall we do? would God it wear
dead, or out of danger: then taking it in her arms, and washing his face
with flooddes of tears, after many sweet kisses, thus said. Ah my little
deintie, and must I needs leave thee? must the safety of thy life remain in
the mercy of a strange Womanne, who not knowing thy Parents, may deal with
thee discourteouslie? well, if thou die, thy Mother will not be long after
thee. And as she thus mourned over her infant, she perceived on his right
cheek a little mark in likeness of a Cross: which made her call her vision
to remembrance, and the words of the Knight, that promised good fortune to the
Child, which made her conceive a comfortable hope, whereupon, about his neck
she tied a fair Crucifixe of gold. Now was the night very far spent, and
Tolomestra feared they should be prevented, wherefore (quoth she) Madame it is
time to determine of some thing, leave muzing I pray you any longer on the
Child, and let me go carry it to Cardina to be borne forth of the Court. The
weeping Mother seeing she councelled for the best, for her last adiewe sealed
many sweet kisses on the face of the infant, and so in great grief delivered
it to Tolomestra, who went and found Cardina, to whom she gave it: and she
without any tariance mounted on Horseback, and not knowing what way she
took, rode on which way Fortune guided her. Uerie doubtful was she how to be
discharged of her carriage, for she feared to let any Woman in the neighbor
Uillages have it, least so the Princess might be discovered: for that it was
commonly blazed through the Empire, that the Princess was imprisoned for the
love of Florendos. At length the day began to appear, when she perceived
herself on a high Mountain, which was very thick set with Palm and Olive
trees: then she alighted from her Horse, and made a little bed of sweet
Herbs, wherein she laid the Child, hoping some body would pass by that
would take compassion on it. So committing the tender infant to the protection
of the powers, she returned to the City in very good time.

CHAP. X.
How Gerrard passing where Cardina had left the Child, heard it cry, and
so brought it home with him to his wife to nourish it.

THe Mountain where Cardina had left ye Princess young Son, was about a days
journey from Constantinople, and was commo^lie called the Mount of Olives,
where near at hand dwelt a welthie Farmer, who having the occupation of the
ground, grew very rich by gathering the fruits of ye Palm, Olive, Date and
other Trees, and like a good Husband he daily followed his affairs, being
named Gerrard. His Wife the same morning likewise was delivered of a Male
child, which being dead borne, caused this good man to walk forth into his
grounds in great heaviness, for he had but one Daughter aged three years, and
his Son would have been a great comfort to him. In these melanchollique
passions as he went near the Tree where Cardina had left the seely infant, he
heard it cry: whereat he greatly meruailing, approached nearer, and saw the
sweet Babie pitifully mourning, wanting the nouriture that should comfort
it. He took it very tenderly in his arms, and seeing it so sweet and
lovely, was persuaded that God had sent it him, in recompense of his own that
was dead borne: and so joyfully went home with it to his Wife, who was named
Marcella, and to her he begins in this manner. Behold sweet Wife, in the
place of your young dead Son, God has this day sent us an other, which I have
brought you home. The^ recounted he to her, how he found it on the Mountain
under an Olive Tree: and therefore (quoth he) I pray thee nourish it in stedde
of thine own, for a goodlier Child did I never behold. The good woman took
it, and vnwrapping the swaddling clothes, saw they were rich and of good
valewe, but chiefly ye Crucifire which hung about his neck: whereupon she
judged it of some noble house, and moved with pity, thus said. I believe
sweet infant, that thy Mother is in no small grief for the loss of thee, but
seeing thy fortune has brought thee to me, I will foster thee as thou were
mine own Son. And from thence forward she used it so lovingly, as every
one thought it to be Gerrards own Child: and bringing it to baptism, because
he found it so among the Palm trees, he caused the Child to be named
Palmerin, who grew on in years, both in comely feature and gentle behavior.
Not long after, Marcella brought her Husband an other Son, whose name was
Colmelio, and him did Palmerin love as his own Brother and companion, as
hereafter you shall more at large understand: but here I will crave leave to
pause for a while, and following the intent of this History, you shall
understand how Griana governed herself, after she had escaped this hard
adventure.

So soon as Cardina was returned to the Court, Griana sent for her, to know
what she had done with the infant: to whom she discoursed in what sort she
had left it, which grieved her as much as the weight of her offense.
Notwithstanding, considering how happily she had escaped shame and disgrace,
from thence forward she dissembled her passions better, and showed herself
so well reclaimed, as the Empress rejoiced much thereat, hoping now to end
the matter for her Nephewe Tarisius: whereupon one day finding her Daughter
alone, she took occasion to confer with her thus. Daughter, will you now
accomplish that, which your Father and I have long been importunate for, I
pray you hold of no longer, least you drive him into anger again, which can
no way return you benefit. When Griana heard her Mother speak so gently,
and knowing well, that (whether she would or no) it must sort to that
conclusion, she answered. Madame, you have thought good (will I nill I) that I
should match with your Nephewe Tarisius, I must then by force do that which
wyllingly I cannot, nor while I live shall I conceive better opinion: if then
(Mother) hereafter our fortunes fall out so contrary, that any misaduenture
happen by this your wilfulnes, you need not complain but of your self,
being the inuenter and procurer thereof. All these speeches of Griana could
not alter her opinion, but without regard of any danger, she went presently to
the Emperor, desiring him (seeing Griana was recovered) to end the marriage
between her Nephew and her: whereto he gave such sudden consent, as before a
seven night was finished, Tarisius and she were married together, to her great
grief, as her countenance declared, for when every one were at their feasting
dancing, and other delights, the woeful Princess thought on the great injury
she had done to Florendos, accounting herself the most unhappy on the earth,
and to herself thus sorrowed. Ah my dear freende, what wylt thou say when
thou hear these tydinges, that I am become so false and disloyal to thee?
what excuse may plead for me to thee? by good reason may I for ever be
excluded from their company, who have kept their faith inviolable to their
friends, and continue in profession of their unchangeable affections, for never
did Woman commit such treason as this that I have done: and yet (my Lord)
altogether against my will, as my woeful heart may give evident witness, which
shall be thine while it remains in this miserable body, which Tarisius must
now have, though in justice it be thine. And in this sort continued her
dolorous complaints til night approached, when she must yield that honor to
Tarisius, which with better will she could have affoorded Florendos.

After the feasts and triumphs of the marriage were finished, Griana desirous
to absent herself from her fathers Court, because the remembrance of
Florendos passions was so grievous to her: desired Tarisius to make short his
stay, and set forward to Hungaria, whether the Emperor her Father caused her
to be so honorably conuaied, as beseemed the Daughter of so great a Prince.
But as she was taking her leave among the Ladies, the Empress came to her
sorrowfully weeping, which when Griana beheld, she said. Madame, I am abashed
to see what heaviness you show for the departure of your Daughter, to whom you
alone have been so cruel, as by your means she is banished for ever from
you and you^ Country: why lament you then? seeing it is your pleasure to make
her unfortunate while she lives? I hartelie desire the heavens to pardon you,
and that the first news hereafter you shall hear of me, may be the true
report of my death. This said, she mounted on horseback, and without any
semblaunce to take her leave of her Father: so being honorably accompanied,
in short time she arrived in Hungaria with Tarisius, whose love to her so
vehemently increased, as he reputed himself y^ most fortunate Prince in
Europe, having gained the paragon among all Ladies. Soon after the aged King
died, by which means Tarisius came to the Crown. Griana highly esteeming
such as she brought with her from Constantinople, to wit, Lerina and Cardina,
but especially Tolomestra, to whom she very often imparted the whole secrets
of her mind, leading so strickt and constant a life, as all the Court did
wonder at her. But the remorse of conscience, which daily touched her for the
loss of her Son, caused her to spend day and night in denout orisons, that
the heavens would forget her heinous offense.

CHAP. XI.
How Florendos understood by the Esquire he sent to Constantinople, the
marriage of Griana and Tarisius: whereat he conceived such inward grief, as
he would have died with extreme sorrow.

ALl this while continued Florendos on the Frontiers between Constantinople
and Macedon, til at length he heard that Griana was released of her
imprisonment, whereof he was so glad, as now he thought to deal more surely
then he did before: whervppon he dispatched Lyomenus one of his Esquires
toward her, with a Letter of earnest and entire affection, wherein he desired
to know, if he might compass ye mean to come and see her, and he doubted
not to bring her so secretly on her iournete, and with so good provision, as
before they should be again discovered, they would be safely arrived in
Macedon. But this hope was soon frustrate, for Lyomenus being come to
Constantinople, found the marriage between Tarisius and Griana consumated:
which he took so displeasantlie, as without giving the Letter, or speaking to
the Princess, he returned hastily again to his Lord and Master. Who being
advertised of his coming, sent for him immediately up into his Chamber, at
whose entrance, the Prince discerned the news by his conuntenance, whereupon he
demanded if Griana were sick, or how she fared? My Lord (quod he) happy
had she been, if she had dyed ten years since: for I doubt [vnlesse you
arm your self with wonderful patience] that what is done will highly
endaunger your person. Why (quoth Florendos) what is happened? Trust me my Lord
(quod he) the very worst that can be for you, Tarisius has espoused her, and
(despite of her) the Emperor caused it to be done. No sooner had Lyomenus
spoken the word, but Florendos cast himself crueli^e against the ground,
saying. O my God take pity on my soul, for my body must needs suffer
misfortune. At which words he fell in a swoune, when Lyomenus thinking him
dead, ran hastily and called Frenato: who knowing full well ye cause of his
passion, labored by all means he might to persuade him (...) notwithst^^ding
all the entreaties he used, in (...) and (...) he could not get one word of
hi^, whereupon he sent for an ancient Hermit near at hand, whom Florendos
made very much account of, who being come, and applying diverse sovereign
Herbs to his temples, whereof the old Father ^n^we well the virtue, at
length Florendos recovered his senses, and opening his eyes, beh^ld the old
Hermit, to who^ with very feeble voice he said. Ah good Father pray for me,
for I feel mine end nigh at hand. Not so my S^nne said the Hermit, what? are
you so unprovided of divine persuasion, as you will loose both body and soul
for matter of so mean consequence? have thou lived so long, and yet ign^raunt
of the inconstancy of Women, which is no other th^^ thou beholdest in Griana?
Know thou not, that as the sail of the Ship is subject to all winds, so
are their affections to continual mutabilitie? and know thou not, that what
they purpose to execute irreuocable, in one moment they are suddenly
dissuaded from? My Son, believe my counsel, and with as much pleasure learn
to forget this folly, as with extreme pain thou diddes^ first imprint it in
thy thoughts. Ah Father (quoth Florendos) never seek in this sort to persuade
me, being assured if you knew how things have past, you would not thus in
fearmes disgrace my Lady: for she is mine, and Tarisius has no right to her,
to whom the Emperor has married her perforce, else would she never have broken
her faith to me, and while I live Father, none but she can be called the Wife
of Florendos, Son to the mighty King of Macedon. The wise old Father seeing
him in choler, and being loathe likewise to offend the Prince, would no
longer cross him in speeches, but fearing to move him too much, mildly thus
spoke. May be (my Son) she has been dear to you, and I would your consent
in love had answered your lyking: but thus to despair, and endaunger your
own life, trust me it is not well done, therefore I desire you to persuade
your self, and by your constancy condemn her lightness, taking patiently
what ha^h happened. These and such like good words used the old Hermit, but
Florendos would take no sustenance, neither be removed from this opinion, for
five days while the old man stayed with him: neither would he look
cheerfully as he was wont, but continued evermore sad and melanchollique, nor
could the King his Father cause him like of any Wife, but only Griana, for
whom continually he never left mourning.

CHAP. XII.
How young Palmerin sleeping, had a strange vision, which provoked him to know
whose Son he was, and of the talk which passed between him and Dyof^na, the
daughter of Gerrard.

PAlmerin being now come to the age of fifteen years, nourished in the
Mountain as the Child of Gerrard his supposed Father, well beloved of him and
Marcella his wife as their own Son: grew in stature so tall, comely and well
nurtured, as well might he be known of noble parentage. For albeit he companyed
with Gerrards Children, who used him after their rusticall capacities: yet he
desired more to pass the Mountains with his long Bow, to chase the Bears
and Bores through thick and thin, and to keep Hawks and dogs, rather
then Sheep and Cattle as the other Children did. In these sports he had such
wonderful delight, as oftentimes he would come home very late and sore
wearied: but one time among the rest, he came home so ouerlaboured, as he was
glad to lay him down to rest, and he was no sooner fallen a sleep, but he
was solicited with a marvelous visyon, the effect whereof thus follows. He
thought (as he was pursuing a goodly Heart through a Forest) he met with
the fairest Lady that ever eye beheld, who sat on the side of a goodly
Fountain, and called him unto her, saying. Be not abashed Palmerin, though I
am come from the furthest parts to find thee in this Country, for I am well
assured, that ere many days be past, thy bounty and prowess shall make thee
renowned through the world, for one of the hardiest Knights that ever lived.
Leave therefore this obscure and rusticall kind of life, and henceforth lift
thy mind to high occasions which are offered thee: and hereof believe me, as
she that loves thee as her own life, being devoted only thine at all
times, as nature may witness who has marked me with thy like Charracter. The^
showing her arm, she said. Behold in this hand, and on this side of my
heart, one like and self same mark, as you broughtest on thy face from thy
Mothers womb. To which words Palmerin would have answered, but the Lady
vanished away so suddenly, as he could not perceive what was become of her.
Whereupon raising himself, and meruayling from whence this occasion should
proceed, he admired the beauty of the Lady he saw in his sleep, which was
so lively in his remembrance, as he judged her present before his eyes. But
persuading himself that such apparitions happened by idle thoughts, or by some
vapor of no effect: made no account thereof, whereupon, the next night
following, the same Lady that appeared to him in the Forest, presented
herself to him again, holding in her hands a sumptuous Crown of gold, and
thus spoke. See here (my Lord) the honor which I hold, being given me
only for the love of you. In this sort continued this vision for fourteen
or fifteen days following, till at length the Lady showed herself very
angry, saying. I am ashamed Palmerin, that you defer so long to seek me
out, do you think the promises I have made you are frivolous? No, no, the
time and travail thou take (if thou give credit to my words) shall make
thee know that thou art ye Son of a King, and not of the Country swayne that
has fostered thee. From henceforth therefore expect me no more in this
Mountain, but if my beauty have found place in thy har^, seek then to
conquer me, that thou may be y^ Lord and possessour of me. Thus departed
the Lady, leaving a desire (more then accustomed) in the heart of Palmerin, who
till that time made little reckoning of so high matters, for the Pastoral life
he led with Gerrard and his family, seemed the most happiest to him in all
the world, not having seen any person of greater calling then he. But now
new affections so elevated his mind, as he intended to go seek her, whom in
sleep he had beheld so often: For (quoth he) if she assure me to discende of
a royal lineage, I may well presume she knows me bett^r then my Father
Gerrard, else would she not so often induce me to follow my fortune, and the good
that is provided for me, well might I be accounted a fool, if I would not
adventure on so especial an occasion, therefore happen what will, I mean to
search through the whole world till I have found her, and none but she shall
ever be my Mistress. But how can it be that I am descended from so high a
place, seeing my Father is such a simple Countriman? has my Mother been
forgetful of her reputation, that some Prince or great Lord has so become my
Father? Well, I will know of her if I can before I depart, and if she will not
tell me, I will search for her that shall assure me. Thus was Palmerin
confounded with remembrance of his visions, as from that time he became
maruailous pensive and solitary: then bethought he, how he might know of his
Mother Marcella the end of his desire, whereof Dyofena (who loved him dearly)
partly advertised him.

You have heard heertofore, how when Gerrard found Palmerin among the Olive
Trees, he had a daughter three years old, named Dyofena, indifferent fair,
who as she increased in years, became so amorous of her supposed brother,
that hardly she could dissemble her affection: notwithstanding, shame and
regard locked up her lips, that she durst not speak what she gladly
would, but seeing Palmerin in like sadness as she was, she immagined that one
sickness had strooken them both, wherefore casting many doubts as she lay in
her bed, in the same Chamber her Parents did, she heard them enter into this
discourse. Have you not seen Palmerin (quoth he) how heavy and sad he
has been a long time? Yea truly have I (quod she) it may be that some
have told him he is not your Son: so falling out of one matter into an
other, Dyofena heard them report the manner how they found him, which she
desirous to let Palmerin understand, arose early the next morning, and
coming to Palmerin, thus conferred with him. Brother, if you knew so much as I
do, peradventure you would be not a little abashed. Why good Sister (quoth he)
I pray you let me understand the matter. In sooth (quoth she) I ever thought
till this time, that you had been mine own natural Brother, but by chance
hearing some talk between my Father and Mother this last night, I am no other
then your freende, and she y^ loves you dearly: which I have evermore
hitherto feared to let you know, doubting the nerenes of our consanguinitie,
which I now perceive cannot hinder our marriage, if you will request me of my
Father, who I am sure will not deny you. And so she rehearsed the manner of
his finding, which so well lyked Palmerin, as he gave the more credit to the
visions he had seen, nevertheless, he thus dallied with Dyofena. It may be
Sister, you misunderstoode our Parents, my self will deniaund the truth of
our Mother, if she assure me as you have done, then will I talk with them
concerning our marriage. So shall you do well (said Dyofena) to be thorowlie
assured, yet need you not report me to have informed you, least thereby you
bring me into my Parents displeasure. Palmerin thus leaving Dyofena, chanced
to find his Mother Marcella alone, to whom he said. Mother, I beseech you
grant me one request that I shall demand of you. That will I my Son (quoth
she) if it be in my power to do. Understand then good Mother (quoth he) that I
have oftentimes dreamed how I am not your Son, so that I know not what to
say, unless you please to assure me better. When Marcella heard these
words, she was strooken in a study: but Palmerin was still so importunate, as
at last she thus answered. In good faith (fair Freende) I never kn^w thine
own natural Parents, yet have I looued thee as if thou were mine own Son:
and so what words Dyofena had before reported, Marcella confirmed, taking him
with her into her Chamber, where she showed him the costly swaddling clothes
that he was found in, and the Crucifire likewise that hung about his neck,
which he entreated her to bestow on him, to the end (quoth he) that for your
sake I may keep it while I live. Marcella would not deny his request, but
put it about his neck herself. From which time forward, Palmerin showed
himself of more cheereful disposition, devising how he might compass the
mean to go seek his fortune, whereto his sundry apparitions had so often
incited him. And as none can shun what is ordained him by divine providence,
not many days after, as he was walking alone upon the Mountain, he heard a
voice cry very pitifully for help and succor: whereupon Palmerin ran
that way which he heard the voice, where he beheld a Lion greedily
devouring a Horse, and Palmerin having no weapon to defend himself withal but
a staff, very hardilie set upon the beast, gyuing him such a stroke
between the eyes, as he fell down dead to the ground, then coming to him he
heard complain, said: I have my Freende in some part revenged thy wrong.
Alas Sir (quod he) had you not been, my life had perished, for as I travailed
on my journey, this Lion furiously set upon me to devour me: which the
rest of my company perceiving, took themselves to flight, leaving me as you
found me. The best is (said Palmerin) that you have escaped with life: and if
you please to go with me not far hence, where I have been nourished, you
shall have the best entertainment that I can make you. My Freende (quoth the
Stranger) you have already done so much for me, as if you will go with me
into the Country where I dwell, I have wherewithal to reward your travail
richly. Is it far hence Sir, said Palmerin? In the City of Hermida (quod
he) in the Realm of Macedon I dwell, from whence I parted a month since with my
merchandise, which I have left at Constantinople: from whence returning
homeward, this unlooked for misfortune befeil me, which had made an end of
me without your assistance. As they were thus conferring together, one of the
Strangers servant came to look him, and finding him so happily escaped, was
not a little joyful, reporting that he had left his companio^s not far off.
Return then said his Master, and will them come to me to the next Uillage,
where I mean to have my wounds dressed, which the servant performed
immediately, and all this while stood Palmerin in debating with himself if he
should thus leave his Father Gerrard or not: at length [after many opinions]
fearing if he returned home again not to find the like opportunity,
concluded to depart with the Stranger. So was he set on a very good
Palfray, and setting forwards to Macedon, y^ night they were entertained in a
very good lodging, where the stranger caused his wounds to be searched,
reporting to eueri^ one, how by the aid of Palmerin his life was preserved,
for which cause he accounted of him as of his own Son. All this while
Gerrard and his Wife little thought of this mishappe, but expected Palmerins
return till dark night, and seeing he came not as he was wont: both he and
his wife the next day searched the Mountains, but they could not find him,
which made Gerrard to question in himself, what evil he had offered him, that
should make him thus depart. Now durst not his Wife Marcella tell him, the
talk between her and Palmerin, but accompanied her Husband in sorrow for
their loss: especially Dyofena and her Brother Colmelio were most sorry,
Dyofena for loss, as she thought, of her Husband, and Colmelio for the
company of his supposed Brother, whose absence went so near his heart, as he
intended never to give over search till he had found him.

CHAP. XIII.
How Palmerin went with this Merchant named Estebon to the City of Hermida,
who afterward gave him Horse and Armor to be made Knight.

EStebon the Merchant thus conducting Palmerin on his way, at length arrived at
the City of Hermida, where he was lovingly welcomed home by his Wife, both
young and beautiful as any in that Country, to whom he reported his
dangerous assault by ye Lion, and without Palmerins help he had been
devoured: but (quoth he) good fortune sent him at the very instant that slew
him, for which I shall be beholding to him while I have a day to live, therefore
good Wife entertain him in the best sort you can devise, for he has well
deserved it. This speech had the Merchant with his fair Wife, who embracing
Palmerin, said: That nature had omitted nothing in her workmanship, making him
so amiable and full of hardines. Palmerin seeing himself so favored of so
beautiful a woman, having before spent his time among Sheep herds,
Swineheards and loutish Swains of y^ Country, with modesty began to blushe,
and was so well stored with civility to make her this answer. I desire
Mistress that (...) behavior may be such, as may continue my Masters good
liking and yours toward me. So from that time he followed Merchandise, and
profited so well in the course of traffic, as Estebon committed all his
affairs to Palmerins trust: who rather gave his mind to martial exercises,
and followed Knightly dispositions so much, as very nature declared the
noblenes of his mind, for he delighted to manage great Horses, to fight at al
manner of weapons, to see dangerous Combats, to frequent the assemblye of
Knights, to talk of Arms and honorable exployts, and in brief, to exercise
all the braueries of a noble Courtier.

Whereat Estebon meruailed so much, as faling in talk with him, he said. Me
thinks it is strange Palmerin, that thou being the Son of a drudge, and
nourished on the Mountain of Olives (as thy self has often told me)
disdaynest the life of a Merchant, frequenting the company of hardy Knights,
as though thou should take Lance and sheelde to enter the Combat. Sir (said
Palmerin) I know not if my Father be such as I have told you, but I wot well my
heart so serves me, as I can think of nothing but actions of honor and
knighthoode. The Merchant was contented to hear Palmerin in these terarmes,
because he perceived that his Wife favored him greatly, whereat he became a
little jealous, and gladly would remove the occasion, wherefore he said. Seeing
it is so Palmerin, that thou have no mind to follow my affairs, I am well
contented y^ shall exercise chivalry, being the thing thou naturally
affectest, and whereby thou may attain to credit and account. For mine own
part, because I will not hinder so good forwardness, thou shall have of me
money, Horse and Armor, that thou may go to Macedon to the King, where if
thou request it of the Prince Florendos his Son, he will not refuse to give
thee thy order. Palmerin returned him very hearty thanks, and having provided
al things expedient for his journey: took his leave of the Merchant Estebon
and his wife, hoping to speed well in his aduenturous enterprise.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Palmerin arrived at the Court of Macedon, hoping to receive the order of
knighthood at the hand of the Prince Florendos, Son to the aged King
Primaleon, by the favor of the Lady Arismena.

SUch speed made Palmerin being departed from the Merchant, as on the fourth
day following, riding by a Rivers side, he found a Dwarffe sitting heavily
weeping, of whom he demanded the cause of his mourning. Alas Sir (said the
Dwarffe) as I was riding by the commandment of my Master, to a Lady whom he
dearly loves, a Knight even now took my Horse from me, and very
villainously offered me outrage, which yet does not so much grieve me, as
(being thus on foot) I know not how to get over this River. Mount up behind
me (said Palmerin) and at the first Town we come to, I will provide thee of
another Horse. Then mounted the Dwarffe up behind him, and having past the
River, desired to know of Palmerin whether he travailed: for (quoth he) I never
saw man whom I had greater desire to serve, then you. Dwarffe (answered
Palmerin) I now iourneie toward the Court of Macedon to the King, where I
hope to find the Prince Florendos, who is accounted one of the woorthiest
Knights in the world, and by his hand I desire to be knighted if I may. And
after you have received your order (said the Dwarffe) I hope you will not be so
unwise to hazard the adventure, wherein so many have failed and lost their
lives. What adventure is that quoth Palmerin? To go to the Mountain
A^tifaeria (said the Dwarffe) in hope to kill the Serpent, which has been the
death of so many valiant Knights. And what occasion said Palmerin, moved them
to fight with the Serpent? That will I tell you, answered the Dwarffe. The King
Primaleon, father to the Prince Florendos whom you seek, three years since
fell into a very strange disease, for which no remedy can yet be found,
notwithstanding the dilligent endeavors of the Queen, and Lady Arismena her
Daughter, one of the fairest and most virtuous Princesses that ever was heard
of: who seeing her Father in such dangerous estate, has often assembled the
best Physicians in the whole world, who have practiced al possible means to
recover his health, yet hither to all has been to no purpose. Whereupon she
sent to an ancient Knight, the most skilfullest in the art of Nigromancie
this day living, who returned this answer: that he should never be healed,
except he be first washed with the water of a Fountain, which stands on
the top of the Mountain Artifaeria, whether fourtimes a year resort three
Sisters, Magitians of the Isle Carderia, to gather virtuous Herbs which there
they wash, and whereof they frame all their enchantments. This place is so
defended by the Monster whereof I told you, that no man as yet durst approach
it. Which news when the Princess Arismena understood, hoping by strength of
men to recover the water and vanquish the Beast, leauied a great number of
Soldiers well appointed, who were no sooner entered the Mountain, but the
Serpent came furiously forth of his Den, throwing fire and smoke out of his
mouth, and beating his wings together with such terror, as the very hardiest
durst pass no further, but were all glad to take themselves to flight, yet
could they not depart with such expedition, but the greater part of them paid
their lives for their bold attempt, the Mountain was so stored with Lions,
Bears, Wolves, Hearts, Tygres, Ounces, and other wild ravenous Beasts that
devoured them. Now at length many Knights have tried themselves in this
adventure, thinking by their Prowess to perform more the^ the other: but all
the worse, for not one of them returned back again alive. And why goes not
the Prince Florendos him self, said Palmerin, that is esteemed y^ most valiant
Knight through all Greece? Alas Sir, said the Dwarffe, some other matter has so
drowned his mind in mellancholique, as he lives like one that dispiseth
himself. While ye Dwarffe continued his discourse, the desire of honor and
renown did so lively touch the spirit of Palmerin, as he said to him self.
It may be that Arismena was the Lady, which in my sleeping thoughts visited me
so often, if the Destinies have vowed her mine, why should I fear the Serpent,
or all the other Beasts wherewith this Dwarffe does so terrify me? Have not I
slain a Lion already with a staff? Tush the more danger is in the place,
the more honor depends upon the victory. If I leave my life there, I am not the
first, if I return with conquest, I shall be beyond any yet in fortune:
therefore fall out as it will, no perrill shall dismaie me from giving the
adventure, whereupon he said to the Dwarffe. But tell me my Freende, he that
bringes the water from the Mountain to the King, what advantage shall he
deserve? My Lord, (quoth he) it has been many times published, that his
reward shall be the best City in all this Relame. See then Dwarffe said
Palmerin, one man more will hazard his life in this enterprise, albeit I
should receive but thanks for my frauaile, wylt thou go with me? That will I
(answered the Dwarffe) if you please, and never will I forsake you while
breath is in my body. Thus set they on till they came to the great City of
Macedon, at what time Florendos was gone to the Temple in such heaviness, as he
seemed a man of another world, being accompanied with many Knights, and his
fair Sister the Lady Arismena, to whom Palmerin boldly addressed himself:
and as though he had been a Courtier all his life time, with seemly
modesty he set his knee to the ground before her, and thus began. Madame, I
humbly ^eseeche you to vouchsafe me one request, which well you may not deny
me, in that I am a Stranger, as also in respect of the desire I have to do
you service. And trust me Sir (quoth she) you shall not be refused, what is
it you would have me do for you? That at your request (said Palmerin) the
Prince Florendos your Brother, will give me my Knighthoode. Arismena seeing
Palmerin so amiable and well disposed of body, meruailed of whence he was,
and said. In good sooth Sir, such matter nothing appertains unto me, for (as
I judge) such a motion should proceed from your self: yet taking him by the
hand, she presented him to her Brother, saying. I pray you my Lord grant to
this young Gentleman as yet not knighted, the thing he has desired me to
demand. Florendos having not as yet beheld him, looked upon him, when an
exceeding passion, presenting ye Princess Griana to his thoughts, suddenly
touched him, and being rapt into more conceit of joy then he had been
accustomed, demanded of Palmerin if he would be made Knight. With right good
will my Lord quoth he, if it shall like you to do me so much honor, for above
all things else it is my only desire. My freende, said Florendos, it is
necessary I should first know, whether you be noble borne or no. My Lord,
quoth Palmerin, as yet I never knew my Father or Mother, nor any of my
kindred: notwithstanding, mine own heart makes me judge no less of my self,
and more gladly would I die, then do any thing that were not virtuous, and
well worthy the name of a Gentleman. And trust me, said Florendos, I am of
the same opinion: this night therefore you must observe the religious watch as
is accustomed, and to morrow will I give you your order, and put the spur on
your heel my self. Palmerin on his knee humbly kissed the Princes hand, and
continuing in talk together, Florendos took a great delight in beholding
him, so that he demanded his name and Country. My Lord, quoth he, they which
found me amongst the Palm Trees, on y^ Mountain of Olives, not far from
Constantinople, have given me the name of Palmerin. By mine honor said
Florendos, I ought well to know the City whereof you speak, as the place
wherein my dearest affections took their first life, and not long since, are
bequeathed to death, awaiting now but the hour to be discharged of the burden.

Thus having in his company his unknown Son, begotten by him on the
Princess Griana, knew little that his love had sorted to such effect:
nevertheless, nature provoked him to like so well of Palmerin, as none in y^
Court contented him more then he. And longer would they have continued their
talk, but that fair Arismena interrupted them, asking Palmerin if he would
discharge her of the request he demanded. That do I Madame (quoth he) and in
requital thereof, dedicate the whole circuit of my life to your gracious
service: and to begin my deuoire on your be half, so soon as I have received
my Knighthoode, I will take my journey toward the Serpent, in hope to bring
the water that must recover the King your Fathers health. Alas good Sir, said
she, God forbid that you should fall in such danger by my means. I know
well answered Palmerin, that I can die but once, and if it be now, then am I
dispatched, and if I escape, I shall do that whereof many other have failed,
and this is my resolution fair Madame. Believe me, said Florendos, me thinks
you are as yet too young, to finish an action wherein consists so great danger,
I pray you therefore refer it unto such, as have had more experience in Arms
then as yet you have. My Lord, said Palmerin, in other matters I shall obey
when you command, but this I must desire you not to dissuade me from. Well
then, quoth Florendos, seeing you will needs have it so, I am content, you
shall in the mean while keep me company: as for Sword and Armor, trouble
not you self to provide ame, because my self will furnish you sufficiently.
Thus all day Florendos accompanied Palmerin, demanding of him what things he
had seen in Constantinople, and falling from one discourse to another, he
asked him what Esquire he had to atte^d on him. The^ he showed his Dwarffe
called Vrbanillo, such a deformed and evil favored fellow, as every one that
saw him laughed heartily, whereupon Palmerin said to Florendos. By my faith my
Lord, as unseemly as he is, I think so well of him, as I should be
displeased if he were any way iniuried. Assure your self, said Florendos,
that he will stand you in great stedde when you have no need of him, and look
y^ you leave nothing behind you, that you need to fight against the Serpent,
and trust it in his discretion to bring after you. When Vrbanillo perceived
every one test so with him, he was half angry, and in some choler thus said
to the Prince. I can no way, my Lord, better my shape or proportion, but if I
live, this little deformed body of mine shall give you to understand, that I
bear so good a mind, as where my Master leaves his life, I mean to finish
mine, and though in mean while I can do him no other service, he shall be
assured of my truth and loyalty. But not offended (Owarffe my good freende)
said Florendos, for I think well of thee and of thy behavior: And so because
the Tables were covered for Supper, they brake of talk, Palmerin preparing
himself to his watchful deuoire in the Chapel.

CHAP. XV.
How Florendos gave to Palmerin the Armor and Sword of Gamezio, whom he
slew before Constantinople, and afterward Knighted him: and how a Damsel
came to the Court, who presented him with a Helmet and a rich Sheelde.

THe time being come, that Palmerin should perform his deuonte watch in the
Chapel, before he received his Knighthoode, according to the ancient
custom: Florendos gave commandment that the Armor of Gamezio should be
brought him, which the Emperor had given him, after his conquest of the Sultan
of Babilons army on the Sea, as you have heard before, and these he showed to
Palmerin, saying. My friend, this Armor sometimes belonged to the best Knight
of his time, whom (nevertheless) I conquered, being then more pleasant,
joyful, and at better content, then I shall be while I have a day to live. And
because I have some special opinion of your prowess, and that these ornaments
of defense you will better employ, then any other on whom I shall bestow them:
I pray you henceforth to wear them for my sake. My Lord, said Palmerin, my
desire is, that my service toward your honor, may be witnessed in my good
employing of this gentle gift. Then Frenato and diverse other Knights did help
to arm him, and afterward accompanied him to the Chapel, where all that
night he spent in sollemne orisons, that God would endue him with strength to
vanquish the Serpent, that so the King might again receive his health.

At the break of day, as Florendos went to the Chapel to give him his
order, there entered among them on the sudden a comely Damsel, bearing a
Helmet and a Sheeld of Azier, the goodliest and most beautiful that ever was
seen, upon the Sheelde being portraied a Ladies arm, having her hand fast
closed together: the Damsel coming before the Prince Florendos, began thus.
I pray you my Lord to pause a while, till I have conferred a little with
Palmerin. Florendos was greatly amazed at this accident, in that he had never
seen the Damsel before: notwithstanding he returned this answer. Fair
Damsel and my Freende, good leave have you to say what you please. Then
coming to Palmerin, and falling on her knees before him, she said. Sir
Palmerin, a Knight that has authority to command me, and whom as yet you do
not know, has sent you by me this Helment and Sheelde, wherein you shall find
ye very secrets of your heart. And if you desire to know whence this honor
proceeds, it comes from him who has proved the effect hereof, and that
knows more of you nearest affairest then you do your self, albeit as yet he
has never seen you. Damsel, said Palmerin, where may I find the learned
man that has thus honored me, who^ I may remunerate with my cheifest
endeavors hereafter? You cannot as yet know him, said the Damsel. I pray
you fair Uirgin, quoth Palmerin, that you will answer on my behalf, how in
any place I shall come hereafter, I remain ready to do what likes him to
command me. It suffiseth (quoth she) look that hereafter you remember your
promise: then coming to the Prince Florendos, she said. My Lord, the same Man
from whom I have saluted Palmerin, gave me in charge to say to you, that you
should not fear or doubt to dubbe him Knight: but to persuade your self, that
both by Father and Mother he is so noble as he does well deserve it, and him
hereafter you will love beyond all other, for by him you shall enjoy the thing
you most esteem and desire. Thus having no longer license to stay with you, I
humbly desire you to excuse my departure. Sweet Maid, said Florendos, may
your words sort to so good end, as you have promised. So departed the
Damsel, leaving Palmerin on his knee before the Prince, who taking the Sword
that sometimes belonged to Gamezio, Knighted him, saying: And may thou prove
as famous and fortunate, as my hope persuades me thou will. Then was he
honorably conveyed to the Palace, where the fair Arismena unarmed him, and
covered him with a rich Mantle of white Satin, imbroydered all over with
sumptuous flowers of Gold: beside, no one in y^ troop but highly reverenced
him, for the worthy report y^ Damsel made of him. And albeit the Princess
Arismena dissuaded him so well as she could, that he should not enda^ger
himself against the Serpent, because by him her Brother should overcome his
melancholy, and fearing his loss without hope of recovery: yet needs would
he be gone the same day, but that her importunate entreaty persuaded him to
stay eight days longer. Palmerin being soon after alone by himself, he
remembered the words of the Damsel, who promised him to find the secrets of
his heart in his Sheelde: whereupon he well advised himself, and saw that the
hand portraied in the Sheelde, had the same mark which the Lady had, that
appeared to him in his sleep, whereat not a little maruailing, he said within
himself. It must needs be without all doubt, that he which sent me this
present, knows full well ye scope of my fortune, for I am well assured, that
the Lady which spoke to me in my sleep, when I abode in the house of my
Father Gerrarde, showed me her hand, with the self same mark I see here
pictured: by which I may persuade my self, that she will not cease to follow
and find me out, until such time as I may speak with her. Whereupon he
found himself so suddenly inueigled with her love, as he thus complained.
Ah Palmerin, well may thou see that long thou can not resist this
impression, but whence should this humor proseede? to love her thou never
saw, nor know where is her abiding? If it fall out that tho die in thy
pursuit, these passions shall so have a small end, and I gain y^ greatest
felicity that I can desire. By this time had he spent the eight days, which
he promised Arismena for Florendos company, when as well to begin the search
of her he loved so well, as to end the adventure he intended of the Serpent:
he prepared to depart, providing himself a great huge Mace of iron, which did
him good service, as you shall read hereafter.

CHAP. XVI.
How Palmerin fought with the horrible Serpent on the Mountain Artaeferia,
and slew him, bringing the glass filled with the water of the Fountain,
whereby King Primaleon of Macedon recovered his health.

EIght days had Palmerin stayed with Florendos, and in company of the fair
Princess Arismena, who fearing that he would never return from the
Mountain Artifaeria, was very pensive and sad: and oftentimes she entreated
him, not to hazard himself against those cruel, ravenous and supernatural
Monsters, but rather to witness his valor against Knights of account like
himself, but all her speeches profited not, for he was resolute to depart. I
shall yet desire you, said the Princess, that for my sake you will take with
you three Esquires which I will give you, who may lend you succor if any
inconvenience should befall you. Then she called the Esquires, and presented
them unto him, with ye glass that he should bring the water in from the
Fountain, if Fortune stood with him to finish the adventure. Palmerin
mou^ting on horseback, and Florendos accompanying him half a days journey on
ye way, left him on his journey toward the Mountain Artifaeria, where he
arrived on the last day of April. The^ he commanded the Esquires and his
Dwarffe Vrbanillo, to expect his return at the foot of the Mountain, for he
would suffer none of the^ to go up with him: so ascended he the Hill by a
little trackt footepath, with his iron Mace on his neck, and the Glass for
the water fastened at his gyrdle. Having thus travailed up till about midday,
he found the passage so thick set with Trees and brakes, as he was
constrained to alight from his Horse, who^ he unbridled and left there
feeding: and much further had he not gone, but the night ouertooke him, yet did
ye Moon shine bright and clear, which made him still travail onwarde, till
he beheld the Rock where the water was, and the Serpents Den, who was come
somewhat lower to recreate himself among the sweet Herbs, where he had
closely couched himself. But when he heard Palmerin coming, he began to
swell, and writhe his tail together very strangely: all which could not
dismay this aduenturous Knight, but commending himself to God, set down his
(...), and with his Mace marched stoutly against his enemy, saying. Why
Palmerin? did thou so often request of Florendos and the Princess his
Sister, to try thy strength against this devil, and now thou art come in sight
of him wylt thou faint? Does it not beseem thee better to die with honor,
then to live with shame? let the one encourage thee to follow thy enterprise,
and the other kill thee when thou offerest to retire. And with these words he
advanced him to the Serpent, and the Serpent fiercelye began to assail him,
and with his tail had smote him down, but that he nimbly prevented the
stroke, delivering the Serpent so sore a blow on ye head with his Mace, as
made him reele and stagger, and cry so terribly, as the whole Mountain
resounded with a marvelous Echo, and to reuengo himself, with his tallants
he got hold on Palmerins Armor, which he rent violently in two or three
places, wounding his body very dangerously. When Palmerin perceived in what
hard plight he was, he took heart a fresh, and watching his advantage, struck
the Serpent with his Mace so strongly on the neck, as he fell to the ground
in a manner dead, and Palmerin plied him with so many strokes one after
another, as he left him not while any life was in him. After this happy
victory, for which deuous^ie he praised God, binding up his wounds so well
as he could, with extreme wearines he laid him down and slept, when he seemed
to see the three Sisters whereof we have spoken before, who were the Daughters
to a Knight, Lord of the Isle Carderia, to whom none might be compared for
knowledge in the Magical sciences, and so well he had instructed his
Daughters, as after his death, they alone excelled in this Art, so that the
men of that Country commonly called them the Goddesses of destiny, because
they could divine before what should follow after. And if any one did happen
to injury them, they would revenge themselves by their enchauntments, so that
they were greatly feared and held in reverence. They used diverse times this
Mountain Artifaeria as well to gather Herbs for their necessary use, as
also for the Water of the Fountain, for the defense whereof they had there
left this Serpent, who was in time grown so huge and monstrous, as he rather
seemed a devil then a natural Beast. Notwithstanding, how hidious soever he
was, Palmerin as you have heard overcame and slew him, finding the three
Sisters in the manner as I have told you: who were not greatly discontented
with him, but esteemed so well of him, as in his sleep the eldest of them thus
spoke to him. Believe me Palmerin, thy beginning is so honorable, as great
pity it were to let thee die here, chiefly for the want y^e all Greece
shall have of thee in time to come, the whole Empire whereof is predestined
thine: and therefore will I heal the wounds thou have at this time received.
I will then do somewhat more for him, said the second Sister, I will enchau^t
him so well for his avail, as hereafter no co^iuratio^ or witchcraft shall have
any power to hurt him. Truly said the third Sister, for my part, I will give
him such fortune, as the first time he shall see his Lady Polinarda, (who so
many times saluted him in his Dreams) she shall love him so entirely: as
no dolor or forment shall make her forget while she lives, the happiness she
shall receive by his occasions. Then the eldest Sister took a Golden Cup, and
filled it with the water of the Fountain, and wringing the juice of certain
Herbs into it, washed therewith Palmerins wounds, so that they were
immediately healed.

Now felt he very well all they did, but his slumber took away the liberty
of his speech, until such time as they were departed, but first the eldest of
them thus spoke. Since this Knight has had so good a beginning, and y^ his
strength has deprived our guard of our Fountain, I pray you let us suffer
him to have his Glass full of our Water, that by his means the King of
Macedon may be healed, which a number of other Knights have failed of
heretofore. Whereto they all consented, and so it came to pass: then gathering
their Herbs as they were wont, and washing them, they took their way to the
Isle Card^ria.

CHAP. XVII.
How Palmerin descended from the Mountain, with his Glass full of the water
of the enchau^ted Fountain, and how joyful Vrbanillo and the other Esquires
were, seeing their Master return with so good fortune.

WHen these three Sisters were departed, Palmerin awaked and arose, not a
little meruailing at that he had heard and seen: but most of al when he felt
his wou^des healed, and saw his glass full of the water he came for, so
reudering thanks to heaven for his good success, he went up higher on the
Mountain, thinking to see the Fountain, but he could not, wherefore without any
longer stay he descended down again, thus saying to himself. How happy may
I count my self, to find so good fortune in this desolate Mountain? for now
I know her name that is destenied to be mine, henceforth shall she not conceal
her self from me, may I find the place where she abides: and this I vow by
him that made me, that I will not cease to seek her through the world, til I
hear some tidings of her: and were it not for the promise I have made the
Princess Arismena, to bring her this water to recover the King her Father,
this day would I begin my religious enterprise, in hope [if the Ladies spoke
truth y^ appeared to me in my sleepe] hereafter to be one of the happiest
Knights in the world. So walked he on til he came where he left his horse,
whereon he mounted, and came to Vrbanillo and his other Esquires, who having
heard the cry of the Serpent, when Palmerin gave him his first stroke,
persuaded themselves that their Master was slain: but when they saw him
coming, Vrbanillo above all the rest was most joyful, and ran apace to meet
him, desiring to know how he had sped. Uerie well I thank God, said Palme^in,
who gave me strength to kill the Monster, and to bring sufficient of the Water
I hope, to win the King Primaleon his health. Then have I the thing I most
desire, said Vrbanillo, albeit I greatly feared that you had accompanied all
the other Knights in death, that adventured before you, and could not speed
so well. So mounted they all on horseback, and made so good iourneies as they
arrived at Macedon: whereof Florendos and fair Arismena were not a little
joyful, especially when they were assured, that Palmerin had brought with him
the Kings health, by means whereof it is not to be demanded, if he were highly
honored and received at the Court.

CHAP. XVIII.
How four Knights would have taken the Glass of fatal water from Vrbanillo,
before Palmerin arrived (...) Macedon, and of the Combat between them.

YOu must here understand, that the same day, Palmerin, in company of his
Esquires, departed from the Mountain, he sent Vrbanillo the Dwarffe before
toward Macedon, with the Glass of water, when it so fortuned y^ four
Knights met with him, one of the^ saluting him in these hard terms. Deformed
villain, give me that Glass, or I shall take thy head from thy shoulders.
Palmerin, who came not far behind, seeing the Knights offer injury to his
Dwarffe, gave spurs to his Horse, and thus answered. How now Gentlemen? are
you not ashamed in my presence to abuse my servant? trust me I neither can nor
will so put it up: and so couching his Lance, he encounted one of them so
roughly, as he fell from his Horse dead to the ground. When the other three
saw their companopm thus foiled, they altogether set upon Palmerin: but their
fortune fell out so ill, as two of them were soon vanquished, and the third
took himself to flight very hardly escaping. Palmerin made no account of
following him, but leaving them rode on his way, his Dwarffe thus coming to
him. Believe me my Lord (quoth he) he is to be accounted over foolish hardy,
that at the weapons point seeks to offend you: I dare boldly affirm my
words, by evidence of the fortune of these four Knights. In that, said
Palmerin, thou may be deceived, but God is always freende to justice and
equity, and enemy to such as go against them. But because you shall know the
occasion why these four Knights would have taken the glass from Vrbanillo, you
must note that they were all Sons to a great Lord of a Castle, which was a
days iourneie off the Mountain Artifaeria, who having intelligence by
Sheepe-heards and other pesants, what good fortune had befallen Palmerin, to
kill the Serpent, and bring away the fatal water, repined greatly thereat:
for the Lord did highly malice the King of Macedon, because he had enforced
him to surrender a Manor, which he against all right, held from one of his
Sisters, and for this cause, knowing that by the virtue of that water the King
should recover his health, he sent his four Sons to take it from Palmerin,
whose success in their attempt fell out as you have heard. Now Palmerin by
this time is come to Macedon to the King, whom with great reverence he saluted
on his knee: when y^ King embracing him so well as he could, said. Trust me my
good Freende, next God I must needs esteem you dearest, for that as he by his
Godhead has made me breath this air, though weak and sickly: by divine
providence he has sent you to restore me my bodily health, from henceforth
therefore I shall entreat you to command me and mine at your pleasure. My
gracious Lord, said Palmerin, the heavens give me success to do you
service, for I know no Prince living this day, for whom I would more gladly
adventure my life. I thank you good Sir, quoth the King, but the grief I have
sustained for the sorrow of my Son Florendos, brought me into such a long and
lingering extreamitie, as well may I bless the time, that by your good
success am so happily delivered: let me therefore entertain you as my
second Son, and persuade your self of such a Father, who will love you as if
you were his own natural Child, in that I and the greater part of my Kingdom
shall be at your disposition. Worthy Sir, said Palmerin, woorthilie might I be
reputed amongst the worst in the world, refusing the honor you please to offer
me, especially in such an extraordinary kind of favor: for the rest,
(being thus accepted in your princely grace) I have sufficient being
furnished with Horse and Armor to do me service. With these words the King
embraced him, and mere joy caused the tears to trickle down his cheeks: so
that Palmerin stayed longer with him then he made account to do, till the Duke
of Durace sent for him, as you shall read in the discourse following.

CHA. XIX.
How Duke Astor of Durace sent to the King of Macedon, desiring him to send
him the Knight, that had slain the Serpent on the Mountain Artifaeria, to aid
him against the County Passaco of Mecaena, who laid straight siedge to one of
his Cities.

SO far was spread the fame of this victory, which Palmerin in had against
the Serpent on ye Mountain Artifaeria, as at length the Dake Astor of Durance
heard thereof, against whom the Countle Passaco of Mecaena warge^ battle, and
seeing himself unable to resist his enemic, minded to send to the King of
Macedon, requiring aid of teh Knight that slew the Serpent at the enchaunted
Fountain: and heereuppon he dispatched one of his Gentlemen toward the King,
who made good haste till he came thither, when doing his reverence, and
delivering his Letters of credit to the King, he said. Dread^ Lord, the Duke
of Durace my Master, most humbly salutes your Majesty by me. The King having
read the Letters, and noting the contents: bad the Messenger discharge the rest
of his message. It is so Sir, said the Gentleman, that of long time my Lord and
master has been assaulted by the County Passaco, and in such cruel sort
has warred on him, as he has well near destroyed his whole Country, for he
has taken the City of Mizzara, and against all right does challenge it for
his own. After this, the Duke my Master raising his siedge to bid him
battle, Fortune has been so contrary to my Lord, as his noble Sons are
slain, and ye greater part of his worthyest Gentlemen. Yet not contented with
all this, the County pursues him s^il to his very City of Durace, which he
has begirt with siedge so strongly, as he is doubtful of a further danger.
But within these eight days he understood that your highness has here a
Knight, that slew the Serpent on ye enchaunted Mountain, in whose valor my
Lord reposeth such confidence, as would you grant him license to come
thither, my Lord will accompany him with so many hardy men at Arms, as he
doubts not to enforce the County to leave his Country, and for that the matter
requires expedition, he desires your assistaunce with all possible speed. I
am sorry, quoth the King, that the Duke my Nephew is in such extremity, and I
promise you I did not think as yet to part with Palmerin: but seeing the
necessity is so urgent, I will entreat him to go with you, and so many
approved Knights with him, as the County shall perceive, I am not well pleased
with his hard dealing toward my Nephew. Now was Palmerin present when the
Gentleman delivered his message, which pleased him not a little, because he
would gladly leave the King to follow his fortune, and was thus held from his
desire by importunate requests: but see^g the King had granted to send him
to the Duke, he fell on his knees, using these speeches. In respect my good
Lord, that the Duke your Nephew has urgent occasion to employ me, and in that
his suit is only for me, without any other of your people: I beseech you
suffer me to go alone to him, for my hope is so good, in a cause of truth and
(...), that we shall be sufficient there to end the controu^^ie. Not so my
good freende Palmerin, said the King, you (...) not ha^arde your self alone,
but take such company (...) with you. My Lord, quoth Palmerin, he demaundes me
without any other company, and therefore let me persuade you to satis^fie his
request: so turning to the Gentleman, he bid him prepare to set forward, for he
was ready. Worthy Sir, answered the Messenger, with what expedition you
please, for never was Knight expected with more earnest longing for, then you
are. This sudden resolution of Palmerin displeased Florendos: wherefore
taking him aside, he said. I see then my dear Freende you will needs be
gone, albeit your company has given me greater sollace and delight, then any
thing else since I lost mine only content: yet is my regard of your honor
such, y^ I fear more to hear your misfortune, then I pity ye necessity of
my Cousin the Duke of Durace. Yet let me entreat you, that finishing your
intent with fortunate success, you make your present return to the King my
Father, whose love, and whose liberalitye you need not doubt of. My Lord
(quoth Palmerin) the King and you have so highly honored me, as wheresoever
I shall come hereafter, I rest yours in my very uttermost endeavors.

These words did Ptolome hear the Son of Frenato, who^ Florendos had kept
since ye time he was his Page, and was now old enough to receive Knighthoode:
which made him desirous to purchase honor by some means, especially if the
King would move Palmerin to take him with him, his request he persuaded
himself would not be denied, whereupon, kneeling before the King, he began
thus. If it so please your highness, that at your hands I might receive my
order of Knighthoode, before Palmerin departed from your Court: I am assured he
would not disdain me for his companion, especially if your Majesty did move
the question on my behalf. Believe me, quoth the King, so good a motion shall
not be hindered by me, and therefore to morrow will I give you your order, and
such Armor as shall well beseem a Knight, prepare you in mean time to
perform your watch. Highly contented was Ptolome at these speeches, and gave
order for his provision of needful occasions, til evening came, when he
entered the Chapel, where he spent the night in devout orisons, y^ heaven
would so further ye whole course of his time, as might stand with the
advancement of justice and his own honor. Early in the morning, the King
accompanied with his Son Florendos and many other Knights, entered the
Chapel, where finding Ptolome on his knees, he gave him his knighthoode,
wishing his fortune to prove such, as might make him famous where ever he
came: afterward he desired Palmerin, that this new Knight might bear him
company in his travails, whereto Palmerin willingly consented, accepting so
well of Ptolomes behavior, as he purposed thence forward not to forsake so
good a companion. The^ they both took their leave of the King and Florendos,
and departed with the Gentleman toward the Duke of Durace, making such good
expedition in their iourneye, as having crossed the Seas with a prosperous wind,
they landed in the Country of Durace. Now because the City was besiedged on
all sides, they were doubtful how to get in unseen of the enemy, which
the Gentlemanne their guide performed so well: as by privy signs made to the
Sintinell, at length they got in without any danger. The Duke hearing tidings
of their arrival, left his Chamber and came to welcome Palmerin, whom he
entertained with great honor, spending the most part of the night in familiar
conference with him, till having brought him to his Chamber, he left them
both to their good rest, till the next morning, when he came again to visit
them, thus saluting Palmerin.

Your arrival, Sir Knight, does arm me with such assured hope, as by the
help I shall receive at your hand, mine enemy (I trust) shall not outbraue me
as he has done hitherto: and therefore you with your worthy companion, are
both so welcome as you can desire. My Lord, (quoth Palmerin) the King that
sent me to you, has bound me to him by so many courtesies, as for the love
of him and Florendos his Son, you may assure your self of my uttermost
service, so long as I shall be able to hold my Sword. The Duke returned his
noble offer many thanks, and walking into the Hall, the Duchess there
expected the coming of Palmerin, so after many welcoms and courtly
embracings, the Tables being covered, they sat down to Dinner: all which
time, Palmerins eyes were fixed on the Duchess Daughter, who was one of the
fairest Uyrgins that ever he saw, and so busied was his thoughts in beholding
her, as he gave small regard to the Dukes words, who reported what shameful
injuries the County had offered him from time to time, and how many
skirmishes had passed between them since the beginning of the wars. Thus spent
they the Dinner time, till the Tables being withdrawn, and the Duchess with
her Daughter gone into their Chamber, the Duke questioned with Palmerin as
concerning Ptolome, who was very near allied to the Duke: and so with
discoursing of nouels of Macedon, as also the doubtful affairs of the wars,
they passed the whole day till night came, when Palmerin and Ptolome departing
to their Chamber, Palmerin could take no rest, the beauty of the Duchess
Daughter so troubled his thoughts, which made him desirous to know her name:
if this were she the three Sisters spoke of on the Mountain, and was beside
promised him in hi^ (...) visions. Palmerin was not alone thus passionate, but
on the other side the young Lady became as amorous of him: but Fortune would not
permit their love, as you shall hear more hereafter. The Cou^tie having all this while maintained very straight siedge, intending now to loose or gain al,
gave fierce assault upon the City: first calling all the cheifest Lords and
Captains of his Army, moving them with earnest and Soldier like
persuasions, to foresee all aduauntages, and to encounter their enemies with
magnanimious and resolute courage. When he had thus unboldened his men to the
fight, with sound of Drums, Trompets and Clari^ns they bad the City
battle: then might you behold how they besturred themselves with Fagots to
fill the Ditches and Trenches, set scaling Ladders to the walls, how the one
side assaulted and the other defended, that many lost their lives or departed
maimed, such havoc did Palmerin and P^olome with the Dukes power, make on
their enemies, notwithstanding they were in number far beyond them, and
marvelous well provided of all necessaries. But then Palmerin remembered a
sudden policy to prevent a mischief, for as the enemy retired to prepare
for the second assault, he called ye most part of the best Knights that the
Duke had, willing each one betake himself to his horse and follow him, leaving
the rest well appointed for defense of the walls. The Counties power sounding
the alarm, and coming roughly again upon the City: Palmerin with his
company privily issued forth at ye Posterne gate on the backs of the enemies,
and gave such a brave onsette, as they were forced to forsake their scaling
Ladders to resist this encounter. There were many strokes delivered on either
side, the County and most part of his Knights being on horseback, which made
them hold the longer play with Palmerin and his men: notwithstanding, the
County seeing such a hardy attempt given on a sudden, and doubting fresh
supply would come from the City, with fear began to retire, and with one
of his Brethren labored to resist this sharp assault, but Palmerin and his
company gave them small time to rest, laying on load with marvelous
fiercenes, whereat the County was so offended, as coming to Palmerin, he gave
him such a cruel stroke on the Helmet, as he fell therewith to the ground, yet
did he quickly recover himself again, and requited the County with so sound
a salutation, as he made him tomble from his saddle headlong to the earth, at
what time on the other side Ptolome had so canuazed the Counties Brother, as he
sealed him a quittaunce with his sword for his life. Then began the Counties
Soldiers to despair of their success, and Palmerin with his train to
follow them so closely, as they were glad to take themselves to flight,
leaving their Master overthrown in the Army, where he was trodden to death
with the trampling of the Horses. Thus did the victory remain to the Duke,
his enemies scattering in flight glad to save their lives, whom Palmerin
commanded to follow no further, least gathering themselves together again,
and espying advantage, they might so endanger them: for oftentimes the
vanquished too narrowly pursued, recover courage and daunte the pride of the
conquerers. For this cause he returned with his men into the City, the Duke
understanding the foil of his enemy, which made him with a great number of
worthy Citizens to go meet Palmerin and Ptolome, whom embracing he thus
entertained. Ah good Knights, by you is my estate recovered, and the death of
my Sons revenged on the murderer, therefore dispose of me and mine as you
shall think best: to which words Palmerin thus answered. My Lord, let heaven
have the honor of our victory, as for me, I have done, and will hereafter
what I can, for the great kindness of the King of Macedon your Uncle, who has
honored me in sending me to you, and other recompense I never did or will
seek. As they thus parled together, the Duke perceived by the blood on
Palmerins Armor, that he was wounded in many places, wherefore (quoth he) I
see you are sore wounded, let us make haste to our Palace, where a Lady
attending on the Duchess and well seen in chirurgeri^, shall give attendaunce
on you till you are recovered. So mounting on horseback, they rode to the
Palace, where Palmerin was lodged. Being brought into his Chamber, the
Duchess and her Daughter help to unarm him, when the Lady dressed his
wounds, persuading him there was no danger in them to be feared. Thus each one
departing, Laurana the Duchess Daughter called Vrbanillo the Dwarsse, saying
to him. My Freende, desire thy Master to make bold of any thing he wants, and
that for my sake he will despair of nothing. Madame, said y^ Dwarffe, you have
good reason to wish my Master well, as well for the good assistaunce he gave
the Duke your Father, as also in respect of his deserts, which are as
honorable as any that ever came in this Court. These words Palmerin very well
heard, having his eye continually on her: wherefore when she and all the
other were departed, he called Vrbanillo, demanding what talk he had with
the Princess, which he reported, and his answer also. Gramercies, said
Palmerin, I pray thee find the mean to let her know that I am her Servant
and Knight, ready to accomplish any thing that she shall command me. Refer
this matter to me Sir, quoth the Dwarffe, I know what Saint must patronize
these affairs, and what offering must be laid on his Altar.

CHAP. XX.
How Palmerin became highly enamoured with the beauty of the Princess
Laurana, thinking her to be the Lady that solicited him in his visions.

VRbanillo the Dwarffe, not forgetful of his Masters commandment, the next
day when Laurana came with her Mother to visit Palmerin, she took the
Dwarffe aside, demau^ding what rest his Master took the night past. Madame
(quoth he) indifferent, I thank God and you, for in you two consists the
disposition of my Masters health. As how quoth she? Thus Madame, said
Vrbanillo, the first day that he beheld you, he gave the whole possession of
himself so firmly to you, as day and night he meditates on your divine
perfections, doubting in requital of his service to my Lord your Father, and
his Country, whose lives and yours he has defended, him self shall be repayed
with sudden and cruel death: for had he not come for your safety, well had
he escaped this dangerous extreamitie. Then seeing (fair Madame) that his
valor has been the mean of your deliverance, do not so degenerate from
gentle nature, as to kill him that gave you life. Why my Friend (quoth she)
what would thou have me do? To love him, sweet Madame, quoth he, as he
does you. Alas, said she, thou may assure thy self, y^ none can wysh thy
Master better then I do, being my duty and his desert: with which words
she changed color with such modest bashfulnes, as it might be perceived she
could hardly master her affections. Which when y^ Dwarffe beheld, as one not
to learn his lesson in this art, persuaded himself by the very looks of
Laurana, that his Masters love would sort to happy end, and thereuppon he
followed the matter thus. I think Madame, that you wysh my Master as well as
any, but that is not enough, unless your wysh agree with his in this point:
that you grant your self his only Lady and Mistress, as he has vowed
himself your Knight and Servant. If it may please you to wysh this good to my
Master, vouchsafe this favor as a president of your lyking: that so soon as
he shall find himself better in health, you will but consent to speak with
him alone, in some such convenient and unsuspected place, as he may have
liberty to acquaint you with the secrets of his thoughts. Alas (quoth she) how
should I so do, without offering too much impeache to mine own honor?
Madame, said ye Dwarffe, the night gives favor to loves sweet enterprises.
By this time the Duchess was ready to depart, which Laurana perceiving, said
to the Dwarffe. Assure thy Master from me, that I am more his the^ mine own,
and I will do for his welfare what I may with modesty. By reason of their
departure, the Dwarffe could not make her answer, but shaddowing the matter
as he had done before, went about his Masters business, till he came and
found him alone, when he discoursed all that had past between the Princess
and him, which so well contented Palmerin as nothing could more: because he
persuaded himself, as I have said already, that this was she which the
three Sisters promised him, by whom he should receive the honor that destiny
allowed him. For this cause thence forward he was very desirous to know her
name, commanding Vrbanillo very straightly to enquire it, which he did,
informing his master that her name was Laurana: whereupon he well saw that
he was deceived, in that the Sisters had named his Mistress Polinarda, and
therefore he resolved to withdraw his affection, and to depart thence so soon
as he should be able to bear Armor. But it may be easily presumed, that when
one has so far ventured in love, that he perceiues himself beloved, as the
Dwarffe persuaded his Master: hardly can he give over so fair a beginning:
yet here it fell out contrary, as you shall well perceive, that the end was
more sudden then the beginning. Palmerin now knowing ye Princess name, began
to use other countenance to her then he was accustomed, but she good Lady
(in his excuse) conceived better opinion then she had cause: yet as it evermore
falls out in love, that when Ladies see themselves but slenderly courted by
their Friends, they grow importunate in their amorous desires, so came it to
pass with Laurana, who perceiving herself not solicited by Palmerin as she
was wont, one night somewhat late she called ye Dwarffe, and thus began. How
comes it to pass (my good Friend) that thy Master is not of so pleasant
disposition, as heretofore he has been? it may be thou have not let him
understand my last salutation, or else fear with-holdes him from following his
determination: I pray thee do the message of my earnest good will to him, and
tell him that I long to impart our affections together, to the full resolution
of our desired thoughts, which I have found the way unsuspected to accomplish,
so please him to come to my Chamber to morrow at night, where I shall not fail
to expect his presence. When the Dwarffe heard Laurana use these words,
thinking his Master was still in his former cogitations, thus answered. Trust
me fair Madame, within these few days my Master is become so mellanchollie,
as I have many times feared his death, and I am sure he has no other cause
to torment him so, but only the fury of the extreme love he bears you: yet
seeing you have promised him such gracious favor, let me alone to change this
unpleasant humor. Fail not then quoth she, to let him know my mind. I go
presently, said the Dwarffe, to acquaint him with these long desired tidings.
So taking his leave, he went to his Masters Chamber, whom he found fast a
sleep, when not daring to awake him, let stay his message till the next
morning, and so laid him down to rest: at what time sleep had thoroughly
possessed him, he began to cry and complain so loud, as his Master hearing
him arose, and demanded of him the cause of his lament. Alas my Lord (quoth
he) never in all my life was I so affrighted, me thought that one of the
fairest Ladies that ever eye looked on, held a naked sword against my throat,
saying. Uile and villainous creature as thou art, dare thou presume so much
to offend me, as to make thy Lord and Master amorous of Lady Laurana, and to
forsake me? justly do thou deserve to dye on this weapon for thy
paillardise: and if hereafter thou carry any message to prejudice my right,
assure thy self that I will chastise thee in such sort, as all deformed
villains shall receive example by thee. I tell thee Traitor, Palmerin his
fortunes climbes higher then the name of Laurana, and where he is more looued
for the royalty of his lineage, then for his base and Pastoral education. With
which words she gave me such a stroke on the head with her sword, as I
(fearful of my life) cried so loud as you say you heard me. This motion
made Palmerin easily perceive, that Polinarda had made this threatening to the
Dwarffe for Laurana: which concealing to himself, he said in laughter. I think
thou did forget to drink when thou (...) to bed, and so thy heart being
dry conceived this fond vision: I pray thee sleep, and trouble me no more
with such idle passions. The Dwarffe betook him to rest, but Palmerins
thoughts all night were hammering on this Dream, so that he resolved to
depart thence the next morning, and seek else where his adventures, seeing he
was admonished by so many aduertisements. So at the day rising he called the
Dwarffe, and commanded him to prepare his Armor, for he intended to take his
leave of the Duke. Ptolome hearing this, and having noted beside all that the
Dwarffe told his Master in the night. Dissembling the matter, as was his
manner, he came and bad Palmerin good morrow, who answered Ptolome in this
manner. My dear Friend, I have concealed none of mine affairs from thee,
since the time we received our knighthoode, and parted together from the
Court of Macedon: now therefore shall I impart to thee what I have determined.

It is so, that urgent occasions constraines me presently to leave this
Countreie, and henceforth to frame my course which way Fortune will direct me,
by which occasion I see we must be enforced to leave each other:
notwithstanding, let me entreat that our absence may no way impair our
freendshippe, not doubting but in good time we shall meet together again. In
mean space, if you see the King or Prince Florendos, forgette not the humble
duty of their vowed Servant I beseech ye, who dedicates his life and honor
in all attempts to their gracious favors. By God, said Ptolome, let who will
do the message for me, for neither death nor danger shall separate me from
you: but I will bear you company while life and soul hold together. If you be
so resolute, said Palmerin, shame were it for me so to refuse you. Set forward
then when you please (quoth Ptolome) for we neither must nor will depart, that's
flat. So being both armed they came to the Duke, who meruailed much to see
them so prepared, and therefore demanded whether they went. My good Lord,
answered Palmerin, in that your Country is now quieted, we must entreat you
for our departure, because weighty affairs in other places do so command
us. How happens it fair Friends, said the Duke, that you will so soon leave
me? My Lord (quoth Palmerin) we are so enforced, and therefore we humbly
entreat you, not to be offended. If your affairs be such said the Duke,
loathe am I to hinder you, command of me and mine what you please, for all
remains at your disposition. Most humble thanks did Palmerin and Ptolome
return ye Duke, and ere they went to horseback, they came to take their leave
of the Duchess and Laurana, who was well nie dead, seeing her hope deceived,
for she expected the night coming, when she and Palmerin should confer
together of their love: but seeing him now departing, she was out of all hope
to see him again, the extreme grief whereof so overcame her, as giving a
great shrike she fell in a swoune. The Ladies and Gentlewomen in great
amazement came about her, ignorant of her evil but only Palmerin and his
Dwarffe, which he likewise would not reveal to any, for the reason you
heard discoursed before: and rather would she entertain her own death, then
make known a secret of such importance: wherefore having somewhat recovered
herself, and not able to conceal her anguish, with an extreme sigh she thus
breathed forth her sorrow. Ah Palmerin, easily have thou kindled the fire,
which with great shame thou leauest consuming unquenched. Who would have
thought such treason could harbor, where fair conditions and honorable
valor shined so brightlie? Well may I cond^mne al men of disloyalty, seeing
thou have failed resembling so excellent. Believe me Knight, thou have done
me great wrong, and thy self much more, for which where ever thou c^mmest, be
thou named the most ungrateful Knight that ever drew Sword, seeking her death
so cruelly, who loves thee deerer then her own life. These complaints made the
sorrowful Laurana before the Duchess, not sparing to discharge the whole
burden of her oppressed heart, her Mother not daring to gainesay her, but
expected when the should depart this life: wherefore persuading her from
despair, she sweetly promised to work so with Palmerin, as he should stay
and enjoy her to his wife. But all was in vain, for he mounted on horseback,
and accompanied with Ptolome and Vibanillo, left the City of Durace, no one
knowing which way they were ridden: Palmerin converted into such heaviness, as
nothing could torment him more, so earnest was his desire to see her, whom
fate and Fortune had appointed for him.

CHAP. XXI.
How Palmerin and Ptolome met with a Damsel, who made great moan for a
Casket which two Knights had forcibly taken from her, and what happened to them.

Being thus departed from Durace, these Knights rode along, thinking in what
heaviness they had left the Dukes Daughter: when Palmerin accusing himself as
guilty of this mischaunce, within himself thus sadly discoursed. Unhappy
man, that ever thou cammest into this Country, where thou have left so hard an
opinion of thy self, as while thou live thou shall be the worse esteemed:
and well worthy, for justly may thou be accused of disloyalty, in making
means to obtain the love of the fair Princess Laurana, and having conquered
where thou desiredst, to make so light account of her as thou haste done. Had
death prevented thee before, she had been satis-fied, thine honor defended,
and thy unknown Polinarda no way iniuried: which speeches made the tears to
trickle down his cheeks, when Ptolome looking aside espied him, and gessing
the cause of his sadness, said. Uerily I never thought to see such womannishe
behavior in you, nor that any grief or misfortune should have tears so
soon at commandment. How will you hereafter withstand so many
casualties, hard adventures, and dangerous stratagems, with many and sundry
narrow brunts that you must pass through, when I see you unable to overcome
your own self: being supprized by her tears, to whom you have done honor
to affoorde a good countenance? If you had received of her the sweetes of
love, reason might then plead in your excuse: but having no way misprised her
honor, or offered offense to modest chastity, what injury may she say that
you have done her? Forget I pray you these unseemly fashions, hardly
agreeing with a Knight of such report as you are, let us find some thing else
to talk on, and tell me which way you intend to journey. By my life, (quod
Palmerin) I know not: but let us take which way Fortune shall please to
conduct us. I think it best then, said Ptolome, that we shape our course
toward Rome, where we shall find people of all Nations, by whom we may be
instructed as concerning adventures, worthy our travail, and guyding to
honor. On then cheerly, quoth Palmerin, and so they travailed eight days
together, not meeting with any adventure worthy to be spoken off: till at
length they met a Damsel heavily mourning, who said. Alas, what will she
say whose trust was only in me, having lost the thing wherein consisted her
hope, to recover y^ highest of her noble desires? Palmerin hearing these
words, and moved with compassion, rode to her, and demanded the cause of her
mourning. Sir Knight (quoth she) I was sent by a Lady with a Caskette, wherein
was one of the best Swords in the whole world, which is so enchaunted, as
none can draw it out of the skabbard, but he that is esteemed the worthiest
Knight living: but before any be admitted to make proffe of this adventure, he
must grant a request that I am to ask him. With this Sword have I travailed
many strange Countries, as France, Italy, Sclauonye and diuer^ other, where
many have tried, but no one yet could finish the adventure: whereupon I was
this day travailing toward the Emperors Court of Greece, and hereby I met
with two Knights, who having heard the cause of my long travail, made proof
of their fortune one after another, and both failed, whereat they were so
offended, as they took the Casket from me perforce, and are gone there with I
know not whither, which does so grieve me, in respect of her loss toward
whom I am, as death would be more welcome to me then life. Fair Uirgin,
said Palmerin, do not discomfort your self, but she we me which way they
rode that dealt with you so discourteouslie. Gentle Knight (quoth she) if your
hap be to restore my loss again, you do the most gracious act, that ever
Knight did for a distressed Damsel. These Traitors to honor (whereof the one
is in Crunson Armor, bearing in his Sheelde three Lions heads) took this
way by the wood, and as yet I am sure they can not be far hence. Then
Palmerin clasped his Helmet, and taking his Sword and Lance, desired Ptolome
to guard the Damsel and follow him, galloping that way which she had showed
him: and by the time he had rid two miles, he espied them he looked for,
talking with an other Knight they had met, and they three together were
assaying to open the Casket, to whom Palmerin cried. Treacherous villains, that
can not meet with Ladies on the way, but must offer them injury, deliver the
Casket, or ye die. One of the two turned presently, and seeing him that thus
threatened them to be alone, not moving a ^ote began to laughe, and
scornefullie returned this answer. Softly, softly good Sir, God pardon
their souls whom you kill so easily: but for all his words, Palmerin ran
against them, and they at him, so that he received a small wound on his
shoulder, in recompense whereof, he gave one of them a pasport into another
world, and laid so lustilie on the second, as he set him quickly beside his
saddle. When the third saw his companions at so hard a reckoning, he said to
himself. By my faith he spoke not unadvisedly, that said: A safe escape is
better then a bad tarrying. And allowing this sentence for current in his own
opinion, gave the spurs to his Horse, making have away with the Casket so fast
as he could: but Palmerin being somewhat better mounted, got such advantage
of this runaway, as with his sword he parted his right arm from his body,
whereupon he fell to the ground and the Casket with him. Then Palmerin
alighted and took it up, and leaving ye Knight there, returned which way he
came, when opening the Casket, he took great pleasure in behelding the Sword,
which was marvelous costly: yet would he not prove to draw it forth,
because he knew not her pleasure to whom it appertained. At length he espied
Ptolome coming, who came apace (if need had been) to assist him: but when he
knew how he had overcome y^ Knights, and recovered the thing was so desired,
no man could be better contented, especially the Damsel, who leaping from
her Palfray, came and kissed Palmerins feet, saying. And may all happiness
repay this gentle deed, fair Knight, for but by you, my death had been best
welcome to me. D^mosell (quoth he) see here the Casket according as I sound
it, I know not whither they that took it from you have abused it or no. No,
no, said she, they could no way wrong it, the Sword being here that belongs
to the best Knight. I pray you (quoth Ptolome) let me make trial of my
strength, albeit I know my self no such man as you speak of: so taking the
Casket, offered to begin, when the Damsel desired him to forbear, for (quoth
she) you must first grant me one request. What ere it be, said Ptolome, I
grant it: and so set all his might to his intent, but could not accomplish
it, wherefore quoth he to the Damosel. Believe me Lady, he that wrought this
enchauntment, did more by his art, then I can by my cunning, and in my opinion
you may travail long enough, before you find him that shall quit your
expectation. The more will be my trouble quoth the Damsel, being tied by
necessitye to such a Knights fortune. When Palmerin saw that his companion had
failed, he doubted whether he should take it in hand or no: yet seeing he
could speed no worse then other had done, he said to the Damsel, will you
any thing with me before I adventure my self, for my Freende shall not be mal
content for a fellow. Gentle Knight, quoth she, I will nothing, but that you
make me the like promise your friend did. Of that doubt you not said Palmerin:
so laying hand valiantly on the Sword, without any great labor he drew it
forth, being the richest and goodliest Sword that ever was seen. Ah good
Knight, said the Damsel, happy be the day of thy nativity, for thou have
delivered me from incredible labor. The Sword is yours, but by your promise
you stand bound to go with me where I shall conduct you, to do that shall
please my Lady to command you. Lead the way Damsel quoth Palmerin, and be
sure we will not leave thy company. So mounted ye Damsel on her Palfray, and
took the way toward Rome, where she that delivered her the Casket remained
in devotion, and with such speed they dispatched their travail, as they
arrived at the Gate of a strong Castle, where the Damsel alighted, desiring
Palmerin and Ptolome to expect her return awhile. The Gate being opened, she
went straight to her Mistress and her Sister, who being glad of her
coming, demanded if she had found the man she went to seek. Ladies (quod
she) I have, and hither he is come with me, but this I da^e assure you before
hand, that a more goodly and valiant Gentleman lives not this day: for in my
presence he vanquished three Knights, who perforce took the Casket from me,
and for the Sword, he drew it forth so easily, as it had been that he
wears by his side. Go, said the Lady and cause him come near, and come
Sister let us go to the Gate to entertain him. Then was the Draw bridge let
down, when Palmerin and Ptolome riding to the Gate, met there the Ladies, whom
they saluted with great reverence, and each Lady leading a Knight in by the
hand, conducted them to their Chambers to be unarmed.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Lady of the Castle declared to Palmerin, what moved the Giant
Darmaco to take from her her Daughter and her goods, whereupon Palmerin
promised to enter Combat with the Giant: as much for pity, as to acquit his
promise made to the Damsel, that brought the Casket, and the enchaunted Sword.

OUr two Knights being thus entered the Castle and unarmed, the Lady brought
each of them a rich Mantle of Crimson Damask, imbroydered with Gold and
pearl, to cover them, and so came with them into the Hall to meat, where
wanted no choice of dainty delicates: so after y^ Tables were withdrawn, and
many other speeches passed between them, the Lady thus began to Palmerin.

Sir Knight, as now I am a poor and disinherited Gentlewoman, that sometime
was Wife to one of ye welthiest Knights in this Country, with whom I long
time remained not having any Child, till at length it pleased God to send me
a Daughter, so fair a creature as ever nature framed, who at my Husbands death
was left with me but five years aged. My Lord and Husband learned in the
art Magic, and for his skill renowned in this Country, the day before his
death he called me to him, using these speeches. Dear Wife, let if suffice
thee that I know what shall happen to thee after my death, and that one shall
take perforce from thee, not only such goods as I leave thee, but also thy
fair Daughter, to help which extremity, I have somewhat provided for thee
before my departure.

Thou shall find in my Cabinett a Sword, which I my self have enclosed in a
Casket, and have set so many inchaunted spells on that Sword, as no man shall
be able to draw it out of the scabbard, unless he be the best approved Knight
in the world, and he it is that must give thee succor, and help to recover
again thy loss. Too true fell out my Husbands speeches, for soon after
Darmaco the Giant came hither, and as his custom was to abuse whom he
listed, so took he from me the best of my Castelles, and in despite of me
took my Daughter from me, saying that he would give her to one of his Sons
in marriage, a villain far more vicious then the Father, and so deformed, as
nature stands ashamed at her own workmanship. Now in respect I would not
consent to this unseemly marriage, such goods as was left me, he violently
took from me, this Sword only excepted which you have worthily conquered,
and that had gone with him too, but that my Sister hid it very secretly. Now
worthy Knight, if ever pity took place in thy gentle heart, revenge me on
the villain, ye has thus robde me of my goods and my Daughter, whose youth
(being as yet but ten years old) is the cause that the Giant has not
consumated the marriage. And if it shall like you to do thus much for me, you
shall not only fulfill your promise to the Damsel that brought you hither,
but you shall do a deed acceptaple to God, profitable to me, comfortable to
my poor Child, and honorable for ever unto your own self. Madame (answered
Palmerin) it is no marvel if Darmaco have done you this wrong, in y^ Giants
do take a habit in treacherous dealinges: wherefore did not my promise bind me
to your Damosel, I would not pass so lightly out of this Country, ere I
compelled him somewhat to recompense this injury, and this shall I (God
willing) do to morrow, so please you I may be conducted to him. Ah gentle
Knight, said the Lady, what I am not able, Heaven will no doubt repay thee:
And because it was now somewhat late, after they had spent a little more time
together in conference, these Ladies accompanied him and Ptolome into their
Chamber, and taking their leave, committed the Knights to their good rest for
that night, which they passed with quiet repose, and on the next morning after
they were armed, they demanded their guide of y^ Lady, that should direct
them the way toward the Giant. Then she called the Damsel that carried the
Casket, and two Knights of her own, whom she commanded to go with Palmerin:
so committing him to God and good success, they took their way straight to
the Castle of Darmaco, where they arrived in the evening, when they espied a
Squire on the walls, who was appointed there to keep the watch, to whom
Palmerin said. My Freende, I pray thee if Darmaco be within, cause him to
come forth, for I would speak with him. And what would you with him
answered the Squire? I would entreat him, said Palmerin, to use himself
more courteously then he has done heretofore, and that he would do
right to a good Lady whom he has disinherited, namely to send her her goods
and her Daughter again: and if my entreaty may not prevail with him, bid
him if he dare come to the Combatt, wherein I will make him confess under my
Sword, that his actions have been villainous, traitorous, and disloyal. In
good sooth Sir, answered the Squire in derision, you may seem to have reason,
and they that sent you likewise, but your journey I fear me will not amount to
so much: therefore if you will be ruled by me get you going, unless you are
willing to leave your head for a sign to our Gates. My head, said Palmerin,
my Sword holds too good an edge, and mine arm too sound strength, to leave a
Jewel of such price so easily: go therefore when I bid thee thou were best,
otherwise assure thy self if I vanquish thy Master, that thou with the rest
shall surely dye the death. Too soon, said the Squire, shall I do your
message, and if any harm happen to you, say my good Freende you were
councelled before: but as for my Master Darmaco, he has not been within for
this hour and more, yet is his Son Mordano here, who can bid you welcome as
well as his Father. So departed the Squire, and in short time Mordano the
Giants Son came upon the walls, demanding of Palmerin what he sought for? I
told thy Squire, answered Palmerin: but tell me, art thou y^ Son of the
Giant, that delightest in offering villainie to Ladies? and how then, said
Mordano, what if I am? I pray thee, said Palmerin, bid thy Father that without
any further quarrel he deliver the Lady that he detaines violent lie,
otherwise I shall cause him to do it whether he will or no. I shall make thee
answer said Mordano, if thou dare ^arrie but till I arm my self: and so
presently departing, in short time he came forth very well appointed, with a
marvelous strong Lance in his hand, and mounted on a very lusty Courser, so
prauncing toward Palmerin, he said. Wretch, art thou come to seek thine
own death? I pity thee: yet if thou will yield thy self to my mercy, I
will spare thy life, and suffer thee to waste thy time in one of the ba^e
Dungions in this Castle. From lodging there, God sheelde me, quoth Palmerin,
and being moved with these rough words of his enemy, he encountered Mordano
with such courage, as their Lances being broken, both of them were
dismounted, Palmerin not hurt, but Mordano was wounded on the right side, the
trunchion of Palmerins Lance being left in his body. Notwithstanding he
receuered himself quickly, and came furiously toward Palmerin, and gave
him such a cruel stroke on the head, as the blood began to trickle down
his face: which when he perceived, and how it stood him in hand now to be
venturous, he requited Mordano with so sound a greeting, as he parted one of
his arms quite from his body, and astomed him likewise that he fell to the
ground, but recovering himself, he ran toward the Castle and Palmerin after
him. The Servant of the Castle, seeing their Lords Son in such danger,
with Iauelinges and other weapons came against Palmerin, whom they had
murdered, if Ptolome and the two Knights that were sent with him, had not
speedily come from their close ambush to defend him, and so manfully did
they behave themselves, as they drove them into y^ base Court, where Mordano
fell dead at Ptolomes feet, who deferring no time, presently with his Sword
took his head from his shoulders. The servants this seeing, dispersed
themselves and ran into corners, so that Palmerin and his company had no body
left to resist them, some lying there wounded to the death, and other escaping
forth at a back Gate, which they made fast after the^ least they should be
followed. When Palmerin saw all things fall out so effectually, he called
for the Damsel and the Knights that came with him, who being not a little
glad of this great good fortune, desired first to seek for Esmerinda their
Ladies Daughter, for they were well assured that she was in the Castle.
Search in every place, quoth he, and because the night drew on, the Gates
were made fast, and there they determined to lodge for y^ night. In mean
while, the Damsel went about the Castle, and near the Giants Chamber she
found Esmerinda, who immediately knowing her, came running and caught her
lovingly about the neck: for before, (not knowing that her company had
conquered the Castle) she and three other W^menne that kept her company, were
greatly feared, but now the Damsel gave her perfect assurance, that all
was done for her delivery, and by the only Knight for prowess in the
world, whom her Lady Mother had thus sent thither. As they continued this
talk, Palmerin came to them, before whom the young Gentlewoman Esmerinda
humbled herself on her knees: but he taking her up, embraced her with these
speeches. Pretty soul, your Lady mother has great desire to see you, will
not you go with us to her? Sir Knight, quod she, I never in my life desired
any thing more, then to see my Mother: but I greatly doubt that the false
Darmaco will meet us by the way, for he went this morning to the funeral of
one of his Sisters, and it will be to morrow before his return, when if he
hap to meet us, we are but dead. Let me deal for that good Lady, said
Palmerin: I have learned already to kill the Son, I doubt not but this small
practice, will make me do as much to the Father. While Palmerin and Ptolome
thus devised with Esmerinda, the Damsel and Vtbanillo had provided Supper,
which being ended they went to rest, expecting the morning, when they prepared
ye Women to horseback, and having taken what them best liked out of the
Castle, they set fire on the rest, and so took their way toward the
sorrowful Widdowe: who expecting good tidings, continued in earnest and
devout orisons, that ye good Knight might overcome her blood-thirstie enemy,
and return with victory and her Daughter Esmerinda.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Palmerin returning with his company to the Ladies Castle, happened to
meet with the Giant Darmaco, who lost his life in Combat with Palmerin.

THus rode Palmerin and his company very joyful of their good fortune,
especially Esmerinda, above all the rest: but this pleasant humor lasted not
long, for she had espied Darmaco coming forth of a wood, having with him
his wife and ten well appointed Knights, whereat the young Lady was so
affrighted, as she cried out, saying: O God, now are we all cast away. At which
words the other women began to discourage themselves, and seeing the Giant so
near, knew not whether they were best to go forward or back again:
whereupon Palmerin said to Ptolome. I pray thee good Freende, while I fight
with Darmaco, do you and these two Knights deal with the rest: in the mean
while, I think it good that my Dwarffe Vrbanillo, convey these Ladies into the
thickest of the wood. He had no sooner thus said, but he beheld the Giant
make apace toward them, who not thinking what had happened, yet seeing fair
Esmerinda so delivered: in wonderful rage, not taking either Sword or Sheelde
with him, he praunced toward Palmerin, who entertained him so soundly on the
head with his Fauchion, as the Giant tombled forth of his Saddle, hanging in
his styrrop by the left foot, and was no way able to recover himself.

The Horse feeling his Master from his back, and his burden to weighe over
heavy on his side, the Giants foot likewise tickling him in the flancke,
began to course about, and to beat his Master with his feet every way he
could reach him, when Palmerin on the other side laid him on such strokes, as
at length he sent his soul to the devils, the patrons of his villainous life.
Now thought Palmerin he had no more to do, but go help his companions
against the other Knights, wherein he was deceived, for the Giantesse to
revenge her Husbands death, gave so cruel a stroke at Palmerin with her
Husbands Mace, as had he not shrunk aside she had slain him, and so continued
more like a Lion then a Woman, redoubling stroke after stroke: which forced
Palmerin for safegarde of himself, seeing no means or persuasions could
prevail with her, to send her packing after her Husband. Ptolome and his
Knights had dealt so well with the rest, as on the coming of Palmerin they had
dispatched them all, if fresh supply had not come to the^, as you shall hear
more anon.

The Lady of the Castle mother to Esmerinda, so soon as Palmerin departed
thence toward the Giant, sent to seek a young Gentleman named Crispino, to
whom she promised her Daughter in marriage, if so be she could recover her
again out of the Giants power: who staying not long after this message, made
have to the Castle, the Lady entertaining him in this manner. Not long since,
my good Freende, there departed hence a Knight, who intendes to revenge my
wrongs on the Giant Darmaco, and because I know not to what end this
enterprise will sort: I pray you Arm you, and take ten of your hardiest men
with you, to help the good Knight if he should be distressed. Crispino soon
consented to this motion, and in his way toward the Castle, it was his
chance to meet with the Dwarffe and the Ladies that fled into the wood. It
is not to demand how pleasing this sight was to him, beholding Esmerinda whom
he loved as himself: of whom he demanded where their company was, and she
reported in what state they left them at time of their flight. Whereupon he
commanded five of his men to guide ye Ladies, to a Kinsmans house of his that
was near at hand, and he with the rest of his train galloped to the place,
where Palmerin Ptolome, and the Ladies two Knights encountered, with the fresh
supply that came to Darmacos men. He was no sooner arrived, but he beheld
Palmerin and Ptolome wounded very sore, and one of the Ladies Knights (...)
among the rest, which moved him and his men to bestir themselves: so that
(short tale to make) the Giants men were all vanquished in the end, and then
Crispino declared to Palmerin, how he had sent Esmerinda and the Ladies to his
Cozins house not far of, whether if it pleased him to walk, he should
receive what courtesy could be performed on so sudden warning, in respect of
the happy fortune y^ whole Country should find by him, being thus delivered
of Darmaco and his Son, but above all, for the safetye of his best beloved
Esmerinda. Thus rode they together with Crispino, whose Cousin made them very
gracious welcome, rejoicing greatly at this happy victory, and afterward they
set forward to the good Widdowe, Crispino by the way reporting to Palmerin his
love to Esmerinda, and how her Mother had promised him her in marriage,
desiring him to assist the matter that it might be finished: which he promised
to do, and so at length they came to the Castle, where when the Lady saw
her Daughter, and heard how her cheifest enemies were slain, it is hard to
express her exceeding joy, which her cheerful countenance somewhat made
manifest, welcomming Palmerin with these words. Ah gen^le Knight, how might I
be able while I live to recompense this inestimable favor? the comfort of mine
age, and my oppressed soul have you brought me, may never harms befall so good
a Knight. Lady, quoth he, give the praise to God, as for me, judge if I have
been as good as my promise to your Damsel or no: and if there be any thing
else to do, Lady I am ready now to perform it. You have done so much for me,
said she, as nothing remains more to be desired, unless of your bounty you
will cause me to receive what the Giant took from me by force: for seeing he
is dead, they that with-helde it from me, will now willingly, restore it
again. That shall be likewise accomplished, quoth Palmerin: but because he and
Ptolome were sore wounded as you heard, they stayed to be (...) and sent
Crispino with his Cousin and a good sufficient train, to demand the Ladies
Castle and her goods. They that held it of the Giant, understanding his
death, made present deliverance thereof, and committed themselves to the
Ladies mercy: whether she sent her Daughter, so soon as Palmerin and Ptolome
were healed, to whom the Subjects vowed their faith and allegeaunce, and with
great Triumphs honored the marriage of Crispino and Esmerinda. On the morrow,
as the Knights sat at meat, there entered the Hall a Squire, who said to
Palmerin, that a Damosel stayed without to speak with him. Let her come in,
quoth he, and say her pleasure. The Squire bringing her into the Hall, she
fell on her knees before Palmerin, saying. Sir Knight, do you not know me?
No in good sooth, answered Palmerin. Believe me (quoth the Damsel) then
has my service been evil employed which s^metime I did you, and whereof I am
sure you have heard good account. Then Palmerin knew her (she bringing the
Sheelde and the Helmet when Florendos knighted him) whereupon he rose from the
Table, and embracing her, said. Fair Damsel and my freende, I pray you
pardon me, for the length of time since I first saw you, did quite exempt you
from my remembrance: pleases it you to command me any service? Sir Knight,
said the Damsel, when I presented you the Helmet and Sheelde, wherewith you
took your order of Knighthoode, you promised me (if you remember) that you
would use it with right good will, in any affairs the Knight had that sent it
you, and when he should require such performaunce: now is the time to confirm
your deed with your word, for he has sent me to you with humble entreaty,
that without any stay, you go where I shall conduct you, otherwise you are
the only cause of his death. God sheelde me from such misfortune said
Palmerin, rather would I go with you presently from the Table. So do I pray
you, (quoth she) for I have have. Then he called for his Armor, and the table
withdrawn, he went into his Chamber to arm himself, and so did Ptolome also:
returning, they took their leave of the Ladies and mounted on horseback, the
whole company being so sorry for their departure, as Esmerinda came to the
Damsel, saying. I promise you Damsel, you have done us wrong in mine
opinion, to hinder us of the presence of so good a Knight. Lady, answered the
Damsel, think you he was borne for you only? content your self with the
good you have received by him, and suffer such as have need of his prowess, to
receive his assistaunce as you have done. And good reason said Esmerinda, if
it be to so good an end, that no resistaunce be offered when help is
required. So departed the two Knights with the Damsel which way she guided
them, and very desirous was Palmerin to be with the Knight that sent to seek
him: because he would gladly know, of whence he was that wyshed him so well,
as his message declared by the Damsel the same day he was Knighted.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Palmerin and Ptolome arrived at the Court of the King of Bohemia, where
they entered Combat against the County of Ormeque and his two Cozins, who
accused the Knight and his Son of treason, that sent to seek Palmerin.

Many miles had these Knights rid with the Damsel, when Palmerin at
length desired her to tell him, what he was that sent him y^ Helmet and the
Sheeld: whereto she answered, that seeing he was so desirous to know, listen,
quod she, and I shall report the whole unto you. The Knight we speak of, is
disce^ded of very royal blood, being Uncle to the King of Bohemia that
reigns at this present, as also to ye Empress of Allemaigne the very best
seen in Nigromancie this day living. This noble man is named Prince Adrian,
who never liked to live in the Court of the King his Brother, but contented
with what patrimony his Father left him, at length married with a very
beautiful Lady, of whom in time he begat a Son named Dyardo, which Son
his Brother the King of Bohemia, nourished up in his Court with his own
Son. So mutually in love agreed these two young Princes, as after the death of
the aged King, the young Dyardo should ioyn the rule with his Cousin the King:
who took to Wife ye Daughter to the Duke of Lorayne, bringing her with him
into this Country, in company of her Sister, a Princess so wise and virtuous
as ever lived. It so came to pass, that Dyardo my Lords most noble Son,
framing his thoughts to the inspirations of love, affected so highly the other
Sister, as he determined never to have any other to his Wife, if he might
compass what he intended. For her good Lady, he could not be deceived in his
amorous desires, he found her love so equal with his, yet did they shadow
their affections so discreetlie, as none could perceive them, but Domarto the
traitorous County of Ormeque, one of the best Knights in all this Country,
were he as familiar with virtue and honesty, as he is with malice and
disloyalty. This Traitor enterprised to match with the Queens Sister,
beloved as you have heard by my Lords worthy Son, and thereuppon after
many sollicitings, made known his intent unto her, whereof she made so
slender account, as she forbad him any more to trouble her. Domarto seeing my
Lord Dyardo his only hinderaunce in love, intended a mallicious villainie:
and on a sudden accused the Prince, that he intended to poison the King, so
to obtain the Crown, as descended of a nearer co^sanguinitie. And as it often
falls out in such cases, when one seeks to cross an others fortune, there
is no time flacked in following such drifts: even so this Traitor, finding the
young King alone, began his matter in this coullorable sort. My gracious Lord,
the faith and allegeaunce I owe to you highness, binds me to make your
princely cares acquainted with such news, as, God is my witness, said the
Traitor (lifting his eyes and hands to heaven) mine own death were more
welcome to me, such is the love I bear them whom it concerns, being al so
near allied to you in birth, as sorry I am they should be detected: but in
your regard my gracious Lord, the action touching you in such sort as it
does, let me die rather then spare any living creature, no not mine own
Son, had nature given me any. This needelesse exordium have I made to so
foul an occasion, albeit truth needs no coullers or eloquent figures and
therefore in brief my Lord, this is the sum. I am credibly informed, that
your highness Cousin the Prince Dyardo, and Madame Cardonia Sister to ye
Queen, have laid the platform to poison your Majesty, and this have they
attempted, by the procurement of old Adrian your Uncle, who pretends that the
Crown of Bohemia is his. I know not whether it be for want of discretion or
no: but howsoever it be my Lord, you should not leave such a villainie
unpunished. The King began greatly to marvel at these news, and knew not
well what to think: whereupon he answered the County, that he could not
believe this accusation. But the Traitor set so smoothe a countenance on the
matter, and did auerre it still with such stout protestations, as he induced
the King to believe him: so that a day or two after, the King being walking
in his Garden, seeing Dyardo and Cardonya at the Queens chamber window,
secretly conferring of their amorous affections, commanded them both to be
carried to prison. The County glad thereof, provoked the King still with such
anger against them, as immediately he would have the^ both done to death:
but that the Queen and the Lords of his Counsel, found means to quallifie
his displeasure, declaring what discredit his highness should receive, if he did
not suffer them to be openly convicted of their offenses. All this while good
Princes, were they ignorant of this detection, till at length the King
discoursed the whole matter to the^, and likewise who was their accuser: nor
did the County fail to maintain his words openly, offering to make it good
in fight, against any that durst say the contrary, and because he had two
Cozins, hardy and valiant Knights, conspirators likewise in this faction,
there could be none found that would enter the Combat against them. Which when
the noble Prince Adrian understood, very grief had well near slain him, in
respect he had no Child but this Dyardo, as also for y^ he was accused with y^
he never thought. Hereupon he went presently to the King his Nephew, and
prevailed so well with him, as he obtained the space of two Months, to bring
with him one or two that might maintain the innocence of him, his Son
Dyardo, and the Princess Cardonia, against the Traitor Domarto and his
Cozins. And this is the cause he sent me to seek you forth, in hope that you
are as much his Freende as he is yours, which you may somewhat perceive, by
the friendly presents he sent you by me to Macedon. So help me God, said
Palmerin, you have reported a most strange dyscourse, and never did I think,
that such treason could enter the thoughts of any Knight, or other inferior
person. All this is true, quoth ye Damsel, and it is appointed y^ the Prince-
Dyardo, with his aged and crazed Father, shall defend their own causes, without
seeking help of any other: but he never as yet received the order of
Knighthoode, and therefore is constrained to desire your assistaunce. And that
shall I do with all my heart, said Palmerin, would God we were there where he
expects us, for the desire I have to see him, as also to understand what he
knows of my following fortunes. Those matters are hid from me, quoth she,
yet this have I heard him say diverse times, being in talk of you, that he
accounted you the most honorable Knight in the world: and that if he ever
chanced to see you, he would advise you to go to the Emperor of Allemaignes
Court, to be the knightly Servant to the Princess Polinarda. When Palmerin
heard the name of Polinarda, he remembered that it was her name, whom he had
so many times seen in his fraunces, for which cause he asked of the Damsel,
what the Lady was of whom she spoke? My Lord quoth the, Polinarda is Daughter
to the Emperor, and Niece unto my Lord Adrian, the most beautiful Princess
that ever eye beheld. By my faith, said Palmerin, y^ more easily may I be
induced to grant her my service, and thither intend I to travail, when I have
finished your Lords business. So rode they with much more haste the^ before, till
at length they came to the City of Almedya, where the King remained, and ye
Prince Adrian expecting Palmerins coming, which when he heard, he came to
meet him, each embracing other with marvelous courtesy, and the good old
man with the tears in his eyes thus said. Ah good Knight, what may
counteruaile this your exceeding pains, to maintain the right of my Son and
me, who are falselie accused of such villainous treason, as (on the peril of
my soul) we never did imagine? Thereof am I certainly persuaded, answered
Palmerin, and therefore am I come to enter the Combat with him, that dare
affirm otherwise. Mine old age, quoth Adrian, might excuse me henceforth
from bearing Arms, but being unable to endure so vile a slander, so long as
life and soul will hold together, shall I do my deuoire: so please your
companion to make the second, as old as I am I will be the third, for the
traiterous Cou^tie has two of his Cozins y^ take part with him. And if my
fortune so fall out as I die in this trial, I shall receive my lot very
contentedlie, if mine eyes might first behold mine injury revenged. I pray
you said Palmerin, go presently to the King, to the end that his highness
may grant us the field, for my Freende and I think long till we have made
your accuser know his treachery. Adrian immediately went to the King, and on
his knees thus began. My Lord, you know that the County of Ormeque has
accused me, my Son Dyardo, and Madame Cardonya, of the crime of Lesae
Maiestatis, and in that we all are innocent, I am ready to maintain, that he
has falsely and malliciously belied us, which I my self will approve upon
him, or two more with me, against him and his Cozins, if they dare enter the
field with him in this quarrel, where we will either make known their
villainie, or receive the reward belongs to disloyal Traitors. As for the
wrong which you (my Lord) have done me, being your Uncle, and my Son Dyardo
your Cousin german: that I refer to God to recompense, and to the better
knowledge you shall receive of me hereafter, being ^owe too old to be a
Traitor, and my Son too loving to prove disloyal. The King was abashed to
hear his Uncle speak so audaciously, doubting now whether he should give
credit to what had been reported, especially against him, so near his
highness in blood, who so liberally offered to enter the Combat:
notwithstanding his white head and aged body made him unfit for such actions,
wherefore he thus answered. Good Uncle, impute not me any thing faulty in
your accusation, and that the proof shall manifest that must be made. The
County being present, was strooken in a quandarie at these words, and gladly
he would have demed this former slander, but he could find no way cleanly to
do it: wherefore seeing of force he must needs enter the Combat, he boldly
fell on his knees before ye King with these words. My Lord, what I have said
is very certain, and most true it is, that by the counsel of Prince Adrian,
here present, his Son practiced with Lady Cardonya, to poison you, that he
might be King: which to make good, there is my gadge, on the behalf of my
self and my Cozins. Thou lie Traitor in thy throat, said old Adrian, I
take thine offer: and as he would have gone on with further speeches, Palmerin
stepped before the King, saying. Worthy Lord, seeing the effect of the words
must be put in execution, which have been here spoken on both sides before
your Majesty: may it please you the Prince Dyardo and Lady Cardonya may be
sent for, to take with us their oaths as in such cases is required, and in
mean time let each one go put himself in equipage for the Combat. Good
reason said the King, and presently he commanded the Princes to be brought,
who being come, Palmerin demanded where they were that took part with the
County: whereupon he presented his Cozins, the one named Edron, proud and
arrogant, and the other Edward of self same quality. These two took their
oaths with ye County, that the Princes accused, conspired the Kings death,
in such sort as has been before declared: and old Adrian, Dyardo, and fair
Cardonya swear the contrary. But it is true, and I will not deny it (said the
Prince Dyardo) that I have and do love Lady Cardonya, as much or rather more
then mine own self, yet never did I carry any other intent, but to request her
in holy wedlock, so pleased the King and Queen to like so well thereof as we
could. But that ever I intended treason or villainie, it is most false, and
County thou lie in thy throat, and thy copartners that have sworn with
thee. It is sufficient, said Palmerin: but my Lord, quod he to the King, if we
be conquerers, the accused shall be delivered, and the accusers hanged? What
say you County, quoth the King? Good reason Sir, the like do we request if
we be victors. Will you (said Palmerin) that each shall help his fellow as
he finds it convenient? What else? said the County, that is expedient. While
this talk endured, Edron regarded so well Palmerin, that he espied the Sword
which the Damsel carried in the Casket, and brought to that Court as she did
to others, which showing the County, he said out aloude. Where did the devils
find this Knight to give him this Sword? Belike they gave him strength to
draw it out, else he might have failed as many other did: the Damsel was
unwise to bestow it in such bad sort. At which words Palmerin being angry,
returned Edron this round answer. I see (Knight) there is in thee more
bravery and foolish glory then manly action, thou blamest me before thou
know me, but ere you and I part, I Will find better reason to bestow on you,
and beat better government into your pate with this sword that likes you not.
This caused every one wishlie to behold Palmerin, the King remembering that he
had seen the Sword, which none in his Court could deserve to conquer:
whereupon he esteemed so well of Palmerin, as he commanded Edron to silence,
and all to go arm themselves, because he intended that day to see the Combat
fought.

CHAP. XXV.
How Palmerin, Adrian and Ptolome entered the Combat, against the County of
Ormeque and his Cozins, whom they honorably vanquished.

AFter the King had commanded the Knights to go arm themselves, he gave
charge to four of his auncientest Knights to see the field provided, and
there to place the Judges, according to the wonted custom in Bohemia: the
Knights being careful of the Kings command, had soon prepared all things
in readiness, wherefore the King, his Lords, Ladies and Gentlewomen, went to see
the issue of this valiant enterprise, Then was the Prince Dyardo and fair
Cardonya brought into the field, before whom was made a very great fire,
wherein they should be burned, if the County conquered. Soon after came the
six Combatants, who entered at two places appointed one against the other, the
Challengers being conducted by two of the Judges to their place, and the
Defendants by the other two where they were appointed: so the Judges being
placed, the Marshal summoned ye field, and the Heraldes bid the Champions do
their deuo^re.

Palmerin had good regard to Edron, whose words sticking on his stomach,
called now for revenge, wherefore couching his Lance, he encountered him with
such a full carrire, as his Lance passed through his body, and Edron tombled
dead to the ground. In the mean while, ye County and Prince Adrian had
vnhorssed each other, Adrian so sore wounded as he could hardly help
himself: as for Ptolome and Edward, they had astonished each other with falls
from their Horses, but they recovered themselves quickly, and with sharp
strokes began to charge each other valiantly. Greatly ashamed was the
County to be vnhorssed, and therefore to recover his honor, he came with
great fury toward his enemy: which Palmerin perceiving, stepped between
them, saying. To me County, to me, who will bid more for thy head then any
in the field. With which words he reached him such a sure stroke on ye head,
as made the fire fly forth of his eyes: notwithstanding, as a man of good
courage, he stepped aside, and thrusting his sword into Palmerins Horse throat,
enforced him quickly to take him to his feet: but all the worse for him as it
fell out afterward, for Palmerin having beaten him out of breath, he flong
away his weapon, and caught him about the middle, where they tugged so long
together, that Palmerin getting him down, and his knees on his belly, with
his sword soon took his head from his shoulders. All this while Ptolome had
good play with his enemy, and after many dangerous wounds received on
either side, at length he had the better of the day by killing his
adversary. Then he and Palmerin went to the Judges, who giving the^ sentence
of honorable victory, they took of their Helmets, and came to see in what
estate the Prince Adrian was. Evil enough (quoth he) my noble good Friends,
but the less account do I make of my life, in that mine eyes have seen due
vengeance on mine enemies. Then was he nobly borne forth of the field, the
King commanding to lodge him in his own Palace, and the Chirurgions
searching his wounds, found them mortal, which news did grieve the whole
Court ingenerall: the good old Prince yet being of some courage, was joyful
to die in so good sort, having defended his own honor and his Sons, wh^me
he sent for, and in the presence of all the standers by, sa^d, My Son, seeing
it has pleased God thus to send for me, good reason is it that his will be
fulfilled, but ere I depart, this I command thee, that (next God) thou truly
serve and love my Lord the King, bearing toward him a heart so faithful, as I
have done to the hour of my death: and conceive no essence at what has
passed against thee and me, having come to pass (as I judge) more by evil
counsel, then any settled persuasion against us. For the rest, to thy uttermost,
remember the good thou have this day received by y^ noble Knight, who is
called Palmerin: then calling Palmerin to him, he said. Sir Palmerin, death
has seized so surely on me, as I cannot let you know a number of things that
concern you very neerelie, I counsel you therefore to travail to y^
Emperors Court of Allemaigne, where you shall hear tidings of that you seek
so earnestly: with which words he delivered up his ghost. And because it
seems good ^re I pass any further, to let you know how the Prince Adrian
came by the knowledge of Palmerin, thus it is. I have heretofore reported, that
he was a notable Cabalist or Magitian, by means whereof few secrets were
concealed from him: so casting the Callender of most honorable byrthes, he
ha^pened on Palmerin, and perceiving the high fortune he was borne to,
chiefly that he should prove a most noble K^^ght, and the greatest Lord in
Europe, he was desirous to contract a marriage between him and his Niece
Polinarda, presenting her to him in his visions, as has been declared. He
thus deceasing, the King highly discontented at his Uncles hard fortune,
caused him to be buried in most sumptuous manner, making him a Tomb in form of
a Piramides, the most excellent and stately that ever was in Bohemia, and over
against it, were hanged the bodies of the County and his two Cozins, for his
Trophe. Thus every thing quieted, and the funeralles of the Prince Adrian
solemnized, Palmerin would presently depart toward Allemaigne: but Ptolomes
wounds were so dangerous, as he was constrained to stay longer then he
intended. In the mean space, the King did them all the honor could be
devised, in hope to stay them still in his Court, but it was impossible, for
Palmerin told him, he must needs go to the Emperor, about affairs of very
great importance. I know your meaning well enough, said the King, you
intend to go Combat with the enchaunted Knight: and in so doing, you shall
loose both your pains and your life, as many other have done before you.
What enchaunted Knight is it said Palmerin? on my faith my Lord, I never
heard any one talk of him but you. Then will I tell ye, (quoth the King)
since I have begun the matter. Not long since in the Country of the Emperor
mine Uncle, in the City of Y^manes dwelled a welthie Knight, who had a fair
Daughter, amorous of a Gentleman, and their love kept so secret as none knew
it but themselves. It so fell out, that her Father married her to another
Gentleman in his house, but for any good acceptance, or cheerful
countenance of the Gentlewoman, the bridegroom could have none, so highly
esteemed she her first love: and continued in opinion toward him so firm, as
she granted him enteraunce into her Chamber at an appointed time, where he
murdered her Husband, and carried the Lady with him whether he pleased. The
brute hereof was so soon spread abroad, as the mother of the murdered
Gentleman heard thereof, whereupon she made her complaint to the Emperor, who
immediately sent to summon ye other before him: but they refusing to come, and
having taken themselves to a very strong Castle, were in ye end so straightly
besieged, as the Lady with her lover, at length were taken, and having
confessed the truth of their offense, sentence was given on them y^ they
should be burned. The Father to this Knight offender so grieved heereat, as he
went to one of his Sisters, entending never to see the Emperor or his Court
again. His Sister seeing him in this extreamitie, (as no malice or bad
invention is comparable to a Woman's) devised to enchaunt one of her Sons, a
good and hardy Knight, in such sort as he should never be overcome in fight,
but with an enchauntment of greater force. Beside, she gave him a Bow, and a
great company of impoysoned arrows, wherewith he should kill the Emperor and
his Children, or any other whom himself pleased: which he had not failed to
have done, but mine Uncle Adrian understanding thereof, did take such regard
to the matter, as he could not hurt them, but many of his people, so that the
Country is wonderfully perplexed. For he is mounted on a Horse enchaunted as
himself is, the swiftest in pace y^ ever was seen, wherewith he flies into
many out places of the Empire, committing a thousand harms and cannot be
stayed, for whosoever comes to him armed, Knight or pesant, all dies the death,
and none escapes him. And that which is worst of all, it is commonly reported,
that if mine Uncle will not give him his eldest Son Trineus, and fair
Poli^arda his Daughter, to do with them what shall like his humor, he will
never depart the Country, til he have thoroughly ruinated it. By my Sword (my
Lord) said Palmerin, in all my life I never heard so strange a tale, were I
sure to die a thousand deaths, I will fight with this devil, and deliver the
Country if my strength will compass it. Alas my good Freende, said the King,
it would much displease me, that you should hazard your self in such danger,
for where such deuillish enchauntments are, the strength of man (how great
so^uer it be) does not avail: and therefore for my sake I pray you to
forbear. Let come what pleases God said Palmerin, for if I die now, I shall
be excused for ever h^ereafter. W^ll saw the King that he could not change
him, therefore he left off any further to entreat him: and too long he thought
he tarryed for Ptolomes health, so desirous was he to be with the Emperor,
hoping that his Combat with ye enchaunted Knight, would grant him means to
see and talk with fair Polinarda. Wherefore, when his companion had gotten a
little strength, they took their leave of the King and the Ladies, chiefly
of the Prince Dyardo and fair Cardonya: who after their departure had such
success in their love, as with y^ Kings consent the marriage was finished.
Now are Palmerin and Ptolome on their way to Gaunt, where the Emperor made
his continual aboade: the enchaunted Knight so persecuting him, as he durst at
no time come forth of his Castle.

CHAP. XXVI.
How Palmerin and Ptolome arrived at the City of Gaunt, where the Emperor
of Allemaigne kept his Court, and of the Combat between Palmerin and the
enchaunted Knight.

GOod expedition made these Knights in their journey, till at length they
arrived at the City of Gaunt, where the Emperor of Allemaigne then soiourned,
not knowing how to depart thence, because the enchaunted Knight watched him at
all hours: our Knights being thus come thither, lodged in the house of a
welthie Burgess, where they were entertained in very honorable manner. They
were no sooner dismounted from their Horses, but the whole City was on a
sudden uproar, and the people ran on heaps from one place to another:
which made him remember what the King of Bohemia had told him, and presently
he imagined what after followed, for his Host in great fear came running to
him, saying.

Alas Sir, we all are undone, the enchaunted Knight has gotten the Gates of
our City, and in despite of ye guarde he is entered: wonderful is the harm
that he will now do, if the Prince Trineus and fair Polynarda be not
reskewed. God defend such hard fortune, said Palmerin, rather will I fight
with him, and if I die, I shall accompany many other in unfortunate success.
With these words he took his Lance, and galloped that way where he heard
the tumult, which was at the Emperors Castle, where the enchaunted Knight was
shooting his arrows at the windows he espied open. Joyful was Palmerin to
find him in so fit a place, where his Lady Polinarda might give judgment of
his valor, which opinion did so renew his courage, as presently he marched
toward his enemy, who held in his hand a Persian Bow, with an arrow in it,
ready to shoot, having a great sort more at his back in his Quiver: he was
of unreasonable stature, yet with a countenance stern and courageous, all
which could not dismay Palmerin, but called to him in this manner. Proud Knight,
that by the aid of devils and evil spirits have committed monstrous
cruelties: it is now time that he whom thou seruest should have his pray,
which is thy soul into endless perdition. And so without staying for any
answer, he ran valiantly against him: but the enchaunted Knight taking his
advantage, shot an arrowe at him so violently, as if pierced through his
Armor to the bare flesh. Palmerin having broken his Lance, with an iron Mace
he had, he reached such a stroke to the Knight, as he brake his Bow in two
pieces, and the blow falling on the head of his Horse, made him therewithal
fall dead to the ground. The Knight having recovered himself, took a Mace
that hung at his saddle Bow, and came against Palmerin, who was now on foot
likewise: so laid they on load terribly with their Maces, that the Emperor
and his Lords and Ladies hearing the strokes, came to the windows to see the
Co^bat, little thinking that any one durst presinne to meddle with his enemy,
yet all this while the Knights never breathed, though their Sheeldes and Armor
were very much mangled, and their bodies wounded in many places. And because
Palmerin saw the sight endure so long with the Mace, he threw it down and
took him to his Sword, wherewith he did so bumbaste him about the head, as
he could scant tell where to strike again: but the Knight on a sudden
lifting up his Mace, gave Palmerin such a stroke between the head and the
shoulders, as made him reele to and fro amazedly, yet coming to himself, and
seeing the Knight faint with his great expense of blood, closed with him, and
casting his leg behind him, threw him to the ground, when setting his foot
on his breast to keep him down, with his sword he parted his head from his
body. What question were it, whether the Emperor reioysed hereat or no^ who
for his whole Empire would not he were alive again, being so well delivered
from his only enemy in the world, that could so molest him and his Country
with such cruelty. And to say sooth, the enchaunted Knight was altogether
invincible, nor could Palmerin have thus prevailed against his wonderful
enchauntments, but that the three Magical Sisters of the Mountain Artifaeria
highly favored him, as you heard before what promises they made him.

The Combat being thus ended, and the enchaunted Knight dead, the Emperor
(giving thanks to God for this victory) let open the Gates of the Castle, and
came forth himself to welcome Palmerin, who kneeling on his knee before the
Emperor, thus spoke. Mighty Prince, such renown have I heard through the
world, of your exceeding honor and bounty, as I have travailed many strange
Countries to come offer you my service, desiring your highness, (if my suit may
seem reasonable) to accept me hence forth amongst your Knightly Servant. Ah
fair Knight, answered the Emperor, it is for me to know of you, how I may
re^^^erate this unspeakable courtesy, for but by you, mine enemy had
triumphed in my spoil: so much the^ is my self, my Children and Country
bound to you, as no satis-faction is sufficient to regratiate. So taking him
by the hand, and perceiving his body wounded in many places, he conducted him
into one of the fairest Chambers in his Castle, where he was unarmed,
commanding his Chirurgions to take dilligent care of him, because in truth
they much doubted his life. Wherefore getting him into his bed, all needful
things for his health were applied to him, and no cost was spared, to save his
life that preserved the whol^ Country.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the Empress came to visit Palmerin, who kept his Chamber, because he
had received such dangerous wounds, in the Combat with the enchaunted Knight,
and of the speech he had with the fair Princess Polinarda.

THe Empress with her fair Daughter Polinarda, glad of the death of the
enchaunted Knight, came to Palmerins chamber to visit him, who hearing of
their coming, cast a night Mantle about him which the Emperor had sent him,
and came with great reverence to welcome them: so desirous was he to see her,
for whom he had travailed so many strange Regions. In this place it is
necessary that you remember, what gracious gifts the three fatal Sisters
bestowed on him, in the Mountain Artifaeria, one of them granting him this
special favor, that he should be highly esteemed of her to whom he was
destenied, so soon as she beheld him, which came t^ pass as here shall be
declared. Palmerin expecting the entrance of the Empress and her Daughter in
his Chamber, meeting them at the door, falling on his knee, did with great
humility kiss their hands: but the Empress taking him up in her arms,
saluted him with these speeches. Gentle Knight, right happy may we count our
selves by your coming hither, the Realm being more desolate then it has
been seen heretofore, and not without cause* in respect of the great injury
the Knight did us, wh^m you have slain, he having sworn the death of my
children that never offended him: but God be thanked the lot has fallen on
himself, which he determined to inflict on other, for which great grace they
stand so deeply bound to you, as to their Father that first gave them life,
which by your prowess you have happily preserved, this second gift being of
no less account then the first, worthelie may you be called their second
Father. Palmerin giving ear to ye Empress salutations, had his mind more
busied in beholding Polinarda, whose dainty regard so maistred his opinions,
as head, heart, thoughts and all were now set to work: yet covertly he
shaped this answer to the Empress. Madame, what I have done for you and
yours, is nothing in respect of my great good will: for since the time I first
had knowledge of my self, and before I received the order of knighthoode,
understanding of my Lord the Emperor, and what honorable entertainment was in
his Court, I dedicated my service to him only, and for this cause Madame came
I hither. But how is it possible Sir, said she, that you can content your
self to be one of his Knights, your deserts bein so great? Very well Madame,
quoth he, and yours too, so please your highness to affoorde me such favor.
With all my heart Sir, said she, shall I entertain you toward the Emperor,
and on mine own behalf will provide better for you then I will speak of: and
did it like you, I would accept you for a Uirgins Knight here, and none
other. Whereupon she called her Daughter Polinarda, saying. Fair Daughter,
this Knight as yet has little acquaintance in the Court, I pray you see his
entertainment may be good, because his desire is to make stay with us, and
for your own part, look that you entreat him well, with this request, that
you accept him for your servant, and he shall be your Knight. And are you
both agreed Ladies, said Palmerin? Heaven forsake me if I refuse honor of so
high account. And as they would have proceeded on, the Emperor came in and
brake off their talk, and coming to the Empress, said. Madame, I beseech
you have good regard to the health of this Knight, and let our Chirurgions not
trifle the time with him, for I persuade my self, that the enchaunted Knight
with his venomed arrows, has wounded him with great danger inwardly, and
has besides sore bruised his body with the weight of his Mace. But Palmerin
having Polinarda so near him, neither minded his wounds or what the Emperor
had spoken, his object more delighted, then his wounds grieved him, then the
Emperor taking him by the hand, said. I pray you my dear Freende to be of
good comfort, despair not for any thing I beseech you, and be advised by
them y^ have care of your health, for you shall want nothing if my Crown will
purchase it. So departed he and the Empress, with their Daughter Polinarda,
whom love had already so inueigled, that she (being yet but tender of years)
found her self so restrained of her liberty, as scant she knew how to
dissemble this sudden affection: and from that time forward she became so
sad and pensive, as one of her Ladies, the most favored and familiar with
her, named Brionella, Daughter to the Duke of Saxon, well perceived it, yet
durst she not presume to demand, whence proceeded this strange alteration,
but so circumspectly did she regard the Princess, as she well noted the
ground of her greefes. Whereupon it happened, that one time amongst other,
they two being alone together, Brionella judging that her Lady delighted to
hear speech of Palmerin, now to hitte the nayl^ on the head, she thus
began. What say you Madame, (by your favor) of the new come Knight? did you
ever see a brauer and more accomplished Gentleman: Upon my faith Madame, in mine
opinion, I think that nature has wrought all her perfections in him, and
favored him above all other Knights in manhood and Chivalry. Ah Brionella,
answered the Princess, thou art not alone of this opinion, for I ever thought
as much though I kept it in silence: would God I had as great authority over
him, as he already has gotten over me. Is the matter so with you, said
Brionella? it should seem you are in love with him then. To tell thee the
truth Brionella, quoth she, I am, and did I not doubt four other has
prevented me, I would adventure to make him mine. In good sooth Madam, said
Brionella, you two being united together in one reciprocal league of love,
well might it be reported the most honorable match, and of the two noblest
young Princes through the whole world: and seeing you have made a choice so
worthy, dismay not good Madame, but proceed in your determination. Thus
devised the two Ladies together on Palmerin, who was no less in affliction for
ye love of Polinarda, whom he had searched with so great pain and travail,
and had now found with so high good fortune. If love was so earnest with him
before in his sleeping visions, having not seen her: much more vehement was
the impression now, having her in presence. Whereupon the day following, he
called for his garments, and as he was making himself ready, the Emperor by
one of his Gentlemen sent him the good morrow, desirous to understand in what
plight he felt himself. Good Sir, answered Palmerin to the Gentleman, I
beseech you do my humble duty to the Emperor for this great courtesy, and
you may thus assure him, that (heaven be praised) I feel my self in so good
estate as ever I did. Which the Emperor hearing was highly contented, and
sent to desire his company to the Chapel, where Palmerin (never before so
thoroughly touched with the forcible assaults of love) glaunced so many
sweet looks on the Princess Polinarda, and breathed so many sighs, the
secret Ambassadors of his heart, as it was a heaven to him to be in these
passions. The Emperor and all the train returned from the Chapel, they went
to meat, and Palmerin being placed right against Polinarda, was in such fits
as he knew not what countenance to use: for his couller went and came in
such manner, as the Princess might easily judge the cause of his dolor,
whereupon she presently presumed, that she had more interrest in his thoughts
then ere she looked for. The like opinion conceived he of her, yet was no other
testimony delivered on either side, then sad countenances, the reuealers of a
tormented spirit. Thus continued these two lovers, till the Tables were
withdrawn, and then the Lords and Ladies fell to dancing, in which delight and
diverse other, the whole day was spent, till the Empress and her Ladies
departing to their Chambers, the good night on all sides was reverently given:
when Palmerin went to his lodging in such an agony, as more likely to die
then live, he threw himself on his bed, where having sighed and sorrowed
long time grievously, at length he brake forth into these terms. Ah
Palmerin, unhappy, wretched and most miserable, now art thou entered into such
a Laborinth, as impossible is it for thee to get out again with life, but what
should move thee to so high an enterprise, being no way able to equal her
that is second to none? Alas, now do I plainly see the small credit is to
be reposed in Dreams, and that the visions I saw in my Father Gerrards house,
on the Mountain Artifaeria and else where, are frivolous illusions, and of no
account: with them may I join ye promise made me by old Adrian, who boasted
to know so much of my fortunes, for love is not of such power on my behalf,
that fair Polinarda either can or will make any reckoning of me. Then
Palmerin resolve thy self suddenly to die, that this invisible and consuming
fire, which by little and little melts thee away, may be extinguished, and thy
self eased. With these words he breathed forth such an extreme sighe, as
Vrbanillo the Dwarffe (being near) heard him, who doubting least any new
mischaunce had happened, by the privy wounds she enchaunted Archer gave him,
made have to know the cause of this evil. Ah Vrbanillo, quoth Palmerin, I
find my self far worse then dead. What my Lord, said the Dwarffe, now you
ought to be of best disposition, will you deceive us with this alteration? The
Emperor never gave you bad countenance since your coming, whence then
should proceed this strange conceit? No no Vrbanillo, quoth he, it is not
the Emperor, but a Lord of greater power then his Majesty. It is Love my
Lad, the strickt commander of the stoutest minds, he has conquered me, and
well I know I shall die, if thou do not find the mean to help me. By my
faith my Lord (quoth the Dwarffe) so please you to tell me how and wherein I
may help you, let me die a thousand deaths if I do it not. Understande then
my good Vrbanillo, said Palmerin, that this strange alteration, proceeds from
the divine looks of my peerless Mistress Polinarda, whose fiery beams have
searched so narowly every corner of my thoughts, as I must die because I love
too deerlie. But could thou make known to her the least part of my
insupportable vexations, may be she would have some pitiful remorse of my
martyrdom: for well may it be judged, that a Lady accomplished with so many
virtuous perfections, must needs be stored with sweetness, favor and pity.
Not unlike my good Lord, said Vrbanillo, but do not you remember how I was
punished, when in the like case I ventured to solicit your love to Laurana,
Daughter to the Duke of Durace? by my faith my Lord, I shall not forget it
while I have a day to live, and am afraid to fall again into the like
danger. And this spoke Vrbanillo with such a grace, as Palmerin could not but
laugh, noting with what fear the deformed fellow gave it forth, whereupon he
said. Thou need not be dismayed, if she that smote thee in thy sleep be
that Polinarda, for whose love I am thus tormented, and for whom I was borne,
as many have informed me: I pray thee therefore speak to her, and dread no
coullers. It is good, said Vrbanillo, that you would have me more hardy
then you are your self: speak to her your self if you dare, for I dare not
adventure it for fear of my life. If thou do it not (quoth Palmerin) assure
thy self thou shall never henceforth serve me. Nay then (quoth the Dwarffe) I
will rather put my self in ieoperdy, to be better beaten then I was ye last
time before I will loose so good a Master. I pray thee do, said Palmerin, in
respect thou see the earnestnes of mine affections. Fear not (quoth the
Dwarffe) albeit you were a great deal more fit to break the matter then I:
but I will gadge my life to gain you the Lady, and hereupon they rested till
the next morning.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How Polinarda desired Palmerin to give her his Dwarffe, and of the speech
which she and Vrbanillo had afterward together.

EArly the next morning Palmerin arose, and having walked abroad to
contemplate his desires, returned into the Chamber of presence, where he found
Trineus the Emperors Son, conferring with the Ladies: at which very instant
the Dwarff entered, whose badde shaped body and face, made them all fall a
laughing, so that Trineus came to his Sister Polinarda, saying. Sister, did you
ever behold a more proper Page to attend on Ladies, then this gaunt Squire
that serves my Lord Palmerin? In good ^ooth Brother, quoth she, he is far
unlike his noble master, yet would I like well enough if he were mine. I
beseech you Sir Palmerin, said Trineus, bestow your Servant on my Sister
Polinarda. Madame, quoth Palmerin, were he better, he is yours and his Master
likewise, then called he Vrbanillo, who kneeling to understand his Masters
pleasure, he said: Vrbanillo, I have given you to my Lady Polinarda as her
man, will you not serve her honorably and truly above all other? Yea my
Lord, quoth he, next after you, but you will I not leave while I live,
although you would disdain my service. Good reason have thou, said the
Princess, and well am I pleased it should be so: yet during ye time of his stay
here, you shall forsake him and abide with me. For y^ Madame, quoth the
Dwarffe, I am well contented. Then look you fail not, said the Princess,
henceforth to give your attendaunce. These speeches were thus used as it were
for pastime, that she might thereby deceive the judgments of other: but her
whole intent was, to know of Vrbanillo, if his Master were affected to any
other Lady, by whose means her love might be frustrate. For as you have heard
a little before, that love had brought her under such obeysaunce, as did not
the regard of honor with-holde her, her self would first break the Ise of
her vexations, rather the^ S^aie too long and not be solicited. Many other
devises had the Ladies with Vrbanillo, who knew so well how to behave
himself, as from thence forward he grew so familiar amongst them: as he would
enter their Chambers when himself pleased, under couller of attendaunce on the
Princess Polinarda, from time to time to move his Masters messages. But at
length she prevented him in this sort, for being alone at a window in the
presence Chamber, she called the Dwarffe, and making her entrance by other
occasions, she asked him whose Son Palmerin was. God knows Madame, quoth
he, for I do not, nor himself neither: but of this I can assure you, y^
never was Knightly Chivalry better employed by any then by him, for since the
time of my knowledge, he has done such noble acts, as it is not remembered
that ^uer Knight in this age did the like. And then from point to point he
discoursed, all y^ Palmerin had done since he came to him: and can you think
then Madame, (quoth the Dwarffe) that he is not d^sceded of noble lineage? Trust
me Lady, I have my self heard by many learned Magitians and other, that their
diuinations were no less then I say. When Polinarda heard the Dwarffe thus
speak on his Masters behalf, if before his love had kindled her liking, no
marvel if heart and spirit were now enflamed: so that now she could no
longer co^ceale what she had hitherto covered, and therefore said to the
Dwarffe. I beseech thee Vrbanillo, by the faith and duty thou bear to thy
Master, t^l me one thing that I desire to know of him, which shall be
nothing but to his honor and advantage. You have so coniured me, fair
Madame, quoth the Dwarffe, as death shall not make me hide what you please to
command, if it lie in me to resolve you. Know then Vrbanillo, said the
Princess, that I love thy Master as well as my Brother Trineus, and am
desirous to know of thee, what Lady it is he esteems above all other,
because when I know her, I may love her the better for his sake: withal, that
I may commend the Ladies happiness, whose fortune is to be loved of so brave a
Gallant. Well perceived the Dwarffe, that now or never was the time to bestirre
himself, according to the promise he made his Master: wherefore he answered
the Princess in this manner. Believe me Madame, were it to any other, I would
not reveal such secrets of my Lord as you desire to know: but to you that
are his Lady and Mistress, I am content to bewraie ye whole. Suffiseth then
Madame, that he loves in such sort, as if the heavens send him not remedy
the sooner, impossible is it that his life should long endure: for I see him so
far beside himself, and tormented with so many passions, as every hour his
death is expected. What will ye Lady that I say? he complains, he sighs,
and day by day is in such despair for his Ladies love: as happy might I
have accounted him, had he never seen her, or that his days were as short as
his desires. If then Polinarda were in doubt (not judging herself to be she)
it may easily be imagined, and presently was she brought into such
perplexity, as the vermillion couller in her cheeks began to change, such
sudden fears possessed her, and so many sundry opinions thwarted her
conceit, as feign she would have spoken, but could not of long time, whereby
the Dwarffe discerned the cause of her alteration, yet he dissembled what he
saw, and thus continued on his discourse. Now considering (fair Madame) the
high deserts of my Lord, may she be esteemed happy (as you say) that shall
cause the loss of the best Knight living this day? Ah Mistress, if he die (as
God forbid) farewell the flower of all noblenes, and the most assured Fre^nde to
distressed Ladies. Wherefore I beseech you pardon^ me, if I shall name her
unto you, and let me entreat you to deal with her so far, that the
courtesy wherein she is indebted to so goo^ a Knight as my Master is, may be
showed effectually, as that she would love and favor him, as he does and has
very well deserved. Trust me Vrbanillo, answered the Princess, when I know
the Lady, I will, and beside, if she do not regard his passions as she
ought, I will entreat her at my request to be more pitiful. These words
procured a sudden iealouzie in her, that she should promise to another what
she desired her self: yet earnest to be resolved, she vowed to fulfill her
promise, and therefore desired him to tell her name. So you will give me your
word Madame, quoth the Dwarffe, not to take in ill part what I shall say, I
will satis-fie your request presently. Be leeue me, said the Princess, I will
not, rather persuade thy self, that herein thou do me great pleasure. Ah
fair Princess, quoth the Dwarff, it is for you and no other that my Lord is
thus tormented, it is for you that he lives and dies a hundred times a day:
sweet Lady have pity on him, and seek not the loss of so good a Knight,
who looues you deerer then his own life. At which answer she was supprized
with incredible pleasure, yet feigning the contrary, she said: Is it I? and
how long I pray you? By my faith Madame, quoth he, that can I not well tell
ye, but I have heard him say of long time, more then four years before he
was Knighted, he vowed himself yours: since which time, all his honorable
actions has he only dedicated to your praise. So that to find you, he left
the King of Macedon, and his Son Florendos, of whom he was esteemed as no
man the like, yet that honor he forsook to do you service: and for your
love he yielded himself as vassaile to the Emperor your Father, and gave
himself your Knight if you deigne to accept him. When Polynarda had well
heard the Dwarffe, (albeit her heart floted in joys) yet could she so well
command her thoughts, as she seemed to make small account of his words:
notwithstanding, she returned him this aunsweere. I promised thee Vrbanillo,
not to conceive ill of ought thou should tell me, nor do I: yet would I have
thee to regard my calling, being daughter to so great a Prince as is the
Emperor. But if it be so, that Palmerin thy Lord bears me such special
affection, I must let him know by thee, that it would have ^eene far more
seemly, himself to have told me, then to make thee Ambassador in such
secret affairs: nevertheless, I not mislike his honorable love and good
will, whereof I shall think better, when I know the effect is conformable to
thy protestations. Madame (quoth the Dwarffe) so you would please to vouchsafe
him time and place, he will acquaint you with strange matter concerning both
your destinies: which courtesy can no way impeache your honor. Why tell him,
said the Princess, he shall have me daily here in the Chamber of presence,
where he may say his pleasure with safety: in mean space, I accept him as my
Knight, charging him, that he do not depart the Court without my license, if
he desire to do me pleasure. The Dwarffe well pleased with so good an
answer, on his knee kissing the Princess hand, took leave of her to
return toward Palmerin: who meeting him by the way, in place convenient,
said. How now Vrbanillo? what news have thou brought me? life or death? So
good news Master, answered the Dwarffe, as you have good occasion to repute
your self, the most fortunate Knight that ever bare Arms. Then Palmerin
embracing him, said. Ah tell me what they are, have thou spoken with divine
Polinarda? takes she any pity on my consuming cares? That does she my
Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, and commandes you by me, [if you be so vowed hers as
I have perswaded] y^ hence forth you depart not the Emperors Court without
her leave. Then recited he the whole talk between them, and lastly the
pleasure she conceived in so good tidings, so that she accepted him only for
her Knight. While y^ Dwarffe continued this discourse, Palmerin was ravished
with such inward joy, as with a great sigh, he said. Oh heavens, how do you
favor me? now see I well, that my several apparitions on the Mounts of
Olives and Artifaeria, are predestinations ordained to me by your gracious
prescience: I beseech you therefore humbly, that what you have promised, may
soon come to effect, for the regard of incomparable Polinarda. Then demanded
he, by what means he might attain to speak with the Princess? She says,
quod he, that you shall daily have her in the presence, or in the Empress
Chamber, and there may you safely impart your whole mind unto her. But I have
other news to tell ye, for I understand certainly, that the Emperor intendes
a matter greatly for your advantage: he minds to morrow to visit one of his
Castelles near at hand, and there to pass the time in honor of the Ladies,
will have a Tourney. There (better then any where else) may you and Polinarda
confer together: therefore courage your self, and go keep comanie with my
Lord the Emperor, it may be himself will acquaint you with this enterprise.
Now credit me Vrbanillo, said Palmerin, thou have done so much for me, as I
shall never recompense thee while I live: but I pray thee tell me, did she
not at the first take my message strangely? That did she (quoth the Dwarffe)
when I persuaded her that you loved a Lady in such sort, as hardly could you
live without her favorable regard: then she thinking it was some other and
not herself, changed couller marvelous passionatlie, but let it suffice you,
that she is as deep in love as you are or can be. So went Palmerin to the
Emperor, who calling him to him, said. My noble Freende, I shall make known
to you, what has been concluded in your absence, the Ladies of our Court
have been so long locked in, for fear of the enchaunted Knight whom you have
slain, as they have desired to prograce a little: for which cause, and to
pleasure them, I am thus determined. Two leagues hence have I a goodly Castle,
environed with woods and pleasant Meddowes, there may we hunte the wild Heart
and Bore with other pastimes: but now have I caused Scaffolds and other
provision to be made there for a Tourney, and forty Knights will I appoint in
this action, ten against ten, and the first conquerers shall keep the
field against ten other that shall revenge the ten vanquished, so having
all iousted, they shall fight at Barriers with rebated swords, and the brauest
Champion shall have a rich Jewel, which the Empress has provided for the
purpose. Now would I have you one of the ten challengers, and my Nephew
Ganareno on the Defendants side, for him do I esteem one of the best Knights
in my Court: will you not do thus much at my request? God forbid, said
Palmerin, that I should refuse any thing you please to command. These news
were immediately published through the Court, which made every Knight speedily
to prepare himself, in hope to be of the number of the forty, that should
perform the Tourney: and thus they privily imparted to their Ladies, how
they would break both Sword and Lance for their love. Among whom Ptolome was
not the last, for he so affected the young Princess Brionella, as he had made
her sole Mistress of his heart, yet could he not find the means to acquaint
her therewith: but the next day, as she rode among the Ladies, they had good
leisure to confer together, and before they arrived at the Castle, they
discovered thorowlie to each other their affections, promising mutuallie such
a just consent in love, as the one should brag of the others happiness. While
they continued their amorous discourses, Palmerin, who had newly presented
himself to Polinarda, was greatly discontented, because so soon as he came to
her, the Empress called her, and left not talking with her till they alighted
from horseback: notwithstanding before night, he gained recompense for that
disadvantage, for after Supper, the Emperor and the Ladies went a walking by a
goodly Rivers side, there to disporte themselves in the cool of the evening.
Now was it the merry May month, when the fields were richly decked with
Natures Tapistrie, and Cupid gave opportunity to his Subjects, to contemplate
their sweet and affable desires, and well came it to pass for Palmerin, while
Trineus and Ptolome were conuerssing with the Empress: that he taking his
Mistress by the arm, walked with her amongst the fair flowers, and seeing
the time and place serve him so well, trembling (as supprised with a vehement
passion) thus began. Madame, your gracious nature will not count it strange,
but rather take it in good part, that I a Knight errant, and as yet unknown
among courtly assemblies, should presume to make known a secret to you, which
my self dare not imagine without reverence, and death can cause me declare to
none: nor may I proceed without some assurance of my uncertain hope, by her
divine pity that gives me life. And although the words of my Dwarffe have
acquainted me with your princely favor, sufficient to expel all fear and
suspicion of reproof: yet such is the height where to I aspire, as the greatest
Monarche in the world ^anne scantly deserve, then well may I esteem my self
unworthy* But doubting whether your speeches were such, or that my Dwarffe (as
such as he often may do) has reported more then he had in charge: I am
desirous, (trusting on your benignity and special favor above all other) to
understand, if your pleasure be so highlye to honor me, as henceforth to
accept me for your Knight and Servant. And if such undeserved grace may fall
to my lot: I shall not only acknowledge, that Fortune has directed my course
to the only place of honor, but shall have good occasion beside to make
known by my Knighthoode, that I am the favored of the most fair Princess.
Herein good Madame, you shall not dissent from reason, if I having lost my
liberty by being only yours, want the modesty that should sheelde me in
your high regard: therefore may you sweet Lady in mine excuse, accuse love
and your celestial beauty, both stronger to co^mande then I to gainesay. My
Dwarff has let you know (as he told me) part of the pain I endure for your
sake, which you cannot but think well off, in that my destenie so commanded
me, long time before I saw or knew you, not alone in visions, but by
manifest sollicitings, so that in search of you, I have suffered such travail,
as marvel it is that nature could make me able to sustain. Notwithstanding,
I account all right happily bestowed, if I may gain favor in your gracious
eyes, without which it is impossible for me to live: for there is no part
possessing life or spirit in me, that is not vowed to your only service.
These words were dipped in tears, and delivered with many a bitter sigh, which
moved Polinarda to such compassion, as taking him by the right hand, she began
to play with his fingers, her trembling testifying her secret afflictions:
and breaking off Palmerins discourse, as he thought to have continued longer,
thus answered. Sir Knight, it seems by your countenance that you despair of
something, or else have more fortitude then I can conceive. Esteem you me of
so simple judgment, that knowing your valor and knightly perfections, I
should not account my self happy to have so brave a Champion? Let it suffice
you, that what Vrbanillo told you, is true, and in regard of the pain you
suffer for my love, and fancying me so firmly as you do: believe me good
Knight, you feel no grief, but it is as familiar with me, so that what
thought you have of me, the like have I of you, as time and the unspotted love
I bear you shall witness, in mean time promise me not to depart my Fathers
Court without my consent. And because I see the Ladies approaching, refer we the
rest till some other time, when we shall have more leisure to confer
together: and tell me now if you be determined to ioust to morrow? That
will I Madame, quoth he, if it please you to command me. In sooth said she,
I will not hinder ye, because I know the honor of the Tourney will be yours:
for my sake therefore shall you were this Bracelet, as a sign of my favor and
pledge of my love. So taking off her Bracelet, she gave it to Palmerin, who
received it with no little content: and so concluding their talk, because
many Knights and Ladies came about them, they walked where the Emperor and the
Empress were, devising with Ptolome and Trineus. Now because dark night drew
on, and y^ evening dew was dangerous, they returned to the Castle, entending
the next day after dinner to begin the Tournament.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Palmerin gained the honor of the Tourney, and of that which happened
afterward.

AFter the order of the Tourney was set down by the Emperor, as you have
heard, Palmerin did but expecte the hour to go to it, not doubting to
perform such chiual^ie, that his Ladies favor should be woorthilie honored:
wherefore having prepared all his necessaries ready, immediately after Dinner,
accompanied with nine other Knights bravely Armed, whereof Ptolome was one, he
entered the Lysts royal. And espying his Mistress, Polinarda in the window
with the Empress, after he had done her humble reverence, he began to
manage his Horse with such brave carr^res, as every one delighted to behold
him: but specially the Princess, whose heart love had thorowlye conquered, so
that she gloried to be beloved of a Knight so worthy and commendable, as that
her eye was never from the object of her sweet desires. And marking his
Sheelde, she beh^lde in a Sable field, a Silver hand fast closed, the import
whereof caused her to marvel, in respect what had passed between them
before, and gladly would she have known the meaning, but the place would
affoorde no such conuenience: wherefore persuading herself for the time, she
was content in seeing her Bracelet, which her Knight wore upon his right arm.
And after many courses and lofty points, done by Palmerin and other Knights
before their Ladies, among whom Ptolome showed so correspondent, as the
presence of his Lady Brionella highly provoked him. Then entered the Prince
Ganareno, Nephewe to the Emperor, a Knight of no small reckoning amongst the
Allemaignes, and with him nine other in most sumptuous Armor, and their
braueries likewise ended to their Ladies (yet nothing comparable to Palmerin
and his companions) they went to their Tent, and while the Trompets and
Clarions summoned the field, every Knight prepared himself in readiness.
Palmerin, not so much to win common applause, as her love that had the
sovereign power over him, seeing Ganareno ordering himself to run first,
took a strong Lance, and encountered him with such puissaunce, as Horse and
man were both overthrown, and very sore bruised: notwithstanding, he was
soon recovered by his companions, and in a Chair carried forth of the field.
One of his Knights would needs revenge his misfortune, and was himself in
like sort served: in brief, the other eight had all one payment, not one of
them being able to move Palmerin from his saddle. Palmerin joyful of his
good success, was departing away with his company, when one of them thus
spoke unto him. Sir Palmerin, you have saved our labor, and got the honor
that we desired. The time will come, (quod Palmerin) when you may do as much
for me: but for this time (if you please) you may excuse me. All that were
present, as well Lords as Ladies, m^ruailed at the valor of Palmerin: and
among the rest the Emperor, who said aloud, that he never kn^we a more valiant
Gentleman. Polinarda being so near as she heard her Fathers words, and had
herself beh^lde his high good fortune, was suddenly solicited with such
affectionate pleasure, as forgetting herself and where she was, she thus spoke
to Brionella indifferent loud. What say you fair Freende? does not Palmerin
worthily deserve to be loved? By my faith Madame, answered she, I never saw
Knight give such ^ough encounters with the Lance, as he did to Ganareno and
the rest of his companions. Polinarda would have proceeded further, but there
entered ten other Knights, the foremost being Ptolome, not content (as it
seemed) that he ^anne not at the first, and then entered ten Knights more,
of whom the foremost was Cormedes an Allemaigne Knight. They raunging
themselves in order, Ptolome and Cormedes bravely encountered, but neither were
vnhorss^d: which grieved Ptolome to do no better in presence of his Lady,
wherefore taking another Lance, at the second course Cormedes was cast quite
out of his saddle, and three more of his fellows after him for company. Which
when the Duke of Lorraynes Brother perceived, a Knight well accounted of in
that Country, desirous to recover the honor his foregoers had lost, thus
spoke to Ptolome. It seems that these Grecian Knights, are come to rob us of
the honor that is ours by inheritance, in unhappy hour were the Allemaignes
borne if they so suffer it: and so cou^ching his Lance, met Ptolome with so
full a carr^re, as loosing saddle and stirrops he fell to the ground, and ^oure
more of his Knights after him had like entertainment, but a hardye Knight of
the Emperors named Menadus, met y^ Dukes Brother so rudely, as down he fell
to the ground with his saddle between his legs. Thus were many brave
encounters with the Lance to vanquish one another, and all for the love of
their Ladies, who delighted to see their Knights so bravely behave themselves.
The Ioust finished, each one allighted, and with their blunt Swords fell to
the Barriers, and so cruelly they laid on each other, as they would not suffer
one another to take breath: especially Ptolome, who buckled with the Duke of
Lorraynes Brother, to win the honor he lost in the Iousting. And now a fresh
entered noble Palmerin, who as the only man to whom Love and Fortune were
favorable, raunged among the thickest, and with his Sword made way among them
valiantly: at length he came to the Duke of Lorraynes Brother, and so can^azed
him about the pate with his blunt Fauchion, as he fell to the ground greatly
(...), charging him to speak no more in disgrace of ^recian Knights. All the
sport ended, the Knights withdr^w themselves into their Chambers to be unarmed,
and (...) Knight wrapping himself in his Mantle, Palmerin was in his Ladies
li^ery, for she had sent him a (...) rich one, and so coming into the Chamber
of presence, the Emperor welcomed him in this manner. Believe me my Lord, I
account the Prince happy that has you for his Fr^^nde. As I am my gracious
sovereign, answered Palmerin, I am your humble and obedient Servant during
life, ready to accomplish what shall please you to command me. The Emperor
highly thanked him, and presently came the Empress, one of her Ladies bringing
with her a rich (...), all covered with pearls and stones of great value,
which she presented to Palmerin, as the prize and (...) in the Tourney, and
said to Polinarda. (...) Daughter, I am sure you will bestow some gift on Sir
Palmerin, in that he has so worthily deserved. These words raised a sweet
blushing in the Princess countenance, not a little rejoicing that he whom
she loved, had carried away the prize from all the other Knights: so with a
pretty modest smile, she took a chain of Gold from about her neck, saying.
See here Sir Palmerin what I give ye, this gift is to tie and chain you in
such sort, as you may never depart from the Emperors service. Palmerin with
exceeding contentment received the Chain, and on his knee humbly thanked the
Empress and the Princess, to whom he spoke as follows. Madame, I am well
contented to abide in such a prison, and never will I desire any other
liberty, but still will be his vassaile that has power to command me.
This answer pleased the Emperor exceedingly, in that he desired to have
Palmerin still abide in his Court. Wherefore he said to Polinarda, you have
done well Daughter thus to bind Palmerin, for now he can not escape away
when he list. So the Tables being covered, the Emperor and all the Knights of
the Tourney satte down to meat, where much talk was spent as concerning y^
(...) on al sides, but Palmerin and Polinarda had enough to do to view each
other, their eyes doing their office, and carrying between them the m^ssage
of their passions, yet so discreetlie shaddowed as none could perceive them.
Supper ended, the Knights and Ladi^s went to dancing, and afterward to their
Chambers, because the Emperor had commanded the next day an other
Tournament: a brief report whereof may very well serve, in that you can imagine
there wanted no brave chivalry. What Palmerin did that day, it were in (...)
to tell, because ye former da^e makes known his woorthines, and Ptolome
behaved himself in so good sort, that Brionella was as proud of him as the
Princess of her Knight, and therefore presented him with a very rich Diamond,
as a token of his desert and her love. Thus while the Ioustes endured, the Duke
of Lorrayne had great familiarity with Palmerin, because he had delivered his
Sister Cardonya, from the false treason of the Cou^ty of Ormequ^. All pastimes
thus finished, ye Emperor returned to Gaunt, where Palmerin entreated his
Mistress to appoint him time and place, where they might more priuatlie
discourse on their love, the which the promised, and awaited opportunity.

CHAP. XXX.
How Polinarda disclosed her secrets to Brionella, and of the talk she had
with Palmerin.

POlinarda not forgetting ye promise she made her Friend, to meet him in some
place where they might argue on their love, determined to discover her
affections to Brionella, the beloved of Ptolome: well perceiving, that without
her help, she could not attain the end of her desires, wherefore without any
longer stay, she thus began with her. My chosen Freende, I would make known
one thing unto thee, which death can compel me discover to no other, wherefore
thou must have care to keep secret my speeches, in respect of my calling, not
doubting but in time to recompense any pain thou take for me. Fair
Princess, said Brionella, in that you do me such honor, as to impart your
thoughts to me, rather will I die then fail one jot of your commandment,
and therefore assure your self, that what you declare shall never be
discovered. Then Polinarda revealed to her ye love she bare Palmerin, what
passions did torment her, and in what extreamitie her desires had driven her:
and therefore sweet Freende (quoth she with a deep sigh) find thou the mean
that I may priuatlie talk with him. Brionella admiring the earnest love of the
Princess, knew not readily what to answer, but seeing that by these means
she might more easily confer with Ptolome, whom she likewise entirely
loved, thus spoke. It is no wonder Madame, you being so incomparable, as I
know no Prince living of who^ you are not worthy, if you have resolved your
love on noble Palmerin, in that there is no Knight in the world better
deserves you, his rare chivalry being such, as it cannot otherwise be, but
that he is descended of royal lineage, being accomplished with so many
special perfections. Therefore Madam, so like you, I have devised well for
your purpose, as thus. You know my Chamber window stands so commodious, as
you may with safety confer with him at pleasure, which you may let him
understand by his Dwarffe, and appoint him time as you shall think
convenient. This counsel did not a little content y^ Princess, because she
longed to chatte with her lover, and therefore concluded at his departure to
appoint Palmerin his time. Now was the Chamber of Brionella joining to the
City wall, and had a goodly prospect into the fields, and Palmerins lodging
was near unto it, facing the wall as the other did: so that one might easily
pass between the lodgings, nothing being betwixt them but a little Garden,
bravely decked with flowers, and goodly fruit Trees. The time appointed,
Polinarda called the Dwarffe to her, saying. Vrbanillo, thou shall go to thy
Master from me, and after thou have saluted him with my manifold well
wishinges, will him this night to come secretly to Lady Brionellas Chamber,
where at the window we may safely talk together: and bid him not misdoubt
my Lady Brionella, for I have made her acquainted with all my secrets. And
because thy self may conduct him to the place, come, and I will presently
she we it thee. So went the Dwarffe with Polinarda to Brionellas chamber, where
having seen the window, and glad to carry such tidings to his Master,
being well assured how they would content him: he departed, and tarried not
long on his message, because Palmerin thought each hour a year to hear from
his Mistress, wherefore he beholding the Dwarffe coming, took him in his
arms, and demanded what news he had brought him? The Dwarffe with a
cheerful countenance thus answered. My Lord, Fortune speed you as
luckily, as the news that I bring you do well deserve. By this beginning,
Palmerin perceived that he brought such tidings as he long looked for, which
was, how he might speak with the Princess: wherefore embracing him again, he
commanded him to make report of that his sweet Mistress had given him
charge. Then the Dwarffe delivered, how the Princess had great desire to see
him, and where she did intend to speak with him. Which when Palmerin heard,
^illed with unspeakable joys, he recorded the words to himself with many
itterations, and the more often he spoke the words, the more his delights
increased. But tell me, (quoth he to the Dwarffe) did thou mark the place
well, where I must talk with my Goddess? Thereof doubt you not my Lord,
said the Dwarffe, for I shall not fail to bring you surely thither, if it be
your pleasure I shall go with you, because y^ Princess her self, in company
of Lady Brionella showed it me. How am I beholding to her, said Palmerin, for
this high favor, which else were my death if I had been denied? Upon this he
called Ptolome, to whom he imparted every circumstaunce, which Ptolome reputed
for his great avail: this offering the mean for him to visit Brionella, and
therefore they concluded to go together the night ^nsuing, to the place
appointed for this loving encounter. The hour of rest being come, and every
one in their Chambers as best beseemed, Palme^in, Ptolome and the Dwarffe
remained together, and seeing the time ready to countenance their
enterprise, took each of them a rich Mantle, and with their Swords under
their arms, went out at a window upon the walls: and albeit the passage was
somewhat dangerous, yet love had so encouraged them, as without regard of
danger or fortune, they came to the window which the Dwarffe showed them, not
seen by any. Polinarda who was most attentive, hearing the trampling of their
feet, said to Brionella. Is not this Palmerin? So opening the Casements, they
saw Palmerin and Ptolome attending like dilligent Servants. If then both
parties were pleased it is not to be doubted, nothing in the world more
contenting them then the sight of each other. And truly Palmerin and the
Princess had great reason, for beside that their fatal destenies did so
provoke them, their equal natures were so commendable and correspondent, as
though they had never seen, yet were they borne to love together. Now was
Polinarda very bravely acco^stred in a gorgious night Mantle, and such soft
white silks, as the showed more bright then the morning Star, her fiery
pointed looks so wounding Palmerin, as rapt up as it were into a second
heaven, he remained silent a long time, not able to speak a word. The
Princess was likewise in the self same conceit, and so overcome with regard
of her Paramour, as she continued mute, and was loath to give the onsette.
Palmerin ashamed to accompany his Lady with such silence, began thus mildly
to court his Mistress. I did never think, fair Madame, that Fortune would
honor me with such extraordinary favor, directing my course to your noble
Fathers Court, to be thus entertained into your gracious service, having no
deserts in me to induce you to your choice: but it may be in respect of some
good report by such, to whom I account my self highly beholding, having thus
found the place where I was pr^ordained to love, my Star has appointed it,
and withal, to make me the happiest man living. And it may be Madame, that
such as en^ie not my happiness, have acquainted you with some of my exterior
actions, which God [not I] has brought to pass: but they ignorant of the
entire and fervent love I bear you, could make no just report thereof to you,
being a secret so special, and not to be comprehended, beside, the depth and
wonderful nature thereof not to be measured, therefore to be buried in your
heavenly opinion, which how ample so ever you please to grant me, ye more am
I bound both in duty and affection, which in despite of en^ie and his
confederates, shall remain immooueable, and plead the continual loyalty of
your Knight and Servant. And if I should report how many times your divine
person has been presented me in sleep, I should therewithal discourse
infinite passions, which I endured seeing my self frustrate of that I now
behold. How many Countries and Cities? what perrils and da^ngers have I past
to find you, provoked on still with never changing love? If this then were
sufficient to make me run through a world of dangers, I leave it to your
judgment (sweet Madame) what it may do now, seeing with myh^ ^yes what I
dreamed on before, and may with ^^fetie say, incomparable beauty. Heerehence
proceeds, that my extreme affections have overcome all other parts in m^,
not able to imagine how many reverend opinions I use of you: which must
entreat you on my behalf, that your accustomed clemency will pardon my
preiudicate concei^e, because being not mine own but yours only, I may
easily offend. These speeches moistened with ye tears of his eyes and
like-warme blood of his heart, delivered manifest evidence how truly he loved
the Princess, who bearing him company in all arguments of love, thus
answered. I doubt not Sir Palmerin, but the love you bear me is exceeding
great, noting your earnest affections, and the great travail you have
sustained in search of me, and no other certainty do I request to be
persuaded by, being as vehement in affection toward you, as you are to me,
for proof whereof, this attempt may suffice, that against my duty I should
be seen thus secretly, in a place so suspicious, and time so unnecessary.
But if I have offended herein, accuse those seemly perfections which I have
regarded in you, and the confidence I repose in your good conceit, coupled with
the honorable estimation y^ is generally reputed in your virtues. Pardon me
(sweet Lady) said Palmerin, if by my longing desire to speak with you, I
have in any thing displeased, for earnest good will to do you service,
constrained me to be thus importunate. The matter is far from any desert of
offense, quoth the Princess, for hither are you come by my commandment, to
the end that we might see one another, and talk of such things as nearest
concern us: and therefore resolve your self good Knight, that I esteem you
above all other, and promise you by the faith of a Princess and loyal
Freende, to die rather then any other shall be Lord of me. Which very words,
so ravished his senses, as very hardly he could sustain himself: whereupon
Polinarda put her hand out at the window, which he in often kissing well
marking, beheld the Charracter thereon as you have heard before. Ah Madame,
quod he, this is the token that makes me the happiest man living. As how I
pray you? said she, what know you hereof? Then Palmerin discoursed all his
dreams and visions, and breefely ran through repetition of his whole life,
how the wise Adrian had sent him the Sheelde of Sable, wherein in was figured a
hand fast closed together, signifying the same hand I hold at this present,
because this has ye same mark the other had in figure. In truth said the
Princess, I was desirous to know the meaning of that Sheeld, wherein I saw a
Silver hand closed, which you bare the first day of the Tournament, being now
not a little glad that you have so satis-fied me. Afterward Palmerin made
known to her, the mark himself had on his face, which agreed with hers in
perfect likelihoode. O God (quoth she) happy be the time of this meeting,
blame me not my Lord to be thus supprised with your love, seeing our fatal
deste^ies have so appointed: this will cause me to live in more hope of good
success, then before I did, and that our amity will sort to such end, as
our two hearts shall be combined in one, yet let me see I beseech you the
mark on your face, how near it resembles this on my hand. She fetching a
Taper which burned in the Chamber, lifted up his comely locks of hair, and
saw them both shaped in one form, wherefore suddenly setting away the
light, she embraced Palmerins head in her arms, and sealed many sweet
kisses on his amiable Charracter. The like loving salutation passed between
Ptolome and Brionella, at another Casement of the Window, with sollemne vows
and protestations never to fail in their love, and this to be the place for
conuersing on their desires, till Fortune affoorded the^ better opportunity:
and longer would they have there continued, but that the Dwarffe came to his
Master in this manner. My Lord, I think you can never find time to make an
end, will you have the day light prevent ye, and so discredit you all? in
sooth it is time you were in your Chamber. Palmerin who was loathe to depart
from the pleasure of his thoughts, made small account of the dwarffes words and
continued on in amorous devises: but the Princess a little more fearful then
he, seeing the Dwarffe said true, and loathe to be seen suspitiously, said. My
Lord, it is time to break off, but I pray you fail not of your promise, let
us visit one another now you know the way and place. So Palmerin and Ptolome
took leave of their Ladies, and passed to their Chambers without suspicion:
the success of their love you shall understand hereafter, as time and place
shall fit for the purpose: but now to satis-fie you with choice of delights,
we will return a while to another discourse.

CHAP. XXXI.
How the King of France kept a royal and magnificent Court, and how his
Son Jews became enamored of the Duchess of Burgundy.

DUring the time that the Emperor of Allemaigne lived in this happiness,
accompanied (as you have heard) with many hardy Knights: there reigned in
France a mighty Prince named Agariell, valiant, wise and virtuous, having
three Sons, whereof the second was the hardiest Knight at Arms, being named
Jews. This King Agariell, the more to honor his Knights and noble Gentlemen
abiding in his Realm, determined to keep open Court for all ^^mmers, as none
of his predecessors ever did the like before him: and therefore sent abroad
his Heraldes, Gentlemen of his escuyrie and others, to summon his Lords and
Barrons of France, that on a day appointed they would all meet at the Court.
And because none should be ignorant what he intended, he requested that all
Gentlemen professing Arms, at the feast of Easter following, should repair
to Parris, being the head and cheifest City of his Realm. The Queen
likewise advertised al Ladies and Gentlewomen, at whose command every one
obeyed, so that in few days the Court was furnished with Lords and L^dies:
nothing now intended but delights and courtly pastimes, which made the Duke
of Burgun^^^ likewise repai^^ thither. Now was the Duke aged, a man of good
providence, and a tried Knight, having matched in marriage with the King of
Denmarks Sister, a young beautiful Lady, and of virtuous education: the Duke
hoping to have issue by her, because by his first Wife he could not have any.
The King advertised of the Dukes coming, commanded his Son Jews with an
honorable train to go entertayne him, which he did, so that many solemn
reuerences passed between the Duke and him, as also to the Duchess, whom as
he welcomed with many salutations, so did he earnestle co^template her
excellent beauty, reputing her fairer then the fairest, and on a sudden
became amorous of her, such a violent breach made love into his heart at the
very first sight of her. In this great and unlooked for vexation, he conducted
her to the lodging was prepared for the Duke, dissembling so well as he could
his new desire: but so vehement was his oppression, as without returning
again to the King, he went to his Chamber. Prince Jews being thus alone by
himself, Love not a little tryumphing of his new pray, tormented his thoughts
with so many conceits, as all the night he spent in sighs and dolorous
laments, his mind still travailing by what means he might compass his intent.
Sometimes he thought it impossible in respectet of y^ Duke, then again as
easy because of his age, a contrary too y^ksome in his eyes for the sweet
flourishing youth of the D^chesse: all which imaginations wrought so diversely in
him, as his spirit forsaking counsel and reason, made him break forth into
these exclaimes. Ah heavens, have you beauty with such excellency, as to
cause me endure a torment more then mortal? Ah mine eyes, too lauishe were you
in beholding her, who cannot choose but utterly disdain thee, thou have no
acquaintance with her, and therefore let thy death chastise thy boldness. Yet
may thou be deceived in thine opinion foolish man, perhaps in offering her
thy service she may accept it, for the Duke is old, and likely to die, how
happy were it for thee to be his executor for his Lady? Despair not then man,
for things thought impossible are easiest oftentimes in performance. In these
and such like terms he spent the night, and seeing the fair morning salute
him at his Chamber window, he arose, intending that day to bewray his passions
to the Duchess, and knowing that the Duke would go visit the Queen,
accompanied with many Knights he came to bid him good morrow, which the Duke
taking very kindly, requited him with many thanks, ignorant that for the
fair Wife, he was so courteous to the old Husband. The Duke having taken his
way to the Queen, Jews kept company with the Duchess very mannerly, waiting
opportunity to dyscouer his affections, and reuiewing her beauty so perfect
and rare, not able longer to hold, began thus. It is marvel Madam, if fair
beauty should be so bitter, as a man cannot surfette but he must needs die.
The Duchess not knowing of whom the Prince spoke, nor as yet regarding that he
was in love, answered. In sooth my Lord, the Lady has small reason, that
she should use you so hardly, if you mean it by your self. In brief
Madame, quoth he, it is you have wounded me, and none but you can ease my
afflictions: if then (sweet Lady) you retain such pity, as all your other
excellencies show you to have, you will not disdain to give me remedy, which
if you do, for ever I remain your Knight and loyal Freende. And in mine
opinion Madame, you can not well refuse me, seeing Fortune has been such an
enemy to you in marriage, the Duke being old and full of mellanchollie, you
young, tender and dainty as may be, he more meet to keep company with
Atropos the mortal Goddess, then live with a Saint of so rare perfections.
But had my luck been such, before you were espoused to have known you, I
would with valor have hindered your briding so, or Fortune should have
foullie denied me: for such is my religion in love, as better death then
discontent, and had I been Lord of Europe, you had been Lady.
Notwithstanding Madame, so like it you, I may be your Freende and knightly
servant: for Love wants no wyles to compass desire, and my suit is modest if
you count it not unseemly. The Duchess, whom sweet love could easily entice
to folly, hardly might resist a present conquest: wherefore changing
countenance, and not daring to reveal what she gladly would, said. Trust me
my Lord, your speeches are not comely, to violate chaste wedlock is so
monstrous, as you can have no privilege to ask, nor I to grant, and
therefore content ye. This answer, albeit it was sharp, and scant pleasing
to ye Prince, yet love so persuaded him, that the Duchess had another meaning
then she bewrayed: for nothing her countenance so full of change, he gessed
that some sparks had fallen among her affections, wherefore he began again. I
beseech you Madame accuse Love, if I have spoken to your dislyking, yet hope I
to see the time, when I shall make known how great my affection is to do you
service: and continuing this talk he brought her to the Queens lodging, Love
following them both so narrowly at the heels, as ye Duchess was no less
affectionate then Jews was passionate. Which when he got some light of, in
hope to purchase his his desire, he solicited her in more secret manner then
he was wont, so that being one day in place where they might familiarlie
talk: Jews perseuering in his enterprise, declared what torments he suffered
for her love, whereupon the Duchess, not only by ye Princes reasons which
were perswasiue, but as well to mittigate her own oppressions, thus answered.
Great is the force of your persuasions my Lord, but greater is y^ of love,
which has made me yours: so that what you request, I cannot deny, and though
it stand not with mine honor, yet such is my fortune. Let me entreat you
therefore to conceal this love so discreetlie, as none may know of it,
especially my Lord the Duke, and expect the day that shall yield you content
and make me happy. This answer so highly pleased the Prince, as neue^ man
thought himself in greater felicity, and rendering her manifold thanks,
said. I swear to you Madame, by the divine force of love that gouerns us
both, to be for ever your Knight, and never shall any other desire abide in
me, then you shall like and well allow of, for otherwise I were not worthy
this special favor. The Duchess thanking him, departed, and thenceforth so
secretly shaddowed their love, as none suspected that the Prince loved the
Duchess.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the enterprise of Jews the Prince of France, for the love of the Duchess
of Burgundy.

LOng continued the King of France this state in all magnificence, there
meeting many noble personages, as well Strangers as of ye Realm, that it was
marvelous to behold, as also the Ladies and Damsels that accompanied the
Queen: who on a day in the presence Chamber among many Knights, conferred of
the bounty and prowess of the flourishing brave young Courtiers, among whom the
Prince Jews making one, each one spoke in behalf of his Ladies beauty, yet
concealing their names to themselves, till better occasions might cause the^
deservedly to be known. All this talk the Prince well marking, who for the
Duchess love was deprived of liberty, threw many sweet glaunces at the
Mistress of his affections, persuading himself, that nature never made a more
perfect creature, and not able to make her like again, burst her molde,
whereupon he said. Lords and Ladies, who with such advantage have chatted on
beauty, understand that such as you have yet spoken of, or severally in your
own thoughts shall think upon: may not be equal with one that I know, even
she that is Lady and commander of my heart, whose beauty is so far beyond all
other, as bright Cynthia from the goodliest star in the firmament. And because
that none shall imagine, how (being carried away with private opinion) I use
these speeches, I will make good my words by deeds of Arms, against any
Knight whatsoever that dare say the c^ntrarie. Now in regard that none shall
plead ignorance, I will advertise all Knights, how the first day of May
next ensuing, and seven days more immediately following, I will be in open
field in my Tent, where I will e^ecte a stately monument, on the top
whereof shall be her figure whose Knight I am, and there will I defend it in
this honorable quarrel, against such Knights as will Combat for ye beauty of
their Ladies, I affirming mine to excel all other in perfections. This
condition must be observed by such as enter the field, that they bring the
Ladies figure with them whom they honor most: and if Fortune frown on them in
such sort as they be vanquished, they shall there leave their Ladies Image, to
be placed under my Mistress as her subject. Now if my unhappy Stars so
cross me, as I loose the credit I would be loathe, the conqueror shall enter
in my Tent, and in my Ladies place shall his Mistress be mounted, if he mean
to maintain her with such conditions as I do mine. And he that last shall
accomplish these eight days, shall bear away the honor with the
portraitures of the Ladies, which by him or any other all the said time have
been gained. And this liberty shall be granted, that he which receives the
foil with the Lance, shall Co^bat with the Sword (if he please) before he
yield. Now, that this mine enterprise may be openly known, and put in
execution as the virtue requires: I will send Horsemen through all the
provinces of Christendom, that all Knights willing thus to adventure, shall be
here received. His speeches ended, the Gentlemen present could not marvel
sufficiently, at this great and high enterprise of the Prince Jews, and the
danger whereinto he thrust himself, yet not knowing who was the Lady he
would thus adventure for: but she being present, perceived that the Prince in
honor of her love, took in hand this perillo^s hazard, wherein she
conceived such secret content, as the passions of love having penetrated her
heart, made her fear his misfortune, which she would not for her life. In this
assembly was present the Duke of Sauoye, a young Prince, brave, hardy and
courageous as might be, and esteeming so well of himself, as he thought no
Knight in ye world could vanquish him, who to answer the Prince Jews, arose
and thus spoke. My Lord, I would not willingly have entered the Combat against
you, but that I heard you so far outreache your self, as she whose beauty
you maintain, is more perfect then all other Ladies: but she that is the
commander of my heart, is such a brave accomplished Lady, as (in truth) her
beauty may not be matched through the whole world. And to affirm what I
say, I swear by the order of my knighthoode, that the morrow after you have
finished your eight days enterprise, I will enter the same field, and auerre
against all Knights, that the Goddess to whom I am dedicated, excelles all
other Ladies in her heavenly gifts: and he that dare maintain the c^ntrarie,
under my Sword I will make him confess it. All such therefore as will make
proof of their valor, shall find me there in my Tent at my appointed day, and
nine days after to sustain the same quarrel in plain Combat, either at the
Lance, the Ma^e, the Sword, on horseback or on foot, at his choice. And
though I vanquish one Knight, it shall not be lawful for me to rest a minute
space, but presently take him in hand that shall follow: and be it my
fortune to b^ ^oyled by him, he shall keep the field in manner as you my Lord
devised. And to the end all may be the better executed, pleases you y^ in
such places where your intelligenc^rs shall come, my enterprise may likewise
be declared, in respect I hope to behave my self so well, as my Lady will
make special account of me. The Lady for who^ the Duke of Sauoye thus
attempted, was Daughter to the King, and Sister to Jews named Lucemania, whom
he loved entirely, and above all things desired in marriage: which to
compass, and to honor his Lady, he thus offered the Combat against all
Knights. These Princes, intending to go through with their intent, concluded
between them, that the Duke of Sauoye should break it to the King, to gain
his good will: whereupon the Duke departing toward the Queens Chamber to
find the King, espied him a^ very good leisure walking in his Garden, to whom
he went in all haste, and on his knee thus began. So please it your highness to
grant me one^boone, I shall be bound to continue the ^oue I have borne your
Majesty, which is to prolong my life in your service, as ye most forward
Knight in your royal Court. The King who had long time favored the Duke,
(...) him by the hand, thus answered. Dema^nde my good Cousin what you please,
and it shall be granted. Then the Duke deliberatelie discoursed, what the
Prince Jews and he had intended for the love of their Ladies: wherewith the
King scant content, and m^ruailing at this hasty enterprise, said. Why Cousin?
do you imagine your selves able to maintain so hard a task, in res^^^ance of
so many hardy Knights, wherewith the world is now plentifully stored?
Believe me, in maine Countries are Ladies of greater beauty [I doubt] then is
at this (...) in our Realm of France. I promise you, I hardly like what my
Son and you attempt, but seeing my word is paste, you shall not now be
hindered: do therefore what your think expedient, with this consideration
always, that the ending of matters is greater then the beginning. The Duke
humbly thanking the King, answered. We doubt not my Lord, but by the hope of
God and favor of our Ladies, to end our affairs with fortunate success, but
if now we should give over, and not go forward with our promise, we might
woorthily be reproved of shame and cowardice, the most villainous reproaches
that can be to any noble heart. The King perceiving the earnest affection of
these two young Princes, and that to deny their request would be more hurtful
then to grant: commanded him again to proceed with their intent, with such
surety against all strange Knights, as what loss or victory happened to them,
they must be content with all that fell out. The Duke not a little joyful,
kissing his highness hand departed, and immediately acquainted Prince Jews
therewith: but now the Queen understanding her Sons enterprise, sent for
him, and with sad countenance thus spoke. I would (my Son) that the intent of you
and the Duke of Sauoye, were either awhile deferred, or utterly forgotten,
because I greatly doubt, that the end will bring a further consequence then
you expect. For think you, that by all your forces and Chiualries, the
beauties of your Ladies shall be any jot increased? no believe me: but if they
love you as loyal Friends ought to do, as greatly will they dislike your
enterprise, as fear the danger whereinto you may fall, a matter causing other
desire then you think on, and more offensive (perhaps) to them, then any
honor you may win can please them. Jews, who by no means would be dissuaded
from his conceit, answered. Good Mother, if for no other fear, this matter
shall not be revoked, in regard of ye shame, and never dying dishonor I shall
gain thereby, which makes me desire a thousand deaths, then not to be so
good as my word: therefore persuade your self good Mother, that albeit her
beauty for whom I enter the Combat, cannot be more perfect hereby, in that it
is without imperfection, yet such is my resolution in a matter so certain, as
her sweet looks shall deliver me strength enough to end my task, without
dread of any inconvenience y^ may happen. The Duchess (enflamed with love)
hearing these words on her behalf, must needs speak, and thus began. I
know not (my Lord) who is the Lady you love, nor what are her virtues, but
hereof I can assure you, that she is highly beholding to you, and (except
great reason to the contrary) ought to love you, considering what peril you
thruste your self into for her beauty. Madame (quoth the Prince) the travail
I shall take, and the bad fortunes may befall me, are little and of no account
in respect of her gracious deserts, therefore for her honor, I will bear my
inward pains with secret content, and attempt these outward actions with
the greatest courage I can possible, desiring no other recompense then her
favorable conceit, whereof once assured, nothing can seem difficult to me,
no, were it to dye in her divine service. And as he would have continued
longer, the King (not yet thorowlie content with his promise past to the Duke
of Sauoye) entered the Chamber, by whose countenance, Jews well knew he was
mal content with him, wherefore falling on his knee, he said. My Lord, no
one is ignorant, how all my welfare and reputation consists only in your
Majesty, as a Prince and Father, the most virtuous that I know, which great
good in some part to recompense, I have enterprised a matter unworthy of
dislike, so please your highness (of your accustomed bounty) to excuse and
accept it in good part, in respect that such as are borne to the highest places
of dignity, ought to be more prompt and ready to all magnanimious actions,
then their inferiors, chiefly in prowess, chiualry, and deeds of
estimation. What brought such renown to Horatius, Mutius Scaeuola, Marcus
Curtius, Manlius Torquatus, and a number more of Roman Knights, if not the
courageous following of occasions offered? What made for ever immortal the fame
of Marius the Roman Citizen, Hanniball the Carthaginian, and Agesila^^ the
Greek, if not the undaunted valor of their minds, delivered in their deeds
of kingly consequence? Assuredly I believe, that their Fathers Uncles, and
ancient progenitors, never made them noble or ought renowned: what then?
only virtue, the very formatrix of all nobility. For this cause my good Lord
and Father, having now opportunity, as my Cousin y^ Duke of Sauoye has informed
you, may it please your grace to permit my endeavors with favor, to the end I
may deliver perfect testimony, that I no whit degenerate from your heroycall
and kingly virtues. The King somewhat moderating his former opinion, answered.
Trust me Son, full well you know how to disguise and cover your follye with
virtues coullers, God send it to fall out so well: arise, and be it as your
Cousin and you have requested. See in mean tune that you provide all needful
occasions, that when the day comes nothing be wanting. Jews humbly thanking
his Father, arose, every one present not a little rejoicing, because they
feared all would be squandered. Then began the Lords and Ladies to confer
together, and the Duchess departing to her lodging, being manned by the
Prince, did not [as I thinke] repent herself of her love, as a number of you
(martching under the same Ensign) would do the like in such a case. In fine,
the Duchess fearful of the thwarts of Fortune, that she would work her
disgrace by some bad conjectures or wounding reports, said. I know well (my
Lord) the good will you bear me, without any further shows or confirmations
by actions so dangerous, which I had rather die then behold, and therefore
whatsoever you shall perform, will condemn me as unworthy of so good
deserts: in this respect you shall therefore grant me one thing, which is, that
above all you have care of your self, else will perpetual discontent cut short
my date, being bereaved of the honor of my green^ desires. Now Madame (quoth
the Prince) may I boast of my fortune, not doubting to follow the devise of a
Lady so virtuous, for your sweet words prolong my life, else ere this had
death robbed you of your Knight. The Duchess heereto with an amiable smile,
answered. I must not loose you yet good Prince, for may I lengthen your life,
it shall be for ever. Many sollemne thanks the Prince returned, and by this
time had brought her to her Chamber, where having baise l^^ main, departed.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How the Prince Jews and the Duke of Sauoye, sent their Heraldes and Horsemen
into all parts, to make known to all Knights their enterprises, and the
conditions of their Combats.

THe Prince Jews joyful of the King his Fathers consent, but of the gracious
answer of the Duchess most of all, dispatched immediately his Heraldes into
all the provinces of Europe, who executed their charge with such dillige^ce, as
there was no Court of Emperor, King or Prince, but they declared the
enterprise of these two young Princes. So that one of the Princes Heraldes,
accompanied with the King of Arms belonging to the Duke of Sauoye, came to the
Emperors Court of Allemaigne, which then was furnished with a great number of
Lords and Knights, being there to sollemnize the day of his birth, but
especially Palmerin above all the rest, tryumphing in the love of his Mistress
Polinarda. The Heralds being entered the great Hall, found the Emperor
sitting in his chair of estate, with many Princes, Barens and noble personages
about him: who granting them liberty of speech, the Heralde of France began
first in this manner. Illustrious and most redoubted Emperor, the cause why we
thus presume before your Majesty, is by the commandment of the virtuous young
Prince Jews, Son to our dread Lord Agatiel King of France, as also of the
Duke of Sauoye his Cousin, so good a Knight as may well command: what our
message is, so please your highness to call all your Knights in presence,
because it chiefly concerns them, we with duty will deliver it. The
Emperor presently called for all Knights and Gentlemen of his Court, who
desirous of the news, were not long in coming, before whom he said. Dread
Lord, the Prince Jews of France my Master, commends him to your Majesty
with this Letter, may it please your grace command it to be read, and you
shall soon see the effect of our Embassade. The Emperor caused his Secretary
to read it openly, and because it contained what you have heard already, it
shall be needelesse to wast longer time in talk thereof: but the Letter being
read, the Heralde thus proceeded. The Prince my Master (worthy Emperor)
gives the Knights of your Court (as else where) to understand, that he intendes
to prove by deeds of Arms, how no Lady in the world is comparable in
beauty to ye Lady he loves, which he will be ready to maintain in Combat
the first of May next, and seven days following, in his Tent before the
Gates of Parris, there will he verify it against all comers that dare auerre
the contrary. Afterward he rehearsed all the conditions to be observed in
this Combat, and the King of Arms to the Duke of Sauoie, made known his
Masters challenge likewise as you have heard. The Emperor meruailing at this
message, said. Without doubt the Ladies had need to be fair, and my Cozins
your Masters valiant and hardy, else it is doubtful how such an enterprise
will fall out, for y^ affections of persons are diverse, and their fortunes
dangerous, nevertheless I desire the issue may sort to their honor. These
Lords and Knights have heard your message, and I judge some of them will
provide to be there, because they prize the beauty of their Ladies at as high
a rate, as your Masters do esteem their fair Friends: yet let them do what
they think most expedien^, because they are old enough to make you answer. As
for me, you may salut^ (on my behalf) the King my Brother, and my Cozins, to
whom I send thanks with all my heart, that they thus acquainted me with their
honorable endeavors. All this while the Knights conferred together, with
diverse judgments of these pretended Combats: some were either fearful or too
forward, others well advised and provoked with discreet courage. Among whom
repute we noble Palmerin, all pensive, his eyes fixed on the ground^, and not a
word^, having in his spirit discoursed, how bitter the diuorc^ would be of
the eye from his sweet object: in the end concluded the Combat, persuading
him self, not in Christendom, nor in the other three habitable parts of the
earth, either Empress, Queen or Lady was more accomplished with perfections,
then his gracious Mistress Polinarda. And in respect of this Embassage, it
seemed to him vituperous, and a dishonor not sufferable if he should not
justify the truth and have so good occasion: wheruppon he desired a thousand
deaths, rather then he would defer so brave a voyage, and so on his knee
before the Emperor thus began. Gracious Lord and my worthy Patron, I
intend (with your good lyking and leave) to depart with all speed possible,
to the Ioustes and Combats of France and Sauoye: let it not therefore
displease (for the honor of Chivalry) that I leave your Court a while, but
may commit my self to this journey with your favorable opinion. The Emperor
very loathe to let Palmerin go, answered. In sooth Palmerin, I greatly
doubted (so soon as I heard these news from France) that it would not pass
without your presence, which displeases me, not so much for their folly as
your absence, which is and will be to me greater grief then you judge: but let
me entreat that thy return may be speedy, and stay no longer then thou have
good occasion. I would gladly know, would you grant it me, what Lady she is
for whom you thus adventure, you need not Palmerin hide it from me. My Lord
(quod he) the Dame for whom I enter the Combat, is such, as none may or ought
compare with, so singular, (...), and (above all) virtuous, and never would I
think my self worthy to bear Arms, if fear of danger, misfortune, or death
it self, should have power to pluck me from my duty. As for my stay, she
Ioustes ended, within one Month or sooner, will I return to your Majesty:
and let me entreat you not to fear any thing in my journey, because I go
for your honor, and my sword shall ring on the stoutest Creast, the ever
continuing honors of the Emperor of Allemaigne. The Emperor unwilling to
forgo him, and loath to hinder knightly chivalry, said. Without question
Palmerin, the Lady is indebted to you, and you declare unspeakable love, that
for her beauty you deliver your self to so great hazard: but as for your
intent to my honor, I rather delight to have it by your presence, then thirste
after such applause with your absence. But seeing you will needs to France,
happy fortune go with you, and make you victorious in all your attempts:
which I doubt not, but by your valor and virtues of your Mistress, ye French
will not brave so much on the seauenteene of May, as perhaps they will on the
first. Provided, that before you depart, you demand and have all things for
your iourneie, as well for such as go in your company, as for your own
necessary provision: and some will I appoint to travail with you, that may
prevent any treacherous inconvenience. Palmerin not refusing this bountiful
offer, with great obeisaunce thanked the Emperor, and taking his leave for
that night, returned to his Chamber, determining to depart with expedition,
because the day of the Ioustes were at hand. Now was Tr^^eus the Emperors
Son a young Prince, and had not yet received his order of knighthoode, he
hearing of Palmerins departure, was marvelous desirous to bear him company:
whereupon he kneeled before his Father, entreating him not to deny him one
request. Demand what thou will my Son (quoth he) I grant it thee. Then I
beseech you good Father, said he, to suffer me see France with noble
Palmerin, that I may be acquainted with ye courtesy and civility of that
nation, not doubting but soon to deserve my knighthoode. And yet if before I
receive my order, I see these high and worthy deeds of Arms, happily they
may entice me to follow their virtues: beside, if now I loose so good an
occasion offered, I know not when I shall compass the like commodity,
therefore (good Father) let me not be denied. The Emperor offended for his
rash promise to his Son, labored to change his mind, but all would not
serve, for the Prince promised to go so covertly, as none should know him.
Wherefore he called Palmerin, who as yet was not departed the Hall, saying. I
see Sir Palmerin, you shall not go alone in your voyage, for my Son Trineus
desires to be your companion: for which cause I commit him to you, and desire
you to conceive so well of him, as at your return we may be all merry
together. Which Palmerin promised, whereupon the Emperor called for the
Master of his Horse, commanding him that all things might be in readiness
against their departure: all which was done with such diligence, as the third
day following all things prepared, they took their leave of the Emperor and
the Ladies, who at their departure shed many tears (a common matter with
them) wishing the victory and honor to Palmerin. Thus with Trineus and twenty
other Knights, a great number of Squires and servants in good equipage, they
iourned toward Parris, without any hinderaunce by the way, or matter of
memory.

Now before we pass any further, you shall understand, that after the
Heraldes of the Prince of France and Duke of Sauoie were departed, and that
Palmerin had obtained leave of the Emperor: the Princess Polinarda advertised
hereof, was greatly displeased with this sudden departure, wherefore calling
V^banillo the Dwarffe to her, she said. V^banillo, thou must go to thy
Master, and will him this night to meet me at our appointed place, that I
may confer with him of a secret neerelie concerning me. Which when Palmerin
heard, the earth being covered with her black Mantle, and every one in
their dead sleep, he called Ptolome and V^banillo, who were well acquainted
with this love walk, and being there in presence of their Ladies, the
Princess with a great sigh thus began. Alas my Lord, what mind is this in you,
thus to voyage toward France, and leave me alone sad and sollitarie? Alas,
not content to hazard so long a journey, but a dangerous Combat beside for my
beauty, which is of so slender estimation, as may not parragon with ye Ladies
of France, being peereles (as I have heard) among those of highest
perfection. Ah my Lord, more comfort and content is it to me to have your
company, then to be crowned Queen of any Realm conquered by your virtue and
prowess. Therefore (sweet Freende) I entreat you with all my heart, and by
the unfeigned love you bear me, to leave such dangerous enterprises, where
death is commonly more frequent then life. These words came with such amiable
coniurations from the Princess, as Palmerin (though loath to be dissuaded)
answered. Let me prevail with you so far good Madame, as not to mislike my
enterprise for your gracious love, for the honor you have done me, in making
me your Knight, I prize at no less value then my dearest blood, and should I
be held from these French exploits, unworthy were I to be your Servant: in
that (as you know) no Knight but caries the honor of his Lady in such
account, as he preferres that before his own life. If then Madame in religion
of this office, I absent my self for a while, I shall accomplish nothing but my
duty, whereto your self bound me, and I hope to execute with such success,
as you shall bear the prize for beauty, not only from the Ladies of France
and Allemaigne, but from all Christendom, yea, the whole world may I live to
travail it. Do not then (sweet Mistress) mislike, if I absent my self for
a cause so reasonable, and continue me still in your favorable conceit, as he
that was borne to do you service. And albeit I can not depart without
exceeding grief and anguish, yet persuaded of your rare arguments, I arm my
self with patience and yield to reason, being present with you always, in
that I carry your divine Image in my soul, and leave heart, life and all with
you till I come. These words were sealed with many devout kisses, and
Ptolome, had like pain in persuading Brionella, yet this contented them in the
end, that the honor of their travail was ye renown of their beauty, and so
with forced content they lovingly departed. The next morning the Princess
sent Palmerin an arming coat of green Ueluet, imbroidered all over with great
Oriental Pearls, and very thick besett with Stars of Gold, and in the
midst of each Star a costly Emeralde: and he had caused her picture to be
most curiously drawn in Gold, her face and hands formed wonderful near the
life, and all her linaments very singulerlie fashioned, and this portrait
caused he to be set in a fair Litter covered with Crimson velvet, which he
had provided only for the purpose, and so set forward.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How the Prince Jews came to see the Duchess of Burgundy, and what happened.

SO soon as the Heraldes and Horsemen of Jews of France and the Duke of
Sauoie, had dispatched their charge, their Lords gave order to prepare al
things in readiness so soon as might be: but yet the Princes affection to the
Duchess so tormented him, as he daily compassed new means to confer with
her, that she might know the passions he endured for her sake. At length it
came to pass, that the King, the Duke of Burgundy, and diverse other Princes
rode forth on pleasure together, and returned not again for two days space,
which made him thus begin with the Duchess. I need not tell you Madame, for
you know it well enough, how continually I languish in remediless
afflictions, till now this opportunity puts me in some hope of comfort, that
you performing a sollemne promise, will deliver me out of this extremity.
Wherefore fair Mistress, since time and occasion has pointed it, and Fortune
(by nature forward and inconstant) favors it, let me entreat you to take the
benefit of both, least hereafter we compass not the like again. My Lord
(quoth the Duchess) you must think I am more yours then mine own, and make
that reckoning of you, as no Lady can the like: how is it possible then for
me (loving as I do) to fly from that which love commands me to fulfill? Let
it suffice you then, that the regard of mine honor defended, I am ready to
do ought may agree with your liking. What happened afterward, I leave to your
oppinions, but by the half the whole may be discerned, notwithstanding,
virtuous Ladies have power to resist such motions, though time, occasion, and
such amorous sollicitings did offer it them: but such may be accounted more
divine then human, and to them may worthily be erected a Trophe, in disgrace
of the temptresse Venus. But this little discourse, not much dissenting from y^
matter, is written in reproach of such young dainty wantons, that attend on
their over fond and unchaste desires: and may likewise be a warning to
vndiscr^et old men, that they choose their Pante^^e fit for their foot.

But now is come the first of May, the day to begin the enterprises of the
Princes of France and Sauoie: Jews to entertain the Duchess love begun with
such advantage, had greater desire now to execute his intent then before.
Wherefore this day was his T^nt erected at ye City Gates, being beautiful
and very sumptuous, and at the enteraunce thereof was placed a goodly
monument of black Marble, curiously set forth we collombes of white Marble,
very thick imbossed with gold and pearl. At the side of his pauillion, was
placed another monument of green Jasper, adorned with many Bases, Pillars and
antique imagerie of Gold, whereon he intended ye strange Knights that came
should place the figures of their Ladies. On the other side was a seemly
place appointed for the Judges of the field, who were the Dukes of Orleaunce
and Burgundy, Princes greatly esteemed for their nobility, and in their time
had been hardy and aduenturous Knights. Many other Tents and Pauillions were
that day there set up, as well for strange Knights that came, as Noble men
and Gentlemen of the Realm. And now comes the Prince bravely mounted to the
field, accompanied with many young Princes, Knights and Gentlemen, the Heralds
and King of Arms ryding before, the Drums, Phifes, Tro^pets and Clarions
sounding so gallantly, as made the air deliver a most sweet Echo. Before
him in a very sumptuous Coche, was carried the curious counterfeite of the
Duchess, so superficially set forth with such perfection of art, as
though it had been the lively Duchess herself. After followed Prince Jews
in gorgious gilt Armor, all ouergrauen with most artificial flowers, and
mounted on a Courser of Spain, esteemed one of the best runners in Europe,
which made way with brave and lofty voltages, as did not a little delight y^
beholders: one of the chief Princes of the Court bearing his Helmet, and
another his Lance. What need I make further report of the Princes tryumphe,
he coming to the field in such equipage, as well beseemed the house from
whence he descended, and as beseemed a lovely Knight in presence of his Lady:
who as her favor had sent him that morning, a costly Girdle garnished with
Rubies, Diamondes, great Emeraldes and other invaluable stones, with a Sword
so good as ever Knight wore, and therewith rode he gyrded to the Field. Before
he went, the King his Father thus spoke to him. My Son, this day and all the
other following. Fortune speed thee so well, as thou may win the honor my
heart does wysh thee. My Lord, answered the Prince, I hope before the sennight
be finished, to accomplish your desire effectually, so favor me she that may
command me. So leaving the King he came to the place appointed for the
Combatte, the Judges placing themselves where they should, and the Prince
himself in his Tent, where having his Mistress picture set on ye appointed
place, he commanded ye Trompets to sound, and a Heralde to proclaim: that no
Knight bearing Arms should be so hardy as to ente^ his Tent, except he
first granted his Lady to be the fairest creature in the world, and if any
were so stubborn not to confess it, by knightly prowess he would force him
do it. The Heralde having done his charge, and the Judges caused the
conditions to be openly read, the people divided themselves in convenient
places, and the Lords Ladies and Gentlewomen betook them to their Tents and
Scaffoldes. The first that entered the field against the Prince, was the
County Durcell of Arragon, his four Squires conducting before him in a great
gorgious Litter, the stature of his Mistress, Daughter to the King of Arragon,
the fairest Lady in all Spain, and for whose beauty he took in hand this
quarrel. After him came four other Squires, the foremost leading his Courser,
the second bearing his Helmette, the third his Sheeld, and the fourth his
Gauntl^ts and Lance: and coming to the monument appointed for strange Ladies,
caused the portrait of his Lady to be placed thereon, then coming to the
Princes Tent, said. I know not Lord Jews, if overcome with glory, presumption
of your strength, or ouerweening your self, you have made this large
enterprise, to Combat with the best approved Knights in the whole world, in
judging no fairer Lady to be this day living then your own: for mine own
part, I am not so troubled in conceit as you are, to quarrel for such a
fabulous matter, yet dare I tell ye, that my Lady is much more beautiful
then yours, which if you will deny, I am ready by the strength of mine arm
to make you confess it. Jews feeling himself grieved with these injurious
speeches of the County, answered. Proud Knight, I am ashamed to hear thy
judgment so simple, as to think I am come hither for a matter of so light
moment, as though I would not justify against thee and all other what I have
promised: but let that pass, before we part, I will cause thee know thy folly,
by that time thy pate and thy body is thoroughly bumbasted, look to thy self,
for I intend to do it. So mounting on horseback, and prepared as it had been
to a war mortal, encountered each other with such fury, as their Lances
flying in shiuers up in the air, they met together so terriblie with their
bodies, their Sheeldes, their Horses and their heads, as they were both
dismounted to the ground. But earnest desire to vanquish, they being beside,
strong and will disposed Knights, made them quickly begin the second
assault with their Swords, which was so dangerous, and handled with such
dexterity, as it was hard to judge who should have the honor of the Combat.
B^t Jews beholding the representation of his Lady, and considering her so
excellent and favorable to him, took heart a fresh, and (as it were inspired
with new vigor) so laid on the County D^^cell, as in short time he brought
him under the mercy of his Sword, when holding it against his threate, he
said. Peremptory Knight, if now thou confess she not my Lady to (...) thine
in beauty, thy indiscreet head shall ransom thy soll^e. The County (for
all this) would not answer one word, by reason of the debilitie he felt
himself in, having lost so much of his blood, as for the grief he conceived
to be thus vanquished: whereat Prince Jews not content, would have taken his
head from his shoulders, but ye Judges of the field canie to him, saying. My
Lord, you ought to forbear, having brought your enemy beyond his own
defense, your victory ^eeing sufficient to content you, forbids his death. The
Prince persuaded, entered his Pauillion, and joyful of his conquest, commanded
two Gardants of the field, to take the figure of the Princess of Arragon, and
place it at the feet of the Duchess counterfeit, which was done immediately,
and the County Durcell brought into his own Tent, where his Chirurgions took
dilligent care for the curing of his wounds. Soon after came a Knight of
Myllaine, who giving such defiances as the other did, was in the end
constrained with great shame, to confess under the conquering Sword of Jews,
the imperfections of his Lady, and her stature placed by the Princess of
Arragon. The same day were five great Lords of Italy brought in like
subjection, and so the tryumphe ended till the next day, when the first that
came into the field was a brave Gallant of Spain, a Knight of good
estimation, and specially reputed, who after a dain-glorious Oration made (as
the nature of the people is that way affected) put his fortune to the trial of
his Lance, where he sped so ill, as he was vnhorssed, and in the following
Combat likewise received the foil. After him seven other Knights of Castile
proved as unfortunate, their Ladies pictures all reuerencing the Du^hesse, who
being not a little proud of her Knight, and the memorable renown he
witnessed of her beauty: I leave to your considerations, both of her conceit
that way, as also in love toward the Prince, who seeing no more ready to
enter the quarrel, returned thence to the Palace, to confer with his sweet
Mistress of his high good fortunes.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the Combat between Prince Jews of France, and Crenus the Duke of Gaul.

GReat pleasure did the King conceive, and all the nobility of the Court, at
the ^otten victories of Prince Jews, against so many worthy Knights, so
that they altogether accounted him most fortunate. And now the third day
when he was entered his Tent, an English Knight (no less brave in terms then
the former) defied the Prince, and between them began a dangerous conflict, in
the midst whereof, the King with many Princes, Barons and Lords, as also the
Queen and the Duchess of Burgundy, came to their standing, and unhappily
beheld the foil of the English Knight, the Duchess hearing him confess her
beauty, and beheld his Ladies portrait placed under hers. But now the
courageous Duke of Gaul named Crenus, came bravely mounted into the field,
doing his duty to the King, Queen and Ladies, who not knowing him, by his
Armor judged him some great Lord, in that no Knight before caused so good
opinion generally, nor came with brauer countenance into ye field: he being
indeed a Prince of wonderful possessions, and a Knight at Arms woorthilie
approved. The Duke (as all the other had done) caused his Ladies counterfeite
to be placed where it ought by his Squires, to the no little admiration of all
the beholders, noting what rare and excellent beauty it was adorned withal,
the workman having performed such exquisite perfections, as it had been the
Lady herself naturally living: while the Squires were thus placing it on the
monument, the Duke advanced himself to Jews in this manner. The overmuch
self conceit (Lord Jews) of minds but easily acquainted with matters of
difficulty, has often been, and yet is the cause, to pluck great personages
more low then they expecte: so that men have seen them deceived of their
intents, and rewarded with ridiculous shame and confusion. This speak I to
you, having here begun a business, the end whereof will be more hard to you,
then as yet the beginning has been: for Europe is sufficiently stored with
hardy Knights to assuage your presumptuous opinion, and Ladies much more fair
and excellent, then she whom you contend for. And this (by the favor of
Fortune, gracious regard of my Lady and Mistress, and help of my good
Sword) will I enforce you to confess: that incomparable Agriola, daughter to
the King of England, for virtue, for beauty and all divine perfections,
exceeds yours whatsoever she be. Before such a leasing (quoth the Prince)
shall pass the lips of a Son of France, rather will I consent to be
peecemeale torn in sunder: and before fair Phoebus have paced one hours
journey, I doubt not to make thee repent thy pride and arrogancy. By the soul
of King Arthur, said ye Duke, look thou guard thy self well, for I have with
my courtela^, abated the pride of a brauer man then thy self, and ere we two
part, I mean to try if I can do it again, therefore resolve thy self to
thy best defense, for (by my life) I will not favor thee. Without any further
speeches they encountered with such violence together, as Prince Jews was
thrown between his horses feet, and he for England lost his stirrops, but
recovered himself well enough by the main of his Horse: then he seeing his
enemy not up again, cast himself out of his saddle to have taken his
advantage, but Jews prevented him, and came marching against the Duke with
his Sword drawn, who stayed him thus. Me thinks Prince of France, before any
worse befall thee, thou were best to yield thy self, and remember that our
Combatte begins for the excellency of beauty. By God man of England,
answered Jews, thou can not persuade me to a thing so far from my
thought, therefore go too, and he that has the fairest Freende, shall soon be
known. In this great choler, he reached the Duke such a stroke on the head,
as made him set one knee to ye ground, but recovering himself quickly, and
both thoroughly angry, they laid on each other so cruelly, as the very hardiest
of the beholders feared the success. Thus fought they for matter of special
value, the defense of their own reputations, and honor of their Ladies, whose
love was more precious in their hearts then their own lines. So long these
eager charges continued on both sides, as Prince Jews having received more
then twenty wounds on his body, feeling himself fainte, fell down before
his enemy, saying. O noble heart of France, the true succeeder of thy famous
predecessors. The victorious Englishman setting his foot upon him, said.
Lord Jews, if now thou declarest not my Lady to excel thine in beauty, it
c^sts thee thy life, a matter nothing pleasing to me, in respect of the
chiualry, and singular prowess I have found in thee, as also this
magna^^^ious enterprise of thine, which in despite of thy foil, and death it
self, shall make thee live for ever. But Jews made no answer, either for his
weakness, or sorrowful conceit of his misfortune, wherefore the Judges came,
who granting the Duke victory, desired him to proceed no further, which he
honorably granting, was as joyful of the conquest, as the Duchess sad and
pensive, thinking Prince Jews had been slain outright, wherefore the floong
away to her lodging, not tarrying for the King or any of the Ladies, who
likewise departed the field in maruailous sorrow, seeing their Son so
pitifully wounded: but above al, the Duchess made more lamentation, then she
would have done for the death of her Husband, yet fearing what she thought
secretly, should by her grief be openly suspected, comforted herself so
well as she could: and being by herself, with one of her trusty Gentlewomen,
she thus breathed forth her mones. Ah treacherous Fortune, enemy to all
actions of regard, why have thou suffered the man thou most favored, thus to
be vanquished? and (which is most to be pitied) without hope of life? Ah
deceitful tremperesse, seeing thou have offered him so much wrong, do me the
favor to bear him company in death, that lived and died so honorably for my
love. Ah death, let it suffice thee y^ Love has wounded him, and make not thou
experience of thy^e inevitable stroke, unless thou will do as much for me.
Ah false and flattering Son of Venus, is this the guerdon thou rewardest them
withal, that serve thee faithfully? So ceasing her complaint awhile, in great
impatience she thus began again. Alas, neither ye one or other are cause
heerof, but my most unhappy self, when (provoked by my beautye) he took in
hand this enterprise: but if it be so (dear Freende) that enu^ous fate deal
so hard with thee, soon may thou be revenged on her that caused it. And
with these words she sell between the arms of one of her Ladies present,
whom she specially trusted, who thus spoke to her, Why how now Madame? w^l
you persuade your self no otherwise? believe me there is no remedy but you
must change this conceit. What will you forgette your self? it is no time if
you remember your self well, for if he whom you love and endure these pains
for, should understand hereof: in stedde of seeking his health, you will
shorten his days, if (as you say) he live not without your welfare. More
requisite is it, that you go comfort him with your cheereful presence, then
thus to be the argument of both your deaths. Beside Madame, if my Lord
survive, as no doubt he shall: what may he presume? trust me matter sufficient
(if you govern not your self better) that you seek to discover, what most of
all beseemes you to conceal. Alas (my Freende) answered the Duchess, I know
you speak the truth: but how is it possible for me to content my self,
seeing what estate he is in only for my love? But if he dye, small reckoning
will I make of my life: for let my honor be blamed or otherwise, let all
adversities and misfortunes go^ together. Yet will I somewhat be advised by
thee, and I will go see if my presence will any thing comfort him. To break
off this talk came an Esquire from the Queen, to entreat her come to her
Majesty, which she did, and went with the Queen to the Princes lodging, who
beholding the Duchess so pale and full of grief, with this conceit his
wounds opened and bl^dde (...): for which cause his Chirurgions, who imagined
the occasion to proceed, by shame the Prince conceived, that any one should
see what wounds he took by the Duke of Gaul, wherefore they forbad any to
enter his (...), until ye peril of death was better passed over, which was
within short time, when ye Duchess by her often visiting him, converted his
sorrows into many joyful co^ceits. But because our History appertains not
only to his deeds, or the love of the Duchess, we will return to the Duke
of Gaul, who after he had thus conquered Prince Jews, followed the conditions
of the field, taking the portraite of his Lady Agriola, and placed it where
the Duchess picture stood, setting it among the other conquered Ladies. That
day diverse other Knights came on behalf of their Ladies, who^ the valiant
Englishman entertained with such valor, as all his pains turned to the
honor of his Mistress Agriola, who now was seated as paragon of the field.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Combatte between Palmerin, and the Duke of Gaul, with the success
thereof.

ON the same day that the Prince of France was vanquished by the Duke of
Gaul, arrived at Paris, Palmerin, Trineus, and their train, but the Combat
was first ended, wherefore they commanded their Squyres to prepare their Tent.
Palmerin understanding y^ the Duke was conqueror, grieved not a little, in y^
he came no sooner to win the honor of the Prince: yet knowing if now he
could conquer the Duke, more glory should arise to him then by the Prince
Jews, he contented himself, passing that night in his Tent with the Prince
Trineus, in diverse arguments of the Combat between Jews of France and the
Duke, yet was Jews highly commended to Palmerin though he were overcome,
because he had so bravely done the two former days against al y^ Knights
that came. All this night could not Palmerin sleep, thinking on the day
ensuing, but rising early in the morning, and commending himself to God in
his prayers, he put on the Coat of Arms his Lady Polinarda gave him before
his departure, and took the counterfeite of his Lady in his arms, not
thinking any of his Knights or Squyres worthy to bear it, and thus
accompanied with Trineus and other Allemaigne Lords, entered the Lystes with so
brave a gesture and countenance, as every one commended him for a good Knight.
And having placed the picture on the accustomed monument, as it had been to
the lively creature herself, he thus began. Ah perfect mirror of all beauty,
virtue and excellency, resolve thy self this day to bear the palm of
honor from all Ladies in the world, in that your Knight craves a thousand
deaths, before he give consent to the contrary: and persuades himself so
assured of your present favor, as he durst venture on a whole Army, to keep
his religion in your divine service. These words were spoken so loud, as ye
Duke of Gaul heard him, wherewith not contented, he answered. What now
Knight? demaundest thou courage of a Lady to defend her beauty, ill can
thou perform what thou speak, if thou be no better prou^ded. For all that
Sir, said Palmerin, I hope to make you grant what I say, and that there is
not a ^ayrer Lady living, then she whose figure thou here beholdest,
otherwise I shall constrain thee whether thou wylt or no. That shall we see,
quoth the Duke, so departing into their Tents to be armed, and ready to Ioust,
they met so valiantly together, as they broke their Lances bravely without
moving each other, and taking new staves encountered again, when the Duke
was vnhorssed, and Palmerin very sore wounded: so betaking the to their
swords, continued a dangerous and doubtful Combat, till in the end Palmerin
overcame the Duke, and holding his sword ready to cut off his head, said.
Knight thou art dead, if thou grant not my Lady to excel thine in beauty.
Ah sir, said the Duke, unhappy be the hour that you took in hand this
voyage, to deprive me of that which made me y^ most happy Knight of the
world, with what countenance may I present my self before her, seeing Fortune
has been so adverse to me? thus filling the air with his regrets, the Judges
came, desiring Palmerin to save his life, whereto he consented, which words
were more bitter to the Duke then death, who in these complaints was lead into
his Tent by his Squires. Palmerin not forgetting the honor due to his Lady,
took down the Image of Agriola, and set his Ladies in the room, saying. New
are you in the place Madame, which is your own by right. This victory was not
a little pleasant to the Frenchm^n, but especially to Prince Jews when he
heard thereof, who the better to make his joy known to Palmerin, sent him
two of the best Horses in his stable, as glad of the revenge on the Duke, as
y^ Palmerin remained conqueror. Palmerin sent hearty thanks to the Prince, as
well for his present as his good will, and continued in his deuoire to his
Ladies beauty, as that da^e he honored her with y^ conquest of four French
Knights, and the submission of their Ladies portraitures: yet above all,
Palmerin commended to Trineus the valor of y^ Englishman, confirming y^ Duke
for a chosen Knight at Arms, and neither Frenchman, Italian, Spanyard,
Englishman, Roman, or Greek, that attempted against Palmerin in the
following days, but still he bare away the victory, and Polinardas picture
their Ladies obeysaunce. The last of the eight days came into the field the
Lord of Albret, greatly esteemed for prowess and chivalry, and he would
defend the beauty of his French Lady: but Palmerin after a long and tedious
fight, brought him and his Mistress among the vanquished, and so concluded ye
French Princes enterprise to his own immortal honor. Afterward came the King
Agariell, with the Princes and Lords of his Court to Palmerins. Tent, making
him the greatest entertainment could be devised, whereof Trineus and the other
Allemaigne Lords were highly contented, and after his wounds were healed,
caused him and his company to be lodged in his own Palace, where the Queen
and her Ladies would often visit him, and the Prince Jews likewise, who by
many entreaties with (...), understood her name for whom Palme^in thus
adventured. But when the King understood, that Trineus was the Emperor of
Allemaignes Son, and all this honorable company came from his Fathers
Court, their welcome cannot be sufficiently set down, nor Palmerins praises
effectually rehearsed, whom the Prince Jews thus entertained. In sooth Sir
Palmerin, ye Prince may imagine himself happy, that is honored with your
knightly service, but above all, the noble Emperor of Allemaigne. My Lord,
quoth Palmerin, it likes you to speak your pleasure of me, yet did I never
know Knights more worthy in fight then your Countrymen, among whom your
deserts may not escape vnreported, no more then the deeds of Scipio can among
the Romans. Many other honor able and familiare speeches passed between
the Prince and Palmerin, about the Ladies figures that were brought to the
Ioustes: Polinarda only tryumphing beyond all the rest, having no second but
fair Agriola of England, the Goddess and Mistress to the Duke of Gaul.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the Combat which the Dukes of Sauoye and Lorrayne had together, for the
beauty of their Ladies, and what was the issue thereof.

YOu have here before heard, the enterprise of the Duke of Sauoy for the
beauty of his Lady, and how after Prince Jews his days of Combat were
finished, he should maintain nine other in the like quarrel: wherefore the
day after Palmerins victory, he put himself in order as the time required,
and having in the field erected two Pillars of Porphire, displacing them that
belonged to the Prince Jews, his Tent was there set up all of Crimson velvet,
very curiouslye imbroydered with Gold and pearl, and round about within
were many brave se^tences of love, drawn from Historiographers and Poets, as
well Greek as Latin, in praise of the Mistress of his devoted affections. In
the morning he went to give the good morrow to the Princess Luc^ma^^a
Daughter to the King of France, whom he had chosen for his spouse and Wife.
After many sollemne courtesies passed between them, fearing the Queen should
find them together, he took his leave of her, she giving him from her arm
a sump^uo^s Bracelet, garnished with six great Diamondes, and six fair
Rubies, which gift encouraged him to follow his enterprise. Being come into
the Field, the Judges appointed, were the eldest Son of France, and the
County of Armigna^, wise Princes and valiant Knights, and standing in y^ Gate
of his Tent unarmed, because he saw none ready to offer him battle: the Duke
of Lorrayne at length entered the Field, attended on by a brave company of
Knights and Squires, who brought the portrait of his Lady, being a figure of
rare beauty, and having a Crown on her head, where over was written in great
Letters of Gold, This is Polinarda, exceedyng in beauty al Ladies in the
world, which was read by many, who could not satis-fie their eyes in
beholding so brave a spectacle, and being set on the Pillar appointed, he
came to the Duke of Sauoye, saying. Blasphemous Knight, detractour of the
beauty of Ladies, here may thine own eyes witness how thou have belyed
beauty, in presuming to think any more fair then this incomparable creature,
to whom thy Lady may not worthily be handmaide. And if thou will not
presently confess what I command thee, sheelde thy head from my weapon,
which I mean to knock well for thy great vndiscretion. The Duke of Sauoy
enraged with these words, armed himself presently without any answer, and
mounting on horseback with a strong Lance in his hand, encountered his enemy
so couragiouslye, as breaking their staves bravely in thyuers to their very
Gauntlets, passed on without any further harm. The Duke of Sauoy angry that
he had not dismounted his enemy, with his Sword drawn returned furiously
upon him, and laid on such strokes as the fire flew forth of his Helmet: yet
the Duke of Lorrayne like a good and hardy Knight, defended himself
valiantly, and reached the Duke of Sauoy many shrewd wounds, so that both of
them thoroughly netled, rent each others Armor in such sort with their
swords, and mangled their flesh so unmercifully, as the Judges could not
imagine who had the better vauntage. The Duke of Sauoye wondering to see the
Duke of Lorraine hold out so long, began to storm more like a Fiend then a man, railing on Fortune, that (in respect of his Ladies beauty) she asisted
him no better, and being at the very point of despair, took heart a (...),
and redoubling his strokes upon his adversary, at length ^lewe his horse under
him, who falling down, and his Master under him, by reason he was so sore
wearyed, and beside, had broken his thigh in the fall, could not recover
himself, before the Duke of Sauoie (being alighted) set foot upon him, and
in furye would have parted his head from his shoulders, but that the Judges
ran quickly and stayed him. Then was ye Duke of Lorraine half dead carried
into his Tent, and the Duke of Sauoie caused Polinardas picture to be set at
Lucemanias feet, a thing very strange in respect of their great difference.
Afterward he was unarmed to have his wounds bound up, which were so
dangerous, as gladly he would have been excused from the Combat with any
other Knight for that day, did not shame, and the Law he made himself
provoke him to the contrary. But within an hour after, he was defied by a
Knight of Scicilie, who would Combat on foot with the battle Axe, in which
conflicte the Duke was very near overcome, he had lost so much blood before:
but in brief, the Scicilian Knight lost the day, his Ladies picture was
yielded conquered, and the Duke of Sauoie went to rest him in his Tent.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How the Duke of Sauoye entered the Combatte against Ptolome, and how he sped.

PAlmerin not as yet in perfect health, was advertised, how the Duke of Sauoie
had conquered the Duke of Lorraine, fighting for the beauty of the Princess
Polinarda, the conceit whereof so grieved him as nothing could more, to see
her honor so badlie defended, whom above all other he esteemed dearest, which
made him in great choler say before the Prince Trineus. By God (my Lord)
Love made a slender choice of the Duke of Lorraine for his vassayle, and
Madame Polinarda scant wise to choose him for her Champion, in respect of the
excellent beauty Nature has bestowed on her. And yet it could not be
imagined, how the Duke of Lorraine should gain the victory without shame, in
seeking honor beyond his desert, because he is unworthy such extraordinary
favor: which makes me repute it rather of a faint heart, then any want of a
just quarrel. Trineus hearing Palmerin so affectionate in his speeches, in a
merry laughter, said. In good sooth Sir Palmerin, the Duke of Lorraine was but
ill councelled, to enter the Combat for my Sisters beauty without her license,
in that he once learned, how you could defend it much better then he.
Palmerin fearing he had spoken more then he ought, because he discoursed his
love too openly, excused the matter thus. If it were not (my Lord) that I
doubt to offer wrong to a Lady, on whom depends my life, and whom I love
more dear then my self: I would cause the Frenchman well to understand, how
Madame Polinarda your Sister, surpasses in all perfections either of grace or
beauty, all the Ladies of this Country, yea, I dare say of the whole world,
therefore one may easily conjecture, that the Duke of Lorraine during ye
Combat, had his mind fixed on baser occasions. Then Trineus smyling to see
Palmerin so dilligent to shadow his love, said. It is no strange matter
Freende Palmerin, to see presuming minds paid with self same coin, as the
Duke is: and yet I can not marvel enough, that my Sister Polinarda would not
commit this matter to your charge, she having had so good knowledge of your
valor and prowess. These speeches pleased not Palmerin a little, and did in
such sort encourage him, as for the injury done his Lady by the Duke of
Sauoye, in setting her figure at the feet of Lucemania, as had not Trineus
persuaded him with fair speeches, all sick and sore as he was, he would have
gone to revenge this dishonor. Notwithstanding, he called Prolome secretly,
saying. Thou know (my dear Freende) what shame is offered her, to whom I
was destenied before my birth, by the presumption of an ouer-bolde Knight, and
what grief it is to me, that I cannot at this present revenge this wrong my
self, I pray thee therefore supply my insufficiency, and enter the Combat
with that vainglorious Duke, of whom thou may gain honor and yield me
content, in giving ease to my afflictions, which else are insupportable. I
promise you my Lord, answered Ptolome, before you made the mo^^on I intended
it, and I will accomplish it with such good will, as I doubt not to overcome
the Duke of Sauoy. And for my Mi^^^esse Brionella, will I enter the field,
whose beauty is sufficient to enriche me with the victory, for in my conceit,
she far passes Lucemania. Therefore my Lord let me request one courtesy,
which I am loathe you should deny me: that if you shall be able to morrow, but
to accompany me with your presence in the field. If the air will suffer me,
quoth Palmerin, I will, in mean while I will pray, that thy fortune may fall
out to my hearts desire. Thus Trineus, Palmerin and Ptolome, were passing the
time with other noble men, of the valor of the Duke of Sauoy against all
strange Knights, and how he had not foiled the Duke of Lorraine, had not his
Horse fallen on him and maimed him, otherwise he brought the Combatte to so
good a judgment, as he had wunne the honor of ye field. Whereat Palmerin was
more offended then before, because himself was not able to revenge this
misfortune, heerewithall he conceived a kind of jealousy of the Duke of
Lorraine, because he had chosen his Lady Polinarda for his Mistress, and
on her behalf had entered the Combatte, and how he durst place her picture on
the Pillar with her name, without he had received some commandment from her,
which conceit so grieved him, as his wounds began to be as dangerous as at
the first, continually laboring in his thoughts, now with the lightness, then
again with the constancy of Women, nevertheless, he could not judge
(affecting earnestly the virtues of his Lady) that she would be of such a
double lyking, and in this doubtful estate, said. Ah God, I see that Women
win lightly, and loose again more easily. Then repenting his words,
follows on thus. O heavens, and what shall I say? it is impossible that she
(meaning Polinarda) should be so forgetful, and never will I believe, that a
Princess so wise and virtuous, would reward me with such treason, which may
not, nay I dare swear cannot, once enter her thoughts. Yet would not all
opinions serve to allay this new jealousy, but still it had power to
confound reason, and all the night continued he in this variable conceit, till
the next morning, when Ptolome (so soon as the Sun arose) acco^panyed with
Trineus, went to his Tent, where being armed, all saving his Helmet, having
his Lance and Sheelde, he came to the Duke, saying. Thou know Knight the
cause of my coming, stand upon thy guarde, for I sight for beauty. The Duke
suddenly at these words mounted on horseback, and ran against his enemy
with such strength, as Ptolome cast the Duke forth of his saddle, and suddenly
alighted with his Sword drawn: but the Duke recovering himself, entertained
him in sharper sort then he expected. Now began between them a cruel and
pittious Combat, as their Armor, sheeldes and swords, ^lewe about in pieces,
and the blood trickling down their bodies in many places, so that it was
generally reputed, how the fight could not end without the loss of both their
lives. Yet in the end, the Duke being of stronger constitution then Ptolome,
and greedy of victory over his enemy, ran so violently upon him as he got
him on the ground, and he being uppermost, offered to take the advantage of
his life: but the Judges forbidding it, caused Ptolome to be carried into his
Tent, where the Prince Trineus stayed not a little sorry for this great
misfortune. The Duke likewise sore wounded was carried into his Pauillion, but
first he saw the portrait of Brionella set in the rank of the conquered.
The same day did the Duke fight with a Knight of Scotland at the Ma^e, who not
nimble enough in using that weapon, in the end had the foil, and three other
Knights afterward at several weapons, so that it was admirable to behold the
exploits of Arms the Duke did, in that no Knight as yet meddled with him, but
departed with shame, and their Ladies pictures placed as vanquished. And now
was Palmerins Combatte against the Duke of Gaul not talked on, for the Duke of
Sauoy was accounted the only Knight in the world, to the no small joy of the
Princess Lucemania, who persuaded herself now, that her beauty was most
excellent. But she was not so pleasant as Palmerin was pensive, and ^nraged out
of measure, notwithstanding his weakness, and the often entreaties of Trineus,
he would needs to the field, saying. Good my Lord persuade me not, for I
reckon not my life, so I may take vengeance of the dishonor done to my Lady
your Sister: the manifold courtesies of the Emperor your Father, have so
bound me to her and you, as exceed my life far, and therefore I beseech you
not to hinder me. Trineus yet overcame him by persuasions, assuring him to have
time sufficient for his revenge, whereat greatly displeased, he feigned
himself to be whole sooner then he was indeed, for the great desire he had
to deal with the Duke. And Prince Jews angry, to see the Duke hold the
field longer then he did, not able to be overcome by any Knight, came to
Palmerin saying. I know not my Lord, whether you understand the Duke of
Sauoyes victories against so many hardy Knights, but belike his strength is
much better then mine was, or Fortune allows him more favor then she did to
me. In my conceit if you enter not the Combat, you do me wrong and your self
too, and if he depart hence with victory, then shall I have cause to complain
of you: in that his success has made him so brave and presumptuous, as though
no Knight is able to answer him in the field, let me entreat you Sir Palmerin
to abate his pride, and (as well he deserves) make him know his folly.
Palmerin having greater desire to execute this matter, then thus to be
entreated, returned the Prince this answer. My Lord, God gives honor and
victory to whom he pleases, without either regard of the cause or the
persons. If according to bounty or nobility of mind he distributed such
gifts, then had you been among the better sort, as furnished sufficiently
with valor and magnanimity: yet if your enterprise have not sorted to your
desire, account this for certain that it is for your good, and for other
reasons the^ are to you known, for such matters are his secrets, and he does
balance them by his divine wisdom. Notwithstanding, as well to satis-fie
your request, as ease mine own mind, to morrow morning will I enter my Tent,
albeit my present estate would have me stay awhile, there will I Combat with
the Duke, not certain how Fortune means to deal with me. But happen what
shall, I go with a mind to conquer, and doubt not but the issue will be
such, as shall yield you content, and me the victory, so shall your sadness and
mine be converted into pleasure. With this answer the Prince satis-fied,
departed, yet was he ignorant of Palmerins intent, which was far otherwise
then he imagined: but pleased as he was he went into the presence Chamber,
where many Knights were conferring of deeds of Arms past, to whom he opened
the fantasy of Palmerin, which caused a general doubting of the Duke, setting
him down for vanquished, except Palmerins weakness were his greater Freende.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of the perilous Combat between Palmerin and the Duke of Sauoye, and the issue
thereof.

Six days together had y^ Duke of Sauoye maintained this quarrel, for the
beauty of his Lady Lucemania, and no Knight as yet could get any advantage
of him, until ye seventh day, when Palmerin prepared himself to the field,
and entered his Tent, accompanied with Prince Jews of France, Trineus and many
other Princes. The King with all his train taking their standing to behold ye
Combat, Palmerin came armed forth of his Tent, saving his Helmet, which was
carried before him by two Squires with his Sheeld and Mace, and next to them
came two Princes, who bare the portraiture of his Lady Polinarda, which being
set on the Pillar, he clasped on his Helmet, and taking his Mace in his
hand, martched to the Dukes Tent, and thus summoned him. Knight, thou have
long enough defended the field, and to my great grief that it has been so
long, my turn is now come, and it is good reason I should keep it the rest
of the time: for the Lady whom I love, is not only much more beautiful then
thine, but beside, excels all other whatsoever, and if thou will not
confess the same, I will not leave thee with this Mace till I have forced thee
to do it. I know not said the Duke, what thou can do, but I am of the
mind, that I shall soon quallifie thy over bold brauing. At these words the
Duke taking his Mace, delivered Palmerin so sound a stroke on the head, as
made him to stagger, but Palmerin requited him well again for it, and long had
they fought together, and bruised each other very pitifully, till at length
Palmerin gave the Duke such a cruel stroke between the head and the
shoulders, as he fell to the ground clean bereft of sense: when Palmerin
taking off his Helmet, would not offer him any further violence, but setting
his sword against his breast, said. Now am I sufficiently revenged on him, that
so ill entreated the figure of the most fairest among Ladies. The Judges of the
field, thinking Palmerin would have slain the Duke, came running to him with
these words. Content you Sir, he is vanquished, and has no power to defend
himself. Whereupon Palmerin put up his Sword again, and leaving the Duke,
went presently to the Pillar where his Ladies portrait stood, which embracing
in his arms, he placed highest, and Lucemania at her feet, saying. I beseech
you Madame to pardon your Knight, in that he did no sooner repel the famous
injury offered you, and impute it not to fear, or want of courage, but
debility of body, which once a little recovered, I came to maintain your
honor, and here confirm you for the most beautiful Lady living. While
Pal^^erin thus contemplated his Mistress figure, the Judges commanded the
Duke to be carried into his Pauillion, where with sovereign drinks life was
got into him again, but when he know himself to be vanquished, and that in
one hour he lost the greatest honor of all his life time, very conceit of
grief had well near slain him. No less was the sorrow of Madame Lucemania,
but she and her Knight were not so much discontented, as Palmerin, Trineus, and
Ptolome were joyful, but above all other Prince Jews of France, more
pleasant then if himself had tryumphed in victory, thinking he could not
sufficiently extol the renown of Palmerin, calling him y^ only puller down
of the proud. That day did Palmerin encounter with seven other Knights, and
in his conquests showed himself not only magnanimious, but merciful, saving
their lives, and honoring his Mistress with the humility of theirs. The next
day likewise after many brave exployts, being ready to leave field because
none came to resist him, on a sudden there entered a Knight in black Armor,
stripte all over with Gold, and bearing in his sheelde of Azur the Golden
Sun, whose brave order of entrance declared him to be a hardy Knight at
Arms, who aduauncing him self to Palmerin, said. My intent of coming hither
(Sir Knight) is to let thee understand, that I am the Servant and beloved of a
Lady, who may not be equalled with any other, and because I am informed, that
y^ maintainest thy F^eend, to excel all Ladies whatsoever, I offer to prove
the contrary, and will make thee confess it. I never spoke words more true,
answered Palmerin, and here abide to justify them: but this place is
ordained to no other end, then to make thee and thy like know, what unadvised
enterprises you take in hand. And one thing is required of ^hee, that before
thou begin the Combat, thou set upon this Pyller the counterfeite of her,
whom thou perswadest thy self to excel my Lady in beauty, according to the
conditions of this field published through all Europe. That cannot I do,
answered the Knight of the Sun, for I have no other picture of her then is
imprinted in my heart, where love has so lively figured her person, as she is
daily presented to me by her incomparable beauty, which cannot be taken from
me but only by death. And if love follow the soul, [as diverse hold opinion]
whole worlds cannot separate me from her. And therefore are all men unworthy
to receive fruition (by their regard) of a thing so precious, which makes me
imagine, none but my self worthy to look on her divine figure. Prepare thee
therefore to thy Horse, and defend thy self. Palmerin desirous to know the
name of this fair Lady, said. I see Sir Knight, that you art marvelous proud
and surly, which make me desire rather to Combat with thee then any other, to
abate this hot humor: albeit this is contrary to his conditions, who was the
principal Author of this enterprise, which is, that thou should set on this
Pillar her portrait whom thou so esteemest, yet this exception shall be
granted thee, for the desire I have to know what thou can do, as also her
name, if thou dare reveal it. To tell thee her name (answered ye Knight of
the Sun) I will not stick with thee, and because in concealing it, I shall
offer her wrong, nature having in her set down the only work of beauty:
know therefore that her name is Polinarda, Daughter to the mighty Emperor of
Allemaigne. These words were so yrkesome to Palmerin, and troubled his
thoughts in such sort, that he knew not readily what to answer:
notwithstanding in midst of his choler, thus spoke. By God Knight thou have
made a good choice, for against her beauty will not I contend, having it in
greater estimation and reverence then you can have: but I am ready to prove,
that thou deseruest not to be named her Knight, no not so much as her meanest
Servant. That shall we try, said the Knight of the Sun, before we part: and
albeit her excellency deserve far greater service then mine: yet so it is,
that for the love I bear her, and the affection I have to obey her by some
agreeable service, I may by good reason name my self hers. At these speeches
Palmerin conceived such jealousy, as without attending any further matter,
mounted in great anger on horseback, and met the Knight of the Sun so
forcibly, as both of them were sent to the ground: whereupon they drew their
Swords, and charged each other with such fury, as their Armor and Sheeldes
were hacked in pieces, and ye ground coullered with their expense of blood. No
permission of breathing was suffered between them, but blood and death
earnestly desired on either part, so that the King, the Lords and the Judges,
reputed this for the strangest Combat that ever they saw, nor could they say
who was likest to win the field, but if the one died, the other could not
escape, so that the King moved with compassion, caused them to be severed, and
commanded them to enter their Tents. Which motion liked well the Knight of the
Sun, for long he persuaded himself he could not hold out, wherefore he mounted
on horseback so well as he could, and withdrewe himself, Palmerin being
wonderfully displeased, that he could not obtain the victory of this Knight.
Soon after, the King and the Prince Jews came into his Tent, and seeing him
very sore wounded, would not let him stay there, but said. Believe me (Sir
Palmerin) you have great need of rest, and your wounds I see are very
dangerous, you shall therefore be conveyed to my Palace, where all helps that
may be devised shall be given, assuring you, that greater honor could never
Knight purchase, then you have done. And though this last Combat were not
ended, you need not be displeased, the issue thereof importing y^ death of the
one or the other, and perhaps of both, which I would not have seen for two of
the best provinces in my Realm. And me thinks you should content your self,
having received before, such honor over so many Lords and Knights of name,
come you therefore with me, and Lord Trineus bear us company. Great thanks
received the King of them for this honorable courtesy, and Palmerin went with
him to the Palace, where the Kings Chirurgions took care of his wounds, he
being lodged in the most stately Chamber in the Court. Now the Prince Jews
began to love Palmerin so dearly, as he could not be an hour forth of his
company, desiring his health as his own welfare: wherefore all things that he
imagined Palmerin took pleasure in, would he perform with his uttermost
endeavors, and would suffer none to hold him talk, but only of matter that
might yield pleasure and delight. Notwithstanding, diverse Knights conferring
with him that evening, as concerning the Knight of the Sun: Palmerin
answered them, that his mind should never be thoroughly quieted, until such time
as he fought with him again. The Prince, who still endeavored to keep him
from sadness, said. I believe (my Lord) that he will not easily be induced to
deal with you again, for you brought him into such estate, as he will keep
himself hereafter out of your hands: and well I am assured, that had you
continued but a little longer, the victory had been yours, for the Knight was
so weakened, that he did nothing but defend your blows. It pleases you (my
Lord) to say so quoth Palmerin, but had he felt such valor in me, or such
courage as beseemes a virtuous Combatant, hardly could he escape as he has
done: nevertheless, I hope (with the favor of Fortune) to meet him once
more, and then we will try who is the strongest. Much other talk they had,
but Palmerin entreated the Prince, that all the portraits of the conquered
Ladies might be brought him, which were above an hundred, of diverse beauties
and most strange fashions, and among them all could be found none second to
Polinarda, but (as we have said already) that of Agriola the Princess of
England: who (by the report of a Gentleman present that had seen her) was much
more beautiful then her figure presented. Such speeches they continued so long
of the Englih Uirgin, as Trineus (albeit he never saw her) became amorous of
her, and at y^ instant he so solemnly vowed himself hers, as thence forward
he swore never to love any but her, so y^ for her sake he thrust himself into
many perrillous fortunes, as in the following discourse of the History you
shall read more at large. From whom let us return to the Prince Jews, who
seeing so many portraitures of Princesses and Ladies, would daily congratulate
Palmerins good fortune, and embracing him, said. So help me God, my noble
companion, I would never desire greater riches in the world, the^ to resemble
you, especially in chiualry, which in you is so surpassing al other, as you
have ended to your honor, what a number have failed in. Oh how happy may the
Lady account herself, that has such a Knight? and were not the condition too
cruel toward my self, I could wish I were a Woman in her place, to have so
high rule and command over you. At which words all present began to smile, yet
showing good countenance to Palmerin, for the affection they saw the Prince
bear him, which is yet to this day a common usage and practice among
Courtiers: but Palmerin somewhat ashamed of such superstitious praises,
answered. Trust me my Lord, I account my happiness the greater, that I have
done service to so high a personage and so good a Knight as you are, desiring
to meet you in such place hereafter, where you may perceive the good will I
bear you, not only for this high entertainment, which is more then I can
deserve, as for the pleasure I have to honor so good a Prince, which if the
occasion happen, you shall perceive the experience. I have spoken nothing
(quoth the Prince) but what is more acquainted to others then my self, and if
I would conceal them, then will they be most openly known, because virtue
does so apparantlie shine in them. Many other speeches passed between, them,
and longer had continued, but that many Lords which came to see the Ioustes,
were now upon departing, and therefore would take their leave of the King,
whereupon they were constrained to break off, the Prince going to the Chamber
of presence, where he gave thanks to a number that honored the Court with
their presence: and so one after another all departed, the Duke of Sauoye
being one of the first, ashamed (God knows) to be so conquered by Palmerin,
and not bidding his Lady Lucemania farewell. But Jews did not serve the
Duchess so, for her love continued as resolute as before, and she loved him
as well conquered, as had he been the conqueror, whereof she assured him by
many amorous meetinges, by which means the Prince stayed the Duke at the
Court, longer then himself would have done. Jews thus lo^ing Palmerin as
you have heard, entreated the Duchess to come and visit him, which she
accomplished the day following, when Palmerin spent many discourses with her,
rather of love then entering into religion, for he perceived by her
countenance, that she had no will to become a Nun: where we will leave them
together, to tell you who the Knight of the Sun was, that fought ye last
Combat with Palmerin.

CHAP. XL.
Who the Knight of the Sun was, and of his strange adventures.

THe King of Hungaria, Father to the Prince Tarisius, that married the fair
Griana, Mother to Palmerin, had in his latter years a Son named Netrides,
and after he had long lived in rest and prosperity, he dyed, leaving the young
Prince Netrides fifteen year old, and in the custody of his elder brother
Tarisius. This Netrides growing in good constitution of body and behavior,
being well beloved generally, so gracious, gentle and well governed he was: as
the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen and the people of Hungaria, esteemed him more
then their King Tarisius, who being crowned after his fathers decease, loved
Netrides as brotherhoode required, till Fortune (envious of this concord) not
willing that ye virtues of this young Prince should be there extingushed:
changed his affection into exceeding hatred, by an occasion hereafter
following. One day the King Tarisius walking in his Garden to take the air,
left his Brother Netrides in his Chamber accompanied with the Queen, who
without imagination of any harm, nor that his fatal sta^s would sort him
any misfortune, sactte down in the Kings chair as he talked with the
Queen, and continued there so long, till Tarisius came up and found him there
sitting, which he took in such ill part, as in a great rage he thus bega^me.
Who made thee so audacious and presumptuous to sit in my seat, against thy
duty and my liking? By mine honor thou have done more then thou ween^st, and
if I see the like again, or I may but hear thereof thy head shall pay the
price of thy folly. Netrides, who of his own nature was humble and gentle,
fell down on his knee, entreating the King his Brother to pardon him, for what
he had done, was not with any intent to displease his Majesty, but an
oversight, and that so he would permit it to pass. The King made him no
answer, because he took Netrides reasons for no payment, but conceived a
secret hatred in his mind, by this occasion of so slender moment, which
increased thence forward, as the matter provoking a fiery Meteore: so that he
did repine at his Brother so much, as he would not speak to him, nor affoorde
him a good countenance. Then called he to remembrance the love of his people
toward his Brother, and if this hatred should come to their knowledge for so
small a cause, he imagined they would displace him, and make Netrides King.
For which cause he intended to have him slain* and the execution ^^reof he
committed to one of his Archers, but God (who is evermore the preserver of the
innocent) would not suffer such a damned deed of paracide to take effect.
Which Tarisius perceiving, and finding one day his Brother alone, enflamed with
this dyscontented humor, said. Netrides, thou have offended me more then I
will now stand to argue on, I therefore banish thee my Court and Kingdom, and
look that within three days thou get thee hence, and on thy life not to
discover it to any man, or take any one with thee to bear thee company. The
young Prince obedient to his Brother, made answer, that he would accomplish his
charge, and so withdrew himself into his Chamber, not declaring to any one his
cause of heaviness. Then willing one of his Squires to saddle his Horse,
departed so closely as he could, forbidding any of his Servant to follow
him, and such expedition he made, as not resting but one night in any lodging,
he left his brothers kingdom, wandering without any care of himself, or
which way he took, but went here and there, as fortune pleased to guide him.
Having long time travailed in Al^lemaigne, his money failed him, in that at his
departure he was but badlie provided: yet could not his pri^celie mind abase
it self to beg, so y^ being without meat or drink, or any place to rest
himself in, ashamed of himself, he sought to shroude him where none might
discrye him, and so entering a great Forest, very thick set with Trees,
shrubs, and bushes, he esteemed this a convenient place to rest in, wherefore
alighting from his Horse, and turning him to feed, laid himself down at the
root of a Tree, and thus began to breathe forth his complaints. Ah inconstant
Fortune, and to me most of all inconstant, did thou erecte me so high, and
reject me now thus low? well then may I say, that more wrong thou do a
man in one hour, then right all his life time: for it heretofore thou did
lend me pleasure and delight, thou now make me pay for it, (and that with
usury too rigorous) not leaving any hope to comfort me. Ah tirranous King,
cruel and vnmanlike Brother, thou have with shame banished me, and brought me
into this poor estate, wherein I must die, Oh happy if I might, rather then to
live in the vile estate of beggary. So saying, he laid him down among the
Herbs, and was supprised with such extreme feeblenes, as he fell into his
lamentations again, thus. Ah my Lord and Father, too soon did thou leave
me, would God I then had borne thee company, or that at this instant I could
come to thee. Ah men of Hung^ria, I am well assured (knowing the love you ever
bare me) that you will pity when you hear my afflictions and calamities:
alas, I never deserved this unhappy end. And being unable to continue longer
speech, he there determined to finish his life. But better fortune befell him
then he expected, by the means of an ancient Knight named Lombardo, who
being near, heard all his dolorous complaints. This Knight being rich and
of noble blood, had near that Forest a strong, delightful and sumptuous
Castle, and delighted to walk among the woods for his recreation, as good hap
it was fore Netrides that he walked this evening. He hearing these sad and
sorrowful regrets, pity so touched his heart, as the tears bedewed his
^heekes: yet would he not trouble him while he continued his mones, but
afterward came and took him by the hand saying. Arise my Freende and take
courage, for you are in the place, where you shall find more good to benefit
you, then harm to offend you, therefore cherish your spirits, and forget
this heaviness, which may endaunger you beyond recovery. Netrides seeing this
honorable Gentlemanne, with his bearde so white as snow, hearing his
courteous offer, and for him now so necessary: with joy, fear and bashfulnes
all coupled together, accepted it, and humbly thanked him, albeit (quoth he) a
contented death is better to me, them a miserable and despised life. The Knight
comforting him answered, that it was not in his power to choose life or death,
but the founder of the heavens reserved that authority in his own hands.
With these words he took him by the hand, and conducted him to his Castle,
where he was worthily entertained by the Knight himself, his Lady and her
Daughter, one of the fairest Uirgins in all that Country. Lombardo having heard
all his misfortunes and hard adventures, in the night discoursed the whole to
his Lady, wherefore (good Wife) quoth he, entertain him so well as may be,
for I assure you he is descended of high degree, and if his manners and virtues
be correspondent to his birth, we will give him our Daughter in marriage, if
so himself accept our offer. The good Lady misliked not her Husbands opinion,
wherefore the next morning she went to entertain her guest, saying. My Lord,
your coming hither has well contented my Lord and Husband, and so please it
you to stay here, he will be glad and feign of your company: which gentle
offer Netrides accepted, thanking God and the Lady for his good fortune. Thus
remained he with this ancient Knight Lombardo, who afterward never remembered
him of his miseries in ye Forest, but entreated him so well as though he had
been his own Son. Netrides seeing the Knights Daughter so fair and well
conditioned, and she regarding not only the virtues of his mind, but also his
comely and well featured body, they began amorously to affect each other
secretly, but love invented y^ mean to reveal it openly: for Lombardo well
noting the great discretion of this young Gentleman, and knowing him to be
descended of blood royal, resolved to cause him marry his Daughter,
demanding the question of Netrides among other speeches, if so he liked to
marry his Daughter? My Lord, quoth he, it is the sum of my desire, and greater
honor cannot you bestow on me, so please her to conceive the same opinion I
do. The marriage was soll^mnized with all expedition, with y^ presence of
many Gentles, neighbors thereabout, who meruailed the Knight bestowed his
Daughter so, in that they esteemed Netrydes but a poor Knight errant. It
fortuned afterward that the ancient Knight and his Lady deceased, leaving
their Daughter great with child, to the no little content of Netrydes, that
after all his sorrow he should become a Father. Three days before this Lady
fell in travail, she dreamed that she was shut up in a very dark Chamber,
whereout she could by no means get, and therefore called for help to one of
her Gentlewomen. Then was she advised to take her child in her arms, and to
stay there still, whereupon she beheld her infant, and saw that his face
resembled the beams of the Sun, the brightness whereof chased away the
darkness, so that she might behold the place as clear as any other, saying.
My Lord, forgette this heaviness, and you shall rejoice by this infant, for this
is he shall reestablish you in the place you have lost, and shall seat you in
that Chair with honor, for which you were exiled thence, giving you his
crown, that traitorously chased you from his kingdom. He comforted with these
words, took the child in his arms, and said. Little soul, I pray God thy
mother speak truth, and that thou may be able to execute it. So saying, he
espied a furious man who snatched the infant forth of his arms, and
notwithstand^ng all his entreaties and supplications, carried it away with him.
This sorrow for Netrydes made her give a loud shryke, when he calling his
Wife, demanded the cause of her sudden affright, whereupon she rehearsed to
him the whole manner of her Dream, and rejoicing thereat, said. I hope my Lord
that it will so happen to you as I have dreamed, and therefore comfort your
self without fear of misfortune: notwithstanding, he remained in many
doubtful opinions, till they understood by effects the certaintye of this
dream. Now was come the time of the Ladies deliverance, which was a goodly
man Child, so fair and well favored as one should lightly behold, being
named Frysol, and she would suffer none to nursse it but her own self, for
the certain hope she reposed in him. The Child growing in time to such
comely stature, as each one took great pleasure to behold him, whereof the
Mother was so glad, that albeit she had afterward two other Sonn^s, yet
showed she no such special love toward them as unto Frysol, which procured
some hatred between his brethren and him. This young Lord growing to fourteen
years of age, was in stature very tall, delighting himself in ryding great
Horses, shooting in the long Bow, casting y^ Bar, and diverse other
Gentlemanlike exercises, as also to chase in the Forest, where old Lombardo
met with his Father. So that one day after long and weary chasing of the
Heart, having sweated very sore, and marvelous dry for want of drink, finding
a little spring by the foot of a Tree, he la^e down and drank, but
afterward he became so ill and sickly, as he trembled ^^rie ^ore, so that
one of his Squires could hardly lead him again to the Castle. Netrides
seeing him so exceeding ill, was marvelous sorry, commanding his Physician
to seek some present help for him, who plied him with such wholesome potions,
as his feu^r left him, but his face and all his body was so painted, as he had
been a Leaper: which made him be mocked of his other Brethron, and scorned of
all the Servant, except his Father and Mother, which was such grief to him,
as he would have died with fretting at them, but his Father rebuked them, and
comforted him in this manner. I did hope my Son by thy means, to be restored
again to the Realm of my deceased Father: but now, how long it will be
before, God knows, if this strange malladie of thine be never helped. Frysol
amazed at his Fathers words, desired him earnestly to report the whole
circumstance, which Netrides at length did, rehearsing how he was Brother to
the King of Hungaria, the hard intreataunce he used toward him, and lastly
he told him the Dream^ of his Mother. Frisol studying along space on his
fathers words, at length answered. My Lord, you are not ignorant of the
sovereign power of the highest, who by his divine judgment has sent me this
disease that thus torments me: even so when pleases him he will take it from
me again, and give me health and strength much more then ever I had, with
means sufficient to give you aid and succoure, according to the matter
whereon you have diuined. And albeit I feel so extreme anguish, as death may
not be likened to it, yet does this hope comfort me in such sort, that me
thinks already I am become more healthful: therefore my Lord dismay of
nothing, but persuade your self there is comfort behind. These words were so
pleasing to Netrides, as mere joy caused the tears to trickle down his
cheeks, meruailing at the wonderful courage of his Son, enduring such
terrible pains as he did: wherefore what he thought, he could not reveal,
but withdrewe himself into his Chamber.

CHAP. XLI.
How Frisol persecuted with his disease, and the mockery of his Brethren,
determined to go seek strange adventures.

FRisol having heard the original of his birthe, as also ye vision that
appeared to his Mother, was thence forward more pensive then he had been
before, and perceiving his Brethren continued their bad disposition, and day by
day mocked him more and more: he determined to forsake his fathers house, to
seek adventures, and remedy for his sickness, if any were to be found. And
being one day in the Forest, more mellanchollie then accustomed, he espied a
Knight vexed with Leprosy come by the high way, mounted on a poor Palfray,
to whom he said. My Friend, I am infected with the same disease thou art,
wherefore will thou suffer me to bear thee company, and I will be ready to
do what thou shall command me. The Knight perceiving he might gain some
benefit by Frisol, was well contented, and so bad him mount up behind him.
So was he glad to do what was contrary to his nature, and in this life
continued two years, travailing many Countries, bearing continually the
wallet, and what profit came he delivered his Master, reserving nothing for
himself but what he gave him, and bearing a mind so noble and virtuous, as he
desired rather death, then to enrich himself by any villainous or dishonest
act. So many Countries and provinces had they travailed, as at last they came
into the Realm of Hungaria, when Frisol remembered that he was in his Uncles
Land, who led a life so base and ignominious: he was overcome with exceeding
heaviness, which ill agreed with his dangerous disease, so that his companion
desired to know ye cause of his sadness, but Frysol prayed him to content
himself, saying that death was more agreeable to him, then a life so dolorous
and miserable. At which words the Knight growing in choler, thruste him beside
the Horse, and rode away leaning poor Frysol there, having no other comfort
then to fill the air with his tears and complaints, till at length he
received succor by a young Maid named Leonarda, the Daughter of a rich
Countriman that dwelt on a Mountain near at hand. This Maiden leading her
Fathers Beasts and Cattle to pasture, took great delight in gathering
herbs and roots, wherewith to make ointments for all wounds and diseases:
and this day (by the divine permission) she chanced that way where she
heard the mornefull lamentations of Frysol, whom when she beheld, overcome
with pity and compassion, said. Alas my Friend, how came you into this
desert and comfortless place, being oppressed with such a bad and dangerous
sickness? In good sooth Mistress, (quod he) by no other means then the
misfortune and displeasure of my life: Oh how happy were my death at this
instant, the^ to live any longer in this monstrous languishing. Friend,
answered the Maiden, you ought not thus to dyspayre in sickness, but consider,
that the Lord and governor of the heavens and earth, does by these means
try and prove his people, whom if he perceive thankful and patient in their
afflictions: of reprobate enemies, he makes the^ his Friends and Children,
only by the ransom that his beloved Son paid. If then you will put your
whole confidence in him, I am persuaded you shall soon find remedy. So
causing him to arise, she conducted him to her Fathers house, where for
certain days, she bathed him with wholesome Herbs, and anointed him with
such precious ointments, as in short time his disease forsook him, and he was
as clean as at the time he drank the water, for which he humbly thanking
the Maiden, said. God make me able (fair Uyrgin) to requite this wonderful
kindness received at your hands, accounting my self more indebted to you, then
to my parents that gave me first life, and this persuade your self, that
wheresoever my body be separated from this place, my heart shall remain ready
to do you any service. That is my will and intent, quoth Leonarda, but thank
him chiefly that made (...) to help you, and in so doing shall I account my
labor well bestowed. Frysol for this unexpected good fortune, was thence
forward very dutiful and loving toward Leonardas Father and her Brethren,
as the readiest Servant he had in his house: but the good man esteemed so well
of him, as by no means he would suffer him to be so painful, but with such
fare as God sent him, entertained and welcomed him, not suffering him to
depart thence in the space of a year and more. Frysol often accompanying
Leonarda to the field, she seeing him so fair and comely a personage, began
secretly to affect him, yet would she not acquaint him therewith, fearing more
to offend then to be refused. So soon as Frysol had thus recovered his
strength, he determined to stay no longer there, wherefore finding Leonarda at
leisure convenient, he said. I know very well (fair Maiden) how much I am
beholding to you, for the special grace and good I have received by you, which
induces me to make you this promise, that you shall not command any thing,
but I will gladly accomplish it. And because I am desirous to travail after
strange adventures, I would request that it might be with your willing consent,
promising you to stay no longer hence then the term of three years, in which
time I will not fail to visit you again: and if my fortune so fall out, as I
am persuaded, I doubt not to recompense what you did for me. That which I always
feared (Sir Frysol) quoth she, is now come to pass, notwithstanding, seeing
it is convenient I should love honor, more then mine own pleasure, I am
content that you shall go seek your advancement so well begun: but I pray
you not to cast your promise in oblivion. I will not to the death (quoth he)
do any thing to dislike you, or against your will, and since you have so
feelie granted me liberty, persuade your self my word shall be my deed. So
taking his leave of her Father and Brethren, he trauayled toward Allemaigne,
where he heard that chivalry was more maintained then in any other place,
and so rode he four days together without any adventure: till passing
through a Forest, he heard a great noise of people fighting, wherefore making
have that way, he espied an ancient Knight, assaulted by six villains that
sought to murder him, whom he resisted so well as he could, albeit he had
nothing but his sword to defend him. The Knight espying Frysol, called to him
for help, when he (suddenly finding a strong young Tree plucked up by the
root) came therewith to the villains, saying. Why traitorous varlets, who
provoked you to offer such shame to a Knight? with which he took one of them
so soundlye on the pate with his Tree, as he never rose to tell who hurt him.
The Knight and he together so behaved themselves, as three of the villains
were laid dead before them, which the other three perceiving, took themselves
to flight: where upon the old Knight seeing himself so well delivered, came and
embraced Frysol with these wo^rdes. How may I say my good Friend, that my life
had perished without your assistaunce, bethink your self therefore how I may
grately this gentleness: in mean time, I have a house not far hence, let me
entreat you to lodge with me this night, and I will make you the best
entertainment the Country will aff^^rde. Whereto Frysol agreed, promising to
leave him in safety before he departed, for which y^ old Knight thanked him,
and as they went he discoursed to him, how these (...) ass^^led him, because
he had enforced them to surrender certain heritages, which unjustly they
detained from poor Orphans, and for that cause set spies to watch him, that
they might set upon him and kill him, which surely they had done (quoth he)
without your succor. In the continuance of these speeches, they arrived at
his Castle, where many of his Squires meruailed to see him so sore wounded,
but especially his Lady and his two Sons, to whom he rehearsed the sum of
his adventure, and the great favor and help he found by Frysol, for which
cause they entertained him with exceeding honor. And so long aboade Frysol
there with the Knight, till being desirous to receive the order of
knighthoode, he came to the Knight in this manner. May it please you Sir to
bestow on me Horse and Armor, I will go to the Emperors Court of Allemaigne,
he being the most renowned Prince in the world. The good Knight seeing him so
forward to chiualry, gave him Horse, Armor and money for his journey, whereupon
he set forward, and the third day after he arrived at the Emperors Court,
from whence (a little before) Trineus and Palmerin were departed toward
France: which news made Frisol earnestly desire his knighthood, because he
intended with all speed to travail thither likewise, in respect of the honor
was there to be wunne. Frysol understanding the Emperor was in the Chapel
hearing divine service, went thither, where beholding the Princess Polinarda,
he reputed her the only fair Lady of y^ world, thinking he could never glut
his eyes with regarding her, whereupon, service being ended, he fell on his
knee before the Emperor in this manner. Because I know (invincible Lord)
that you are renowned beyond all other potentates whatsoever, and that you
make no small accounte of Knights aduenturous: I desire that by your hand I
may be numbered among them. The Emperor seeing him so young and yet valiantly
given, answered. I would be loathe my Freende to deny a request so reasonable,
but I will first know if you be Gentle borne or no. My Lord, quoth he, I
swear by the faith I owe to God and your Majesty, that I am noble borne, and
of the blood royal by my Fathers side. God forbid then (said the Emperor)
but you should be Knight, and Fortune sheelde you so well in chiualry, as she
has endued you with comely shape and beauty* Then was the Spur put upon his
right heel, and the Emperor bad him rise a Knight, commanding his Daughter
Polmarda to gyrde his Sword to him, which she did, saying. Worthily and with
happiness (Sir Knight) may you employ the order you have received. Madame (quoth
Frysol) if hereafter any virtue or valor abide in me, it shall be employed
only for you, having thus honored me with my Sword, wherewith I hope to
accomplish such deeds of Arms, as shall renown her name that gave me my
weapon: but Polinarda made him no answer, because Palmerin was the only
Image of her thoughts. After Frysol was thus Knighted, taking his leave of the
Emperor and his Daughter, he departed, making no small have till he arrived at
the Ioustes at Parris, where he determined for his first deed of chiualry, to
enter the Combat for the beauty of Polinarda. But he could not get thither so
soon as he intended, for he was hindered by the way with an unexpected
adventure, which was in a fair Forest, where he beheld four Knights carry
away a Lady perforce, who seeing him, cried. Ah good Knight, for Gods sake
succor ^ee: whereupon Frysol coutching his Lance, sent one of the Knights
headlong to the ground, and in short time wounded another in such sort, as
now he had but two left to resist him, on whom Frysol made trial, how well
he could unploy the gift of Polinarda. The Knights seeing the hard fortune of
their two other fellows, the one having broken (...) neck in the fall, and
the other wounded past hope of recovery: took y^ wisest way for themselves,
posting thence so fast as they could ride, but Frysol would not follow, least
they had some other company in ambush that might have intrapped him, wherefore
he conducted the Lady to her Mothers Castle, where he remained that night,
and the next day set forward to Parris, where he arrived at the time he
fought with Palmerin, according as has been before rehearsed.

After the Knight of the Sun (who henceforth shall pass by the name of
Frysol) had left Palmerin, and was departed the field, the night was so
obscure as he knew not which way he rode, so that the moisture of the
^uening dew did great harm to his wounds, as if God had not armed him with
the better strength, he was in danger not to escape with life. The very same
day was the Duke of Gaul departed from Parris, to go aid the King of
England against y^ Kings of Scots and Norvvay, who was Nephewe to the Emperor
of Allemaigne, for that they molested him with troublesome wars: and the Duke
being benighted, was glad to pitch his Tents in a fair field, through which
it fortuned Frysol to pass, complaining of the danger he felt himself in.
The Duke of Gaul being abroad forth of his Tent to recreate himself,
heard this sorrowful noise, which made him send his men to see who it was,
and to bring him with them to the Tent, whither when they had brought him, the
Duke pitting his estate, demanded whence he came, and who had wounded him in
that sort. Then discoursed he the whole matter, how he had fought with the
Knight that overcame the Duke of Sauoye, and so long their fight endured, that
the dark night and the King caused them to be parted, neither of them as yet
conquered, and because he would not return into the City, sought some
Uillage where he might conveniently lodge. The Duke of Gaul hearing the
words of Frysol, esteemed him for a hardy and valiant Knight, having so long
endured against Palmerin unvanquished, wherefo^^ he said. Sir Knight, you are
very welcome to me, all the aid and succor I can give you, you shall be
sure to find with hearty good will: assuring you, that there is no Knight
living to whom I wysh more evil, then him whom you have this day fought
withal. So causing him to be unarmed, willed him to rest himself upon his
own bed, and made his wounds be dressed, abiding there eight days for the
health of Frysol. In which time, the Duke had imparted to him the wars of the
King of England, which made him make more have to be gone, or else he would have
kept him company longer. My Lord, quoth Frysol, so please you to accept my
company, I hope to behave my self so well, as you shall not be discontented
with me. The Duke thanked him, and rejoiced y^ by his means so good a Knight
was preserved, and did him all the honor he could devise, taking him with him
into England, where he found the Country very much desolated with wars, to
his no little grief: but leave we them, and return to Palme^in.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the great courtesy the King of France used to Trineus and Palmerin: and
of their return into Allemaigne.

SO dilligently were Palmerins wounds attended, which he had received by the
hand of Frysol, as not long after he recovered his health, whereof the King
and Prince Jews were highly glad, and much more Trineus, to who^e the King
desired to give his Daughter Lucemania in marriage, which to compass, he
intended a sumptuous banquet, whereto he would inuit these twain, yet first
he would acquaint the Queen therewith, and therefore began the matter with her
thus. I see Madame, that our Daughter Lucemania is of years sufficient for a
Husband, and because I evermore desired her highest preferment, and that I
would kn^w if the Prince Trineus to whom I could wish she were espoused, were
any thing in love that way affected, for hardly in my judgment shall we
find a greater Lord, being heir to the famous Emperor of Allemaigne: for
this intent (I say) will I ordain a banquet, whereto he and noble Palmerin
shall be invited, and our Daughter to bear them company in y^ best sort you
can devise. The Queen, who more desired this marriage then the King her
Husband, answered. You doubt not (my Lord) that I request her cheifest
advantage, wherefore let it be as you have determined, and she shall be
present as you have appointed. This matter thus proceeding, two days after
were Trineus and Palmerin called to this banquet, and to honor them the more,
the King caused his Son Jews, with a brave company of Knights and
Gentlemen, to conduct them into the Palace, where they were royally received
by the King and Queen, and so led up into the Chamber appointed for their
banquet. After they had washed, the King caused Trineus to sit by him, and
Palmerin against him, above whom sat fair Lucemania his Daughter, being
placed just opposite to y^ Prince Trineus, the Queen to furnish the Table,
satte down by the King. And albeit nature had best^wed on y^ Princess most
exquisite beauty, yet her sumptuous accoustr^ments made her appear most
amiable: but all could not move the heart of Trineus, to forget her to whose
shrine he was dedicated. The banquet ended, and y^ Tables withdrawn, Trineus
daunced with the fair young Princess, courting her with many honest and
decent speeches, which made Lucemania suppose he loved her, but the Prince
noted it well enough, albeit his affections were bound to English Agriola. In
this time the other Ladies were conferring of Palmerins knightly valor, when
the County of Armignac his Son, entreating the Duke of Orleaunce Daughter to
dance, was thus stayed by her speeches to y^ other Ladies. You see fair
Ladies (quoth she) that Palmerin has misprized our beauties, to revenge our
injury, let us all fall upon him, and shut him in some place where he may
never come forth, for if he escape us, the Allemaigne Ladies shall bear the
honor from the French, which will be to us perpetual discredit. These words
she spoke with such a pleasant countenance, as moved all the other Ladies to
smile, whereupon the Duchess of Burgundy answered. In sooth it is necessary
we should do so, and let us not suffer him to get out of our hands so
easily, as he did from the Knights that came to the Combat. All the company
lyked this motion well, but the King said. Ladies, I will not consent that
Palmerin shall have any wrong, because I have taken him into my guarde. And
who shall make recompense (quoth another Lady) for the wrong he has done
us? You ought to suffer for satis-faction, said y^ King, and be glad that you
had the mean to see the best Knight in the world, for mine own part I promise
you, I rest so contented. Palmerin hearing the King so commend him, bashfullie
thus answered. Alas my Lord, there is no such matter in me as pleases your
Majesty to report, but what my ability is, it remains to do you service:
accounting my self more then happy by coming to your Court, to have
knowledge of a Prince so noble and virtuous, and no man living (next my Lord
the Emperor) that may commau^de me more then your highness. Among other
speeches, y^ King broke the matter of his Daughters marriage to Palmerin,
desiring him to labor in the cause to Trineus, which he promised: but al in
vain, for after they had taken their leave to return toward Allemaigne,
though Palmerin was earnest in the matter, in respect of the beauty and
nobility of the Princess, as for the support he might have by matching with
the Daughter of France, yet Trineus thus answered. I thank you my Lord for
the good you wish me, as also the honor the King affoordes me: but another
beyond her (whose renown has conquered me) is Lady and Mistress of my
affections. And because you are he from whom I will not hide my most secret
thoughts, know that it is Agriola, Daughter to the King of England, to whom
though my Father be an enemy, yet by your aid and mine own good endeavors, I
do not doubt to compass my love. You know my Lord (quoth Palmerin) that I
wish as well to you as mine own heart, and when occasion serves, trial shall
make manifest. And seeing you have fixed your love on fair Agriola of England,
imparting likewise the same so confidently to me: I am persuaded you could
never make a better choice, therefore let nothing change your opinion. Thus
rode they on with many sundry speeches, not a little glad they were
returning to the Emperor, but Palmerin much more then was Trineus, for the
desire he had to see his Lady Polinarda: wherefore with the consent of the
Prince, he sent a Squire before to advertise the Emperor of their coming,
before whom he had no sooner done reverence, but he was presently known, and
demanded in what estate his Son Trineus and Palmerin were, where he had left
them, and what accide^ts had happened in France? Then the Squire rehearsed the
Combats and victories of his Master against the Princes of France and the
Dukes of Gaul and Sauoye, with their royal entertainment by the King and his
Son, how many portraits of Ladies Palmerin had conquered, with the whole
discourse of every action. Whereof the Emperor, the Empress, and all the
Lords and Ladies were maruailous glad, yet was not their joy comparable to the
Princess Polinardas, hearing the Squire reveal the honorable deeds of her
love, so that her conceit might be discerned by her countenance, and needs she
must thus demand of the Squire. I pray thee tell me my Freende, how fares
my Lord and Brother, with his noble companion Sir Palmerin? The Squire well
abuised, because he knew the love between her and his Master, set his knee
to the ground again with this answer. I left the Prince your Brother,
accompanied with my Lord, Palmerin, well and in good health: but cheefely my
Lord, who since you saw him, has wunne the greatest honor that ever Knight
did. Afterward he reported the manner of the Combats to her, and what grief
his Master sustained in his sickness, when he could not be revenged on ye
Knight that lost her counterfeit, which the Duke of Sauoye placed at the feet
of Lucemania, and last of all, the perilous Combat between his Master and
the Knight of the Sun. Which she took such delight to hear, as she made him
repeat one thing many times, and could not satis-fie herself sufficiently
with these worthy reports. Which the Squire perceiving, delighted as much to
itterate every thing, and said. Believe me Madame, the love my Master bears
to her, for whose beauty he entered the Combat, in my opinion is incredible,
for he is much more hers then his own, and I have seen him in such sort
thinking on her, as one could hardly judge him alive or dead, fearing least
any other should rob him of his love, such is ye jealousy of his unspotted
affection, albeit my Master reputes his Lady immouable. Polinarda changing
countenance oftentimes at y^ Squires words, answered. The Lady should be
very ill councelled, being honored with the love of so good a Knight as
Palmerin, to make refusal of his worthy service: and I promise thee, by the
faith of a Princess, that if I knew her, for the unwillingness I have to hear
him complain, I would endeavor to cause her like none but him, and therein to
think herself the most happy among Ladies. Wherefore [if thou may be so
bolde] tell thy Master at his return, that I will be a mean to aid him
toward her he loves: and therewithal present him my favorable salutations,
in that I evermore desired the fortunate end of his enterprise, not so much
for the lyking of his Lady, being beloved of the best, as for the renowned
chivalry that harbors in his heart. These speeches ended, the Squire returned
to meet the Prince Trineus and his Master, to whom he reported his talk with
Polynarda: which Palmerin rejoicing at, let fall all jealousy, esteeming her
now the truest Lady living. The men of Gaunt for joy of his return, that so
worthily delivered them from the oppressions of the enchaunted Knight, went
forth in several companies, according as honor, years and office directed
them, to meet him, and so conveyed him with signs of joy to the Palace,
where the Emperor so much abased himself, as he came down into the open
Court to entertain him, and glad likewise to see the safe return of his Son
Tryneus, saying. My Son, right happy is thy return, and you Sir Palmerin,
persuade your self so welcome as heart can devise, assuring you, that your
success has not a little pleased me. And needs must I account the Lady
especially bounden to you, for whose love you have past so many dangerous
Combats, good reason has she to love you, in respect of your travails for
her, renowning her so much by your knightly chivalry, so that if she
recompense you not according to your merits, woorthilie may she be condemned of
ingratitude. Alas my Lords (quoth he) her beauty commands higher matters
then all my labors. Polynarda being in presence, remembered well her Fathers
words, and therefore she intended to shun that condemnation, saying to herself.
He that deserves honor ought to were it, and he that commaundes the soul, may
easily overrule the passions of the mind: let my Knight then be rewarded as
he has rightly deserved. All this while, the eyes of these two lovers so well
discharged their office, as Palmerin wished that Juno had granted him so much,
as she did sometime to Argus her sheepehearde, that he might have more ease in
his affliction: for he thought it not enough, only to behold the beauty of
so rare and excellent perfection. Again, he was not a little tormented,
because Polynarda (to cover what she would gladly none should discern) cast
her looks on the ground, which sometimes she likewise compelled him to do:
but her presence whom he esteemed above all other things, would not allow him
that consideration. The Emperor at length commanded, that all the figures of
the Ladies which he had wunne in Co^bat, should be brought before him: but when
he saw so many, and of so contrary quality, he could not but co^m^nd^
Sir Palmerins victory. Then were diverse judgments given of the beauty of the
portraits, each one of the beholders after their several opinions. Ptolome
made description of whom they were, and who did enter Combatte on their
behalf, omitting at no tune the honor of Palmerin: whereat they all admired,
some commending their complexions, others their sweet young years, and
altogether the prowess of him that brought the conquest with him, whereupon
the Emperor said. In good faith Sir Palmerio, I bless the time that Fortune
sent me so good a Knight, and think not to carry away all the glory of your
victory your self, for I mean to have part because you gave your self mine.
And would the Lady you love were in this Court or in my Realm, to the end
I might so assist you in your suit* as you might both be mine. My Lord (quoth
Palmerin) the victory is wholly yours, being gotten by your Knight, and if
the Lady I love were not under your regiment, then should I complain of a
greater matter then abiding with you, being obedient to your highness as your
humble subject and Servant. With which answer the Emperor was highly
contented, and Tryneus coming to his Sister Polynarda, said. Trust me fair
Sister, you are more indebted to Palmerin, then to any other Knight in the
world beside, and rather accept of him then of the Duke of Lorrayne, who
maintaining your beauty, was overcome by the Duke of Sauoy, and your picture
placed at the feet of Lucemania, where yet it had remained, but that Palmerin
conquering the Duke, removed the figure of the French Princess in obeysaunce
to you. Polynarda not content with the indiscreet enterprise of the Duke of
Lorrayne, answered. In sooth good Brother, the Duke of Lorrayne is none of my
Knight, and I repute Palmerin to have more bounty and valor, then the Duke
can have of wit or courage, therefore great marvel that he was not slain.
The Emperor seeing Polynarda was offended with the Duke of Lorrayne,
answered. You cannot (Daughter) forbid men to execute their own pleasure, and
if the Duke liked to enter the Combat for your beauty, it was for the
honorable good will he bare you, and albeit he could not reach his desire,
yet have you no cause to think the worsse of him. Polynarda being a Princess
of rare wit and judgment, as any of her time, would multiply no more words,
but continued silent: nevertheless, Palmerin remembering her answer to
Tryneus, entreated her to keep all the portraits of the Ladies, determining to
send them to whom they belonged, according to their degrees in birth and
honor. Which she thankfully accepted, and spending this whole day in diverse
delights, Palmerin being in the evening in his Chamber accompanied with
Ptolome, sent his Dwarffe to the Princess to appoint the time of their
meeting: and she seeing the Dwarffe, caught him about the neck, demanding of
him what news he brought. None but good Madame, answered the Dwarffe, my
Master has sent you the Bon soir, and therewith his humble duty to your
highness, for, being your Knight, and living only to do you service: he has
good hope that your virtuous nature will not forget, how many dangers he has
past for your sake, and now does love appeal for his desired reward.
Therefore good Madame, as you are hartfast, unite your selves handfast, give my
Master life, your self comfort, and make me happy by carrying of this
message: for I vow by the reverend faith I bear you both, that I will not
depart without some gracious answer. Polynarda smyling to hear Vrbanillo
speak so earnestly, said. The assurance thou give me of the trusty
affection thou bear thy Master, does not a little content me, and pity
it were so good a Knight should labor all this while in vain: therefore
persuade thy Master, that to morrow at night I will meet him where we were
wont, and there will I resolve him to his own content.

CHAP. XLIII.
How Palmerin went in the night to the appointed place, to confer with his
Lady Polinarda, and the amorous communication they had together.

VRbanillo with cheerful countenance returned to his Master, declaring to
him his talk with Polynarda, her sweet looks, her gracious aunsweres, how
choiselie she loved him, and lastly her promise to meet him in the accustomed
place: yet is not this all, for before you depart with her, she has assured
me to resolve you to your own content. And that is it I want (quod he) for
might I once receive my content, then should I think my travails rewarded.
And doubt you not thereof said the Dwarffe, if she be a woman of her word.
Then Ptolome being present, asked the Dwarffe if he saw Bryonella. No in sooth
(quoth he) she was not in the Princess Chamber, nor (to my knowledge) was she
acquainted with my coming, yet dare I think she will be there with my Lady.
The time being come, the Ladies were at the place with devotion answerable to
those silent hours, and their Knights not failing their appointment, what
pleasure on each side was conceived, is not to be enquired, for all wyshings
are nothing in respect of their contentments. Polynarda having her freendly
Knight before her, so sweet a blush ecclipsed her countenance, as would
drive nature into a study to frame the like, and thus she began. Alas my
sweet Freende, in what pain, anguish and heaviness of heart, has your absence
brought me? what tears have fallen from mine eyes, and drops of blood from my
heart, by renting sighs and ^easelesse acclamations, remembering our pleasures
past, our present comfort, and the hope of better hap to come? What dolorous
conceits has often wounded me, thinking on so many hazards and perrils as
might hinder me from seeing you again? and not without cause, believe me, for
had you miscarried, never Lady sustained such a loss, in respect of your
Knightly valor, and the unfeigned love I hear you, whereof (before I depart)
I mean assuredly to resolve you, in requital of your hon^urable tranailes
for maintenance of my beauty. And hereof persuade your self good Knight,
that to have you, I refuse all other good fortunes whatsoever: and therefore I
car^ not though it were openly known, how especially I prize, desire, love
and esteem you. Palmerin confounded with this long expected comfort, and not
able to endure with silence, interrupted her in this manner. By ye faith of
your sworn Servant, sweet Madame, the perrils, mishaps, and dangers I have
past since my departure, never deserved the very least of your complaints, nor
could my endeavors prove such, as your incomparable perfections merrited, the
only remembrance whereof was sufficient to make me invincible: wherefore
fair Mistress, if I have wunne any honor^ your favor was the mean, and
your beauty gave me the virtue, streaming so plentifully from your chaste
ei^s, as the water from the Fountain. To little purpose were it now to
rehearse, y^ strange assaults, massacring thoughts, and violent flames, wherein
I have buried and continually been crucified, since the hour it pleased you
to let me see France: undoubtedly, y^ very meanest of my sufferings was able
to destroy me, without the resolute assurance of your divine favor, which
triu^phing ^uer death, shall make me live continually. So that the desire to
let you know how assuredly I am yours, and the continual wyshing to see you
again, gave me victory over your enemies, and brought me safe through all
extreamities, to honor you; as I do at this present. It now remains Madame,
that you regard the truth of my love, the permanence thereof, and the instant
passions worsse then death to me, yet with this prouiso, that I presume not of
any action meritorious, but your grace, which is able to strengthen me in
greatest debilitie. And no where know I to seek for pity and support of my
cares, if not only by her, who has y^ sovereign power to chase hence, the
cruel and ever threatening menaces of death. Forbear good my Lord, quoth she,
thus to talk of death, considering I cannot live one hour without you, nor
hold I any comfort of my life, but only in loouing you, to enjoy you: so
that what you endure, I suffer, and no passion torments you, but I have a share
therein, so devoutly is my spirit conforted with yours. And therefore think^
not your oppressions greator then mine, for if you do, it proceeds by want
of experience of feminine passions, the extreamitie whereof far surmounteth
your sex. For which cause, to give some rest to our long and ouertrauailed
desires, I give you here my hand, and therewithal a chaste heart, accepting you
only for my Lord and Husband, and to my promise call Heaven and Earth to
witness. Where is the wit so dainty, the tongue so flourishing, or the pen so
dilligent, as can conceive, report or set down in perfect coullers, the joys
of these lovers? You fair Lordinges, and you likewise sweet Ladies, that long
have travailed in amorous affections, and in the end received the reward of
your passions, by your own conceits can imagine the content of these twain:
for Palmerin was of this opinion, that Jupiter had not the like pleasure with
fair Alemena, for whom he caused one might to endure the space of three
days, as he had with his gracious Mistress Polinarda. For now the
manifold strokes he gave for beauty, were here remembered, his dangerous
travails in all places, recounted, his absence, with kind gratulations
welcomed, his tears, sighs, complaints and fears, resolved, and lastly,
his long, unchangeable and most faithful love, f^eendlie rewarded. Let us not
here forget, that Ptolome and Brionella were in y^ same predicament, for he
knowing her to be of the noble and ancient ligne, beside, sole heir to the
house of Saxon, might count himself highly honored with such a Wife: and
therefore the like conjunction was made between them, so that now these
Knights and Ladies were espoused before God, there wanted nothing but the
ceremony of y^ Church to confirm it. But now comes Vrbanillo, and he
breaks of this pleasure, because y^ time was so far spent, as they must
needs depart: which with much a do they did, leaving their Ladies examining
their content, the Princess soon after thus conferring with Brionella. Alas
fair Freende, it is doubtful what danger may arise, because you have
contracted your self to Ptolome without the Emperors consent: how will you
answer when you are charged with the fault? Brionella, who now feared nothing
but the preventing of her love, answered. In sooth Madame, you speak with
great reason, you now give counsel when the deed is done, and cannot be
revoked till it be dispatched: would you have all the good fortune your self,
and suffer your Freende to enjoy no part with you? trust me that is
unconscionable dealing, for he that made you to love, framed me of the self
same metal. But I see you make the occasion to me, to learn how to answer
your own deed: let us refer all to him Madame, that appointed your choice
by destiny, and mine by mine own lyking. Many other pleasant speeches
passed between them, and diverse times their Knights came to visit them, till
Fortune who will never suffer things long in one estate, sent an occasion to
hinder this delight of their love: for there was a Messenger come to the Court
from the King of Norvvay, Nephew to the Emperor, who being admitted audience,
thus delivered his message. Worthy Lord, the King of Norvvay my Master,
requires your assistaunce in his great distress, against the King of England,
who with a mighty and puissaunt Army is entered his dominions, where he has
made great wast and slaughter of his people, in diverse skirmishes and conflicts
passed between them, so that he never had like^neede as at this instant. Trust
me (quoth the Emperor) I will assiste him with right good will, and his
misfortune does not a little grieve me, but I will take order for it
immediately, and my power shall be with him so soon as possibly may be, with
which answer the Messenger departed. Now as concerning the cause of these
wars, between the Kings of Norway and England, it was procured by
displeasure of succor, that the King of Norway gave to ye King of Scots his
Brother, who held war with England about the taking of certain Ships: the
Emperor likewise his heavy enemy, and for that cause he promised help so
soon to y^ King his Nephew. Which when Trineus understood, that his Father
declared himself displeased with the Father of his beloved Agriola, (whose
love no occasion could alter) he was greatly discontented: yet dissembling
his conceit, determined rather to aid the King of England, then his Cousin,
and therefore entreated Palmerin to accompany him to his Chamber, where he
would acquaint him with some part of the sorrow he conceived, by the succor
his Father would send to the King of Norvvay, against her Father whose Servant
he had vowed himself, and therefore (quoth he) let me desire you to conceal a
request I shall make to you. You know my Lord, said Palmerin, that I will no
less obey you then the Emperor your Father, command therefore what you
please, and be it in my power, it shall be executed. So it is, quoth Trineus,
that I would have you not accompany the power my Father sendes by Sea, but
do so much for me, that you, Ptolome, and my self (unknown to any) may
assist the King of England in his wars, by which means I doubt not to
compass the thing I most of all desire. And this I dare tell you, that my life
is only dedicated to her service, and so well do I hope to imploye my pains,
that she shall have cause to love me, and regard the pain I suffer for her
sake: and but I gain the fortune to to purchase my love, right soon and
sudden shall you hear of my death. You that have felt the like torments can
censure of mine, which I dare not impart to the Emperor my Father, because of
the hatred he bears the King of England, advise me therefore good Freende
what I shall do. These speeches were nothing pleasing to Palmerin, seeing he
must now again depart from his Lady: but because he earnestly affected
Trineus, and knew how well he might help him in his love, answered. Assure your
self my Lord, that I will labor dissigentlie for your good, and shall assist
you to my uttermost, in that you bear such love to y^ Princess. And I am of
the opinion, that having received the order of knighthood, which the Emperor
your Father will not deny, it would avail you much, to tell your Father how^
you desire (unknown) to aid the King of Norway. For my part, if he demand
my advise, I will like it so well, as because the Annie cannot be ready so
soon, your honor, Ptolome and my self will ride before toward the King, and
so may we accomplish what you so earnestly desire. This counsel pleased so
well Trineus, as he intended on the morrow to request his order of the Emperor:
as also how gladly he would assist y^ King of Norway, and how necessary it was
for him to go before the Army, as Palmerin and he had devised together.

CHAP. XLIIII.
How Tri^eus was knighted, and what happened to him afterward.

ON the morrow, this young Prince seeing that to accomplish his intent, it was
ecessarie he should be knighted, he gave attenda^ce to find the Emperor at
leisure, when he might solicit his highness with his suit: and understanding
that he was walking in his Gallerie, he went to him, and on his knee thus
began. Dread Lord and Father, so pleased your Mai^stie, it is now time I
should receive my order of Khighthoode, and more necess^^y now then at any of
her time, in respect of my earnest desire to aid the King of Norway my Gozin
in his wars. The Emperor meruailing whence this humor should proceed,
answered. Why Trineus, do you think your self able to take so weighty a
charge in hand^? truly such honor is soon received, but to maintain it as it
ought to be, and prevent the dangers incident thereto, is more hard then you
ween, and makes proof of the most courageous (...), in that neither pain,
^eare or danger must hinder, what a matter of so great consequence does
command. And persuade your self, that such as councelled you thereto, know
^^aut themselves their duty in those affairs, wherefore for a (...) have
patience, and refer it (...) abilitie^ for I will send good store of other
Knights in this expedition, who shall well excuse you to y^ King my Nephew.
(...) not contented with this answer, replied. In truth my Lord, if I were not
desirous to fulfill what is required in chivalry, I would not so boldly have
made this demand, therefore for such exceptions as you admitted, let me not I
beseech you be denied at this time: and let this induce you, that such as are
borne to govern Kingdoms, if they give themselves only to pleasure, without
passing through the pykes of some dangerous hazard, they are not worthy to
be lifted to such honor. The Emperor hearing the brave mind of his Son, and
that his words favored of courage, conceiving well thereof, answered. Since
your desire is so earnest to be made Knight, I am well contented, but I would
have it done honorably, and before a greater assembly then now is in our
Court, Alas my Lord, said Trineus, there is no need of tryumphe before
victory: let such pomp remain, I pray you, til I have w^nne honor and
accounte by my deeds. The Emperor joyful of the Princes good opinion,
persuaded himself he would (...) fortunate, wherefore he granted his request,
so that Palmerin might acco^panie him in his voyage. Of which condition Trineus
was not sorry, because in him consisted all his hope of success: so his Father
commanded him to prepare himself for his order, whereupon Trineus made
himself a costly Armor, and another for Palmerin, the devises being changed,
because they intended to pass unknown. Now had the Emperor levied an Army
of ten thousand good Soldiers, the conduct whereof was appointed to the
County Tolano, a Knight valiant and hardy, having had like charge in sundry
occasions of war: therefore so soon as all things were in readiness, they were
embarked, and sailed with such benefit of wind and weather, as soon after
they took landing in England. Where a while we will leave, returning to
Polynarda, greatly discontent with her Brothers departure, because of
Palmerin, and Brionella no less troubled for her friend Ptoleme: but the
Princess feeling new afflictions for the absence of her love, came to her
Brother, saying. I know not (Brother) who has advised you to venture so
dangerously, our Cousin having assistance sufficient without hazarding your
person, let me then entreat you (good Brother) to affect occasions that
promise better security. Better occasions Sister? quoth he, it is impossible,
if it be a thing allowable and virtuous to succor a stranger, how much more
then is it to our Kinsman, especially such a one as is our Cousin of Norvvay?
therefore I pray you be of good comfort till my return. And if it so happen,
that my Father in my absence intend your marriage, look that your consent not
til I come home again, for my not being here will serve you for a sufficient
excuse. Which Polinarda promised, and her word so past, stood her in no small
sted afterward, as you shall find in the discourse following. So soon as
Trineus was provided of all things for his knighthoode, he came to the
Emperor in this manner. I desire you my Lord to accomplish your promise, having
done my duty as you commanded me. With right good will my Son, said the
Emperor, go Arm your self. Then went he, Palmerin and Ptolome armed to the
Chapel, Trineus being in Green Armor, figured all (...) with hearts of
Gold, and in his Sheelde was portraied a Knight unarmed, holding in his hand a
Bow bent, with an arrow ready to shoot against a green Tree, whereon hunge
a scrole, which had written in it in Letters of Gold this mot: Madame, quand
mourray-ie? Whereby he meant, that the love which made him enterprise this
voyage, should bear him company till death. Palmerins Armor was all black,
declaring his mourning for his absence from his Lady, and in his Sheelde for
his devise was figured, a goodly Eagle, sh^ouding a little Bird under his
wings, declaring thereby the favor he had received of his Mistress. Soon
after came the Emperor into the Chapel, where he Knighted his Son, put his
Spur on his heel, and gi^ded his sword about him: afterward they went to
dinner, and spent the wh^le day in many pleasures, for joy of the new
Knight. P^^merin and Ptolome to comfort their Ladies before their departure
according as they were wont, when y^ Princess Polinarda thus began. Alas my
Lord, what grief will your departure be to me? with what patience do you
think I am able to endure it? persuade your self, the very conceit of your
absence will be my death, or at least a cause of such danger as I shall never
recover. Be well advised therefore how you deal with me, for the intent of my
Brother may be broken if you would labor in it: but if it may not be, then
save my life by your speedy return. These words were delivered with such
tears and reking sighs, as Palmerin might well perceive the vehemence of her
greefes, and answering her heaviness with as earnest oppression, said. Sweet
Lady be persuaded, and tempe^ your sorrow with patience, considering the
union of our spirits makes a simpathie of afflictions, if then for my sake you
will not pacify your self, yet to sheeld your own perril let me entreat you
to be resolved, in that my return shall be with such expedition as you will
command. But if you continue thus melancholy, you will bewray what as yet
should be concealed, and so may great harm ensue to us both: Wherefore I
desire you to moderate your impatience, and think well of my departure, which
is chiefly to seek out a Knight, against whom I fought in France for your
beauty, as for any other matter you may believe me.

Whereupon he reported his Combat with the Knight of the Sun, which made the
Princess (as well for Palmerins promise, as ye account he made of Frysol)
somewhat better quieted, to answer. If it be so my Lord, that your return
will be with such speed, I shall enforce my self to bear the burden of my
cares with as much patience as I can, and see you fail not your appointed
time: but tell me I pray you, what Arms bears the Knight of the Sun you
spoke off? which Palmerin discribing, Polinarda remembered him, saying. My
Lord, I know now very well what he is, for eight days after your departure
toward France, the Emperor my Father knighted him, comma^ding me to gird
him with his Sword, which I could not but obey: wherein the Knight glorying,
solicited me with affections not liking me, which I pray you revenge, being
the man whom the matter nearest concerns. After many other amiable
conferences, the Knights humbly took their leave of their Ladies, and in the
morning betimes, the Mariners called on Trineus and his company to have
aboorde, because the wind served well for England, which they performed with
all speed, having first taken their farewell of the Emperor and the Court. So
hoysing sail, they set on to Sea, and in good t^me came within y^ kenning of
England: where we will forsake them awhile, and return to the Emperors Army,
which he sent to the King of Norvvay his Nephewe.

CHAP. XLV.
How the Army of the emperor of Allemaigne arrived in England, under the
conducte of the County Tolano: and how they were discomfited.

REhearsed it has been already, how the Emperor of Allemaigne promised y^
Messenger of Norwaye, to send his Master the aid of ten thousand men at
Arms, of whom the County Tolano was made General, and they arrived in
England without any resistance* The County understanding by his auaunt
coure^s, the order of the Enemies Army, and where the King of Norway was
encamped, raunged his men in good order, and marched toward their Forte, which
ye King had made in the Duchy of Gaul^, and which he had destroyed during the
time the Duke was in France, having there fortifyed the strongest City, and
the Haven that stood best for their commodity. Crenus at his return with
Frisol, as you have heard, understanding the spoil of his Country, assembled
his people together, and with the aid of the King of England, came within a
days journey of his enemies. The County Tolano hearing thereof, appointed his
men in several companies, and the next day gave such sharp skirmishes to y^
Gaulles, as they were constrained to keep within their defenses. Heereuppon
the Duke determined to bid them battle, and to help him in his attempt, he
caused an ambush of a thousand light Horsemen, to place themselves in a Forest
near adjoining, of which company Frisol was the leader, and to provoke the
Norwayes to the field, he sent out certain men at Arms well provided, who
scouted here and there, to the end the Allemaignes, who had been so hot the
day before, should be compassed with the secret ambush, which fell out
according to Crenus his expectation. For so soon as the Allemaignes saw the
Englishmen so scattered, they dislodged themselves and followed them, with the
whole Army of the King of Norway, because they were persuaded y^ they took
themselus to flight: but y^ Gaulles not dismayed with their coming, being but
four thousand Horse, and ten thousand footmen, came valiantly against the
Allemaigne Ensigns, and then began a very fierce encounter, but the
Englishmen wise and pollitique, fearing misfortune, came on with their
reregard toward the Forest where the ambush lay, when the King of Norway
ignorant of their intent, suddenly made after them with the greatest part of
his power, but they had a worsse welcome then they expected, for y^ Englishmen
advertised what they should do, gathered upon the Forest side, charging
their enemies with such a sharp assault, as in less spac^ then an hour, two
thousand of them were slain. Frysol perceiving the time was come to show
himself, calling his squadron together, cried. Upon the^ valiantly my
friends, the spoil is ours. So entered they pel mel am^ng y^ Allemaignes,
making such slaughter of the^ as was w^nderful to behold, for albeit they
thought not of this deceit, they were so ouerwearied with dalliance, as when
they came to the exploit they could do nothing, but were slain down right,
such valor showed Frysol and his fresh supply, forcing them to flight, and
they following them, being glad to take the City of Tomar which was
strongly fortefied. Which when the King of Norway perceived, he stayed not
long after the^, because he saw it was not best for him, and therefore fled
after them for company at the hard heels, and got the City in good time,
else had they all perrished. Thus remained Crenus Master of the field, and
following his success, the next day begi^t the City of Tomar with siedge,
swearing never to depart thence, till he saw the Citizens either through the
Eats or the walls. Yet had this courage of his been soon cooled, if Frysol
like a good Captain had not cherished up his men, when Crenus at one saillie
of the enemy lost two thousand men, and therefore said. Why how now my
loving Friends and companions? will you fly or faint at the hour of good
fortune? desire you not to purchase the virtue so highly esteemed? know you
not that you deal with people half conquered, and altogether dyscouraged?
courage then my Brethren, courage, and let us not exchange our reputation with
their fear and faynting: you give me double strength good Friends, if but
with good countenance, you will make them know, what cowardly crauens they
are. Follow me bra^e Englishmen, and this very day will we give them
punishment, as their treason and rebellion has well deserved. These words
renewed each ones courage meruailously, so that the Duke with a fresh supply
began again thus to annimate them. You know my good Friends, that although
we are but a handful in respect of them, what success we have already had in
our encounters, so that with greater ease may we now conquer, weakening them
so mightily as we have done: let us not dismay then, but witness that the
worst manne amongst us, is more valiant and hardy in Arms, then the greatest
Lord that is in their company, each man therefore cherrish his hope, and
bearde our enemies to the very teeth. The day following, the enemy came
forth at a posterne Gate, and held the Dukes power very good play, and the
Norwayes very well appointed with Bows and arrows, gauled the Horse so
cruelly, as they were glad to take their Camp, whereupon the County Tolano in
hope of the day, followed upon them with his Allemaigne courtlaces, which
Frysol perceiving, met him in the face with his English squadron, and giving
the spurs to his Horse, ran with his Lance quite through his body: whereat
the Allemaignes much amazed, when they saw their General fall dead from his
Horse, determined valiantly to revenge his death, but Frysol and his men dealt
with them so round lie, as the stoutest was glad and feign to make them way.
Yet had they hemde in Frysol with such a troop, as if the Duke had not
speedily come with reskewe, they had taken him, and then began the sharpest
bickering, for the Duke of Gaul and Frysol with their men so bestirred them,
as the Allemaignes clean discouraged, began to disorder themselves, and with
the Norwayes fled to the City so fast as they could, where Frysol and his
men had entered, but that the King of Norway not daring to come into the
field, was there with men sufficient to resist his entry. Thus remained the
victory to the Duke of Gaul, by the brave policies of Frysol and his men, he
being generally commended of the Army: and thus retired the Allemaignes and
Norvvayes to their shame and dishonor. After the retrait sounded by the King of
Norway, he sent to ye Duke to demand truce for four and twenty hours,
that they might burye the dead, among whom was the County Tolano: which being
granted him, he caused the Counties body to be embalmed, who by the counsel
of his Lord and Captains, was sent home into his Country. The King and his
company secretly in the night embarked themselves, to join with the King of
Scots, who expected his coming, and then did the Citizens send word to the
Duke, that by y^ break of day they would yield the keys of their Gates to
him: whereupon Frysol was Lieuetenant general for y^ Duke of Gaul, and
entered honorably the City of Tomar, where the Englishmen rested themselves
for two or three days, to recompense their pains with profit and pleasure.
The enemy was no sooner departed under sail, but there arose such a terrible
tempest, as the most part of their vessels perished in the Sea, and the other
were so scattered, as they had lost the sight of one another: yet was some
small number remaining with the King, as well of Allemaignes as his own
Countreimen, so getting safe to shore in his kingdom, he determined a revenge
for his great overthrow, but he could not compass his intent, as you shall
read hereafter.

CHAP. XLVI.
How after the Prince Trineus, Palmerin and Ptolome, were arrived in England,
they went to the Court, and what torments the Prince endured for his love to
the fair Lady Agriola.

TRineus, Palmerin and Ptolome, being landed within 4. days journey of the
Kings Camp, which was provided against the King of Scots, were advertised,
that the King stayed but y^ coming of y^ Duke of Tintriel, and then he meant
to bid his enemy battle, that had so boldly presumed upon part of his
Realm. The garders of the port where they landed, seeing they were strangers,
would suffer them pass no further, till they knew their names, whether they
went, and what they came for. Palmerin answering on the behalf of them all,
said. Good friends, we are Grecian Knights, and travail strange Countries to
seek adventures, and because we heard that your King menaceth war, against
his ancient and maleuolent enemy the King of Scots, we come to offer our
selves and our service to him, so please his Majesty to accept it. This
answer so well contented the Officers, as by their means they were conducted
to the Court, where they were honorably entertained, and two days together
were there feasted with the King, in which time Trineus understood, that that
the Queen and her Daughter, were above twenty miles thence, whereupon the
next morning they took their journey thither, and by dinner time came where ye
Queen lay. But it fell out so happily for Trineus, as before they came to
the place where the Court aboade, they met the Queen and her train, who
daily went to a Chapel, not a quarter of a mile from the City, to hear
divine service, as she kept it for a continual exercise, and with her was
fair Agriola her Daughter. The Queen and all her Ladies alighted from their
Palfrayes, they entered the Chapel, the Prince well regarding the Goddess of
his heart, who belike making her prayers more brief then her Mother, came
forth with her waiting Ladies, to walk under a company of green Trees near
adjoining. Trineus seeing her a creature so rare and excellent, made doubt in a
matter of assurance, least he should be surprised as Acteon was, when he
found Diana bathing among her Nymphs. He being thus carried away with
marvelous conceit of her beauty, saluted not the Princess as she passed
before him, nor heard Palmerin who reproved him for omitting his courtesy:
but wading further and further into this amorous fury, spoke so loud as he
was easily heard, in this manner. O heavens, will you suffer the perfections
of a Lady so diuinelie accomplished, to be ye cause of my undeserved death?
when may the time come for me, to let her understand my desire to do her
service? or how might she know the loyal affection I bear her? One of the
Ladies of honor attending on the Princess, reputing his words unwise and
ouer-bolde, answered. Why Sir Knight, where learned you so little courtship, as
when the fairest in the Western world passes before you, you make no gentle
gesture or salutation? I doubt that what is counted honesty and virtue among
men of quallitie, with you is ^^^eemed harsh and uncivil, which makes me
repute you more meet for the Kitchen, then to bear the honorable office and
rich Arms of a Knight, as you do. Trineus as it were awaked out of a trance,
said. Ah sweet Lady pardon me, for by my faith I can neither tell what you
said, nor well where I am my self: for even as you ended, I felt such a
passion strike me to ye very heart, as death will soon arrest me without
remedy. The Lady, who knew not his meaning, checked him again, thus. Were
it not better then for you to be in the field, then here in this foolish and
indiscreet pensiuenes? It is true Lady, (quoth ye Prince) that at this time I
have showed my self vnmannerlie, and a slender Courtier, yet is not the blame
altogether to be thrown on me, ignorant who the Lady was which you speak
of: for we are strange Knights, and are come far from this Country, with
intent to aid and succor the King in his wars with our uttermost endeavors.
Notwithstanding, because we have with no more regard done our duty to your
Mistress, may it please you to entreat her on our behalf, to pardon this
offense: for satis-faction whereof, we will go serve the King her father in
battle, where we doubt not so well to behave our selves, as shall deserve our
pardon, if so be she will not at this instant so favor us. And I gladly
would fair Lady, that such service should be done by her commandment,
for our strength and virtue by her perfections augmented, will attribute the
honor to her that so graciously assisted us, (...) fore, so please you to make
known our good intent toward her, we shall for such kindness remain indebted to
you. The Lady took pleasure in hearing Trineus, especially perceiving the
zeal of him and his companions, to employ their valor on the Kings behalf,
which caused her immediately do this message to the Princess, who at that
instant (as a thing fatal to her) was wounded with love: whereupon she sent
them answer by her Gouernesse, that she entertained them as her Knights, and
as her Servants desired them to go aid the King her Father, yet would she
not consent to pardon them, till the renown of their exploites might show
them to deserve it. Trineus took this answer for better advantage then the
Princess thought on, accounting himself happy by such a good beginning, and
therefore said to the Lady. I think my self (fair Lady) one of the most
favored by Fortune, having the mean to obey your Mistress in her command,
and hope to execute her charge in such sort, as I shall deserve the grace she
does now deny me, yet with all humility on our behalf, I entreat you to
yield thanks for her princely kindness. The Lady returning to Agriola,
accomplished what Trineus desired her, whereupon she turned herself, and gave
them a countenance of favor, which was answered by Trineus, Palmerin and
Ptoleme, with great reverence, and y^ Princess, (showing herself not too
stately toward the Knights) with her hand and gesture gave a sign of her
content, which was not a little welcome to Trineus. Then the Queen coming
forth of the Chapel, with Ag^ola and her train mounted ^n horseback,
taking their wa^e to the Court again: but when Trineus had lest the sight of
them, w^^derfull vexations began to assail him, so that he said to Palmerin.
Ah my good Freende, how happy may that man account himself, whose fortune
honors him with the beauty of Ag^iola? Ah Sir Palmerin, I feel my self so
exceeding lie tormented, as I doubt my death will be inevitable. But tell me
the truth and dissemble not, how think you of my Mistress? is she not a
Lady more then divine? In good faith my Lord, said Palmerin, what the Knight
in France told us, was but fables, in that she exceeds report beyond all
opinion notwithstanding, it is necessary for you to nourish your hope, having
thus spoken to her, and bewrayed your afflictions, not doubting but this good
beginning of your enterprise, will cause the end fall out to your content. So
rode on these three Knights, pleasing their humors with their several
judgments of their Ladies, yet Palmerin had seen such matter in English
Agriola, as, but his plighted promise to Polynarda, was of force sufficient to
change his fancy. The next day they arrived at the King of Englands Camp,
where because they would not be known, they pitched their Tents behind all y^
other: and soon after came the Duke of Tin^riel, bringing with him a number of
hardy men at Arms, so that in short time y^ Kings strength was such, as they
exceeded their enemies in number. Heerevpon the King assembled his counsel,
and concluded, that the next day they would go seek out the King of Scots,
wh^ in two encounters had the upper hand, which made him so peremptory, as he
persuaded himself utterly to confound the King of England: who raising his
power, followed so dill^gentlie, as the third day after, he encamped within
half a mile of his enemy, that had besieged the Town of Corfania, and had
brought it ready to yield, but that the King prevented it by the strength he
brought.

CHAP. XLVII.
Of the cruel battle, between the King of England and the King of Scots.

WHen the King of Scots vnderderstoode the coming of ye King of England, and
that in all have he would bid him battle, he would no longer busy himself in
besiedging Corfania, but retired a little for his better advantage, co^ferring
with his Capitaines about their present affairs, concluding to offer the
ennemie no skirmishes, because thereby they would know their intent:
notwithstanding he gave order to prepare for battle, because he knew the
King of England came for no other purpose. The Englishmen not suffering the
Scots to have any leisure to fortefie themselves, were by the King the next
morning commanded in array, and all wings and squadrons appointed, the Duke
of Tintriel was made leader of the auaun^garde, wherein likewise were Trineus,
Palmerin and Ptolome, and to the Dukes Brother was committed the charge of ye
arrieregarde, and being all ready to martch on, the King himself began this
Oration. I think my Friends that no one of you, but sufficiently is
acquainted in what respect we continue this war, namely, to defend the honor
and reputation of our Realm, and to save the lives of you, your wives and
children, and your goods, which the enemy would violently spoil and take from
you, intending to throw perpetual bondage and slauerye on your necks. Will
you not then defend your liberties? will you not maintain your ancient
renown, which is, to be Lords and commanders of the Scots? assure your
selves, that how str^ng soever our enemy be, I hope with y^ aid of God, your
undaunted courages, and ye right of our cause, to make a noble and victorious
conquest. For I know, that our enemy has not one man in his Army, endued
with such an entire heart and magnanimious courage, as you are, nor that valueth
his title of honor with his life, as you do: and therefore if we martch on
valiantly, continuing resolute and confident together, every man laboring for
his Prince, Country, freende and fellow, and God for us all, your forwardnes
will make them fearful, and your very countenances enough to conquer. Every
manne then be cheerful, with a desire to vanquish, and here I vow to you
on the word of a King, that if Fortune stand so well with us, as to win the
day, never shall the Scots hereafter dare to lift up themselves against us.
Thus did the King of England animate his men, and so martched on in good araie
to the sight of their enemies, who by this time had ranged themselves for
battle, their auauntgarde conducted by the Marquis of Monthel, the King of
Scots himself in the maine battle, and the arrieregarde led by the King of
the Isle Magdalen: and as the King of England had encouraged his Soldiers, so
began the King of Scots to harten his men in this manner. The time is now come
(loyal Subjects and dear Friends) that the pride of the English must be
abated by the virtue and valor of the Scots, so that if you set before your
eyes the occasion calling us to the field, there is no one of you but will
blame his predecessor, for staying so long time to recover, what by true
patrimony belonged to them, and by the Kings of England, (tirannous usurpers)
against all right violentlye taken from our Ancestors. Will you not then
recover you loss, and reenter on those possessions, from which your Fathers
(against all reason) were expulsed? Duty does challenge it at your hands,
being the good not only for your selves, but for your children and
successors. Would you then loose so good opportunity, to reestablish things so
lost? Are your hearts more timorous then your enem^es? are your minds made of
worse metal then theirs? No no, well am I assured that the least among you, is
of higher virtue and account then the best in their company. If it has been
their custom, (as they themselves vaunt) to tryumphe over us, let us learn
them to confess with patience, that they have no such right or custom to
vanquish, as in three skirmishes already we have sufficiently made known,
with what fortune and unconquerable spirits you entertained your enemies.
Dismay no more now (my good Friends) then you have done, let eache-mans
sword make his entrance amidst his foes, and favor one another life, so
shall sweet success return you with victory, The King having ended, they
discerned the English power eager to encounter, and ^o the Armies meeting,
began a dreadful and dangerous battle. There might you hear the Dr^^mnes
thunder, the Trompets sound, the Clarions ring, the Phifes warble, Lances
shyuered, Knights di^^nou^ted, Foo^men scattered, heads defended, arms and
bodies wounded, some crying, other dying, a matter more then lam^ntable to
behold, and so long continued this cruel and bloody conflict, as the most
part of the auauntgarde were slain, sore wounded, or taken prisoners. Which
when the King of Scots perceived, being a Prince so hardy and valiant as
might be, commanded the maine battle to give the charge, in midst whereof
he was in person: whereupon, the fight began again much more fierce then
before, so that you might have heard the Horses storm, the Armor clatter,
and on every side beheld good and venturous Knights give up their lives. At
this furious onset, Palmerin seeing the Scots to retire for advantage, cried to
the King of England. Why how now my Lord? do you forget your self? Why do
you not follow on with your maine battle, seeing the enemy plays upon
advantage? cheerfully let us upon them for the day will be ours. The King
seeing that Palmerin^ counsel was very expedient, commanded his men to martch
on valiantly, which they did with such courage, as not one of them but was
thorowlie busied. Palmerin fearing least Tr^neus would be over venturous,
because the y^ng Prince was meruailo^s forward, desired him not to run so
far into danger, but keep by him* to the ^nde the one might succor the
other, if necessiti^ required. With these words ^e ran upon the S^ots like an
angry Lion, and no man durst withstand him, they saw him make such slaughter:
the King of England following him at an inche, delivering true testimony of
his invincible heart. On the other side, Trineus met with the Kings Brother of
the Isle Magdalen, piercing his Lance quite through his body, so that he fell
dead among his own Soldiers: and Ptolome all this while was not idle* but
where ere he came, he laid his enemy at his feet, so that the Scots wondered
at y^ behavior of these three Knights. When the King of the Isl^ Magdalen
understood the death of his Brother, incensed with unquenchable anger, ran
fiercely among the English, till he came where Trineus, Palmerin and Ptolome
were, one of his Knights showing ye King the man that slew his Brother,
whereupon he making toward Trineus, lifted up his Sword, and thought to have
slain him: but Palmerin stepping beetweene them, said* To me Captain, to me,
and so the King and he encountered together so terribly, as Palmerin was
wounded in two or three places, for which he made such recompense to the King,
as fastening his Sword on his Helmet, cl^st his head in ^wayne, that done he
fell dead to the ground. The sight hereof enflamed the Scots with such rage,
as like mad men they ran cutting and killing among the English, as well to
revenge the King of the Isle Magdalens death, as to defend their own King whose
danger they feared. In this hot skirmish the Kings of England and Scots met
together, who charged each other with such forcible strokes, as the King of
England was vnhorssed and sore wounded: but Trineus being at hand, seeing his
dear friends Father in such perrill, buckled with the King of Scots so
valiantly, as he gave him many a cruel wound, and had not his men made have
to convey him through the throng, he had been slain by Trineus, so was the
King of England mounted again, and revenged his foil on his enemy with
marvelous valor. There tryumphed the three Grecian Knights with inexplicable
honor, the Englishmen making such havoc among the Scots, as utterly
dispayring, they fled, one part to a Forest near at hand, and the other
toward the Sea to their Shyps, the King getting into one of them to save his
life, by the means of one of his Knights, that le^t him a good Iennet of
Spain to escape away withal. And so sailed thence the King with greater
shame, then did the Emperor Antonius from Octauius Caesar, leaving his men
fiercely pursued by the English, who terrefied them in such sort, as many of
the poor Scots chose rather to run into the Sea and drown them selves, then
to ^all into the hands of their conquering enemies.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Of the retrait of the King of Englands Army, and the honor he did to the
three strange Knights.

AFter the King of England was master of the field, he caused the retrait to
be sounded, and his men called together, commanding likewise that search
should be made through the field, to succor such as were sore wounded, and
to bury the dead, least the air should be infected: whereupon the Englishmen
took ye spoil of their enemies, cheefely their bag and bagage which they had
left behind them. In mean while the King withdrew himself into his Tent, where
remembering the great service of the three strange Knights, he commanded his
Nephewe Ce^des to seek them immediately, who found them in a Scottish Tent
binding up their wounds, and being not a little glad of his good fortune,
he came to Palmerin, saying. Gentlemen, the King my Uncle earnestly desires
you to come to him, because he will neither enter the Town, nor unarm
himself, til he hear some tidings of you. Seeing it pleas^th him, said
Palmerin, to commau^d, we humbly obey, wherefore we pray you Sir to return
his Majesty our dutiful thanks, and dilligent attendance. After Cerid^s was
departed, they resolved among themselves (at the earnest request of Trineus)
that Palmerin should be the cheifest among them, and him they would honor as
their Lord, because ye Prince feared to be known if such account should be
made of him: so went they presently to the Kings Tent, where they were no
sooner entered, but the King (albe^t he was sore wounded) arose from his
Chair, and embraced them lovingly one after another, not suffering them to
kneel before him, but honorably thus spoke to them. Worthy Gentlemen, how
welc^me you are I cannot express, for I account my self so highly beholding
to you, as the Realm of England had sustained this day great foil, but by
your fortunate valor: think then worthy Lords, wherein England may
recompense you, and on my word it shall not be denied, in mean while I pray
you let me have your company, because I will see your hurts carefully
attended. The Knights with great reverence accepted the Kings noble offer, and
were conducted into a fair Tent next the Kings, where the Chirurgions with
great diligence dressed their wounds, and afterward they came and supped with
the King. And because the King intended on the morrow to go refresh himself
at the Town of Corfania, which before had been cruelly besiedged by the
Scots, to give God thanks for his happy victory, a famous Sermon was made
before him by the Archbishop of Canterbury: to whom likewise he gave order for
enterring such as had been slain of account, and in that place for memory of
his good fortune, he caused a goodly Monastery to be builded, and dispatched
a Post presently to advertise the Queen of his good success. Now was his
Majesty very desirous to know the three strange Knights, that had so
valiantly assisted him, especially the man that saved his life: whereupon the
next morning he went to see them, demanding how they fared, for (quoth he) we
will now set forward to Corfania, where we will make you better
entertainment then we can here in the field. Then mounted they all on
horseback, and rode to Corfania, where the King remained till he and his
Knights were better recoueced, and where the King made the Duke of Tintriel
high Marshall of England, committing to his charge six thousand men,
commanding him to chase all the Scots forth of his Kingdom, wheresoever he
could find them, and to seize to his highness use the Towns and Cas^elles,
which they before had in use: which the Duke executed with such expedition, as
he left not a Scot in any Uillage or Hamlett, placing faithful Officers for
the King in every jurisdiction. During these labors of the Duke, the King
every day visited these three Knights, and finding Palmerin at a time
convenient, he requested to know of whence he was, and the names of his
companions. Let me entreat you (quod he) not to hide your selves form me,
because I shall not be in quiet till I know, that I may remunerate your deserts
according to your persons. Palmerin, who feared to be discovered, could not
readily devise what answer to make, yet at length in great humility, thus
said. We would desire your Majesty, that it might stand with your good
liking, at this time to excuse the knowledge of our present affairs, as also
what we are: yet thus far will I resolve your highness, that we are all
Gentlemen of Greece, nourished in ye Court of the King of Macedon, who in
seeking strange adue^tures, have travailed many provinces, and now at length
came into your Kingdom, well stored at this time with Knights errant, and
governed (as we well perceive) by a King so gracious, as to such persons
allows honor and good affection, as no King where we yet have come, does the
like. For this cause my Lord, as also understanding that the King of Scots
menaced war against you, came we into your Country, to serve you in all
obeysaunce, as the very simplest among your Soldiers. Trust me (said the
King) I have well noted your service, and a man might be deceived in expecting
better assistaunce, for which I rest yours in ought I may while I live: but if
you would name your selves, then should I know to whom I were ind^bted, as
also that my Subjects might honor you accordingly. That (quod Palmerin) will
neither profit or prejudice your Majesty, let suffice then I beseech you, the
unfeigned good will and service we owe to your highness. The King seeing he
could not get what he would, changed his talk, saying. Was it you Sir, that
on the day of battle was armed all in black? Yea my Lord, said Palmerin, and
this Knight (pointing to Trineus) is my Brother, who sheelded you from danger
against the King of Scots. Ah dear Friends, quoth the King, this made me so
importunate, and may it like you to stay in my Court, I will regard you
according to your especial deseruings, as the only Knights of the world in
my favor, yielding thanks to heaven, for the good I have received by your
means. Humbly did ye three Knights regratiate the King, promising for a while
to soiourne with him.

CHAP. XLIX.
How the Queen of England was advertised of the victory against the King of
Scots, and the overthrow of his whole Army.

AFter the King of England had sent tidinges to the Queen of his good
fortune, and the honor he intended to the three Knights of Greece: the
Messenger was so speed^e, as the second day* following, he arrived at the
City where ye Queen kept her Court, and presented her the Letters from the
King her Husband^, reciting the whole manner of the battle, with the rare
exployts of the three Grecia^ Knights* and how one of them preserved the Kings
life: omitting nothing that was needful to be reported, as how the King
intended to come with the three Knights in great royalty to London, and
therefore she should provide equal entertainment. The Queen highly contented
with these news, demanded of the Messenger, if he knew the three Knights
that gave such assistance to the King: No indeed Madame, answered y^
Messenger, neither did I see them, but at the time I was dispatched with my
message. Agriola, fin^ing in herself the puissaunce of the little God that
made loo^e, suddenly suspected, that these Knights were they which she saw
at the Chapel, and therefore said. I pray thee tell me my Friend, what
Arms bear the Knights? One of them Madame (quoth he) the very best Knight in
the world, is in Green Armor, and that is he that saved the King your
fathers life, when the King of Scots had near slain him, but he remounted my
Lord, giving his enemy such a danger^us wound with his Lance, as it was
greatly doubted he had killed him, he lost so much blood, and this was one of
the principal occasions of our victory. This Knights companion in Black
Armor, behaved himself with wonderful chivalry, for as a Lion makes hauock
in a heard of Cattle, so did he cut, slashe and mangle the Scots, as the very
hardiest durst not abide before him. The third is in Black Armor, sparckled all
over with white Roses, a Knight of no less courage then his companions, and
one that fought for England with incredible prowess. Let me die, said Agriola
to y^ Queen, if these be not the Knights that past by this City, when we
went to the Chapel to perform our exercise: and therwithall she rehearsed
what speech her Gouernesse had with them, and what she commanded them. In
sooth Daughter quoth the Queen, your Gouernesse and you may well be blamed,
for the slender account you made of them: I pray you therefore when they
return, let your former fault be sufficiently recompensed. That shall I not
fail to do, said Agriola. So the Queen honorably rewarded the Messenger,
sending him back with answer, that the Kings charge should be effectually
executed. The King advertised of the Queens reply, set forward with the
Knights of Greece and his train to the Court, and by the way, remembering the
power sent by the Emperor of Allemaigne to the King of Norway, he said to
Palmerin. I cannot sufficienlie marvel gentle Knight, why the Emperor should
declare himself mine enemy, and give assistance to the King of Norway against
me, considering I never did any thing might deserve his displeasure: but I
swear by the faith of a king, that I will revenge my wrong, and let him as^ure
himself, that while I have one foot of ground, or a dozen of my Soldi^rs to
help me, I will never have peace with him: to mollest me so within mine own
dominions, by God, my Friends, I cannot forget it. These words greatly
displea^^^ Trineus, but especially Palmerin, who answered. In my opinion my
Lord, the Emperor did but reason, and as duty bound him, in respect he could
not honestly refuse to aid the King of Norway his Cousin, and hereof I can
assure you, in that I have sometime been in his Court, that he is one of the
wisest and best governed Princes that ever I heard of. Wherefore, be it spoken
under correction, your Majesty should forget this light offense, and consider
if the like had been toward you, you would have done no l^sse. When the King
heard him to support the Emperors cause, he presently judged him to be of his
Course, and therefore said. Are you he Sir, that woonne such honor and renown
in France, at the combat maintained by the Prince Jews for the love of his
Lady? If you be so, I pray you do not deny it, for I shall henceforth think
my Court most happy, to harbor the most excellent among all Knights: and I
promise you I am so jealous of mine own conceyte, as you can hardly p^^swade
me otherwise, such experience have I made of your bounty and virtue. Palmerin
blushing at th^se wor^es, and doubting he should now be certainlye known,
answered. We humbly entreat your Majesty heretofore, and so we do now
again, that you would not enquire whence we are: suffices your highness,
that we are his humble Servants, in any thing that shall like him to command
us. The King this hearing, repented himself that he had been so importunate,
for he feared least his speeches would make them forsake his company, wherefore
by this time being come near his Palace, he said. What I have said
Gentlemen, I hope shall not offend you, in my excuse admit my earnest desire to
know you. By and by ouertooke them the Duke of Tintriel, who went to restore
the Crown (as you have heard) what the Scots usurped, and he advertised the
King, that the Queen and her Ladies were ridden to a Castle four miles from
London to sollace themselves, whereupon the king resolved to ryd^ thither?
Whereof the Prince Trineus was not sorry, such was his desire to see his fair
Friend, whose love still crossed him with so many passions, as he seemed a man
of another world, and did not his wounds s^rue somewhat to cover his disease,
hardly could he have sound any shift to conceal it so closely, wherefore he
began with Palmerin thus. You know my chosen friend, that the hope of my
love made me leave my fathers court, and to prevent my meaning consists only
in you, now in respect of my forcible captivity, being unprovided of strength
sense, or any mean to discover my love to her, who only can help me: I
entreat you by the inviolable league of our amity, that when you chance to
speak with the Goddess of my life, my pains and anguishes may serve for my
salutations, and imparting to her the extreamitie of my sorrows, she may
perceive in what estate I am, and what need I have of her gracious pity.
These words were delivered with such sighs and tears, as Pa^merin was amazed
thereat, albeit he knew how heavy the burden was, and how it exceeded
patience in suffering, comparing his absence from his mistress Polinarda to be
as insupportable, as the presence of Agriola (not daring to speak to her) was
to Trineus, whereupon he answered. My Lord, repose your trust in this matter on
me, which I doubt not to handle in such sort, as you shall have no cause to be
mal content, or the Princess any reason to be ungrateful. But what think you
if my Dwarf did carry this message? in my opinion (through the whole world)
you could not find a more fit fellow, such is his subtle and present
invention, as he will prove the only string to your bow. Alas said the
prince, I care not who were employed herein, so I were sure of comfort. Then
was the dwarf called, to whom Palmerin in this sort began. It is well known to
thee V^banil^o, with what good will I would do any service I could to my Lord
Trineus, as well for the incomparable kindness I have received of my Lady his
Sister, as for the affi^^tie I hope shall one day be between us by his means.
So ^ften have I made experience of my loyal service and fidelity, in my
chiefest and very n^er^st affairs, as well may I impart to thee, the secrets
of my noble companion, p^rswading my self of thy surety and secrecy. It now
remains that thou pleasure the Prince Trineus, in breaking his love to the
Princess^ Agriola, as thou did for me to my Mistress Polynarda: but above
all things have regard, that thou bewray not of whence, or what we are, yet
must thou assure her, that the Prince is one of the greatest Lords in Europe.
My Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, I was never yet disobedient to you in all my time,
and very loath were I now to begin: but because I am such a little writhen
fellow, you make me your Broker in these perilous love matters.
Notwithstanding, I will do it though I died for it, esteeming my life well
bestowed to pleasure such Princes. There can no inconvenience arise hereby to
thee, quoth Palmerin, but profit every way: be not enemy then to thine own
good. That will I never, said the Dwarffe, and well might the Lady be judged
unprovided of reason, and very far from understanding, if she make refusal
of the Princes honorable offer: the King himself, if he knew it, would
imagine his day^s blessed: the issue then of this enterprise can not but sort
to good. The Dwarffes words pleased so well Trineus, as he took him in his
arms, saying: I commend my self, and my happiness to thee. Let me alone,
quoth V^banillo, if I bring you not herbs that shall cool this hot fever,
then let me never be counted for a tall man: so went he about it, as you shall
understand hereafter.

Chap: L.
How the King of England went to the Castle to the Queen and her Ladies, and
of the honorable entertainment made to the three strange Knights.

News being brought to the Queen, that the King was not far off, she sent
a very honorable train to meet him, and with them his son the young Prince
Frederick, ten years old, but beautiful and of such perfection, as promised
great hope in time to come. He having made reverence to his Father, and the
other Princes, demaun^ed for the strange Knights, and saluting them with such
kindness as was rare in a Child, he rode between Trineus and Palmerin,
giving them hearty thanks for their freendly succor to his Father, without
which, said he, as the Queen my Mother told me, he had dyed* and we all
been distressed. By this time they were come to the Castle, all the way so
thick p^stered with people, as there was no room to stir among them, every
one crying. Happy be the Knights that foiled our enemies. So entering the
Castle, in the uttermost Court they met the Queen and her Ladies, among
whom fair Agriola shyned, as beautiful Venus among the other stars,
wherewith the Prince of Allemaigne was so nipt in the head, as an off^n^our
with his guilt before a Judge, so that not regarding what young Frederick, or
the other Lords courteously said to him, he was ready to fall beside his
horse with euermuch gazing: But Palmerin suddenly twitching him softly, said.
Fie, my Lord, what mean you to forget your self thus? see you not her that
is ordained yours, and will you not triumph in your happy sight, but sit as
one utterly discouraged? For shame let pass this pusillanimitie, and with
cheerful countenance go give her the good morrow. The Prince did so, but
with such timorous conceits, as having saluted the Mother, he durst not speak
to the Daughter: who imagining the best, and that bashful reverence did so
with-holde him, she came to him in this manner. Are not you sir, the Knight in
the green Armor, that not long since promised one of my Ladies to aid my
Father in his wars? I am fair Princess, quoth he, and what I have done,
was at your commandment, the virtue whereof gave me such strength, as some of
the Scots have felt to their cost: but had I gone unprovided of such favor, I
am persuaded I could never have returned alive. It now remains, sweet Lady,
that according to the request I then made by your Lady, it would please you to
remitte his offense, who deserved the sharpest punishment can be devised, for
not honoring that Princess, which carries the Palm from all Ladies living.
In truth, my Lord, said the Princess, not only is your fault to be
forgiven, if it could be named a fault, but also ought I to recompense you to
my uttermost power, seeing by your means my Father in safety, and the Realm
of England delivered from the tyrannous ser^itude of the Scots: wherefore you
may assure your self, that if I can stand you in any st^dde toward the King
my Father, you shall command me to my uttermost. The Prince returned her a
thousand thanks, and said. Believe me, Madame, the very least title of your
good will, is recompense to me more then sufficient, and would provoke such
affection in me toward your service, as you could not command the thing,
but I should with dutiful willingness perform it, as I doubt not but better
occasions shall make manifest unto you. Then entered they the great Hall, where
such a ^umptuous banquet was provided, as will ask more time to report, then
leisure will admit. Likewise here to set down the wonderful passions of the
amorous Prince Trineus, in regard of a Lady so exceeding in perfections,
surpasses my capacity: but he that is seated so opposite to so fair a
creature, and loves so earnestly as Trineus, yet dare not speak least he
should be spyed, may judge of that which I cannot utter. But seeing the
liberty of speech was denied, the speedy eye posted between them with sweet
con^eyances, and still must she countenance the stranger Knights, till
fearing to be taken tardie, she closely conferred with the Princess Eufemia,
daughter to the Duke of Norgalles, saying: What think you Coz^n of these
strangers? are they not the seemelyest personages that ever you saw, both in
favor, conntenaunce, good grace and hardiness? I am of the opinion, that
although they report themselves but as simple Knights errant, they be
doubtless great Lords, descended of noble and princely parentage: as one may
easily gather by their civil and virtuous behavior, which is evermore the
witness of true nobility. These words caused Eufemia to mark well Trineus,
as her Cousin Agriola did, which he perceiving, and judging that they talked of
him, his alterations were so sensible as they might be easily discerned: for
the more they eyed him, the greater was his torment, till the Table being
withdrawn, he had some ^ase in opening his mind to Palmerin, whose
comfortable words were as good to him as restoratines. Agriola on the other
side escaped not free, for her ease was no greater when the arose, then when
she sat down, and that must be little, having so dainty a dish before her to
fill her stomach.

The next morning, the King and the Ladies mounted on horseback, setting
toward London, and God knows the Prince was not far behind them, living
only by the regard of her, with whose rare beauty he could never satisfy
his eyes. And as they rode through a Forest, the King seeing the Trees so
green and delightful, and because the heat of the day hindered their
travail, he caused his Pauilions and Tents to be there presently pitched,
and intended to dine there under the cool trees. Dinner being ended, he
would needs go course the Hare, wasting the afternoon in that pastime, and on
the next day, rode to chase a Heart which was taken in the toils, and
therewithal a huge wild Bore, the mightiest that ever was seen, having
wounded him in so many places, as the Dogs and Bloodhoundes mig^t easily tracke
him. Afterward they rowsed* a fallow Dear, when the Huntsmen made ye woods
ring so bravely with winding their Horns, and the Greyhoundes pursued the
course so speedily: as Palemedes chose was not comparable to this, till in the
end the Dear was fallen. These pleasures finished, the King with his company
returned to his Tents, showing to the Queen and her Ladies the fruits of their
pastime, saying. I promise you Madame, I think these Grecian knights excel
in every thing: for as in chivalry, so this day have they showed themselves
excellent woodmen, as none in our train may compare with them. By this time
the Tables were cou^red for Supper, all which time was spent in discoursing of
their sports: till the good night given on all sides, the three knights
withdrew themselves into their tent. All these pleasures made not Vrbanillo
forgetful of his Masters charge, wherefore practicing how to accomplish it
effectually, he found means to come acquainted with the Ladies attending on
the Princess, and in respect the attended on the knights of Greece, he was
licenced the oftener into their company. The next morning, the king and the
knights walking into the Woods, the Dwarffe watching time to deliver his
message, made so many walks and returns before the Princess Pauillion, as at
last she espied him, and calling him to her, said: I pray thee, my Friend, by
the ^aith thou bear^st thy Master, tell me the truth of a matter I shall
ask thee. Madame (quoth the Dwarffe upon his knee) command what you please,
for there is nothing (my mistress^ prejudice excepted) but I will truly tell
you. Which of the three, said the Princess, is thy Master? My Master (quoth
the Dwarffe) has not his second in all perfections, he it is that was in the
black Armor, who in the battle for your Father did so many wonderful
exployts, as far exceeds the fabulous reports of sir Gawen or Lancelot du
Lake. In sooth (quoth she) so have I heard, and beside thy duty reserved to
thy Master, I see thou can set him forth for a most hardy knight: but
tell me of whence he is? what are his companions? and why to they make it so
dainty to be known? Herein Madame, said he, I cannot with my duty answer
you, for I am restrained by a former promise, not to r^ueale the least matter
that may be hurtful to them. Nevertheless, in regard of the reverent good
will they bear you, and that I would not have you offended with such an abject
creature as I am, I would gladly tell you some thing to your content, so you
will promise me on your princely word, that what I reveal shall never be
disouered by you. Persuade thy self thereof, said the Princess, and look
what thou say, by my honor, shall never turn to thy after harm. Then know
fair Madame, (quoth he) that the green knight is of the most noble and
illustrious house in Europe, loving a Lady as his proper life, for whom he
has left his Country, parents and friends, to come and do her service. The
black knight, as I have already told you, is my master, and further then
this I may not tell you. What am I the nearer my desire, quoth she, by this
answer? either thou should have said nothing, or else thoroughly satisfied
m^e, for now I can not be quieted, till thou tell me what Lady it is, that
the green Knight loves so dearly: let me not make so many entreaties, for I
promise to thee again, by the faith of a Princess, that never shall any
creature know it by my means. You urge me so far, quoth the Dwarffe, and
have made me such great promises, as I am constrained (beyond y^ charge given
by my master) to acquaint you with the truth, in respect, the fault will be
greater in you to make refusal, then in yielding. Resolve your self therefore
good Madame, that the brave green Knight, so rich in Arms, but more in mind,
is the Prince Trineus, Son to the Emperor of Allemaigne, so passionate in
love, and so deprived of liberty, by devout service to your excellent bounty:
as against both duty and nature, he has deceived his Father, feigning to
come aid his Kinsman the King of Norway, where contrariwise, he has showed
himself his mortal enemy. And to no other end has he thus offended both
Father and Cousin, then to make known his long and labourous desires, to make
you Lady and Mistress of him and his: and such is his fear^ to be refused, as
he endures more torments, then the martired body of poor Prometheus. Be not
then the cause sweet Lady, that a Prince so famous, and a Knight so gentle,
shall buy his great good service to your Father and Country, yea the most
loyal love he bears to you, with untimely, unfortunate, and cruel death.
Think with your self, is it not the highest among all honors, to be Wife to
such a Lord, and Empress (in time) of renowned Allemaigne? Is it not
perpetual report, to be Lady and commaundresse of the principal part of
Europe? Let not him bear record that a body so adorned, and countenance so
mild and gracious, can entertain tirannie or cruelty: yea Madam such
cruelty, as if you receive him not into your favorable conceit, you shall
procure the death of ye truest Knight in love, that ever lived. The black
knight is the renowned Palmerin d'Oliua, the wonder of the world for ^alour,
conquering in France the Duke of Sauoy, in maintenance of his Ladies beauty,
fair without compare: conforming his Sheelde and Armor equal to his mourning
thoughts, for his absence from her that tryumphes in his love. The third
knight, so adorned with white Roses, is called Ptolome, loved by a Lady well
worthy of him. It now remains fair Princess, that you make the Prince
Trineus equal with them in felicity, for you have the maiden head of his
love, which with honor you may entertain into your chast^ thoughts. Thus have
I acquainted you with such a secret, as no creature but your self could have
got of me, and the danger to fall into your misconceit, has made me such a
blab: leaving all you have heard to your gracious co^struction. Agriola,
meetelie far enough in love before, but now utterly denied of longer
liberty, hearing the words of Vrbanillo, was surprised with such a strange
alteration, as a long time she was driven to silence, not able to utter the
secret conceits of her mind, yet al length (to shadow her sudden change
from the Dwarf) she said. Ah my Freende, thou acquaintest me with matter
altogether incredible, is it possible that Trineus Son to the Emperor of
All^^^aigne, would venture into this Court, considering the mortal enmity
between our Fathers? Trust me my Freende I cannot credit thee. I renounce
mine own soul s^ide the Dwarf, if it be not as I have told you: then judge
Madame what acceptaunce should be made of his service, when love to you
exceeds nature: may it not be termed love surpassing all other, either
registered in antiquities, or present memory? If it should be, quoth she, as
then say, it is beyond my power to return condign recompense, yet in
respect of thy secrecy, I dare assure thee, mine own opinion of him has so
ouer-maistered me, as in honorable modesty he may command, and I am not so
well nurtured to disagree. But if either by my words thou have gathered, or by
any change of countenance perceived, the sudden yielding of a flexible
nature: interpret it in this good sort, that Princes afflictions make each
other melt, as framed of one metal, which I charge thee conceal from him, as
thou regardest my word and his safety. Pardon me Madame, quoth the Dwarf, it
stands not with my allegeaunce to obey you herein, what a villain might I
be accounted, and unworthy the name of a faithful servant if I should ^ide
these happy tidings from him, to ease those torments that every hour threaten
his death? Yea Madame, did my master but think I would so abuse him, well
deserved I to be ^orne in pieces. Well, quoth she, if thou find time
convenient, till him, but no other I charge thee on thy life: and withal
certify him, that I would not for my Fathers Crown he should be known.
Fear you not, good Madame, said the Dwarffe, they are already so well
advised, as none but your self ran any way endaunger them. It suffices that
the Prince understand your pleasure, which I will impart to him when the King
is returned: so kissing her hand he departed, leaving her so highly
contented, in assurance of the loyal love of Trineus, as she never determined
any other Husband, yet would she not disclose her mind, no not to Eufemia,
her secret companion, thinking herself too much bewrayed, because the Dwarffe
knew it. Soon after the Queen sent for her, to walk in the cool shadow of
the Trees, where not long they stayed before the King returned, who reported
what pastime they had all that morning. The Knights having saluted the Queen
and her Ladies, Trineus saluting the Princess Agriola, was so transported as
he scant knew where he was. The Princess likewise fixed with a steadfast eye
on him, as wounded both him and her self together, her complexion so aptly
deciphering her sickness, as the Prince perceiving it, said to himself. Ah
love, have thou wrought so happily for me, as my Lady knows my secret
afflictions? shall I be so fortunate, as she will (...) remorse on my passions?
sweet hope persuades me so, for the often change of her diuince countenance,
tells me there is some mercy in working. The King and Queen departing into
their Pauilion, Trineus and Palmerin did the like into theirs, the Prince
taking Vrbanillo aside, demanded if he had any good news for him. If you will
grant me one thing, said the Dwarffe, I will tell you such tidings, as cannot
but content you. Demand what thou will, quoth Trineus, and by the faith of a
Prince, thou shall not be denied. Then began the whole discourse he had
with the Princess, and what devotion she had for the recovery of his health.
Judge you in what rare humor the Prince now felt himself, without question he
imagined himself in a more beautiful paradise, then ever was invented by
Epicurus himself, and embracing the Dwarf he said. Ah my good friend, what
will thou y^ I give thee? tell me what thou demaundest? thou have my whole
life so much at thy command as thou may liberally share out thine own
recompense, but seeing the beginning is so good, no doubt much better remains
behind. Why my Lord, quod the Dwarf, you know I was borne to do you service,
command what you please and I will accomplish it. Then shall thou, said the
Prince, return to my Mistress again, and kissing her hand, present her from
me this Emerald, desiring her to wear it for my sake: with remembrance to
pity his painful miseries, whose life and death is only in her hand.
V^banillo taking the ring, Trineus and Palmerin went to pass the time with the
King, and the Princess at their entrance regarding Trineus, perceived by his
countenance that he understood her message, for his blood was now risen
cheerely in his face, which before was suncke down with too much langushing,
so that she imagined her self more happy, in being so be loved, then to
love, and knew not well how to dissemble her joy. Ah poor Trineus, the pain
thou endurest, attending the wished hour to speak with her, far surmouneth
the torments of Leander, awaighting when Phoebus would go bathe himself with
Thetis and the Marine Goddesses, that he might afterward swim to his affianced
Hero: and had not she given thee a better sign by her eye to adventure, I
would have reckoned thee more unfortunate, then the be^r^thed spouse to the
prisoner of Abydos. Now had Trineus bashfully taken the Princess by the hand,
when unhappily one came to advertise the king, that the heart he had ^hased the
day before, was now again gotten within y^ toyl^^, that if it pleased him to
hunt in the morning, he should no doubt kill him with little labor. These
news were so welcome to the King, that because he would the next morning more
early go to his past^ne, he withdrewe himself for that night, the Queen and
Agriola likewise departing to their Pauillion: so that Trineus encounter was
thus prevented, and he with Palmerin returned to their T^nt, trusting still on
the Dwarfes diligence, that he should perfect all things to his hearts desire,
and to persuade him the more, Palmerin thus began. I have this hope my Lord,
seeing already so many good signs, that you cannot any way ^ee deceived in
your love: and this I would advise you, Fortune being so favorable, and
assisting you to her very uttermost, you should not hence-foorth show your
self so feminine, but in hardy manner, reveal to the Princess, when you
shall find her at convenient leisure, both how you love her, and what
favorable grace you expect at her hands. I must confess, that Letters and
messages are able to do much: but the person being present, and knowing how
to request, and how to be answered, is more auailable a thousand times: and in
brief, no Messenger can be like himself. I speak not this, as though my
Dwarf were not faithful, but to this end, that she should receive no
occasion of displeasure. In how many dangers have Gentlemen been, only by the
bad construction of their servants message? the readiest wit that it cannot
number them: therefore if you find opportunity, attend no other suter but your
self. This council well liked the Prince Trineus, wherefore he determined to
speak to her himself, so soon as time and leisure would permit him, and in
this resolution they went to take their rest but the remembrance of Polinarda,
would not suffer Palmerin to sleep, comparing his joy in her presence, with
his torme^ting passions now in her absence breathed forth ma^i^ sighs, and
^hed many tears, till at length he began to slumber wherein he thought he
discerned this sight. Being in company with the King, he saw come forth of
a dark cave a dreadful Lion, who with open throat set upon him, and assailed
him in such manner, as with his nails and teeth he rent his Armor, and put him
in very great danger of his life, so that he strove in such sort in his
sleep, as Trineus being in bed with him, awaked him, deemaunding why he
strugled so earnestly. Palmerin thus awaked desired God to withstand all his
evils, and afterward recounted to Trineus the whole effect of his dream, and
said. It will not be amiss my Lord that to morrow we ride armed in the Kings
company, for such illusions, albeit they commonly fall out untrue, yet can
presage no good to follow. I like your counsel well, answered Trineus, and
that Ptolome go armed as well as we. In the morning they arose and armed
themselves, all save their Helmets and Lances, which their Squires carried, and
in this sort came to bid the King goodmorrow, who meruailed much to see them so
prepared, and doubting they had received some occasion of offense, demanded
what moved them so to be armed. You know my Lord quoth Palmerin, that a Knight
ought evermore to be ready for all adventures, and not knowing what
inconvenience or danger may happen, before such time we shall return again,
we have armed our selves to prevent the worst. The King not discontented with
this answer mounted on horseback, and coming to the chase, had excellent game
at Dear, Heart, Bore and wild Buffell, wherein he took such exceeding
pleasure, as he determined to stay there five or six days longer. But in the
place where he supposed himself safe, and free from all hazard, suddenly he
was solicited with the chaunges of fortune, for the Queen and her daughter
Agriola were in marvelous danger, as you shall read in the discourse
following.

Chap. LI.
How the Queen of England and Agriola her daughter, were in danger to be
ravished by the giant Franarco, and of the succor they had by Trineus,
Palmerin and Ptolome.

THe king returning from the chase with his company, little minding any
unfortunate event, and conferring with Palmerin til they drew near unto their
Tents: at length they heard a great tumult, and beheld a Squire making toward
them so fast as his Horse could gallop. Palmerin doubting some unhappy chance,
and remembering his dream, said to the king. Never credit me my Lord, if this
squire come not to you about some special affairs, as well may be gathered
by his speedy pace. At these words the Gentleman came to the king, reporting
how the Giant Franarco, Lord of the castle of Carbones, since his departure
came to his Tents, and from thence had violently taken the Queen and her
Daugter Agriola, notwithstanding the resistance of many knights, who striving
to defend her, lost their lives. The King with these words strooken in
wonderful grief, said.

Ah Gentlemen, this villainous Traitor has notoriously wro^ged us. How is it
possible to recover them again before they be dishonored? Trineus and
Pa^merin moved at these news, asked the Squire, which way he went with the
Queen and her Daughter? In truth my Lord quoth he, I cannot tell ye which way
he took, we all were so troubled, and misused by his train: except they went
along the Forest, and so are gone to the next village. Then Palmerin clasping
on his Helmet, and snatching his Lance from his Dwarf, Galloped amain after
the Giant, not speaking a word to Trineus, who accompanied with Ptolome, rode
apace after him, and as they passed by the Queens Tent, they saw the Ladies
and gentlewomen heavily lamenting, especially Eufemia, the chief companion to
the Princess Agriola. Diverse Knights beside armed themselves to pursue the
Giant, but Trineus not a little enraged, followed the tracke of the horse,
demanding of all he met, if they saw the villain that had stolen away the
Ladies. As concerning this Giant Franarco, you must note that he was the
cruellest tyrant and most notable fellon in all ye Realm, having a days
journey from the Forest where the King hunted, a Castle so well fortefied, and
furnished with munition and all things necessary, as in England was not the
like, which was left to him by the death of his Father, who forciblie took it
from a Lord his neighbor, and diverse other places, especially the Isle
Magdalen. There succeeded ^e ye royal dignity, after the death of the elder
Brother,, who (as you have heard) was slain in the battle by Palmerin, and
he understanding the death of the king of the Isle Magdalen, was so ^ighlie
displeased, y^ although he had always before boorne allegeaunce to the king,
he now solemnly swore to revenge his Brothers death, being so feared of the
whole Country, as none durst enterprise to deal with him. So to revenge the
slaughter of his eldest Brother, with diverse of his kindred and Friends
likewise ^layne in the battle, he strengthened himself with thirty hardy
knights, intending to displease the king so much as he could. And hearing y^
he was coming to London, to feast the knights that were the cause of this
victory, but cheefely him that slew his brother, came with his company this
way, in hope to find them all vnpr^uided. And coming that morning the king
was gone on hunting, he ^ound these he desired to meet withal, for the
hatred he bare them, thinking himself sufficiently revenged, if he could
carry away with him the Queen and her Daughter: which he accomplished to his
own desire, causing them mount up behind two of his Knights. The gentlemen
that were left to keep the Queen company, offended to see such villainy
offered their Lady and Mistress, defended her so well as they could, but all
auayled not against the Giant and his power, because they were armed, and they
with the Queen were unprovided, so that a number of them were slain and sore
wounded, and more had been, but that he feared the return of the King, which
made him in have ride thence with his spoil, sending them somewhat before, and
loytering behind himself, to fight with any that should come to reskew them.
Trineus having gotten the s^ght of them, came passing to the Giant, saying.
Stay traiterous thief, for thou may not so carry her away that is worthy the
greatest lord in the world. With these words they ran fiercely together,
Trineus giving the Giant a sore wound on the shoulder, but the Prince re^eiued
such a mighty stroke from the Giant, as he fell from his Horse with his heels
upward. Palmerin being not far off, and doubting least the Prince had been
slain, came in a great rage to Franarco, saying. Monstrous enemy to menhoode,
who made thee so saucie to lay violent hands on Ladies of such account, by my
Sword villain, I shall make thee dearly to pay for thy folly. So couching
their Lances they met together, the Giant failing, but Palmerin gave him a
shrewd wound on his body, and their horses roughly shouldring one another, as
their masters were both thr^wn to the ground. Franarco (being heavy and
unwieldy) had such a fall, as easily he could not recover himself. Palmerin
nimbly getting up again, gave the Giant such a wound on his right leg, as
the flesh hung down pitifully to behold. The Giant being not able to stand
any longer on that leg, set his knee to the ground, being glad to defend the
strokes of Palmerin, who reached him such a sound blow on the forehead with
the hills of his sword, as the Giant fell along on his back, when Palmerin
soon setting his foot on his breast, with his Sword divided his head from
his shoulders. During this fight, Trineus and Ptolome, made after the Queen
and her Daughter, whom the Giants Knights drove cruelly before them. Now was
it a matter well worthy memory, to see the brave behavior of these two
Knights, but cheefely of Trineus before his sweet Mistress, whose presence
endued him with such exceeding courage, as he thought himself able to conquer
the whole world, and therefore sufficient for all them, were they as many more
in number. But strength does not always equal courage, and lovers think
more then they are able to do, as to Trineus peril it had now fallen out, but
that a company of the Kings Knights arrived, whereupon began a hot encounter
between them, and Trineus coming to the Knight y^ had Agriola behind him,
set him soon beside his horse, with his neck broken in his fall, so that ye
princess getting forth of the throng, and seeing her beloved so valiant in
prowess, b^tweene joy and grief, she said. Ah happy Knight, the mirror of
all such as follow arms, I desire thy fortune may prove such, as thou and thy
company may have victory over these traitors. Now may I be well assured of the
love thou bear me, for which, (if we may escape this hard brunt) persuade
thy self not to pass unrecompensed. Trineus hearing the words of Agriola, was
enflamed with such a spirit of conquering desire, as breaking in among the
thickest, his strokes gave witness he fought for a wife. But the Giants Knights
were men of such proof, as the fresh s^pply that came were all wel-neere
slain, and doubtless the rest had borne them company, but that the King and
Palmerin, with fifty Knights more, came to assist them: for Palmerin having
slain the Giant, mounted on his horse, because it was one of the goodliest y^
ever he saw, and espying the King coming with his train^, set on with him, and
found Trineus in great danger, because so many of his side were slain, but
this fresh assistance brought by the king, was the mean that all the Giants
knights were slaughtered, and they kneeling down thanking God for their
victory. The king alighting, came and embraced the queen, saying. Now happy
may we think our selves Madame, having so well prevented this treacherous
villain? for never did I think to see you again, but that God and these
knights so highly befreended us. The Queen and her Daughter were as yet so
dismayed, in remembrance of their former danger, as beholding so many lie
slain before them, and joyful beside being so fortunatelye delivered, as
between these extremes they knew not what to say, but desired speedily to
s^t forward thence, which they presently did, y^ king commanding his Nephew
Cerides, to see Franarco and his men burned to ashes, and honorable Sepulture
to be provided for the other. When the Queen heard that Eranarco was dead.
Tell me my Lord (quoth she) who has done such a gracious act to kill that
monstrous villain? Even he Madame, said the king, that was cause of my
victory in battle, the knight here in black Armor, to whom I am so far
indebted, as I cannot imagine any recompense sufficient for him: and this can I
not speak without great marvel, seeing so rare valor performed with so
little danger on his behalf. Long may the good knight live said the Queen
that has so defended us, and may they all three prosper in their affairs, for
their knightly service to the Realm of England. While these speeches endured,
Trineus being sore wounded, was brought between two squires and set upon his
horse, but the king, the queen, and cheefely fair Agriola was glad, when she
heard there was no such danger but he might well escape it. Wherefore mounting
al on horseback, they rode to see the Giants body, which made Agriola repute
Palmerin for no less then his Dwarf commended him. Then the king commanded
to unarm the body, and one of his knights should bring away his Helmet and
Sheelde, which would be tokens sufficient for him to recover the Castle of
Garbones which he seized on, and all other things belonging to the Giant, he
sent the Count of Bonneroy with five hundred men to confiscate and return to
his Majesty's use. The Count well knowing such matters would not easily be
accomplished, if they in the Castle should make resistance, therefore
politikely he sent the Giants Targe and Helmet, before, as sent from Franarco,
who was with the king, and they should open the gates because they were coming
thither, for witness whereof they showed the giants signet of arms. The guard too
cr^dulous, and thinking it impossible for any man to conquer the giant, opened
the gates, whereupon the Count presently entered with his power, putting all to
the sword, not sparing any, not so much as the giants younger brother, who
escaping alive from the battle, was the cause who Franarco dealt thus
villanously. Thus did the Count yield the Castle into the Kings obeisance:
remaining Captain thereof under the Kings authority, the like he did in many
other places, where the people advertised of the Giants rebellion, and that the
Castle of Garbones was taken, there was non^ would resist the kings
commandment: whereof the Count was not a little glad, returning as soon as he
could with the glad tidings of his success to the Court, certifying the King
how all things happened.

Chap. LII.
Of the conference Palmerin had with the Princess Agriola, after he had slain
the Giant Franarco.

BY this time the King was come to his Pauillion, where he caused his
Chirurgions dilligently to attend the three knights, for the curing of their
wounds, who found that the prince of Allemaigne was worst of al hurt, yet the
king understanding he was in no danger of life, was the better pacified,
because he loved him dearly, and intended to honor him so much as lay in his
power, promising not to depart thence till he recovered his health: and
because he would prevent like mischances, he caused dilligent watch to be made
every night, as though he had lien in field encamped with the enemy. During
the Princes sickness, ^ee was oftentimes visited by the Queen and fair
Agriola, not unthankful of the courtesy received by him and his companions,
and for which they requited him with manifold thanks. Trineus esteeming
himself worthily recompensed, seeing that heavenly spectacle, whose presence
healed a greater wound then any he had received in fight, desiring the
continuance of the outward hurts, for comforting of his inward oppressions. And
while the queen thus conferred wi^^ T^ineus, Palmerin came to the princess
Agriola, seeing the time so lawful and commo^^^^s, that he might thoroughly
acquaint her with matter long enough before premeditated, but because she was
desirous to talk with him, she first began in manner following. I know not sir
Knig^t, how the king my Father will satisfy the great service you have done
him, in so many hazards to his Realm and himself: but for mine own part, I
think my self so bounden, that after life, which he gave me by generation, my
devoted soul shall remain to honor you. And if these occasions passed do
give me just cause to think my self happy, what less account may I make of
that virtuous Prince. Trineus your companion, who came into this Country only
for my love, as I am persuaded: yet doubtful to be lightly carried away with
report, I should accept it for more sound assurance, so please you to speak
the truth herein. Madame (quoth Palmerin) if I have done any service to the
King or you, it is rewarded with much more the^ sufficient, seeing it pleases
you to make such account thereof, and I promise you, you have two knights
wholly at command for the love of the third, who is so confidently ^owed your
friend and servant, as no man in the world can be more, and this is he that
lies wounded in his bed, the princely son and heir of the Emperor of
Allemaigne, in which report my Dwarf has not deceived you. And give my word
this credit. (Madame) that since the time he first heard of your excellent
beauty, being then in France, he never had other determination, but to spend
his life in your gracious service, and making refusal of many fair Ladies,
especially of Lucemania, daughter to the most christian king of France, set
down this princely and commendable resolution, never to espouse any other but
you, so it may stand with your liking to accept him for your husband: think
then advisedly sweet madam, of the incomparable happiness ordai^ed for ^ou, and
stand not in your own light to loose so good fortune. In truth my Lord quoth
the princess, I were well worthy to be reputed among the number of most har^
hearted and ungrateful Ladies, if I should not love the prince Trineus, were it
but for the danger he remains in for me, and the unfeigned love which you say
he hears m^e. And thus far I presume my Lord on your credit, that if it
were otherwise, you would not disguise the (...) this ^^ner, much less deceive
such a Lady as I am, which (notwithstanding) would be to you but a slender
conquest. Therefore you may assure him on my behalf, that the love I bear him
is more then he thinks, and very far exceeds his judgment, as the proof
hereof (in time) shall deliver true testimony. Madame, quoth Palmerin, his
only desire in this world you have faithfully understood, in you then it
consists to prevent the contrary, by merciful regard of his afflictions,
and your presence will appease the anger of the Emperor your father, in that
so nobly he would enterprise^ (though against his will) to aid the King your
Father only for your love. And this will be the mean that the conceived
pleasure of the Fathers, shall conclu^e in the happy conjunction of their
Children. My Lord, quoth the Princess, I will do what shall please my father
and mother to command me, and no otherwise, considering the danger I may fall
into by yielding my honor to any prejudicial occasion. Palmerin who had no
other fear but to be known what himself was, thus answered. I am persuaded
madame, that your judgment is so perfect, that to attain a place of such
dignity, and a husband so royal as the Prince Trineus, you will not stand
(...) frivolous terms, nor be carried away with any light or feminine fears,
seeing that (setting apart these doubts) you shall worthily accomplish the
thing which shall make you the most renowned Lady under the Occident. I pray
you Sir Palmerin, quoth she, refer this talk to some other time, for the
answer of such a high and weighty matter, deserves to be excogitated with
leisure, for oftentimes we see, that such actions suddenly and slightly
performed, causes more repentance afterward then is expected. Yet thus far
I venture, and so faithfully persuade him, that he is the only Prince in the
world I would accept for my husband, if they were so agreed to whom God,
nature, and duty has bound me: and to let him understand my wiliing desire
toward him, I will speak to him my self, as soon as the Queen is
departed. Not long after, the Queen returned to the King, leaving her Daughter
with two of her Ladies to comfort the prince, whereupon Palmerin taking her by
the hand, brought her to the bed side where Trineus lay, to whom she made
very courteous reverence, and trembling with modest bashfulnesse, said. How fare
ye gentle knight? trust me your hard fortune does greatly displease me, and
if I could bear part therein, believe me I would gladly endure the pain: for
it is good reason that the ca^ser of the harm, should have a portion of the
torment, gratifying you with a Maidens thanks, for your good assistance
without any desert. Trineus was so ravished with her presence, and hearing her
speak so friendly, in whom consisted the safety of his life, as he could not
utter the joy he conceived: which the Princess well noted and Palmerin
likewise, who answered her in this manner. It cannot be madame but my Lord
Trineus will soon amend, having the sudden medecin so near him, that is
only able to help him: and with these words he left them both together, to
acquaint each other with their secret afflictions: when the Prince giving a
grievous sigh, said. Fair madame, to accomplish what you commanded the first
day I saw you, I did my beuoire to execute the effect of the charge, albeit
not so sufficiently as I could wish: yet since that time I never enjoyed one
minute of rest, till this instant, when mine eyes delighted with your sweet
presence, gave hope to my heart of further comfort. For this only cause (fair
mistress) have I forsaken my Parents and country, regarding nothing more then
this present happiness, whereby my wounds are cured, my spirit contented, and
my heart from all dangers sufficiently recouer^d, so that no grief can now
molest me, when your gracious favor thoroughly confounds all. And now might I
imagine my misfortune beyond all other, were not this fearful doubt left to
cross it, that scanning disdain should be hid in such rare perfections, as
oftentimes it comes so to pass: therefore I beseech you Madame, may it stand
with your liking to resolve all doubts by your direct opinion, and herein
shall I account my self more honored, then were I monarch of the whole
world. Love having then so wounded the princess, as for a while she was
driven to silence, at length withdrew the passion, and caused her return this
answer. Alas my Lord, I was (ere this) so certain of your affection toward
me, in respect of the dangerous travails endured for my sake, as you need not
seek any other proves, then what mine own heart was fully resolved on: and so
I continue still, expecting the day to make us both fortunate, which I would
have you as yet dissemble, least crooked mishap any way prevent us. As she was
proceeding in her discourse, the Queen entered the tent again, by which
occasion Trineus could not say what he intended, wherefore taking her secretly
by the hand, wrong her fingers with such a trembling passion, as all the night
following he lay meditating on his gooddesse Agriola, and the comfortable
answer she gave him. If the young prince were in such torments, his Lady
bear him company, thinking on the speeches past between her and Palmerin,
and this evening the Dwarf (not compassing before to speak with Agriola)
presented her with the Emeralde from the Prince, which she kindly receiving, in
recompense thereof sent him a fair Diamond, rewarding the Dwarf liberally for
his pains, who among the rest of his talk, highly commended the virtues of
the Prince, which increased her love so confidently, as she assured him of the
Princess love, that death could not change her settled affection. Trineus fully
resolving heereon, gave such cheerful physic to his heart, and the
Chururgions such diligence to his wounds, as within seven or eight days he
was able to bear armor: whereupon the King departed thence toward London,
where the strange knights were entertained with marvelous honor, the Lords,
Knights, Burgesses, Officers and other Citizens, welcomming them with great
^ampe and royalty, saying. Welcome are the knights that delivered the Queen
and her Daughter, from the cruel Giant Franarco, with diverse other
salutations, whereat Pa^merin and his friends were greatly abashed. Passing on
to the Palace, all the way they were still presented with rare shows and
devises, and the Knights lodgings were appointed in very stately Chambers in
the Court, causing open Court to be kept for eight days space, for the honor
of these knights, and entertainment of all friendly comers, in all which time
there wanted no sports and delights, as such times rnd occasions do necessarily
require. Now came all the Princes, Lords, and renowned Knights in England to
the Court, except the Duke of Gaul, who excused himself by the war in his
own province, which yet was not the cheifest cause of his absence: but the
shame he reputed to himself for his foil in France, when he entered the
Combatte for the beauty of the fair princess Agriola. These knights thus
worthily entreated, they were at no time denied entrance into the King and
Queens Chambers, by which means Trineus might when himself pleased, confer
with the Princess, till this instant among all other, the prince thus began to
his Lady and Mistress. You may easily presume sweet madam, what secret
Conbattes I continually endure for your love, and no help is expected but the
only hope of your favor, which as you have promised to my especial friend
Sir Palmerin, I doubt not but you will persevere in that gracious opinion, and
what promise he has made of my service to you, think not but I observe with
religious care and devotion, though not sufficient to equal your deserts, yet
because ingratitude shall not insult against me. So many thanks (quoth the
Princess) I return you my Lord, as good opinions can be imagined between us
both, and accounting you for my friend, which is a higher degree, I here
discharge you of my service, and (mine honor guarded from blame) I shall judge
my self happy to yield you any content, which I will fulfill,
notwithstanding any danger toward me. But I pray you tell me my Lord,
what is the intent of your love in this action. Madame, (quoth the Prince) Sir
Palmerin, who is now come to bear us company, shall credibly inform you,
so please you to rest contented therewith. Palmerin thus entered, and imagined
their talk was not about affairs of Merchandise, wherefore he said to the
Princess. God speed you Madame, pardon me, I should call you Lady, and Wife
to the Prince of Allemaigne, for I doubt not but you have chosen him your
Husband in heart. Agriola blushing and smyling ^eereat, made no answer:
Wherefore Palmerin went forward in this manner. In faith Madame if you have
done so, I would counsel you to accomplish it presen^lie, and provide to go
with us to Allemaigne, where the Emperor will entertain you with such
gracious favor, as you will not loose if you bear the mind of a Princess:
beside, you shall be the mean of everlasting peace between the King your
Father and his Majesty. To which words, Agriola thus discreetly answered.

I promise you my Lord, there is no Prince this day ly^ing, whom I would more
gladly accept for my Husband, then the Prince Trineus: notwithstanding, for
me to depart without the knowledge of the King or Queen my Parents, is an
act in (mine opinion) far dissenting from duty and honest report.
Therefore my Lord, loving mine honor as you say you do, I pray you let our
behavior be with better wisdom, least we both fall into dangers not
r^couerable. Palmerin perceiving Agriola contrary to the most necessary
occasion, used such arguments, and played so well the Orator, that the poor
Princess had no power to resist: considering the great love she bare the
Princ^ Trineus, which made her yield more easily to his persuasions, so that
she agreed to accomplish their determination, and depart with them toward the
Realm of Allemaigne. T^ineus joys now exceeded measure, and Palmerin (for)
his sake) was no less contented, in respect he should the sooner see his
mistress Polinarda, whose very rememberaunce gave him life, as the air does
the Camelion. But fortune beholding each thing prosper as liked their fancies,
would now needs begin to play her Pagant, crossing them with the
unhappiest stratageme, that ever could happen to so noble Princes, as in the
sequel shall be laxgely discoursed. They little expecting such a chance, are
earnestly following their serious enterprise, which was secretly to carry
Agriola with them into Allemaigne, for which purpose they provided ships and
skillful Pilots to conduct them, conueying all their necessaries abroad, at
what time this adventure following happened in the Court of England.

Chap. LIII.
How in the time of this pleasant and great assembly, there came a Damsel to
London, who desired the king to do her justice against a knight of his own
Court.

DUring the time that this royal company continued at London, minding nothing
but pleasures, pastimes, and courtly recreations: there came a ^amosell so
fair as might be, accompanied with two ancient knights, and a lusty Champion
bravely armed, with six Squires attending on him. The Damsel entering the
Palace, came before the King, and on her knee began^e in this manner. Dread
Lord, having long time heard your good justice toward your Subjects,
without any favor or exception of persons: I am the more bold, (albeit he
that has iniuried me, is reputed for a Man of good quallity, and holds
place of authority in your Court) humbly to crave of your highness one
request, against the most false and disloyal Knight that ever was: whom when I
but remember, more weighty and grievous oppressions fall upon my soul, then
this wretched body of mine is able to endure.

Damsel said the King, I shall right gladly relieve your heaviness, if it ly
in my power to do it: therefore tell me the cause of your offense: and what
he is that has so wronged you. Know my good Lord (quoth she) that I loved
a Knight so deerelye, as contrary to the lyking of my Parents and Friends, and
two much forgetful of mine own self, I took him to my Husband, thinking he
loved me so faithfully, as his shows and behavior gave demonstration. But
the Traitor had no other meaning, then to beguile and falsely deceive me, for
after I had made him Lord of me and mine, and brought him to a Castle of
mine, so strong and fair as any in your highness dominions: the Traitor
expulsed me thence violently, pretending that we were so near allied, as he
might no longer account me for his Wife. Since which time, notwithstanding all
the humble entreaties I have made: he will neither restore me my goods and
possessions again, nor yet accept me as his espoused Wife. Therefore I
beseech you my Lord, as becomes a good and virtuous Prince, for the honor of
nobility and regard of womanhoode, you will take pity on a poor distressed
Lady, and that in such a rightful demand, you would do me justice, which
I had sooner demanded, but could not by the occasions of your troublesome
wars.

Lady, said the King, as yet you have not named the man that has offered you
this surpassing injury. My Lord (quoth she) this is the man in your presence,
name Miseres, a vile Traitor, and public adulterer. And if he dare affirm
that I have spoken untruth, I have here brought a Knight with me, who by
Combatte shall make him confess his falsehood and treason, so please your
Majesty to favor my request. Miseres, (quoth the King) how answer you this
accusation and offense, wherewith this Lady charge you? Miseres being
suddenly driven into this dumpe, knew not well what to say: yet at length
(with humble reverence) he thus began. My sovereign Lord, if credit may
be given to the first countenance of accusations, without hearing how the
party accused can justify himself, I doubt not but your Majesty will
presentlye condemn me: but when the matter is well debated and discided, they
which seemed at first unreprovable, are found malicious and slanderous
persons, and the accused, innocent and free from blame, as here your highness
shall most plainly behold. The matter whereof this Lady detecteth me, is
forged, and most villainously invented: for to me belonged the Castle she
quarrelles for, descended from my Predecessors, to whom I am the true,
lawful, and legitimate inheritour. True it is that this dissembling Womanne,
by sweet speeches, feminine guiles, and secret deceits, oftentimes practiced
to win me for her Husband: but knowing her behavior such as beseemed not a
Woman of modesty and virtue, I would not here her, much less consent to
match with her. And this is the cause of her complaint, in hope that you,
(being above all other Princes most b^nigne and honorable) will constrain
me to wedde her, in respect of your absolute authority, as the duetifull
obedience wherein I am bound. When the Knight which came with the Lady, heard
Myseres blame her in this sort, he stepped before the King with these words.

It is great folly (my Lord) in Miseres, to deny a matter so apparently
known, although, if it were put to the judgment of honest persons, his
common good report might cause him be believed: but the poor Lady desires
that her right may be cleared by Combatte, wherein let him confound her if
he can, or else receive reward for his notorious offense. On her behalf,
therefore my Lord, I say and will maintain, that Myseres is a most disloyal
Traitor, and his mouth shall confess it, or this day will I take his head
from his body. Myseres feeling himself somewhat touched, grew into great
anger, and albeit the shame he did the Lady delivered him culpable, and made
him doubt the issue of the Combatte: yet in meruaylous choler he aun^wered
the Knight, that he falselye belyed him, and was ready to make proof thereof
in Combatte, if it pleased the King so to appoint it. And I doubt not (quoth
he) to make thee pay for thy rashness, and force thee confess thy lack of
discretion, in giving credit to the trothlesse complaints of this deceitful
Woman. Then was it ordained* that this difference should be tried by Arms:
whereupon the Ladies Knight spoke thus to the King. Seeing it has pleased your
Majesty, to grant the Field to Myseres and me, may it please you (as it is
the custom) to command, that he deliver hostages: to the end, if he be
vanquished, the Castle may be delivered into your hands, to deliver it in
justice where it appertains. Good reason, said the King, and therefore
Myseres, you must before you enter the Field, accomplish what the Knight in
equity has demanded.

Then Myseres called one of his Brethren, whom he required to stand as his
hostage: and doubt not before the Sun be set, but I will discharge my self
and my pledge, with which words he departed the Hall to arm himself: but
because the day was too far spent, the matter was deferred till the next
morning. The King and his Lords, seeing the Ladies Knight in such resolute
assurance, merueiled of whence and what he was, for none there knew him but
Palmerin, who neither could guess assuredly what he was, but by the golden
Sun in the Azure sheeld, which made him remember that at the Ioustes in
France the perilous Combat without victory on either side, was fought
between him and this knight. Palmerin being glad to see the man he long looked
for, and purposing now to be fully revenged on him, secretly went forth of the
hall, commanding one of his Squires, to convey his horse and armor the next
morning out of the City, because if he vanquished Miseres, at his return be
intended to fight with him, or if Miseres had the better, yet he should not
depart thence again with life.

Now you must understand, that this Knight which came with the Lady, was the
Knight of the Sun, named Frysoll, who ever since the Combatte between
Palmerin and him, remained with the Duke of Gaul, and was of him highly
honored for his worthy chivalry. Of whom when this distressed Lady heard,
she made her complaint to him of the wrong Myseres had done her, and Frysol
pitying her case, promised to aid her in recovery of ^er right: and so came
with her to the King of Englands Court, to the great grief of the Duke of
Gaul, who made Frysol promise him to return again after the Combatte: but
Frysol was more desirous thereof then the Duke, in respect of his fair Sister,
because he was specially beloved of her. Thus Palmerin following his
enterprise, feared to be prevented, because the Feeld was appointed by the
King, in the same place where he intended to meet with Frysol, and beside,
Palmerin and the Duke of Norgalles were ordained Judges of the field, which he
would not willingly have taken upon him, doubting by that mean to be hindered
of his other determination. The time being come that the Knights should to the
Combatte, the King and the Ladies came to their Scaffolds, and the two Judges
were placed in their Tent, accompanied with many Princes and honorable persons.

After that the Heralds bad commanded the Champions to do their deuoyre,
then they clasped their helmets* and fetching their carrire, met with such
puissaunce as Miseres brake his Lance on Frysols Sheelde, not moving him in
his Saddle: but Frysol driving his Lance through Miseres body, caused the
Traitor to fall dead to the earth. Then he allighting, and opening Miseres
Helmette, saw no life in him, came to the Judges, saying. You may now
perceive my Lords, whether he that offered this Lady such villainy, has
received his due desert, or no, if there yet remain any thing else to do for
recovering of her right, I am here ready to maintain her cause. Palmerin, who
was not very well pleased with this victory, answered. Knight, you have done
enough at this time, pray that other affairs may prove as prosperous to you
hereafter, and in anger went forth of the field, commanding the body of
Miseres to be brought thence, which was afterward interred with great honor.

Frysol having thus vanquished Miseres, the Lady for whom he entered the
Combatte, fell on her knees before the King, desiring him to surrender the
castle which Myseres unjustly detained from her. In sooth Lady, quoth the
King, it is reason you should have justice, and your own delivered you, but
know you his name that defended your quarrel? My Lord (quoth she) in
concealing his name, I should offer him great wrong, concealing the bounty and
prowess of the man, which has not been sparingly showed heretofore, in
presence of the Duke of Gaul, against the King of Norway, whose army was
^icomfited by the worthy valor and policy of this knight, who calls
himself by the name of Frysol, the Duke of Gaul bringing him forth of
Fraunc^ at his last voyage, and ever since has so dearly loved him, as he were
his own natural brother. I promise you Lady, said the King, you made no ill
choice of your Knight, for I have heretofore heard of his actions, and am not
a little glad that I know him, wishing he were of my Court, because a King
accompanied with such persons, must needs imagine his Country happy. And in
respect he is so brave a Champion, it is impossible but he should be a wise
and virtuous Knight, wherefore I pray you cause him to come to me: which she
presently did. And having saluted his Majesty with honorable reverence, the
King embraced him with these words. Worthy Sir, you are most heartily
welcome: I could wish you were one of my Knights, in respect that my Court
should be the more honored, and I might requite your pains better then I can
on a sudden.

Mighty Prince, (quoth Frisol) in assisting this distressed Lady, I have done
but my duty: but if I could any way do your highness service, I know no
Prince living, for whom I would more gladly employ my self. And at this time
urgent affairs excuse me from staying here any longer: nevertheless, I
entreat you my good Lord, (if it may stand with your favorable liking) to
repute me among the number of your Soldiers and Servant. If it must needs
be so, said the King, you shall do what please you, yet will I reckon you
amongst those to whom I owe continual love and affection. And although the
death of Myseres does somewhat gree^e me, because I made some estimation of him:
yet for your sake shall I deliver the Lady her Castle, which you have
conquered with so knightly chi^alrie. Frysol humbly thanked his Majesty, and
departed with the Lady, which way they came: but Palmerin very much offended
at his departure, and earnestly desiring to be revenged on him, commanded his
Dwarffe to mark well which way they went.

The Dwarffe diligently fulfilling his Masters charge, returned and told him
which way they took: whereupon, he being desirous to follow, without giving
any knowledge thereof to his companions, left Trineus to confer with his
fair Mystresse Agriola, and departed the C^urt so secretly, as neither the
Prince or Ptolomie suspec^ed any thing. And so accompanied with the Dwarffe
Vibanillo, (...) come to the place where his Squire stayed with his Armor,
where, when he (...) armed, he mounted on horseback thus speaking to his
man. Return you to the City, and there expect my coming: as for thee
Vrbanillo, thou shall say to Tryneus, that he must pardon me, though I did
not acquaint him with the cause of my departure: which I was more enforced to
do then he thinks on: ne^erthelesse, pray him take no pain to enquire after
me, because I doubt not to return very shortly, although not so soon as he
would: yet pray him to use so little speech thereof as may be. The like may
thou say to Ptolome, and to them both commend me most heartily: With this
charge to you both, that upon pain of your lives, neither of you do follow
me, nor cause any other to seek after me.

So taking his Lance, he galloped that way which his Dwarffe showed him they
were gone, and he with the Squire returned to the City, making very
sorrowful lamentation, because they thought their master would return no
more, in that he would not be known whither he went, yet would they bewray
nothing their master had forbid^e them. Trineus and Ptolome were marvelous
sorrowful, especially the Prince, who without the Dwarffes assurance of his
Masters short return, had followed to seek him: yet not thorowlie contented
with Vrbanillo^ persuasions, the King came to comfort him, saying. You must
think good Sir, that your noble Friend is gone about some strange adventure,
for you know he never enterprised any thing, but it returned him to honor. If
heretofore for the love of his Lady, he showed himself without his Peer in
chivalry, think you be will not regard his reputation, and premeditate his
actions before he run to far in danger? Content your self I pray you,
for if his return be not the sooner, I will cause such provision to be made,
as he shall be found again. The Princess Agriola likewise entreated him not
to be displeased at the absence of Palmerin, for with the help of God and his
Friends, quoth she, his return will cause as much joy, as his departure
does gr^efe. All this could hardly content Trineus, for he dreamed in his
sleep, that the Knight which slew Myseres, was he against whom Palmerin
entered the Combat in France, at what time they could not overcome each other.
And remembering what ill will Palmerin bare him, vehemently suspected that for
this cause he followed him, which imagination somewhat comforted him, and he
reputed the Knight unwise if he meddled any more with Palmerin.

Chap. LIIII.
How after the death of Myseres, Palmerin followed Frysol, whom he had slain,
but that a Damosel^ entreated his life.

ALL that day Palmerin travailed, and most part of the next, yet could he
hear no tidings of the Lady and Frisol, which made him ride in great
melancholy, till at length meeting with a Damosel, mounted on a goodly
Palfray very richly harnessed, of whom he demanded, if she met not a
Knight armed, who bare in a Sheelde of Azure a Golden Sun, and with him a
Lady attended on by many Squires. Truly Sir, quoth the Damsel, if you
will grant me two requests that I shall demand, I will bring you to him you
seek for, before to morrow the third hour of the day. Palmerin who was
wonderful desirous to find his enemy, granted to any thing she would
desire: on condition (quoth he) that you show me the Knight. Follow me then
said the Damsel, for I will accomplish what I have promised. So rode they
together, and among other speeches, Palmerin asked her if she knew the
Knight, and what his name was? The Damsel answered, that she knew not the
Knight, but she was very well acquainted with the Lady in his company, and
this night (quoth she) they mind to lodge at a Castle of mine Auntes. in the
evening they arrived within the sight of the Castle, where they alighted from
their Horses, and entered a little thicket, for fear of being seen, and the
Damsel having a flagon of Wine, and a pastie of read Dear in a maunde at
her saddle bow. Palmerin and she refreshed themselves therewithal: but all
that night could not Palmerin settle himself to sleep, watching the castle
Gate, least in the time of his sleeping his enemy should escape him. The next
morning, so soon as the break of day appeared, Frysol came forth of the
Castle with his company, wherefore Palmerin not a little glad, said to the
Damsel. Now (Lady) is your promise performed, for this is the Knight I
seek: if therefore you will any thing with me, I must entreat you to follow
me, for I would be very loathe that he should escape me.

With which words he mounted on horseback, galloping after Frysol so fast as
the Horse could away, and ouertaking him, said. Stay a while Sir Knight,
think you to pass away in such sort? have you forgot your words at Parris,
to the Knight that guarded the Duke of Sauoyes Tent? now is the time I hope to
correct your presumption, when thou shall well perceive, that thou neither
deseruest to be Servant to the Princess Polinarda, nor art worthy to talk of
her honorable name. Frysol thus slaying, kn^we by Palmerins words, that it was
he against whom he fought the Combat^ in France, whereupon he answered.

Truly Sir Knight, I have not as yet forgotten what I then said, nor is the
beauty of Polinarda, or my love to her so little, that my desire to do her
service should not be now remembered, nor will I forbear to confess it
still, for fear of thee or any other whatsoever. And if thou hast^ sought me
forth in this quarrel, thou have found me to ready to defend it: as I will
more willingly choose to die, then deny any part of my duty to that
gracious Princess.

Palmerin being so angrye, as he would multiply no more words, encountered
his enemy so valyantly, as they brake their Lances, and yet could not
vn^orse each other, then dr^wing their swords, they laid so cruelly upon
their bodies, as their sheeldes being broken, their Helmets battered, their
Armor defaced, and their flesh so gr^^uously mangled, as neither of them both
could judge who was likest to win the victory. Till at length Frisol^ Horse
failing under him, fell to the ground, and he so weakened with his great
loss of blood, as he could not recover himself, before Palmerin came to
him, thinking to have parted his head from his shoulders with his sword, which
when the Lady saw, for whom Frysol had slain Myseres, she fell into most
pitiful acclamations, not sparing her louelye tresses of hair, but with
great impatience renting them violentlye, made the air to echo her lamentable
complaints. Which the Damsel seeing that guyded Palmerin, and moved with
compassion of her exceeceeding greefes: fell on her knees before Palmerin,
entreating him to give over the fight. But he, feyning that he heard her not,
because Frysol with rough struggling had got on foot again: charged him with
such violent strokes, as Frisol (being of invincible courage) requited him
with as worthy chivalry.

Again the Damosel came on her knees to him, entreating him to give over the
fight, saying. You know my Lord, that before you came hither, you promised me
two requests and this I make one of them, that you continue no longer Combatte
against this Knight, and in so doing I shall acquit you of part of the
promise which you made me. Palmerin cha^ing like a furious Lion, answered. I
pray you Damsel ask some other thing, for in this matter, of force you must
pardon me. In sooth said the Damsel, if you deny me my demand, I will
complain at the King of Englands Court, and there will I declare you
perjured, for ill it beseemes such a Knight as you are, to make promise to a
Lady and not observe it. By God Lady, said Palmerin, you do me great wrong,
in withholding me from revenge on him, whom above all men in the world, I
hate most deadlye, unhappy was the hour wherein I met you: and so mounting
up on horseback, he galloped away in very great anger. When the other
sorrowful Lady saw, that Palmerin was gone, and had left her Knight, with
great joy she embraced the Damsel that had procured it, thanking her for
^heelding the life of a most noble Knight, for which courtesy she remained
bound to her during life.

What I have done, (quoth the Damsel) is for the love of you and this
Knight, swearing to you by the faith of a Gentle womanne, that I have another
thing to ask of the Knight which is gone, that concerns me very neerelie.
Notwithstanding, your tears moved mee^with such compassion, that I stand in
danger to loose what I shall never rec^uer, yet in respect the cause was so
honest and virtuous, I do not repent what I have done: but because he
remains indebted to me for another request, I must needs leave you and
follow him, so mounting upon her Palfraye, she rode after Palmerin with all
the haste she possiblye could make. And in her journey we will leave her,
returning to Frysol, whose wounds being very dangerous, the Lady bound them
up so well as she could, till they came at their next Lodging, where by
good Fortune was a Lady so well seen in Surgery, as in short time she
cured his wounds whole and sound. Frysol so well recovered, departed thence
with the Lady, because the third day following they should be at the
Castle, whither already was come Hermes, one of the King of Englands Knights,
being sent by his Lord the King to deliver the Lady her right: which Hermes
did according to his charge, entertained the Lady honorably, delivered her
the Keys of the Castle, and commanded all the Subjects to reverence the
Lady, which they refused not to do, but were glad of her coming. For joy
hereof, were very solemn feasts prepared, and the Lady recounted to Hermes,
Commissioner for the king, how Frysol fought the Combat by the way, against
the Knight of the black armor: whereby Hermes presently knew, that it was
the stra^nge Knight, who had left the Court, unknown to his Companions, or any
of his Friends, whereof he was not a little glad, because he judged that
these news would be welcome to the King. Wherefore so soon as he had
accomplished his charge, and seated the Lady quietly in her Castle, he
departed, intending to follow Palmerin till he found him, trauayling the way
was assigned him by the Lady.

Frisol stayed there with the Lady till he had perfectly recovered his
health, and then without any other recompenc^ for his pains, but only a
Horse, because his own was slain, and a new Armor, his own being spoiled,
he returned to the Duke of Gaul, who rejoiced greatly to have his company.
But when the Duke understood how discourteously he had been used by the black
Knight, who was so highly favored in the English Court, he devised by all the
means possible to be revenged on him: so that being in a Castle on the
Frontiers of his Duchy, yet within the King of Englandes dominion, he
understood the black Knight should pass that way, because he could not else
return to the Court. Now persuading himself for resolute vengeance, he
pitched his Tents in a fair Meadow near a Bridge, and there placed twelve
knights, the most hardy and valiant men in all his Dukedom, who should
maintain this order: that no Knight should pass over the Bridge, unless he
entered Combat with those twelve Knights one after another, and such as were
vanquished, should submit themselves to the Dukes mercy, either for their
deliverance, or to remain his prisoners, and the horse of the party foiled,
should belong to the conqueror, but if they were dismounted, the passenger
should go on his journey, and take their Horses with him. This adventure thus
established, many good Knights were over come, because it was a very hard
matter to vanquishe twelve Knights, and yet escape: But the Duke took no
little pleasure herein, who detained Frysol more by constraint then otherwise,
for his anger so vehemently increased against Palmerin, as no delight or
pleasure could expiate his revenging desires.

Chap. LV.
How Palmerin went with the Damsel to accomplish the promise he made her, and
what befell him.

PAlmerin (as you have heard) departed from the Damsel in a rage, because he
could not execute what he intended, wherefore he devised to deal some other
way, and to single forth Frisol in such convenient place, as one of them
should dye before they departed. And as he was imagining some other way to
overtake Frysol, the Damosel had now again recovered his company, saying. I
pray you Sir Knight, conceive no il opinion of me, for hindering you from
killing your enemy, whom you have left in very great ieoperdy, considering
what bounty and courage is in him, and which your self perhaps will be sorye
for. Wherefore I pray you forget this displeasure, and determin^ to fulfill
what you have promised, which if you will do, you must go with me.

Believe me Damsel, said Palmerin, you showed but little courtesy, so often
hindering me from the thing, which above all other in this world most
tormenteth me. What unhappy body are you? but more unhappy the hour I
met with you? but seeing it is reason I should keep my promise, lead the
way, and I will not fail to follow you. So rode they on, and for four days
space he would not speak one word to her, and feign he would have left her
company, but that he could not with honor forsake her. The next day, as they
rode by a Rivers side, Palmerin espied a Knight standing with a Bow and arrow
in his hand, which he let fly at his Horse and killed him. Palmerin impacient
by remembrance of Frysol, and angrye that the Knight had thus killed his
Horse, made toward him so fast as he could, but the Knight was suddainlye
got on the further site of the Lake, and Palmerin up to the middle in Water
before he was ware of it, and now he could neither see the Knight that slew
his Horse, nor the Damsel that came in his company. Palmerin being in great
perplexity, when he saw nothing but water round about him, and feeling he was
upon a Bridge, beheld a marvelous deep stream running under it, and at the
end thereof a goodly Castle. Walking along the Bridge toward the Castle,
amazed at this contrary adventure, he espied a Knight on the battlements of
the Castle, who said. Stay a while Sir Knight, one shall come presentlye and
open the Gate. Palmerin knew not what to say, but determined to defend
himself if any came to assault him, so the Castle Gate being opened, he
entered with his sword drawn, yet was there no man that displeased him, but
every one made him humble reverence, with very good words and gentle
countenance, declaring by their behavior, that he was more then welcome
thither. Thus walking on to the inner Court, there came toward him a Lady,
accompanied with many Damsels and Knights, all showing cheerful gestures,
and the Lady taking Palmerin by the hand, said.

Ah, gentle knight, right welcome are you to this place, and heaven be praised
for the good it does me, to see you here, that is able to a^complish the
thing, which no other as yet could be able to finish: enter hardily in good
assurance, for you will we make all the honor we are able. Palmerin
believing the Lady, was brought into a maruailous goodly Chamber, where
certain Squires help to unarm him, bringing him a gorgeous Mantle to wrap
about him. This done, he was conducted into a large Hall, where the Table was
covered* the Lady entertaining him so nobly, as in the King of Englands Court
he could not be better. The feast ended, and the Tables withdrawn, the Lady
began to devise with Palmerin, saying. Long time (my Lord) have we desired
your coming, as the man in whom our only help consists: for by your
valor we are persuaded to be delivered from the misery, wherein I and mine
have too long time been detained. I beseech you, Madame, quoth Palmerin, to
tell me your affairs, as also what the Knight meant to kill my Horse, and why
you entertain me with so great kindness. If you will promise me, said the
Lady, to accomplish a needful occasion, and which I think is destinied to
you: I will resolve you, otherwise, I shall but loose my labor. If it be a
matter reasonable, (quoth Palmerin) and that a knight may compass, spare not
to tell me, for I will do my endeavor therein. Gramercies gentle knight said
the Lady, the circumstance of the occasion follows in this sort. This Castle
(my Lord) sometime belonged to my noble Father, a Knight so hardy and valiant
as any in these parts, in whose younger years love so ouerruled him aa he
aff^cted a lady of no less quanlitie and condition then himself, by whom he
had a ^aughter, at whose birth his Lady and Wife deceased. My Father being yet
in the flower of his youth, matched the second time with a Lady of very
honorable and ancient descent, by whom he had me the first Child. My Sister
come to fourteen years of age, my father oftentimes would have richly married
her, whereto she being unwilling, by my Fathers consent she remained with her
mothers Sister, whose skill was very great in all sciences, by whose counsel my
sister caused a goodly Palace to be edified* and a strong Lower in an Isle on
the other side of this Castle, where afterward they made their continual
abiding. During this time, my father loving me dearly, matched me with a
wealthy and noble knight, excelling in all perfections, but cheefely in
chivalry, by whom I had a Daughter a year after our espousall: but the more
my grief, my Husband and Father both died, within little space after my Child's
birth. My Daughter being come to the years of marriage, her beauty made her
desired of many noble Lords: but because I still reputed her too young, I denied
all her sute^s, which afterward turned me to very great detriment. For my
Sisters aunt had a son, the most mishapped, deformed, and worst conditioned
knight, as all the Country could not show such another, yet became he so
amorous of my Daughter, as he requested his mother to demand her of me for
his Wife: but when I heard thereof, you may well persuade your self that never
woman disliked any thing more, and yet to this time do as much as I then did,
so that I made her answer, how I would rather desire my Daughters death, then
so to dishonor her, because he was altogether unworthy such special fortune.
Notwithstanding this sharp repulse, he continued his amorous desires to my
Daughter, so that he earnestly persuaded his mother to permit him to take her
from me perforce, to which suite the indiscreet mother consented, either
moved with pity, or overcome by the importunate soliciting of her, so that
one day (under color of a friend meeting me to be merry) he robbed me of my
Daughter. This wicked traitor had long before that time intended this
treachery, compacting the matter secretly with villains and thieves, by whose
assistance he carried away my Daughter, shutting her up in a strong Lower
whereof I told you. And because he feared I would gather some strength to
reskew her, considering how well I was beloved of my neighbors, he prevented
me by a strange enchauntment, enuironing the castle and the tower with such a
maruailous water, as no knight should enter upon them without their consent.
Now that themselves might come forth and return again at their pleasure, they
devised a little Boat, which is guarded by two fierce Lions, and a puissant
knight that has charge of them, so that none comes to them but whom they
list. Since this unhappy time did I never see my Daughter, whom this damnable
villain (which most of all greeues me) immediately violated and ravished at
his pleasure, swearing now never to take her as his Wife, but to use her as his
Concubine: and beside all this, the Traitor in despite of me, and to revenge
the words I gave him, does monstrously abuse her, and (unmanly) whippeth her
daily with Rods, which my Sister has often entreated to be spared, but he by
no means will be persuaded. Thus seeing my self out of all hope to recover
her again, have ever since continued in earnest invocation to Heaven, that
some notable vengeance might punish this villain: and such favor have I
found in my devout imprecations, as first his mother was chastized with a
disease called Saint Anthonyes fire in one of her legs, which so grievously
torments her, as no remedy can be found to assuage the vexation. Her Son
understanding hereof, would have slain my sister, accusing her to procure his
Mothers infirmity by her learned knowledge: whereupon my Sister feari^g her
life, and watching time convenient for her purpose, escaped from the villain
hither to me, being sorry that her Aunt should thus injuriously deal with
me, and promised to work the mean that I should recover my Daughier. These
words not a little pleasing me, I would needs know how I should come by my
Daughter again, whose misfortune had been so yrksom^ to me, where to she thus
answered.

It is so good Sister, that I cannot now reuerse the enchauntments I have
already made for your Daughter, though gladly I would if it lay in my power,
wherefore you must attend the coming of a Knight, who exceeds all other in
virtue and prowess: for he shall pass the water, kill the Knight, enter the
Tower, and deliver my Niece your Daughter again into your custody. As
concerning the Knight: good Sister, that shall so hardly pass the water
without fear, and fully accomplish my former enchauntment, for him will I
leave with you a Sword, a very sumptuous armor, and diverse other gifts to
bestow on him, because my self shall not live to see him, which came to
pass, for very shortly after my Sister died. Now know you Sir Knight what
matter is preordained for you, therefore take pity on me a poor desolate
Mother, and adventure your self in this cause of honor, as bound heereto by
virtue and needful occasion.

Believe me Madame, said Palmerin, your discourse has been strange, and
good reason mooues you to request vengeance, because your wrong is the greatest
that ever I heard of, which may sometimes persuade you, that the offender
cannot long escape, without shame aunswerable to his villainy, for Heaven will
not suffer it, by assistance whereof I hope to revenge your Daughters rape. And
trust me Lady, I am sorry I came not in your Sisters life time, because she
could have resolved me in a doubtful matter: nevertheless, I will do so
much for you as if she were living. But I marvel what is become of the knight
that slew my horse, and the Damsel that conducted me hither. As for the
Damsel (quoth the Lady) she shall come anon to attend upon you: but the
knight was only a matter of enchauntment, devised by my Sister to discover the
man that should end this adventure. And the Damsel whereof you speak has
brought hither many knights to the Lake, but when their horses were slain,
none of them durst be so hardy as to enter the water, but only you, being
predestined of th^s adventure. In this and other such like talk they spent
the day till Supper time, and afterward was Palmerin c^^ducted ^o his Chamber,
and being in bed he could take no rest, first for grief that he had not
slain Frysol, then again by the strange tale the lady told him: wherefore
rising the sooner in the morning, he went with the Lady to service in her
Chapel, where he d^sired of God that he might prevail against th^se
co^^ura^ions, and vanquish the Knight that had so much abused his order.
Returning from the Chapel, the Lady among other talk thus said. I see Sir
knight that your Armor is broken and much defaced, that one may judge you have
not kept it idle in your Armorie, wherefore I think you met not with your
friend, when you were enforced to so dangerous trial: but as I understand by
the Damsel that was your guide, hither you returned him good payment for his
pains. To supply your want, I will bestow an Armor on you, which my Sister
long since provided for you, and with careful regard kept close in her Chest:
therefore let me entreat you not to refuse it, in respect it was not provided
but for speciell purpose, being needful for the present occasion you must
now enterprise. Palmerin would not refuse her offer, wherefore opening the
Chest, there lay the Armor covered with white Taffata, whereon was wrought in
letters of Gold this inscription: These Arms were made for the good knight
Palmerin D'Oliua, Son to the most royal King that ^his day lives, in all
Greece* That worthy present greatly delighted Palmerin, because herein his
desire was somewhat satisfied, which was to know the estate of his Father:
wherefore in midst of this pleasing humor he said to his Lady: I perceive
fair Madame, that your sister kn^w more of my destiny then any other, for
seeing she could so truly describe my name, I need make no great doubt of her
further judgment. So taking away the silk, behold there a more ^umptuous
Armor, then that which halting Vulcan made for noble Achilles, at the earnest
intreati^ of beautiful. Thetis, being curiously chased over with flowers of
Gold, and the Sheeld of steel, engraven with rare devises, as well might
beseem the greatest Prince in the world. Palmerin presently put off his own^
Armor, and invested himself with the Ladies gift, which so well agreed with
him in every point, as the like could hardly be framed for his body.

When he was thus armed, he desired the Lady to show him the way, that might
conduct him to the place where he should discharge his promise, for he would
delay no further time in a matter of such weight. The Lady commanded three of
her Squires to conduct him, who lead him along a narrow pathway, which brought
him to the enchaunted water so deep and dangerous, and there they showed him
the boat to pass over in, which was fastened with a great Chain to a Tree,
whereupon Palmerin sought the means to untie it: but so ^oone as he laid
hand on the Chain to pluck it toward him, there rushed presently forth of
the enchaunted water two mighty Lions, who assaulted Palmerin in such forcible
manner, as they got him down on the ground under them, yet he recovered
himself quic^ly, and valiantly encountered these hidious monsters, who had such
a deuillish charm on them, as no Sword could any way hurt or wound them.
Palmerin perceiving that all his lab^ur was in vai^e, called to Heaven for
help in this necessity, and commending his abili^y to the highest protection,
and his heart to the gracious regard of his mystresse: he gave one of the
Lions such a cruel stroke between the eyes, as he tumbled headlong into the
Water, and was afterward seen no more, and soon after he sent the other
after for company, but had not his Armor been of marvelous virtue,
doubtless this should have been his last adventure.

Not a little joyful of this happy victory, he entered the Boat, and with one
of the Oars began to row, but now was he surprised with a wonderful
danger, for the Water arose in hung billows, beating and tossing the Boat so
fearfully, as he had much a do to keep the bottom from turning upward. In
this perplexity, which he could not devise him to mittigate, a matter of
greater mischaunce yet befell him, for a marvelous great and ouglie Monster
suddenly started out of the Water, which labored by all means possible to
ouerturne the Boat. Now was he constrained to forgo his Oar, and draw his
weapon to resist this Monster, which terrified him so cruellye on the one side,
and the rough Waters so daungerously on the other, as he was not in the like
hazard, when he fought with the Serpent on the Mountain Artifaeria.

To comfort him in this contagious extreamitie, he implored his diuin^
assistaunce, whose only providence must now defend him, else had the raging
and distempered Water, or the ravenous Monster that gaped for his life,
d^uoured him. But he that in greatest perrilies, was ever of undaunted spirit,
made such hard shifte to row with his Sword, as in despite of the Monster,
and the ^urling waves of the Water, he landed on the other side: when
immediatlye all the coniuration ceased, so that neither Water, Monster, Boat
or any thing else might then ^ee discerned. I leave to imagine, whither
Palmerin were glad or no, that he had so happily escaped this danger: for
joy whereof he fell upon his knees, and with hea^ed hands and eyes to Heaven,
gave thanks unto God for his deliverance. His prayer being ended, he went to
the Castle, where he heard a most grievous and doleful complaint of a Lady,
saying.

Unhappie be the hour of my natiuitye, alas is it possible that in all the
whole world, any Lady may compare with my miseries, Palmerin attentiuelye
marking these speches, knew well it was the imprisoned Lady, wherefore moved
with compassion, he called aloude for one to open the Gate, and so long he
called that the Knight heard him, who looking forth at a Window of the
Fortress, said. In an evil hour (Knight) cammest thou hither, and I
marvel what foolish presumption guyded thee to this place, seeing thou can
no way escape my hands, but in my courtesy it remains, either to spare thee,
or put th^^ to a most cruel death, although my enchauntment have suffered thy
passage. Thou art marvelous har^ye, quoth Palmerin, there at thy Window, but
if thy courage be such, as to deals with me hands to hand: I shall let thee
understand, that thy great words cannot sheelde thee from my Sword, for I
will pull down that pro^d stomach, and reward thy inexorable tyranny, to
that good Lady I heard complain, whom villainously thou look from her
Mother. Come down I pray thee if thou be not afraid, and thou shall see what
entertainment I give to such as thou art.

Are you Sir (quoth the Knight) such a corre^tor and reformer of ^ices? Dare
thou but tarry till I come ^owne I shall teach thee the way to be better
advised. So arming himself presently, he mounted on hors^backe, and came
forth of the Castle: whereupon* Palmerin thus spoke to him, There is (...)
great (...) Knight, you to be on horseback, and I on foot, you shall show in
all manhood^ in offering me such wrong: I pray thee (of courtes^e) alight,
otherwise I shall bestow such a c^rrying on your ^alfray, as your servant
afterwar^e shall take (...) small pains with him. The knight of the Castle
made as though he hear^ him not, and ran fiercely with his lance against
Palmerin, who escaped his enemy, with his Sword gave his Horse such a stroke
on the leg as he past by him, that the bone being cut in twain* he fell to
the ground, having one of the knights legs so fast under him, as he was not
able to recover himself. Palmerin willing to help^ him up again, gave him
half a dozen such raps about the pate, as he lay quiet enough without any
moving: whereupon he unclasped his helmet, when the knight having some air,
began to strive with him, and drawing his pocket ^agger, gave Palmerin a sore
wound therewith in the thigh, in recompense whereof, at one stroke he took his
head from his shoulders. The Squires and Seruant^ of the Castle, who came
forth to see the issue of the fight, ran apace to the Castle again, to shut
the Gate for their own safety: but Palmerin (albeit he was hurt, prevented
them, laying about him so roughly on every side, as he swear if they would not
bring him to the imprisoned Lady, they should all presently die the death. Many
of them with fear ^ombled headlong into the ditch, other on their (...) asked
for mercy; promising to do what ever he commanded them, whereupon he said to
him that had the keys. Arise quickly villain, and conduct me to the prison,
or I shall pay thee for thy laziness. The poor fellow almost frighted out of
his wit, brought him to the Tower where the Lady was, whom they ^ound nak^d
from the middle upward, and so grievously beaten, as all her body was gore
blood, which the knight had ^^^ne that morning, for a Dream he had the night
before, how her mother would send a Knight that should take her thence
perforce, and murder him in which opinion he came to the Lady saying. I
perceive that thy ^^other and friends labor to get thee from me, and practice
my destruction by all the means they may: but for their sakes thou shall
de^rely a^ye their dealing. And with these words the villain so cruelly
whipped her, as she was ready to give up the ghost, and so left her in hope
she would have dyed. Palmerin finding the Lady in this lamentable plight,
said. Arise good Lady and leave your sorrowful acclamations, for the
villain that thus misused you, has had such absolution for his deserts, as he
has left his head in sign of his p^naunce: and if you will depart with me
toward your Mother, I will show you the Traitor where he lies now quiet
enough. Ah my Lord, (quoth the Lady is the Traiterous Scloto dead, that so
monstrouslye wronged me? He is Lady, said Palmerin, you ^eede fear him no
more. Then Heaven be praised (quoth she) for this happy day, and among all
Knights be you the most renow^ed, for ever, with which words she arose, and
wrapping a ^urred Mantle about her, without any other garments on her body,
she went with Palmerin, and passing by the place where Scloto lay slain,
lifting her eyes, and hand^ to Heaven, she said. O my God, ^ow is thy name to
be praised, so iustlye punishing the treachery and disloyal^ye of this
villayne: Ah Traitor, how worthilye haste thou received this death, which is
not rygorous, as thy merciless tyrany has been to me.

(...) Here you must note, that so soon as the Knight was dead, all the
enchauntments about the Castle were presentlye finished, the great Lake being
consumed after Palmerins passage, so that the Ladies Mother advertised thereof,
came to meet Palmerin, embracing her daughter with such exceeding joy, as
they could not sp^ake to each other their tears so hind^red them, at length
the Mother kneeled before Palmerin with these wor^es. Ah worthy Knight, how
happy have you this day made me? all my former greefes (by your means)
being now converted into a singular contentation. A^ she would have proceeded
in her gratulations, she perceived the blood to trickle down Palmerins
Armor, which she sorrowing to be hold, said. He thinks Sir Knight you are
very sore wounded, I beseech you grant me so much honor, as to repose your
self a while within my Castle, where I doubt not to use such dilligent are, as
you shall be whole and sound in very short time. Palmerin not min^ing to
refuse her offer, returned with the Lady, and being unarmed, was brought to
his Chamber, where the Lady dressed his wounds, and he was so well
entertained as heart could devise. Then went the Ladies squires and Servants to
Sclotos Castle, from whence bringing all things that were of any value, they
burned the Traitors body, and putting his head on the point of a Lance, they
placed it on the top of the Tower for a perpetual memory. The next day
came people from all parts of the Istande, to see the Knight that ended the
enchauntments, and among other, the Damsel that conducted him thither was
one, who on her knee thus spoke to him. Now am I satisfied Sir Knight, and you
discharged of the promise you made me, which was only for the deliverance
of this Lady, whom you have valiantly conquered from the tyrant that tormented
her. I beseech him, who evermore has regard of the poor afflicted, that his
pleasure may be to send you the like, or a better adventure, whereby you may
accomplish all your ha^tie enterprises. So will he I doubt not, said
Palmerin, and that was one from which you dissuaded me: but I shall n^uer be
merrye till I find him again, though then at your entreatie he escaped my
hands so well. And Fortune speed the matter so happilye, quoth the Damsel,
as peace and Freendship may be united between you: for if either of you
miscarrye, it were great pittye, con^^dering the worthy valor wherewith you
are both noblye furnished. Let come what will, said Palmerin, never shall
other agreement be between us. With these words the Damsel held her peace,
for the perceived by his answers, that he was not half pleased with the other
Knight.

Chap. LVI.
How Palmerin travailing through a great Forest, e^pyed a Dwarf enter into a
Cave, whom he followed, and found there a Knight, with whom he had much
conference.

SO long continued Palmerin in the castle with the Lady, till his wounds
being healed, and he able to hear Armor, he said to the Lady. Madame, by the
help of God and your diligent endeavor, I find my self in good co^stitution of
body wherefore with your favorable license, I mean to morrow to depart hence,
because occasions of great importance so commands me: yet this assurance
will I leave with you, that in any place where I shall come hereafter, your
woonderful courtesy has gained such power over me, as at all times I remain
to do you any pleasure.

The Lady right glad of Palmerins noble offer, and her Daughter thankeful for
her benefit received, returned him many thankful gratulations: but seeing they
could no lo^nger detain him, for his speeches were such as he ^ould needs be
gone, she said.

Gentle Knight, seeing it likes you no longer to soiourne here, but that you
think it expedient to depart, I would gladlye present you with a simple
gift, not as recompense of your painful travails, but only that hereafter
you might remember from whence i^ came.

Then took she out of a Coffer two rich and precious Ringes, and presenting
him one of them, she said. You shall give this Ring to her whom above all
other you most esteem, the Ring containing this special virtue, that the
longer she wears it, the more she shall love you, and daily shall her love
so vehementlye increase, as all adversities and troubles, she shall bear with
patyence that by means of your love may any way endaunger her.

This other Eing is of a contrary virtue, which you must give to the Lady
your dear Freende beloueth, and to him may you safelye say, that any
occasion whatsoever, cannot pluck it from this Ladies finger: for this is the
nature thereof, that the Lady which wears it, shall not h^e disparaged, and
neither entreaties, gifts, or whatsoever beside, cannot compel her, to do
any thing contrary to her lyking. If it came so to pass that she were
beloved by any other, then him she now affects, she shall be able by
virtue of this Ring, to quench all such libidinous desire in her sollicitour,
and cause him never afterward to move her with any dishoneste request. As
for these stones of so rare and excellent quali^ie, you must note that they
were preciselye chosen for you by my Sister, and placed as you see them, by her
superficial knowledge in the Magical sciences, that in time to come they
shall too such service, as no Jewels (of what value so ever they were) might
be able to do the like.

Beside these, she gave him diverse other Jewels to carry to his Lady, for
which he humblye thanked her, and taking his leave of her and her Daughter, who
shed many tears for his departure, he mounted on horseback, and travailing
through a great Forest, he espy^d a Dwarf, whom he judging to be his
Servant Vrbanillo, because he was of his stature, and very much resembled
him, he called aloude. Hear thou ^all fellow, how came thou in this
place, so unfrequented and inhabited? The Dwarf being in a great fear, ran
so fast as he could into a great Cave between two Bushes, which made
Palmerin alight and follow him, and very far went he into the Cave not
seeing any body, till at length he came into a little room, as it had been
cut out of a quarrie, which had light into it by a little chinke cut through
a Rock: and there he found a young Knigh laid upon a bed, at whose feet
lay the Dwarf, quaking and trembling with his late fear, whom Palmerin now
saw that he was not Vrbanillo, wherefore he saluted the Knight, saying. I
must entreat you Sir Knight to pardon me, because I entered so boldlye,
neither knocking first, or calling for any of your Servant: albeit I desired
to speak with this little man, but nothing could induce him to tarry my
coming, for he fled from me as I had been a devil. Whereupon
persuading my self, to find some other body here more courteous, I followed
him at the hard heels, with no other intent, but only to know how I might
possible get forth of this dissolate Forest, wherein by misaduenture I have
lost my way, for I would not willinglye straye too far, least I should be
forced to remain here as an holy Hermit, considering my profession is clean
contrary. To prevent such chance, I think it was Gods will I should follow
your Servant, let me therefore entreat you, to know what you are, and
wherefore you live here so solitarye, shunning as it seems the company of
men: protesting to you, that if I may in ought assist you, whereby to draw you
from this obscure life, I will with all my heart accomplish it, though it were
matter that should concern my life.

The Knight raising up himself, and sighing so bitterlye as life and soul
would have parted in sunder, answered. Alas noble Knight, seek not to
understand the depth of my sorrow, in respect the remedy is altogether
impossible: yet in that your demand proceeds from such a gentle spirit, as
pitieth the miseries of despised creatures, I will acquaint you with some part
of mine estate.

Know then gentle Knight, that I am the most forlorn Varnan, whose
unfortunate life exceeds all men's whatsoever, for this world affoordeth me
nothing but mishappe, disgrace, contempt, and all tormenting griefs, as for
delight and pleasure, they are loathsome to me, my months, weeks, days,
hours, and minutes, being continually accompanied with all extreme passions.
My greatest ease consists in dolorous lamentations, remembrance of passed
infortunes, sad regrets, and insupportable melancholy. In brief, I am only
he, whose companions are, a traveled spirit, thoughts confounded with
frustrate hope, having utterly lost the light of those gladsome Suns, whereof
the one shined in my face, the other in my heart, that now nothing is left for
me but a life despised, yet welcome to me that am so disdayned.

These words were uttered with so many sighs, such floods of tears, and
haling his flesh with such impatience, as would have relented a heart of
Adamant, which moved Palmerin by gentle persuasions, to request of him the
cause of his disquiet: and so long he continued his importunate entreaties,
that the Knight at length thus answered. Gentle Sir, so well contenteth me the
sorrows which I suffer, that in hope of any remedy, I would not bewray them:
but seeing Fortune has thus conducted you hither, in respect of your gracious
and affable nature, as also that you shall not repute me indiscreet and
misgouerned, I will satisfy you in the cause of my sadness.

True it is, Sir Knight, that I have hitherto, and ever shall, love a Lady,
Daughter to a Knight my neighbor, she being (in my judgment) one of y^
fairest Ladies in the whole world. And perceiving by her behavior that she
loved me as well, or rather more, which indeed she did not: for her I
accomplished all things that a Knight could for his Lady, aduenturing mine
honor, and my life in all dangers for her sake, yea, nothing might be
refused for the divine Mistress of my thoughts. Perceiving my self to be so
equally loved, and my passions to grow beyond my ability, finding occasion
to acquaint her with the secrets of my heart, I desired her to pity my
oppressions, which if she refused to do, she should loose her lover, and his
life withal. For I was so solemnly vowed to her service, as she could not
command any thing so hard or dangerous, but by her favorable regard would
be most easy to me. These words could draw no pity from her, but
displeased and in great anger she answered. That I might not be reckoned among
those Knights, who deserved the love of a Lady of her calling, and thenceforth
I should not be so hardy, as to speak to her, or come in her presence. Go^
quoth sh^e, and follow her love that gave thee thy Faulcon, wherein thou
take such pleasure, and never may thou ^urne again to me.

With these words she (...) from me to a Window, where I was wont always
to stand and talk with her, beguiling the time in no less contentation, then
those happy souls in the Ely^ian Fields, such was the rare beauty, good
grace, and singular courtesy of my (sometime) beloved Lady Valerica. I cannot
deny: but that a Lady bestowed the Falcon on me, but in any such respect as
my Lady imagined, God knows is most untrue, nor could death compel me so
much to abuse my chosen Mistress.

Seeing my Lady then so rigorous, and her answer so severe, yet assured of
mine own innocence and loyalty: I was surprised with such surpassing
heaviness, as every hour expected when my feeble spirit, would^ forsake his
long despyed habitation. My Lady being thus resolute in her own opinion, and
disdayning all means I showed to persuade her, despayring likewise of any
after hope: I determined with my self, to abandone all company, as unworthy
of their societye, and then betook my self to this brutish kind of life,
where I might without any impeach, breathe forth my continual complaints.

In this resolution I came to this place, without the knowledge of my Lady or
any other, this Dwarffe only excepted, who evermore has been my most
trusty Servant, and fetches my necessaries at a village near adjoining, and
by his honest persuasions, has many times with-helde me from committing
violence on my self. Thus have you heard in brief the cause of my sorrow the
depth whereof cannot be considered or valued, but by such as have in like
manner tried and suffered, the disdain and ingratitude of unconstant Ladies.
Palmerin having heard the fortunes of the Knight, repeated to him the graces
and favors of his Lady Polynarda, what honor she did him in her Fathers
Court, and how he was in danger to receive the like reward, as the Knight
did of his Valerica: and fearing indeed that his mishappe would sort to that
issue, he fell down at the feet of this poor refused Lover. The Knight
perceiving, that the reputitio^ of his misfortune was cause of this alteration,
bre^thing forth a vehement sighe, he said.

Alas wretched ^atife that I am, has my dest^ny made me so unhappy, that
enduring an extreamitye worse then death, I cannot dye, and yet he that did
but hear my misery has lost his life? I will not live any longer to
prejudice any other men, but will now make way to the end of mine own
troubles. So drew ^ee forth Palmerins Sword, and ^ffered to thrust it into
his body: but Palmerin received his former estate, started suddainlye up,
and catching him in his arms, said.

How now my Freende? will you be so inc^nsiderate, that for a little temporal
pain which your body endures, to condemn your soul to everlasting
perdition? And though your passions touch you so seuerelye, as you will
affoorde no pity to your self: yet let tree intr^ate you to forbear this
humor. For not without reason have I sustained this sudden motion,
remembering the unspeakable comfort I received by one, who by false suggestions,
or slaundreous reports (which wounds more deep then the fatal weapon) may
in like sort be changed into such conceit, as her judgment may exceed a hell
of torments. Yet can I not deny (your Lady having with such shame refused
you) but you have great occasion to grieve thereat, yet not to stretch the
extreamily so far as to despair, or work injury to your self calling to
memory how light the opinion of a Woman is, how sudden she will alter, and
how prompt she is to jealousy, especially where she loves effectually. And
if heretofore she loved you feruentlye, it is impossible but she should
feel some part of your anguish, and more violently (I think) then your self
can Trust then in him that has all hearts at command, repose your self
constantly on his providence, for he will not leave you frustrate of your
honorable intent, standing with iustl^e and perfect integrity.

As Palmerin continued these comfortable persuasions, the Dwarf covered the
Table, and set before them such a small pitta^nce, as he had provided, and
when they had refreshed themselves: Palmerin took his leave of the Knight,
promising him (if he could by any means) to give some ease to his
oppressions. Varnan returned him many thanks, commanding his Dwarf to conduct
him to the high way, being not a little sorrowful to leave his compa^ie, who
had so well advised and comforted him. Palmerin being come into his ready way,
sent back the Dwarf, and rode on till he was g^t out of the Forest,
intending to find out the Castl^ where Valerica remained, because he would
somewhat solicit the cause of sollitarie Verman. Ryding along in this
determination, he espied a Knight and two squires before him, y^ knight thus
speaking to one of his squires. I know not whether it be time as yet to enter
the Garden, or if Madame Valerica be as yet come thither. Go see if she be
there, and return quickly to me again. Palmerin hearing the name of
Valerica, knew well it was she for whom the solitary Knight lived in such
pensiuenes: wherefore moved with pity of his miseries, he said to himself.
See here the treachery of a trothlesse Woman, so vnhonorablie to forsake the
man that loves her so dearly, and prefer the villainy of this intercepting
Traitor: but I shall teach him ere I go, what a penalty belongs to the
preventing of a loyal knight, and so coming to the knight he say^e. Art thou
a man villain, that would forest all the love of the best Knights in
England? by my Sword, thou shall dearly pay for thy disloyalty. With these
words he gave him such a stroke on the head, as he cleft it therewith to the
very teeth.

The Squires seeing their master slain, began to haste away: but Palmerin
caught him that was sent to the Garden, to whom he said. Come on Sir, if
thou love thy life, bring me to the Lady if thou do: not, thou shall
never follow thy trade any longer. The Squire durst do no otherwise, so he
brought him to the little gate where Valerica was wont to receive in her lover,
and knocking with his finger as his Master was accustomed, Valerica opened the
door, and thinking it was her Friend, cast her arms about Palmerins neck,
who brought her in his arms forth of the Garden, commanding the Squire
presently to follow him. Valerica abashed hereat, said. How now sweet
freende? whether will you carry me? Know you not if my father heard hereof,
that neither of us durst approach before him? Tush Madame, said Palmerin, these
are but words, there is no remedy but you must go with me. So neither with
tears nor requests would he be entreated, but mounting on horseback, caused
the Squire to help the Lady up before him, because he would be sure she
should not escape from him, and riding on toward the Forest, because the
night drew on, he left the rode way, seeking some place where they might
conveniently repose themselves for that night. At length he found out a
little thicket, where they alighted, and he returning his Horse to pasture,
took off his Helmet and came to the Lady, desiring her to be content with
such hard lodging for that night: but when she beheld that it was not her
friend, wringing her hands she thus exclaimed. Alas unhappy wretch that I am,
how trecherously am I deceived? What mishappe may be comparable to mine, having
lost my freende, and abiding at his pleasure that has cruelly murdered him? Ah
Fortune, why art thou so inconstant, to change my former pleasure into this
grievous stratage^^e?

Palmerin hearing her so impatient, said. You must think Lady, that what has
happened, is by divine permission, who has thus appointed to punish your
looseness, and your exceeding disloyalty toward him, who loves you dearer
then his own soul, and for your love leads a most austere life, in the very
desolate and uncomfortable place of the world. If he have thus long endured
such hardness for your sake, it is good reason that you should participate a
little with his misery. Fear not therefore, for I speak nothing of him but
what I have seen: and by great chance, have I thus brought you from your
Fathers house, meaning by Gods grace (this humor forgotten) to cause you match
with him, whose true love above all other has deserved you. Ah miserye
incomparable, said the Lady, I see now it is in vain to shun what the
destenies have appointed, how falls my fortune from ill to worse? Must I now
go to that coward Varnan, whom hitherto I have continually despised? me rather
die a most shameful death.

I know not Lady what you think, said Palmerin, but in my opinion, Varnan is
much better then you esteem him, and a better Knight then he, that could
defend his pate with no wiser policy: woorthilye may you call him cowarde,
and love the other that lives to d^^ you service. So long they stood on these
terms, until a knight passed by them, to whom Valerica cried. Help gentle
Knight, for Gods sake pity me, and deliver me from this Traitor, who
falselie has be guiled me, and violently brought me hither against my will.
What art thou said the Knight, that thus dishonorest this Lady? I shall
teach thee better knowledge of thine order before we part. Palmerin quickly
bridling his Horse, and clasping on his Helmet, said to the Knight. What art
thou that would take her from me, who^ I conquered even now by my Sword?
follow thy way, or I shall she we thee what discipline I use to fools, that
will meddle with matters above their capacitye. Do thou so obstinatelye
stand in thy treachery? said the Knight: Mark what will be the end of thy
presumption.

Chap. LVII.
How Palmerin having thus brought away Valerica, conducted her to the Cave to
her beloved Varnan, and there confirmed the agreement of their love.

BEfore we pass any further, you shall understand that the Knight thus
contending with Palmerin, was Hermes, who the King sent after the Lady with
Frysol, to make deliverance of the Castle, as you have heard before: he being
Palmerins Freende, yet neither knowing the other. For Hermes took such regard
of y^ ladies complaint, as he marked not Palmerin before he put on his helmet.
Palmerin seeing that Hermes would needs try his fortune, encountered him with
such a rough stroke, as down he fell to the ground, Hermes thinking his head
was shyuered in a hundred pieces: so Palmerin called Hermes Squire, commanding
him to help up the Lady, or else he would send him after his Master. The
Squire alighted and h^lpe up the Lady, rewarding her with an infinite number
of cursses, because his Master had sped so ill by her means.

Trust me Lady, quoth Palmerin, though you think my labor but ill bestowed,
yet such is the regard of the solitary Varnan, as ending the Hell of torments
he suffers, I must needs hold better opinion of my pains. With these and
such like speeches he be guiled the time, till they came near to Varnans
Ca^e, who to take the air, was there walking under the Trees: but when he
saw Palmerin returned, and a Lady with him, yea, perceiving well that it was
Valerica, they were no sooner alighted but he caught her in his arms, saying.
Is it possible sweet fortune, that after so long mishap, and when all hope was
utterly gone, thou can afford me this gracious fa^our? Ah happy eyes that
have powered forth such showers of tears, what felicity may compare with yours,
co^templating now the rare beauty of your mistress? May it be, that after so
many insupportable torments, the mean thereof should return such pleasure,
comfort and sollace? Depart then tears, pack hence lamentations, grief,
torments and all melancholy conceits, get you elsewhere and in the most
barbarous countries of the world make your abiding* for she commands you hence,
in whom co^sists my special co^tentment. O fortunate knight, how may I
recompense this inexplicable kind^es, surmou^ting al other that ever was heard
of? impossible is it for me (...) requite this favor, though al my possessions,
life, body and spirit were bound to your service. But heaven will supply my
want, and continue (...) in as great happiness, as your noble bounty has
brought me comfort. Forbear these speeches said Palmerin, albeit I had done a
thousand times as much, yet should I but accomplish what one Christian owes to
another. I pray you therefore let us go into your Cave least we be espied, and
so prevented, beside, I am so ouerwatched, as I cannot stand on my feet
through want of sleep. Valerica seeing her self in such an uncouth place, and
in his custody she most ^etested, her angry stomach would not suffer her to
speak one word, but when ^he had a while rested her self, on a seat of
Herbs and flowers which Varnan diligently prepar^d, Palmerin said. ^ehold
Madame Valerica, see in what place, in what solitary, austere and sharp kind
of life, your Varnan lives by your commandment, now ^eeing time and fortune is
so favorable, let not your rig^r and dis^aine exceed their mu^abili^y.
Consider a little, what greefes he has endured in this comfortless place,
which verily have been so great, as all the pleasures in the world, cannot
recompense the very least (...) them. I beseech you then, if heretofore you
have borne him hard liking, let it now be forgott^n, and if unadvisedly (...)
has any way offended yo^, let his long tor^e^ts and surpas^ing loyalty s^ruel
now for satisfaction, and take him to your (...), as y^ most perfect and
faithful (...) in England. You likewise sir Varnan, without remembrance of your
(...), or her too rigorous refusals heretofore, take her as your lady and
wife, and in all honor unite your self to her by present speeches, for seeing I
^aue brought her hither, it will remain a continual reproach to me, if you
should not accept her as your spouse and wife. Ah my Lord quod Varnan, with
right good will shall I accomplish your command, so it may stand with my ladies
liking, for heerin is comprised ye whole sum of my desires. Ah miserable beyond
al other, said Valerica to Palmerin, must I by a varlet be subjected to so vile
an extreami^y, and constrained to take him for my husband who^ I cannot
affect, he being the most false and cowardly Knight y^ ever I knew? must I
against my fathers will, and by my Traitors procurement that has so abused me,
as no virtuous knight would so have wronged a Lady, be compelled to my marriage?
heaven cannot like hereof, and rather well I die, then do the thing shall
return me such reproach. The^ shriked she sopit^ifully as though she had been
quite distraught of her senses, which Varnan beholding, began thus to
complain. Ah gentle Knight, what grief is it to hear her in these torments,
whom I love much better then mine own life? and for whom I rather desire to
die, then not to ^nioye her with her own liking. I cannot live seeing her in
these ^fflictions, and therefore convey her again to her fathers house, and no
sooner shall she be departed hence, but life will ^orsake this forlorn
Carcass, then shall (...) how faithfullye I loved. Palmerin (...) of Valerica,
said. By God Lady, I think in all the (...) not a more cruel and dis^oyall
(...) then you are, persuade your self, that if I take the pain to carry you
again to your fathers Castle, I shall (...) there in such sort, as all your
life time repentance will hardly ^xcuse you. And to speak the truth, Varnan
does much more then you deserve, if you well remember your self, and for you
are so stubborn, I shall give you the desert (offering to draw his Sword)
that such ungrateful and treacherous women woorthily merit. Va^erica afr^yde
when she saw him in such choler, and doubting he would discover her
incontinent love past, threw her self at his feet, desiring him to appease
his anger, and she would obey what ere he commanded. For (quod she) seeing my
fortune has brought me into his company, who for his unfeigned love to me,
has so long suffered wonderful calamities: well might I be ^steemed of
brutish nature, if I did not acknowledge it, therefore I will be his wife, and
give him my faith here in your presence. Palmerin well pleased with this
answer, ^ooke her up by the hand, and taking Varnan by the other, esp^used
them there together by solemn promises, and afterward laid him down to rest
himself a while. Then Varnan taking Valerica in his arms, with sweet kisses
and amorous speeches, expelled all former (...), esteeming himself the
happiest Knight in the whole world, having now at length obtained the favor
of his Mistress, giving her to understand, how acceptable the gift of pity
was, coming from so ^are a creature to her languishing beloved. Palmerin
seeing them so well agreede, would now depart and leave them to their fortune:
but by earnest importunity of these lovers, he stayed there longer then he
intended. Now was the love between these twain, far greater then their hatred
had beeene, so that after they had stayed three or four days in the Cave,
with such entertainment as the Dwarf could (...) of Valerica, continuing long
time together in comfort of their love, and ending their lives in loyalty
thereof.

Chap. LVIII.
How Palmerin, after he departed from Varnan and Valerica, met with two Ladies
in chase, one of the^ giving him a Faulcon. And what happened to him against
the duke of Gaul his twelve Knights, out of whose hands he delivered Hermes.

WHen Palmerin saw Varnan and Valerica so well contented, after many offers of
their service, and kind a diewes delivered on al sides, he left them in their
Uault, and set forward on his journey, lodging y^ night in an ancient
knights castle, where he understood, how the brethren of the slain Knight,
besieged Valericas father in his Castle: Wherefore he turned an other course,
and leaving the broad way that guided to London, he met two ladies accompanied
with three squires, who had cast off a faulcon and a Martin to ^lie, the sight
whereof so highly contented him, as he would nee^es tarry to see the end
thereof, which made one of the Ladies thus speak to him. I s^e sir knight you
have no have on your journey, because you stay to behold our pastime, therefore
if you will go with us to a water hereby, you shall there see a brave ^light
indeed, such worthy gam^ is there so ple^tifull, and my faulcon so good as she
will never fail. Palmerin who above all pastimes loved Hauking, rode with the
Ladies to the Marshes by their Castle, where they hadds such excellent sport
at Heron, Duck and Mallard: as the day beguiling them, Palmerin was forced to
stay with them that night. When they were come to the castle Palmemerin manned
the Ladies Faulcon so w^ll, as though all his life time he had been a
Faulconer. The Lady seeing him so brave a Ge^tleman, so courteous, af^able and
(...) in behavior, and that he tendered her Hawk so gently: was immediately
supprised with his love, so that she desired to know of whence he was, wh^me
she could so gladlye affoorde to choose for her beloved, and having long
earnestlye beheld him, she said. Sir Knight, that I may entertain you as your
estate beseems, I pray you tell me your nanie, and whither you travail. Lady
(quoth Palmerin) I am a stranger, who by fortune on the Sea was brought to
this Country, and because the King had war against the Emperor of
Allemaigne, I remained a while here as a soldier, attending a prosperous
wind, to convey me home again into my native Country. The Lady hearing
this, and judging him one of the famous Knights, that came to the Court,
loved him more earnestly then she did before, providing such surpassing
delights for him, as she wished that night had been a year in length. The
Tables withdrawn, and many pleasant speeches past between^ Palmerin and the
Ladies Daughter, she conducted him to his Chamber, wishing if her honor might
so auouche it, that Palmerin never might have any other bedfellowe But leaving
him to his good rest, she departed to her chamber, where little sleep
suffised her that night. In the morning, Palmerin called for his Horse to
beegon, the Lady very sorrowful to forgo his company: but seeing she had no
mean to hold him, she said. Seeing your departure Sir may not be denied, I
would present you with the Faulcon, which yesterday did so specially content
you, which if you please to accept for my sake, I shall not forget the honor
you have done me, cheefely that you vouchsafed to stay here this night being
as welcome hither as the King himself. Seeing it is your pleasure Madame, said
Palmerin, to best^we your Faulcon on me, I accept it as the only thing you
could give me, and by the faith of a Knight I promise you, that I will keep it
for your sake, and never part therewith, if by force or villainie it be not
taken from me. The Lady so joyful hereof as might be devised, caused the
Faulcon to be brought to him. Here must you note, that this is the selfsame
Lady, which sent the Faulcon to Varnan, and loved him so dearly as after she
understood he had forsook the Country, she gave her self altogether to
this recreation. Her Father perceiving how she was affected, suffered her to
take her pleasure, sending her evermore the best Hawks that could be gotten.
But it came so to pass, that two Faulcons so friendly given, and in the like
sort^ taken, proved very unfortunate to both the Knights, causing them to
cur^^e the hour, that ever they accepted the Ladies liberality, came near
her Castle, or saw her Hawks, as you have already heard by solitary Varnan*
and hereafter shall perceive in Palmerins fortune, he being departed from the
Lady, rode two days together without any adventure, till at length he came
to the Tent, where the Duke of Gauls Knights guarded the passage, which scant
pleased Palmerin, because he imagined if he fought with them, he should be
deceived in his intent, and not se^ Trineus so soon as he would, whom he left
at the Court expecting his coming, wherefore he would have turned anotherway,
but one of the Knights called to him. Return cowarde return, thou shall not
escape without trial of thy manhood, for we must make proof if there be
any in thee. Palmerin not knowing where to set his Hawk, and very loath to
loose it, was not desirous to Iouste: but seeing that with honor he could not
refuse it, answered. It is small courtesy Sir Knight, to challenge the man
that has no will to your sport: but if there be no remedy, your will be
fulfilled, albeit I hope you will first repent it. I see thou can prate well,
qu^th the Knight* and believe me thou were wise if thou could so escape:
but seeing thou art so long before thou art ready, I Will bring thee to such a
place where hawks shall not hinder thee, and in one year thou shall spare the
wearing of B^^tes and spurs in such a comfortable place, as the Sun nor day
light shall ^ffend thine eyes. I hope I have learned, said Palmerin, to keep
my self from such places: but I would feign know the gentle Chamber Page,
that is so skillful in waiting with his Pantofies, as he can teach Knights
errant how to wear them. The knight being angry, called forth the rest of his
compani^^s, among whom he espied Hermes prisoner, his Helmet lying by him, and
his arms pinni^nd: therefore to revenge his wr^nge, he called his Squire,
saying. I pray thee my Friend look to my Hawk a while, for I am come to
defend^ thy Masters honor, and calling to the dukes Knight, saying. Come Sir
let us dispatch quickly, for I have earnest business in another place: the
Knight laughing at him, answered. Why how now Captain? think you to pass
hence so easilye? Here are sufficient to stay your hasty journey, eleven more
must talk with you, the w^orst of them able to abate your pride, for your
horse lackes a stable, and we will provide him one. So couching their
Lances, they met together with such force, as the Dukes knight was thrown
from his Hor^^e, his shoulder being broken with the weight of his fall:
Palmerin arresting the Knights hor^^e for his ^wn^, gave him to Hermes squire
in keeping, saying. Because the Knight is not willing to get on horseback
again, h^ld this for me, and he may lie at ease to see the fortune of his
fellows. Then came another Knight from the tent, whom Palmerin welcomed in so
freendlye manner, as he lay not able to stir hand or foot: with this one
Lance he vnhorssed four more, and brake it so valiantlye on the seventh
Knight, as while he lived he meant to ioust no more. With a fresh Lance he
dismounted all the rest, none of them being willing to deal with him any
further, wherefore Palmerin came to Hermes, saying. What do you (...) Knight?
Why take you not the best Horse among all the (...)? That ^^all I Sir, seeing
you command me, albeit not lo^^ (...) you serve me as th^se Knights are: yet
God be thanked that by your means I am delivered from imprisonment, wherein
these knights intended to keep me, because I unhorsed four of them, and at
the fifth encounter my horse was killed, which was the cause of my foil and
taking. The knights (quoth Palmerin) have now leisure to res^ them, for they
were troubled before with watching for passengers: I doubt not now but we may
quietly pass the bridge, for I see none of them offer to hinder us. Hermes
mounting on horse back, commanded his squire to take a fresh one for him
likewise, and so they rode on together rejoicing at this good fortune. They had
not ridden the space of a mile, but Hermes demauded Palmerins name, which when
he knew, in great rejoicing he said: Ah worthy knight, now is my travel
ended in search of you: trust me, I would refuse the best city in England, in
respect of the great friendship I have found at your hands, as also for the
comfort your presence will bring to our dread Lord and your noble companions,
who long time have expected your desired return. As they rode on in these
speeches, they came to a fair fountain, where Palmerin would alight to
refresh himself, and to bind up such small wounds, as he had taken in iousting
against the knights of Gaul.

Chap. LIX.
How Frisol was delivered out of Palmerins hands, by the means of Colmelio
his Squire.

THe same day that Palmerin ^ousted with the knights of Gaul, the duke
himself was gone on hunting, by means whereof, he lost the sight of the
pastime, which afterward he repented, because he had with him the most part of
his knights, so that no one was left in his Castle but Frisol, that might be
counted of any value, who beholding so many knights ^oyled by one, maruailed
not a little what be might be, and after long consideration of his haughty
exploits, he said to himself, I cannot think this knight to be the man,
against whom I combatted sometime in France. yet know I no man living but
(...), that could perform such rare chivalry. Now, because Palmerin had
changed his armor, he verily imagined that it was not he, yet was he desirous
to know, but doubtful to follow him by reason of his former experience:
again, if he should suffer him to pass without some trial, he judged it
would return to his great dishonor, wherefore he resolved to adventure his
fortune. And in this determination he came to the dukes sister, who loved him
entirely, as you heard before: she beginning with him in this manner. I cannot
sufficiently marvel (...) Frisol, how you have suffered in your own view, my
brothers knights to be so shamefully con^^unded by one passenger: I de^^re you
sweet friend, if ever you brake lance for a Ladies love, that for my sake you
will deal with that proud knight, and make him know that you can abate his
courage, were his head framed of y^ hardest hammered brass. If you fulfill my
request, you shall do an acceptable deed to my brother, and to me such service,
as I shall hereafter requite to your own content. Madame, quoth Frisol, I did
intend to fight with him, but seeing it pleases you so graciously to command
me, no danger can withhold me, because the world can witness, what great avail
so honorable a Ladies favor is, to the knight that lives to renown her name.
So departing from his lady, he presently armed himself, and mounting on a
lusty Courser, followed the way that Palmerin was gone: the 12. knights not a
little glad thereof, well hoping y^ he would revenge their dishonor. Frisol
continued his travail so long, til at length he came to the fountain where
Palmerin refreshed himself, who had no sooner espied him, but surpris^^ with
great joy, said to Hermes. I am sure this knight comes hither is to seek me,
wherefore I entreat you by the reverend love you bear to your best beloved, not
any way to hinder y^ fight between us, til the end deliver victory to one
(...) or other: for he thinking to revenge the reproach of his fellow, has
followed me to perform what they were not able. Then Palmerin suddenly
clasping on his helmet, mounted on horsback, and taking advantage of the plain
field, because it was most convenient for the combat, which Frisol perceiving,
scornefully said. I think Sir knight, you are some kind of prophet, because
you divine so well the cause of my coming: unhappy was it for you to prevail
in such sort against the duke of Gauls knights, which you must now pay for
with too late repentance. If I did them any harm, said Palmerin, it was their
own seeking, and by your arrogant speeches it may be presumed, you are one of
the same company: but y^ love of the Dukes sister, cannot sheelde you from your
deserved recompense. At these words Frisol well perceived, that this was the
knight he so much doubted: Nevertheless his courage was so good, as remembering
the promise he made to his Lady, gave spurs to his Hose, and they encountered
with such brave chiualry, as y^ shiuers of their Lances flew up into the air,
and then they assaulted each other so roughly with their Swords, as well they
might be esteemed right valiant Champions. No mercy was intended on either
side, for Frysol was determined to die or conquer, and Palmerin held the same
resolution, so that the ground was colored with their blood, their armor and
sheeldes battered in pieces, and no hope left on either side of life. But as
always some mischance or other follows a noble mind, so fell it out with
Frisol, for in their close buckling together, Palmerin had got sure hold on his
sheeld, which Frisol striving forcibly to recover, the buckl^ brake in sunder,
and with the sudden breach thereof he fell down backward, when Palmerin leaping
from his horse, said. And let me never hereafter be called Palmerin, if now I
do not revenge my self sufficiently. Which words when Frisols squire heard, he
came hastily and fell at his feet, saying. Noble knight, I beseech you for the
honor you bear to arms, to pause a while, and tell me if you be Palmerin
D'Oliua, for if you be, I am your brother, who have suffered great pain and
travail to finds you out. Palmerin presently knew Colmelio, the son of
Gerrard his foster father, whose sight was so joyful to his, as casting away
his sword, he ran and embraced him about the neck, saying: My dear friend
Colmelio, the most welcome man in the world to me. How happy may I account my
self quoth Colmelio, to find you when all hope was past? having travailed so
many countries, and al (...) ^ai^e: if then you love me as you make
protestation, let me entreat one favor at your hand, that you forget your
anger toward my master Frysol, and give over your fight, for long time have I
served him as my Lord, and well has he deserved much better service then
mine. Colmelio, said Palmerin, the thing thou demandest is marvelous great,
nevertheless, such is my comfort having met with thee, as I grant thy
request, and happily has he now escaped with life, considering what occasions
have past us heertofore. So taking Colmelio by the hand, he said to Frisol. Sir
knight, at your squires entreaty,, I suffer you quietly to depart, and meet
with me again at any time you think good: but you shall go look another
Squire, for Colmelio at this time goes with me. Frisol, who was wounded in many
places, and very faint with loss of his blood, might ea^^ly be induced to this
agreement of peace: but coming to Colmelio, he said. Will thou forsake thy
master and go with his enemy? Trust me sir, quoth Colmelio, you must needs
pardon me, if in this matter I chance to offend you, for to seek him I
forsook my fathers house, and have continued a very laboursome search. If
thou will needs go, said Frisol, and that my entreaties may not dissawde thee,
I will pray for the success of thy desires, and thy advancement to honor, and
while I live will I account of thee as my friend and brother. So returning as
he came, he began in this manner to exclaim against Fortune. Ah cruel and
inconstant Lady, sufficed not thee to dishonor me before mine enemy, but
thou must rob me of my squire I loved ^o dearly? but so have thou dealt with
them of highest cal^^^g, for infinite kings and potentates have thou deceived,
and (before their very cheifest enemies) dishonored: such has been thy
trecherye to me at this instant, that I may justly complain of thee while I
live. As he continued these complaints, he met diverse armed Knights that came
to assist him, and the duke himself in company among them who demanded of
Frisol, whither his enemy were slain or sent away vanquished. Uanquished,
said Frysol think you so good a knight may be so easily vanquished? Then he
d^^^^^rsed his whole success, which the duke hearing, exclaimed on his
hu^ting, that he was not present when Palmerin passed: wherefore he would needs
follow him, but that Frisol entreated him to the contrary, because the night
approached so near, as it was impossible for him to overtake Palmerin. The duke
in a marvelous rage, for y^ his enterprise fell out no better, returned with
Frisol, and an hour within night they came to his Castle, where he called
for his chirurgi^^s, charging them to give diligent attendance ^n Frisol. When
the Dukes sister heard the misfortune of her friend, she came hastily to him in
his chamber, and after many sweet kisses, said. I beseech you my lord f^rget my
folly, for I was y^ cause of your mischance. Madame, said Frisol, where no
offense is committed, what needs any remission? If my fortune have been ill,
it is not for me to complain on you, for your request tended to mine own
honor: but I must be content with my hap, though it has sorted to so bad
effect, and this does yet comfort me, that I received my foil by the only
Knight in the world. And if the heavens please to lengthen my days, I shall
be desirous to do him service, for there is no man living to whom I could
better afford it. Now need I not mislike (having tried him so often) if he be
worthy the love of divine Polinarda, for he (beyond all other) does best
deserve it. Why, how now? quoth the Lady, are you so unwise, to honor him so
much, that has so iniuried you? and which is most childish, to desire his
service? Go^ then and seek him whom thou so love, for by mine h^nour, I more
despise thee now then any man in the world, thou making such reputation of him,
whom thou ought to pursue with mortal hatred. Frisol smiling hereat, said.
Madame, I must needs say so, seeing no ill words can amend my mischaunce: so
without any answer, she ^^oong forth of his Chamber. The next day, the Duke
called all his Knights, commanding them to restrain the passage ^o longer at
the bridge, intending to go to the Court, s^ soon as Frisol had recovered his
health.

Chap. LX.
How Palmerin, Hermes, and Colmelio returned to London, and the good
entertainment the king of England made them.

AFter that Frisol was returned from the Combat, Palmerin after many
embracings of Colmelio, went with him to the fountain where he left Hermes,
all three together making no little joy: Colmelio for his happy finding of
Palmerin, and he for the love of his supposed brother, and Hermes for the
comfort he should bring the King his Master, being able now to acquaint
his highness with Palmerins name, which he was loath any in the English Court
should know, wherefore he said. Now can you not my Lord hereafter bide your
name, though you have been dainty of it all this while. It is true Sir, quoth
Palmerin, albeit I little thought to be discovered so soon: but seeing it is
so come to pass, my hope is in y^ highest, who will defend me in all mine
attempts: now tell me Colmelio, what news in Greece? Truly my Lord, quoth he,
the discourse will be long and tedious: therefore if you pleas^ to m^unt on
horseback, it will serve well to shorten the thought of our iourny. So as they
rode toward London, Colmelio began to discourse, in how many places he had
^^^ght him in Greece, and how at length he heard of him at Macedon, by report
of his conquest of the serpent at the mountain Arti^aeria, which was the mean
that bro^g^^ the King of Macedon to his former health. Afterward, how he left
Greece, travailing into Allemaigne, and from thence into England, at what time
the Emperors power was discomfited: and hearing great fame of Frisol his late
Master, he spent some time in his service, not doubting but by his means to
find the man he looked for. Palmerin was somewhat moved, hearing Colmelio so
commend Frisol, wherefore he demanded of him, if he knew any thing of that
Knights lineage. No my Lord, quoth he but I can assure ye, that he is one of the
most gentle Knights in the world, and he concealeth his parentage very
secretly, which makes me judge he is disce^ded of royal birth. After Colmelio
had ended his discourse, he repeated to him some part of his fortunes, in the
end persuading him that he would remunerate his pains in seeking him and in
time manifest the love he bare him. By this time they were come to the City of
London, Hermes riding before to the palace, where he advertised the king, how
Palmerin was returned to y^ City, which news so highly contented the king, as
oftentimes he embraced Hermes for bringing the man he long desired to see: but
Trineus and Ptolome exceeded him in joy, and mounted presently on horseback to
go meet their friend, when so many embracings, courte^^es and kind
gratulations had passed between them, as is usual at the meeting of long
absent lovers: Ah my Lord and friend, quoth Trineus, how long has Fortune kept
you from me? and why did you depart not vouchsafing a farewell? What earnest
occasion might cause such an unking departure trust me, I persuaded my self in
respect of the long continuance of our amity, that death could not procure
such a severe enterprise. My Lord, quoth Palmerin it seems you have some
cause to complain of me: but when you understand how matters have happened,
you will not condemn me altogether. For at the time of my departure, I thought
verily to return the next day following: but such importunate affairs
continually fell out, as I could not return till this very instant. Ptolome
said as much as Trineus did, notwithstanding, this fortunate meeting forbad all
further accusations, and they became as good friends as ever they were. So
rode they to the Palace, where the king attending their coming, perceived at
length they were entered the Hall, when Palmerin falling on his knee, kissed his
highness hand, who very honorably embracing him, said Where has my noble
friend been so long? What crooked fortune has caused your so long absence?
you departed from us in black Armor, I pray you tell us, where did you
conquer these sumptuous Arms? by the love you bear to chivalry and to me:
satisfy me in my demand. Palmerin seeing the king coniured him so straightly,
reported the truth of all his adventures, how he had that armor of the Lady
whose daughter he delivered, and left his own there broken* in pieces. The
king embracing him again said. I cannot be persuaded, but all especial
adventures, high good fortunes, and cheifest honors in the world are only
reserved for you, and among all the rest, most maruailous is this of the Castle
in the enchaunted Lake, which many knights have heretofore attempted, but
returned with the loss of their horses, Armor, and with great dishonor.
Thrice welcome are you for these happy tidings, as also for your gentle
courtes^e to Erisol, who is a knight of most honorable reputation. But in
regard of your wearisome travails, it is very requisite that you now go
rest your self, therefore let some body help to disarme you, and betake
your self (on Gods name) to your Chamber, Palmerin reputed the kings council
most expedient, and therefore did as he commanded him, so having reposed
himself a while, he came to see how the Queen and her daughter fared, who
would not suffer him to depart, before he had likewise acquainted her with
all his fortunes, especially the whole circumstaunce of his tra^^ile at the
Ca^^le of the Lake. But night being come, and every one betaking themselves to
rest, Palmerin demanded of the Prince, how he ^^ll^wed his desires, and what
he had concluded as concerning his love? Ah d^^re freende, said Trineus, why
ask you me that question? do you not think that having so lost you, I
likewise was disappointed of any mean to help me? know then, that at this
instant I am in the midst of all my misfortunes, for so badly has it
happened, that I am now further from Agriola then ever I was, and I shall tell
you how. Not many days since, as I was familiarlye de^ising with my Lady, the
Duke of Gauls daughter chanced to hear^ such amorous speeches as passed
between the Princess and me, whereby she gathered, that Agriola made some
estimation of me: whereupon she labored, to cause my Mistress in short time
mislike what I had so long travailed to persuade her with, as thus. That it
ill beseemed a Princess of her account, of so gracious descent, and Daughter
to such a mighty King, to confer with strangers, or vouchsafe a listening
to any thing they said: for they were none such as she reputed them, but after
they had brought a Ladies honor in danger, they then were satisfied, as
they used it for a custom among their companions. And so well could she feed
the Princess humor, with these suborning and spightfull detractions, which
seemed to her as sweet and freendlye persuasions, that in steed of the little
love I latelye conquered, I find nothing but frowns and disdain, that she
will scant afford me a look. Which discourtesie has well nere driven me to
despair, in regard of her slender opinion of me, as being so hindered only
through your absence. Often I determined with Ptolome, to leave the Court and
follow you in travail: but the King by no means would permit me, sending
many of his own Knights, because I should not go: yet was I resolved, that
had you not come, no displeasure whatsoever should have held me here: but
to find you I intended, or loose my life. This falls out very hard, quoth
Palmerin, for by these means we shall stay here God knows how long: beside,
Hermes knows my name, which makes me doubt least we shall be revealed: the
Emperor likewise may be offended at our long tarriaunce. In regard of all
this, good Prince, I think it best, that we send your squire and Vrbanillo my
Dwarffe, to advertise his Majesty of our affairs, and how by reason of the
tempest, we were cast quite out of course so far, as we could not by any means
assist his Army, not doubting but to see his highness in very short time. In
the mean while, we may practice means to win the Princess favor again, and
so in good time depart hence, with the honorable prize that we came for.
Trineus was newlye revived with these speeches, wherefore he desired, that
betimes in the morning he would dispatche their Servants toward
Allemaigne. Which Palmerin failed not to do, in respect of a dream he had the
night before, for he imagined that he saw his Lady Polynarda in marvelous
heaviness, and that she said to him. Alas my Lord, what shall become of me?
for I am narrowly sought to be separated from you. This fearful vision so
discouraged him, as he sent thence his Dwarf, to show her what trouble he
had with his dream, and how constant he remained in his love to her.

Chap. LXI.
How Palmerin promised the princess Agriola, to con^ay her out of England,
with his friends, which he performed, to the special content of the prince
Trineus.

EArly on the next morning Palmerin arose, and wrote a letter to his Lady
Polinarda wherein he secretly put a ring, which she gave him when he departed
from her, straightly commanding Vrbanillo that he should diligently attend
on the Princess till he came, which should be with all the speed he could
possible. Ptolome likewise wrote to his Ladi^ Brionella, and these Letters
dispatched, the Messengers immediately set forward on their journey. From
this time Colmelio was Palmerins Squire, which pleased him very well, because
he knew that Palmerin was nobly borne, so that by his means in time he
should rise to preferment. This day the king would ride abroad a Hunting,
which gave Palmerin occasion to see the Faulcon fli^, being reputed by the
king and all his train, to be the best that ever flew. In this time of
recreation, Hermes reported to the King, that the knight so long absent was
named Palmerin, and the same knight that woonne so much honor in France,
which so well contented the king, as he more and more desired his company:
summoning all his Barons and Lords to his Court, where he made such feasts,
triumphs, and other sportes, for the honor of the noble Palmarin and his
companions as the like had not been of long time before. At night, when the
Maskers, Mumeries and Moriscoes were in presence, that Palmerin espied
convenient time to talk with the princess, he took her aside to a window, and
thus began. Madam, before I begin what I have to acquaint you withal, I must
give you this ring, as I was commanded by the lady of the castle in the lake:
the singular virtues thereof are such, as I entreat you to keep it
continually on your finger: which Agriola receiving, with a courteous reverence,
faithfully promised to accomplish his request: then Palmerin, with earnest
affection on his friends behalf, thus continued his discourse. I cannot but
marvel, fair Princess, you being a Lady of so special quality, renowned
among the most virtuous creatures in the world, for your rare integrity and
profound judgment that you will be governed by the unadvised perswasio^s of
other: which I would not believe, had not the Prince Trineus certainly assured
me, how since my departure, in steed of favorable countenance, and the
intreatance beseeming so great a Lord, he can have nothing but frowns,
disdain and coy regard, which is as easy for him to endure, as a thousand
deaths one after another. Assure your self so far beguiled, as your
councellers dissuade you from your cheifest good, desirous to withhold you from
the height of honor, whereof you cannot fail, being matched in marriage with
the most vertuo^s Prince Trineus. Make you no small account, that he being one
of the most noble states on the earth, has left his parents, his friends and
country, has past so many strange and uncouth regions, has adventured the
injury of the seas, b^aten with so many bitter blastes and raging billows,
every minute in danger of Shipwreck, and all for your love? Think you that
he being son to the Emperor of Allemaigne, attending every day the rule of the
Empire, that he came hither to you in hope of your rich dowry? No trust me,
Madame, and I think your own conscience does so resolve you, that nearer home
he could have found other, endued with larger possessions then this Realm
affords you. But hearing the fame of your manifold virtues, rare life, choice
beauty, and all other good gifts, he was willing without regard of his own
estate, to thrust himself in danger, yea, to forget himself for your love,
which hitherto he has with religious service entreated, and except you
intertaine him with more gracious favor, he is in danger of life. Which if it
should happen by your occasion, for ever you shall be noted of monstrous
ingratitude, and Christendom should sustain a loss unrecoverable. How far
such a thought ought to be from you, I leave to your own co^struction. If
hitherto you have known me, a knight ready to support the causes of Ladies
far beneath your height, think you I have not greater reason to honor you?
yea, not a move you with any request, but what may every way advance your
credit. And though my lord Trineus were not of the blood imperial, yet might
his gentle heart, unfeigned love, and ^urpassing humanity, cause you to make
choice of him, above all other whatsoever they be. But seeing it so falls out,
that you will not regard good counsel, following rather the persuasion of mean
capacities, whose judgments may not reach to so high occasions, continue in
your obstinacy, and mark the end of such indiscreet consures. I see that our
company is yrksome to you, therefore (sooner then you imagine) we will remove
that occa^^on. I know well enough, that you intend to match with the duke of
Gaul, who is but your fathers subject: so refusing y^ degree of an Empress,
you shall tarry in England, and be a Duchess. Think you, that if my Lord
matched not with you, the greatest Princess in Europe would not triumph in his
love? Yes certainly Madam, when you may at leisure sit down and recount your
(...), which you sustained by flatterers and par^sites. Think what will be the
danger after our departure, the Emperor his father, not minding to poc^^t the
loss of his late army, will send such a puissaunt strength into England, as
the King your father, nor (...) duke your husband that must be, will scant
excuse y^ whole ruin of this country. The mean to prevent this mishap, and
assure your continual tranquillity, is in entertaining the counsel I have
given you: where otherwise your self conceit, makes way to manifold
misfortunes and dangers. Thus concluding his speeches, in great heaviness he
turned from her, whereat the Princess inwardly grieved, for the Ring which he
had given her was of such virtue, that after she had put it on her finger, she
was wonderfully affected toward Trineus, as she could not think on any other:
wherefore in this sudden change, and trembling with the doubtful conceit of her
own spirit, she called Palmerin to her, thus answering. Alas my Lord, and only
comfort in these heavy passions, what fear has these hard and rigorous
speeches brought me into? It is very true that following the counsel of young
Ladies like my self, I have been persuaded to cast off the Princes love,
accounting him but a simple knight errant: but now being assured of his
nobility, loialty, and great gentleness, and that he would not request (as I
hope) any thing contrary to virtue and honor, I believe what you have said, and
submit my self to your discretion, as willing to obey any thing you shall
command me. Yet this I must request, that above all things mine honor may be
defended, for rather would I suffer mine own loss for ever, then this famous
realm or my father should be any way endangered. Believe me Lady* quoth
Palmerin, if thus you continue, you may well venture to gain this general
benefit, for henceforth there will none be so hardy, as to molest your father
with war, having matched his daughter with the great Emperors son of
Allemagne. To confirm this promise, you shall give me this sweet hand which I
kiss, as the hand of the sovereign Lady and Empress of high Allemaigne, that
you will not shrink hereafter from this honorable determination: but for your
own regard, you must conceal this contract from your most trusty friends,
and dispose in such sort of your self, for I hope to compass the mean and
opportunity, that you shall leave England, and go to the noble regions of your
worthy Lord and husband. What I have promised, said Agriola, I will perform,
and with what speed you shall think convenient: albeit I repose such trust in
you, that having been so fortunate hitherto in your interprises, you will be
careful in accomplishing these dangerous intentions. Thus before they
departed, the marriage of Trineus and Agriola was concluded, and because they
would not as then be suspected, they stepped into the dance next the young
prince, showing very amiable and pleasant gestures: which Trineus (in his often
turning) diligently noted, imagining that Palmerin had not so long conferred
with his Lady, but some assured resolution was determined, yet he dissembled
his inward ioies so cunningly as he could. Each eye was fixed on these two brave
knights, the Ladies and Gentlewomen persuading themselves, that they never
beheld more noble personages, deserving like estimation for their special
chivalry, as also for their bounty and Courtly ^iuilitie. Thus passed the
feast in all kind of pleasures, and these two Knights withdrawing themselves
into their chamber, Palmerin discoursed to Trineus his talk with Agriola, and
how he had with such cunning pursued the matter that in the end be obtained
what he demanded, reporting the gentle conclusion he made with the Princess.
These joyful news dro^e the prince into such a quandarie, as he could not
express his secret content, wherefore Palmerin awaking him out of his musing,
said. As I am true knight, I never thought y^ a man of your estate could be of
so slender courage. What countenance would you use in a matter of sorrow, when
such dainty tidings make you so effeminate? Be of good cheer man, Agriola is
your own, and none but Trineus must be her Lord and husband. I must confess
my lord, said Trineus, that my behauior, but little beseemes my calling: but y^
cause thereof is, that I know no desert in my self y^ may be esteemed* worthy
y^ least favor of my Lady. Beside, these news brought me such special
contentme^t, as I am no longer mine own, but in her only I live, and she
holds the ballan^^ of my danger or felicity, in that I was borne to be her
^eruant. But now I desire you my Lord, seeing the occasion offers itself, we
hinder it not by any negligence: for if now we loose the favor of the time, we
never (I fear) shall recover the like, therefore let us so soon as we can,
pro^^d^ al things ready for our depart^^e. Refer that to me, quoth Palmerin, be
you as ready as I shall make provision. The next day he went to the master of
a ship, to know when time would serve for their secret departure, who answered
him, that the time was then very convenient, the wind serving prosperously,
and the Sea calm and nauigable, and he would furnish him with all necessaries
for his passage. Quoth Palmerin, see that your men and all things be in
readiness, y^ we may launch away upon half an hours warning. So departed the
master about his business, and Palmerin to the prince Trineus, whom he informed
with these glad tidings, now nothing remaining but to know the princess
pleasure, ^he being (...) wi^e as ready to depart as y^ most forward. But
(quoth Palmerin) how shall we safely get you forth of the Court? I will, said
the Princess, this night feign my self sick, and for my greater quiet,
cause my Ladies to absent my Chamber, and so secretly will I escape disg^^s^d
to the (...) gate of the Palace, which is not far from my todging, whereto I
may pass unseen of any, and from thence go with you sa^^ly to the Haven. This
practice was faithfully concluded between them, and Agriola withdrewe her
self closely to her chamber, where at night she began her c^u^terfeit
sickness, commanding her Lady^^ to (...) her alone, because ^he (...) Her
Ladies little thinking of (...) went to their own lodgings very pe^siue and
sorrowful, which Agriola perceiving, covered her self with her night mantle, and
came to the place where the Knights staid her coming. Palmerin taking her
under his arm, conuaied her in that manner to the princes chamber, where they
altogether laid down the order for their embarking, Trineus extolling his
happy fortune, seeing his Lady so ready to accomplish his desire. They arming
themselves, and taking with them the princess costly jewels, whereof she had
plentifully stored her self, they came to the haven, where they found the ship
and mariners ready, and getting all aboard, the wind serving for their avail,
they set sail, and before day they got far enough from London.

Chap. LXII.
How the king of England and the Queen were advertised, how their daughter
Agriola was conuayed away, and of their sorrow for her departure.

THe Duke of Gauls daughter, who continually was bedfellow to the Princess,
absenting her self very long from bed, fearing to disquiet her Lady, being
sick as she supposed: but coming at length to see h^w she fared, finding the
bed empty, and Agriola gone, she presently made a great out-crie, whereat
the other Ladies came, and altogether amazed at this sudden adventure, went to
the Queens Chamber, where they reported how the Princess was gone, but how,
or when, they knew not. The Queen at these tidings suddenly arose, and coming
to her daughters Chamber found it too true, which made her fall into such
pitiful acclamations, far surpassing those of Maguelona, when she lost her
friend Peter of Province in the wood.

In these lamentings she returned to the king, whose heaviness exceeded
judgment, for the loss of his daughter, and then came diverse lords and
gentlemen, who declared that the strange Knights were likewise departed. Which
raised such a ^umour through all the City, that they had stolen away the
Princess. The King understanding the general sorrow for his daughters absence,
said. In sooth my friends, if these Knights have done such service for me,
they have sufficiently recompensed themselves, in doing me the greatest
dishonor they could devise: yet will I not condemn them so much as my
daughter, for that I am persuaded she procured this mischaunce. But now I
well perceive what credit a man may repose in his enemy: for Palmerin evermore
served the Emperor of Allemaigne, then h^rdly could he be true to me. Yet is
it in vain for me to blame him, or his companions, if they took^ the advantage
of their own intents. But now there (...) no remedy, my daughter is in the
company of most chosen knights: if she have done well, or ill, hereafter her
deserts will answer her misdemeanour. Thus the king would not suffer any
pursuit after them, though the Queen and her Ladies earnestly entreated him: he
answering that no such moan should be made, for a child so ungrateful (...)
disobedient, but having committed an action so ^ile and ^^^rme, she should no
more account of her as (...) child. And well may we (quoth he) so refuse
her, in that she wou^^ leave her parents, and depart with strangers: (...)
might we have accounted our selves* if we had lost her in her infancy. The
Queen seeing her lord so impatient, appeased his displeasure so well as she
could, because she would not move him too much. Within few days after the
Duke of Gaul arrived at the Court, who most of all grieved at th^se unhappy
tidings, wherefore he persuaded the king to proclaim open war against the
Emperor of Allemaigne, assuring him, that the knight which most commonly
accompanied Palmerin, was Trineus the Emperors son. When the king heard the
Dukes speeches, forgetting his anger, he rejoiced, esteeming himself happy,
and his daughter wise, in matching her self with such a husband: and if she
had made her choice among all the Princes of the world, she could not have
sorted out one comparable in honor. In brief answered the duke, that for a
daughter so lost, he would not seek the death of his lovers and subjects: but
being one of Fortunes changes, he could not withstand it, and thus the king
wisely and patiently ent^red hi^ gree^e.

Chap. LXIII.
How Vrbanillo and the Prince Trineus Esquire, arrived at the Emperors Court,
and what great joy their coming procured.

IN this place ^ur history takes this occasion, how the King of France daily
expecting news from Palmerin, as concerning his intent of marriage, between
his daughter and the Prince Trineus: but seeing he heard no tidings at all, he
determined to send his ambassad^rs to the Emperor, electing for cheef^ in this
embassage the Count of A^mignac, to whom he gave full power and authority to
conclude the marriage between Trineus and his daughter Lucemania, as also of
the princess Polinarda with his son and heir. The king dispatching al things
for his embassage, sent many ^arons and knight^ of name to accompany the Count,
to countenance the matter with more royalty and magnificence, and in this
manner they came to Gaunt, where the Emperor being advertised of their
arrival, (...) no great account thereof, such was his grief for his sonne^
absence and Palmerins, of whom he could not hear any tidings, as also for the
foil his Army sustained in England. But while the messenger from the
ambassadors of France stayed with the Emperor, Vrbanillo and the princes
Squire entered the hall, whose presence highly contented the Emperor, as
embracing them very lovingly, he demanded for Palmerin and his son Trineus,
when they delivering their letters, and the Emperor persuaded thereby of their
speedy return, was greatly contented, saying to the Ambassadors messenger. My
friend, seeing I have heard such long looked for tidings of my son, you may
return to the (...) your master, desiring him to come when he thinks
convenient, and he shall be heartily welcome to me: with this answer the
messenger departed. The^ the emperor taking Vrbanillo by y^ hand, said. Tell me
now I pray thee, how fares thy master? where is he? is my son with him? My
gracious lord, quoth the dwar^e, where your noble son abides, there is my
master, both of ^^^ght good disposition, and highly honored. And hereof I can
assure your majesty, y^ you have a son, who by good reason (...) to be numbered
among the best knights living, for such honorable experience has he made of
his worthiness, that perpetual memory will record his deeds of chiualry: what
else remains you shall know at their coming, which will be so soon as they
can possibly. I ever persuaded my self, said the Emperor, that in the company
o^ so good a knight as Palmerin, my son could not but purchase credit and
honor: the refore seeing they have such prosperity of health, I care the less
for their stay, but welcome are they whenever they come. By this time
Polinarda heard of the Dwarfes arriual, which greatly pleasing her she said to
Brionella. I pray thee sweet friend go speedily and seek the Dwarf, that we
may know what is become of our Lords and my brother Trineus. Brionella, who
longed to hear of her love Sir Ptolome, whom well she knew to be one of the
company, with all speed accomplished the Princess commandment, and found the
joyful messenger with the Emperor, who took great delight in the Dwarfes
reports: but his majesty perceiving with what cheerful countenance she came
to bring Vrbanillo to her Lady the princess, bad him go with her, hoping by
his means his Daughters extreme sadness would be comforted. Brionella being
forth of the Emperors presence, embraced him many times to know his tidings,
when the Dwarf not ignorant of the Ladies passions, delivered Ptolomes letter
to cheer her: but when the Princess saw Vrbanillo coming, with the tears in
her eyes she ran apace to meet him, and casting her arms about his neck,
embraced him very often, saying. Tell me Vrbanillo, tell me, how fares my
brother and thy Master Palmerin? Madame, quoth the Dwarf, so well as your
own heart can wish, and will ere long be here with you. Then delivered he y^
letter from Trineus, which certified her of his short return, and that he
would bring with him y^ thing she most esteemed. But the wag knowing she
expected other matters, and that her brothers medicine was not sufficient for
her cure, he gave her his masters letter, when she hastily breaking open y^
seal, found the ring which her loyal friend had sent her, and after she had
welcomd it with many devout kisses, she put it on her finger, with these words.
I charge thee keep this token safely, in witness of the knights gentleness
that sent it, whom my heart has made special choice of above all other. Then
reading the letter, and discree^ly considering (not without great e^fuse of
tears) the sweet words, humble supplications, entire excuses, and extreme
passions, that her friend continually suffered for her love, delivering many
bitter sighs, she said. Ah my true and loyal friend, I believe well, and take
in good part your cause of absence, being assured, that if possibly you could
return sooner, nothing should stay you from the place, where y^ only remedy
of your dolorous greefes abides. But seeing for my love you may not forsake my
brother, I pray you for your continual safety, and speedy conduction to your
longing desires, that mine eyes ouerwatched with tedious expectation, and my
heart near tired with bootlesse wishings, may by your presence be thoroughly
comforted. Afterward Vrbanillo breefely reported to her the noble actions of
his Lord and master, the love of Ttineus to the Princess Agriola, discribing
her beauty and rare perfections, whereupon Polinarda thus answered. Believe
me Vrbani^lo, if the Princess be so fair as thou say she is, her great
virtues and firm loyalty likewise comparable, envy and false report shall not
impeach her, to be reckoned among the most happy Ladies of the world, and her
desires will be as honorably effected, as with virtuous thoughts she first began
them. The like (I doubt not) will happen to thy master, for fortune has
evermore so specially favored him, as now it were against reason she should
alter her countenance. So departed the Dwarf from the Princess, returning to
the Emperor, who by no means could get any other tidings of his son then what
you have heard, which made him doubt the dwarf iuggled with him. The next day
the Emperor sent his cheifest Lords and Barons, to conduct the French
ambassadors to the court, which was sumptuously hanged with Tapistrie,
especially the great hall, which was adorned with costly cloth of gold, and
rich purple, as it had been the Palace of Solomon. The Ambassadors
entertained with maruailous royalty, and having delivered the sum of their
embassage, the Emperor answered that he would confer thereon with his
council, in me any while they might return to their lodgings. After they were
departed the hall, the Emperor demanded of the princes electours and the rest
of his nobility, if these marriages of his son and daughter, with the heir
and princess of France, might not be granted, as well for the utility and
honor of the Empire, as for the general benefit of Christendom, commanding
them to speak their judgments without fear. The Lords altogether answered,
that the m^tion was so good and the aliance so honorable, as it was no way to
be misliked. I will then (quoth he) talk with the empress, that she may
understand her daughters opinion, and then my lords of France shall be answered.
So leaving them he went to the Empress chamber, to whom he reported his
agreement with his council, which pleased her likewise maruailous well: but when
she had a little considered on the matter, she answered, that but little could
be said before Trineus returned home again. You reason well, quoth the
Emperor, but in mean time I pray you ^ou^d your daughters judgment, y^ we
may return our brother of France some certain answer. Which she promised to
do, and so departing from her lord, she went to her daughters chamber, where
having commanded her ladies aside, she thus began. Fair daughter, it is the
emperors pleasure and mine, that you marry with the eldest son and heir of
France, and your brother Trineus with his sister, for he is one of the most
renowned kings in Europe, and his son recounted among the best knights of the
world: for which good fortune you may thank the heavens, that so great a
prince offers his Son to be your husband. Advise your self of your answer,
for by your opinion must the ambassadors be dispatched hence, who came to the
court for nothing else but to conclude these honorable marriages. Polinarda
hearing y^ words of her mother, was surprised with such sudden heaviness, as she
could not tell what to answer: but fearing the Empress should perceive that her
love was already determined, with sad countenance thus replied. Madame, you
know what promise I made my brother the day when he departed from the Court, in
the presen^^ of you and all the nobility, that I would not marry before his
return: and me thinks I were greatly to be blamed, and well worthy grievous
reprehension, if I should so falsify my word, which I cannot do without
impeach of mine honor. And herein shall I follow the laudable bertue of the
Emperor my father, who evermore esteemed his promise above al earthly
possessions. Beside, I can assure you that my brother will never marry with the
princess Lucemania, for he loves one many degrees beyond her, and (may I
speak it without offense) one of the most beautiful Ladies that ever nature
framed. Thus Madame, my Father and you have excuses sufficient and auayleable,
wherewith to answer the king of France. It may be, quoth the empress, that
your brother loves else where: but I can tell ye, that neither he nor you shall
do any thing contrary to the Emperors commandment. Polinarda seeing her mother
persist in her opinyon, bit in her sorrows with many secret sighs: yet knew
she so well how to dissemble her passions, as the Empress could not discern
her private meaning. So returned she to the Emperor, aduertising him of her
daughters answer: whereat he was so offended, as in great anger he came
himself to his Daughter, saying. Why how now Daughter? are you so bold to
disobey my commandment? or dare you repugne against my will? al is to no end
that you have babled with your mother, for (will ye or no) it shall be as I
have appointed. I know right well dread Lord and father, quoth she, that I
ought no way to deny your pleasure, but rather will I die a thousand deaths,
then consent to match with the Son of France, considering what promise I
have made my brother* and if I should so far dishonor my self, as not to
regard what I have promised, I were not worthy hereafter to be called your
daughter. Thus stood she resolute in her answer, and therewith shed such
abundance of tears, as the Emperor was constrained to tell the Ambassadors,
that the marriages could not be concluded till the return of Trineus,
notwithstanding he granted all the articles of their embassage. The princess
qualli^^ing her grief as well as she could, sent for the Dwarf, and taking
him by the hand, said. Alas my friend, I am now in y^ greatest perplexity in
the world, nevertheless, one thing comforts me: that thou be hold the true
love and loyalty I bear thy master, which never shall be broken, what ever
become of me. And would to God he were now here, then would I speak it openly
without fear of any, that I am ^is, and he mine. Madame, quoth the Dwarf, if
you continue faithful to my master, persuade your self of his assurance, for
he building on your constancy, takes such continual pleasure in remembering
you, that it is the only mean that preserues his life: and you may be b^lde
to credit me, that if your brothers love did not withold him, he would have
bin here long ere this, but he will come soon enough (I hope) to end this
doubt. As for me, I am of the opinion that heaven will not suffer so good a
knight to die, but first will permit him to see his mistress. Die? quoth the
princess, sooner let all the knights in the world end their days, and the
eldest Son of France likewise, though he love me so dearly, so might I be
rid of these importunate Ambassadors. The Emperor seeing he could get no
other answer of his daughter, concluded with the French ambassadors, that so
soon as his son was returned, he should be aduertized, and so for that time
they might depart: but the empress and he first bestowed on them many rich
presents, and so in short time they arrived again in France, where great joy
was made in hope of these marriages, albeit they little thought the Prince
Trineus would tarry so long. Above all other, the French prince was most
joyful, hearing the County of Armignac report the wonderful beauty of
Polinarda: but ^he good Lady was of another mind, for she had rather b^ take
her self to a Cloister, then to break her faith to Palmerin whom she loved so
constantly. Thus leave we her conferring with Vrbanillo, returning to Palmerin
and the Prince Trineus.

Chap. LXIIII.
How Palmerin being thus on the Sea, caused Trineus there to marry the
Princess Agriola.

THis noble company being thus on the Sea, having wind at will, sailed with
such expedition, as in four^ days they had gotten far enough from England,
and the prince seeing Agriola very pensive and sad, comforting her with many
sweet kisses, and taking her by the hand, thus spoke. O sovereign Creator,
how shall I render sufficient thanks and praise to thee, in granting me the
only thing I desired? A^ sweet madame, and my only mistress Agriola, how^
much is your servant indeb^ed to you? has any knight more cause to honor and
extol his lady then I? Believe me fair Princess, such are the rare effects of
your gracious nature, and I so joyful of my happy fortune, as neither friend
or father shall fetch you again from me. I^ my life might endure the length
of ten men^, and every day I should accomplish wonders in your service, yet
could I not remunerate the least part of your Princely deserts. But if your
love be such to me, as I am right well assured ^t is, let me entreat you
forbear this heaviness, and banish from your thoughts your melancholy humors:
for seeing you so sad and pensive, I suffer a torment worser then death it
self. F^r let me perceive (how little soever it be) y^ my presence may be to
your lyking, and our present enterprise somewhat more pleasing: I fly to the
heavens with conceit of happiness, and value my fortune above the reach of
humane capacity. In steed of tears, let us use quaint terms, and for these
dumps, pleasant imaginations, persuade your self Madam, you are now in his
custody, that honors you for your virtues, reuerenceth you for your divine
perfections, extols you for incomparable merits, and lives for you with his
very uttermost endeavors, Think not though you have left your parents, the
fault is not pardonable, for the new alyance wherein you have combyned your
self, shall one day glad you with such special content, that what you do
imagine now a dangerous offense, will be reputed on act of prouid^nt and
princely discretion. Then shall you find true, what Palmerin has spoken, and
his promises of preferment and imperial dignity shall be both rightly and
sufficiently perfo^rmed. Let these persuasions, if not my intreatyes excel
these passions, and procure better comfort. Madam, quoth Palmerin, though you
have left your country, consider the occasion, y^ love of a mighty prince, and
the heavenly appointment, that your noble virtues should be coupled together,
has brought you from England, to sit on the imperyal seat in Allemaigne. How
careful we have been of your honor, your self can witness, no motion being
offered to prejudice your lyking. That you are contracted before the only
immortal witness, you will not deny: therefore to prevent all ensuing dangers,
the actual ceremony shall be here celebrated, and the royalty thereof
solemnized when we come into Allemaigne. So, if Himen claims his due, you may
grant it without reproach, and Juno will as well smile at her sacred offering
here, as if it were in bower or hall. The credit of Princes, are charie, and
angry parent^^ may hinder, what heaven does further: but the deed done, it
cannot be recalled, nor can you be divorced but only by death, and pity
were it, love so well begun, but should^ continue, therefore (so please you*)
let it be performed. The Princes both agreed, they were there married,
requiting their chaste love, with a simpathie of virtuous desires: but this time
of delight and pleasure had small continuance, for Fortune enemy to
prosperity, accompanied with her eldest son Mischaunce, converted their
joys into sorrow, tears and pains unspeakable, as you shall read
hereafter. These Lovers thus ryding merilye on the stream, suddenlye the Sea
began to swell, the wind changed roughly, the Skies were troubled, and such a
dangerous tempest beat upon their Ship, as the Pilot, Master and Mariners
knew not what to say, and five days together they were in this perplexity,
sometime forward, then again^ backward, that no hope of life was expected, but
every on^ prepared themselves for death, the implacable messenger of God, for
they could discern no other remedy. Agriola not accustomed to these dangers,
was meruailously discomforted: but Trineus persuaded her with many examples, in
that such stratagems were usual on the Sea, albeit, sh^^ to end the fear
she saw before her eyes, would often times have cast her self into the
raging waters. At length the tempest ouer-passed, they discryed an Island,
wheret^ with the help of their Oars they coasted, shrouding them selves under
the sides of an high mountain^: and although the place seemed casual, yet
there they determened to ca^t^ Anchor, until the Seas were more calm and quiet
B^ing thus under the lee, and defended from the wind with the h^ge R^cke,
Palmerin came up on the ha^ches, to see what judgment he could make of the
Island, and so delectable the country seemed unto him, as he was desirous to go
on shore, taking his Faulcon on his fist that was given him in England, so with
no other defense but his Sword, he went to view the soil, not suffering any
body to bear him company. Trineus and Agriola persuaded him to the contrary,
but all would not serve: for the situation of the Country pleased him so
well, as he walked on in great contentation, not minding to return again to
the ship, till toward the evening.

Chap. LXV.
How Trineus, Agriola, Ptolome and all their Mariners, were taken by the
Turks, after that Palmerin was gone to view the Island.

THe History reports, that while Palmerin was thus absent, there arrived
four or five Turkish Galleys, who likewise glad to shun the tempesteous
weather, cast Anchor near to Trineus ship, and seeing no body on the deck of
this strange vessel, because (fearing no harm) they were all at rest: they
environed it about, and having boorded it, the Captain of the Turks called to
them, saying. What? are ye asleep within, that ye let us board ye without any
resistance? by the reverence of our gods we shall awake ye: but little to your
ease. So came the Soldiers on boorde after their Captain, who put the
Pilote, the Master, and many of the Mariners to the Sword, sparing none but
such as they pleased to ransom. Then searching the Cabins, they ^ound Trineus,
Agriola and Ptolome, whom they took prisoners, by reason they were unarmed, as
also somewhat sicklye after their roughe passage. This rouing Captain or
Pyrate, named Olimael, noting the singular beauty of Agriola, commanded her
to be ^arryed on board his Galley. When the Princess saw her self so hardly
handeled, and that her Lord was prisoner with these villainous Moors, so that
perforce they must abandon one another: she brake forth into pitiful
acclamations, and looking on her husband, thus spoke. Ah my Lord, how hard and
strange is this fortune? have we escaped a tempest so dangerous, now to fall
into this merciless extremity? Oh that you and Sir Ptolome had been Armed,
that these Moors might have bought our lives with the sword: but despightfull
chance has (...) thwarted us, as no mean^ is left to prevent our peril. Ah
Palmerin, how greenous i^ ^hine absence, and how displeasaunt will our mishap
be to thee? how much would thy valor now avail us, being utterly destitute
of any succor or refuge? I know our mishap will so offend ^hee, as I fear
thou will use some outrag^ on thy self. With these words she fell down^ among
them in a dead trance, the sight whereof so enraged Trineus and Ptolome, as
snatching weapons out of the Moors hands, they laid about them so lustily,
that in short time they had ^laine half a score of them. But unable were they
to con^^nd against so many, wherefore being taken again, they were bound so
cruelly with cords and chains, as ren^e their tender and delicate flesh in
many places: and being so conveyed into an other Galley, their Squires likewise
prisoners with them, the Moors took what they pleased out of the Ship, and
when they had done, set it on fire. Then presently they weyed Anchor, and
launching away, made haste, least any reskewe should follow them, so that
quickly they loss the sight of the Islande, and Olimael coming to see
Agriola, assaied by many means to assuage her heaviness, embracing her in his
arms, and promising her great ^iche^ if she would be paci^^ed. But (...) his
speeches were in vain, for she seeing the Moore embrace her, with angry (...)
like a Lion enraged, caught him by the hair and the throat, saying. Thou
villain Dog, think thou I take any delight in thy company? How dare
tho^ traitourlye thee^e lay hand on me? And so roughly did she struggle with
Olimael, as if his men had not assisted him, she had strangled him:
notwithstanding he took all patiently, persuading himself, that by gentle
speeches, smooth ^latterings, and large promises, he should in time win her to
his pleasure. So came he forth of the cabin, with his throat and face bravely
painted with Agriolaes nails, washing away the blood, which made comely
circles about his phisno^ie: then called he the Captains and chief of his
company, willing them to share the booty among them, and he would have
nothing but the Princess for his part, for he was so inueigled with the
beauty of his prisoner, as he had no delight but only in beholding her. In
this manner then he bestowed his prisonners, Trineus he gave to one of his
(...), and Ptolome to a Knight that seru^d the Sold^^^ of (...) he gave among
the common (...)* But when the Prince saw he must needs leave his Lady, and
each man would carye his prisoner whether him pleased: his grief for his wife,
and sorrow for his friends, I leave to your judgment, as not ^able to ^ee
expressed. Yet some hope of comfort he reposed in Palmerin, tha^by his means
((...) escaped their hands) he should get again Agriola, else was there no
way left to help him. Ptolome who dearly loved the Prince, before they
parted, thus began. Why how now my Lord? where is your woonted prudence and
dis^^etion? Where is that constant mag^^nimitie, which in so many fortunes
heretofore you used? what? is it lost, or have you forget it? What mean ye?
will ye be subject to passions, as a weak effeminate person? You that are
sprung from the most ancient noble and generous race of Christendom, esteemed
for a most courag^ous and virtuous Knight, will you ^ee driven into these sad
and desolate ^pinions? What then would a Turk* Moore or barbarous Myr^^don do
in like afflictions? when he y^ has assurance of his God, and knows that all
persecutions, fortunes and mishaps, are proves of his fidelity, and the
means to attain eternal quiet, shows th^se undutiful behauiors, as though
he had lost all means of hope and comfort. If the body be afflicted, let the
spirit be animated, and armed with patience, against all infirmities of the
flesh. Leave these soft countenances for Women, and if you will not persuade
your self, that these troubles happen for the increasing of our joy, it may
be the mean^ that God will forsake us. Then neither fear or dispayr^ I pray
you, for he that suffered us to fall into these Moors hands, both can and
will deliver us again. As for your Lady Agriola, doubt not of her
unconquerable loyalty, for she has in her custody a jewel of such virtue, as
no one can dishonor her against her own lyking. Comfort your self then in
the power of the highest, and repose your self on the constancy of your
Lady, with this certain persuasion, that this cross and adversity has
fallen upon us, for our greater good and advancement hereafter. Then came
Olimael, and interrupted their talk, commanding nine or ten of his people, to
convey Trineus into another Galley, and Ptolome into that where his Master
was, that so they ^ight depart, to recover the rest of their Galleyes, which
were scattered from them by reason of the tempest. And s^ they departed one
from another, the Galley wherein Trineus was discrying a goodly Ship of
Christians, whereof they being glad, set sail with the wind toward the
Christians, who rode away so fast as they could, and had escaped, but that
they met full with certain Pirates of Natolia, who joining with the Galleys,
in the end boorded her, and parted the spoil among them: the wind suddenly
began to change, so that they were constrained to ^lye for succor to an
Islande in the Kingdom of Persia, which they reached in good time, glad to
sheelde themselves from danger: These Pirates thus come to the Haven, went all
on shore to refresh themselves: but they had no sooner set foot on land*
such enchauntments were there dispersed through the whole Isle, as they
presently knew not one another. But to acquaint you with the manner of these
enchauntments, you must note, that the Isle where they landed was called
Malfada, which name was given it by the Lady thereof, who was called likewise
Malfada, the most subtle Magitian of her time: so that we may say of her, as
the Poets feigned of the ancient Circes. And albeit she was issued of
Christian parents, yet having such familiarity with the devil and his
malign spirits, she would not acquaint her self with any goodness toward
Christians, but daily practice their harm and destruction. And for this
intent, she had long time enchaunted this Island with such charms, that what
Ships arrived there, could never depart thence again, much less such as
entered within the Isle. They being thus stayed, Malfada would come her self,
and choose such as she lyked, the rest she transformed into Hearts, Wolves,
Dogs, Boares, and all manner of beasts. Such likewise as she took with her
into her Fortress, when she had abused them to content her own pleasure, she
would cast them forth, transforming them as she did the other: in brief, she
was worse then a Devil, and the whole Isle a very disguised hell. This wicked
woman knowing, that more unfortunate people were landed at the Haven, called
her servant, and came to see them: but she made no great account of them,
wherefore she commanded her servant to take all the riches forth of the
Ship, converting it by her inchauntment, that it seemed like a bottomless
gulf. Afterward at her pleasure, she transformed them that came in it, among
whom Trineus was changed into the shape of a very fair Dog, not that he
was so, for that is a thing against nature, and which God no way will permit,
that man shall take any brutish shape, or a brute beast any humane form. For
the Magical dispositions thus hold their Art, that the enchaunted esteem
themselves beasts, and of that sort was this (...) Mastiue: notwithstanding,
these distressed captives had natural reason and humane power, but the benefit
of speech was taken from them. And thus was Trineus transformed, which he
seemed not to mistike, for not remembering himself, he forgot all his heavy
passions, maruelling only at his sudden mutation. And here will we leave him
in his strange deformity, to report what befell to the Princess Agriola,
after that dolorous separation between her Lord and her.

THus Gentlemen have we left the Prince Trineus transformed into the shape of
a Dog, in the Isle of Malfada, by the Enchauntresse: the English Princess
Agriola, in the custody of the Turkish Pirate Olimael: Ptolome and Colmelio
carried into Aethiopia, and Palm^rin raunging in the Islande with his Hawk for
his delight. Right strange will be the meeting of all these friends again,
after the hazards of many perilous fortunes. For Agriola thus separated from
the Prince her husband, is married to the great Emperor of Turkey: how
wonderfully the ring which Palmerin gave her, preserues her chastity, will be
worth the hearing. How Palmerin counterfeiting himself dumb, does many rare
exployts in the Isle of Calpha, will be as acceptable. How Palmerin gains his
Polinarda, (...) his chaste wife Agriola, Ptolome his Brionella, and all Honors
meeting together in the Emperors Court of Allemaigne, will be so strange as the
like was never heard: and all this performs the second part, which shall be
published so soon as it can be printed.

A. Mundy.
FINIS. Honos alit Arts.
THE Second Part of the honorable History, of Palmerin d'Oliua:

Continuing his rare fortunes, Knightly deeds of Chivalry, happy success in
love: and how he was Crowned Emperor of Constantinople.

Herein is likewise concluded the variable troubles of the Prince TRINEVS, and
fair AGRIOLA, the Kings daughter of ENGLAND: with their fortunate Marriage.

Translated by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Majesty's Chamber.

Patere aut abstine.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.

To the worshipful Master Fraunces Young, of Bre^t Pelham, in the County of
Hertford Esquire, and to Mistress Susan Young, his wife, and my most kind
Mistress: this worlds joy and heavenly felicity entirely wished.
PRomise is debt (worshipful Sir) as the Proverb avouches, and debt must
needs be paid, as reason requires: the one not arguing so much liberality
in speech, as the other does virtue in accomplishing. When I presented ye my
first part of Palmerin of England, I promised to hasten these likewise that
should preceede it: because this History of Palmerin d'Oliua, is the beginning
and inducement to all those that follow thereon. Wherefore having sent ye the
first, so likewise do I now the second, and will make what speed I can in
translating the third and last, if your kind favor spur me on, as I doubt
not but it will. So still remaining yours (even to my uttermost,) I humbly take
my leave, this first of August.

Your Worships ever to be commanded, Anthony Mundy.
To the Friendly READERS.
THough long, yet at length this second book of Palmerin is finished, and he
having endured so many bitter brunts in search of adventures: after all, now
remains either to be commended or condemned by your censure. Condemn him
you cannot with reason, considering all his actions have been so honorable:
as too malicious were the man would deal so hardly with him that has given no
occasion of offense. Commend him then you must, in respect of his manifold
virtues, thrust altogether in the face of Fortune, only for your delight and
recreation.

As concerning his Sons, Palmendos and Primaleon, the one is kept under his
mothers wing, the Queen of Tharsus* and the other sporting in the Court at
Constantinople: not daring to set foot in the stirroppe after Knightly
exercises, til they hear how their Father speedes. If he have that favor his
deeds deserved, then on goes their Armor, and in the cheifest places of
Christendom will they show themselves, with repetition to the world of
wonderful adventures.

But while they expect good news or bad, I will hasten on the translation of
the third part of this most famous History, which being of some great
quantity, will ask the longer time e^e he can enjoy the benefit thereof: be
therefore kind to these two former Books, and that will be the better means
of hastening the third.

Yours to his uttermost, Anthony Mundy.
The second part of the ancient and honorable History of Palmerin D'Oliua.
Continuing his rare fortunes, Knig^tly deeds of Chivalry, happy success in
love, and how he was crowned Emperor of Constantinople. Herein is likewise
concluded the variable troubles of Trineus, and fair Agriola of England, with
their fortunate marriage, etc.
Chap. I.
How Olimael presented the Princess Agriola to the great Turk, who
immediately became amorous of her: and what rewards and preferment the Pyrate
received, for his gift.

A^ yet I am sure you remember in the first part, how the Pyrate Olimael (...)
his prisoners reseruin^ for (...) none but the King of Englandes daughter,
hop^ng in time to (...) her (...). An being alone (...) in the fairest Cabin
in the (...) he could to comfort her: but (...) were bestowed in vain, for
she would receive no kind of sustenaunce, desyring every hour to die,
having so lost her Lord Trineus. He seeing that fair speeches, offers, gifts,
and other inticements proper to persuasion, could not compass the thing he
desired, he grew into choler, intending to gain his pleasure perforce, so
that after many threatenings, with rough violence he would needs ravish her.
Agriola seeing that her feeble strength could not long withstand the Turk,
albeit she strove and resisted so well as she could: therefore with devout
prayer she called on God, desiring him to take pity on her, and not to
suffer that villainous Ruffian to dishonor her. Her prayer being ended,
Olimael began in such sort to tremble, as he staggered back ward four or
five times, and so exceedingly was he surprised with fear, as he was
constrained to leave her, and withdraw himself into another place. The
Princess, though she were amazed at this sudden change, noting with what
terror the Captain departed, yet was she greatly comforted by her
deliverance, imputing the whole work thereof to the Almighty providence, and
the virtue of the Ring that Palmerin gave her: wherefore with thankful heart,
and elevated eyes to heaven, she said, O celestial Father, how great and
infinite is thy goodness? how happy is the creature, whom thou regardest
with the eye of pity? assurdly I now perceive, that such as in extremity
have recourse to thee, shall no way perish. Then taking the virtuous Ring, and
kissing it many times, said:

Unualuable Jewel, given me by the best Knight in the world, how carefully
will I keep thee? how true is that saying: That great persons give great
presents. Henceforth shall (...) be kept (for the love of him that gave thee,
and for thy singular virtue) in the place where I usually store things of
greatest price. So taking a little Chain of Gold, which served her as a
Bracelet, she fastened this (...) Jewel thereto, and put it about her neck,
so that the sumptuous Stone lay glistering between her (...) white breasts, a
prospect so rare and delicate, and of no less power to draw the beholders
eyes, then the A^amant, the Amber, or the Ieate, can by their virtue: beside,
so woonderfully repleat with sweet regard, as I dare affirm that the most
cruel Tyrant in Turkey, would stand amazed at those two dainty Mountains,
more mortifyed and humbled then the aged Hermits of Thebaida, Olimael yet
quaking at his sudden a^teration, durst presume no more to offer her
villaynie, but by rich gifts and presents sought to persuade her: all which
auailed not, for as he got but little profit by his violence, so won he much
less by his treacherous offerings. So sailed they eight days together, Olimael
not able to compass Agriolas love, nor hearing any tidings of the vessels
that were lost, neither of his Cousin who had Trineus captive, which grieved him
as nothing could do more, in that he was so unprovided, as well he could not
present himself before his Lord, to whom he had promised to bring store of
Christian prisoners, and now he had in his bootelesse love so lost his time,
as either the tempest or shipwreck, had spoiled him of his own company. In
this doubtful opinion, he debated with himself, that the great Turk did
earnestly affect fair Ladies, so by the mean of his beautiful prisoner, he
imagined to be entertained with good countenance, and his loss would be
past over with forgetfulness: wherefore he commanded the Pilot to make
toward the port of Ottobant, where as then the great Emperor of Turkey
soiourned, and (...) they came in short time after. Notwithstanding, as a
Servant well instructed, not daring to abuse the familiarity of his Lord, he
sent one of his Knights to excuse his cause, and to report, that by casual
mischaunce he had lost his men and Galleys: but if his Majesty pleased to
forget his misfortune, and receive him into his accustomed favor, he would
bring him one of the fairest Ladies in Chri^endome, and descended of most
royal percentage. The Emperor being las^iuions, and more addicted to
unchaste desires then any in his Realm, hearing this message, was so supprised
with the only report of her beauty, as immediately he became passionate for
her love: sending the Pyrate word that he could not bring a more desired
present, (...) therefore remitted all his offenses, promising him greatter
favor then ever he had. And because no contrary occasion may hinder his
coming, quoth the Emperor, thou shall carry him this Letter, sealed with
mine own signet, that he may no way ^oubt of his assurance. The Knight taking
the Letter, and kissing the Emperors feet, according to the cu^^ome, return^d
to his Master, delivering him the answer he had receiue^. Olimael joyful
thereof, caused Agriola to cloth her self in her most sumptuous garments, and
so with al^ his men s^t forward toward the Court. Now although the Prin^esse
was all blubbered with tears, and half dead to see her self in the power of
these Strangers, professed an^ sworn enemies to her faith and religion: yet
could not the rare perfections of her beauty be shadowed, but the glimse
thereof set every eye to wonder. And as she looks about her, to see if any of
her company were landed with her, she espied Ptolome, whom they minded
secretly to convey from her, but she beholding him so sad and sorrowful,
stepped toward him, saying. Ah, my dear friend Ptolome, what wreakfull chance
has Fortune thrown upon us: but well may I content my self, for this is a
just scourge for mine offense, and undutiful obedience to the King my father.
Ah my Lord and loyal husband Trineus, never shall I see thee again, for God
does know whither these villains has s^nt thee. Ah noble Palmerin, who was
wont heretofore to comfort me, too much have thou failed us, all thy former
promises are now altered: for in steed of imperial sovereignty, pleasure
an^ honor* I am requited with pouerue, grief, shame and mockery. Ah death,
sweet death* too long desired ^rath: why come thou not to end all these
miseries? But God will not permit thee, because by my torments and afflictions,
I may feel the weighty burden of my offenses, and large bounty of his
mercies.

Ptolome seeing her in this mournful vexation, said. It is no time now
(Madame) thus to offend your self, but rather (as wise and well governed) is
bear these adversities, even with as great content as your former
prosperities, taking in good part whatsoever shall happen: for I am in good
hope, and my mind persuades me, that we shall be delivered by noble Palmerin,
who I am sure endures greater grief in his liberty, having left us, (...)
we can do in our imprisonment. Olimael exceeding angry to (...) Agriola
weep, violently pulled Ptolome from her, charging his men, not to suffer him
once to come in her sight, which he suffered patiently because he saw it was in
vain to kick against the prick. When they were come to the Palace, and
admitted to the Emperors presence, Olimael kneeling down and kissing his
foot, presented Agriola to his majesty: who seeing her of such rare and
wonderful beauty, said to Olimael. This present (my Freende) is of such
surpassing value, as thou could never honor me with the like: good reason
is it therefore, that a gift so precious should be rewarded with like
recompense, and so persuade thy self I will, and thou shall say the Emperou^
is bountiful. As for the Lady thou have given me, I ^^^ceiue her so fair and
gracious, as I inte^d never to have any other wi^e: and that I may espouse her
with the (...) magnificence, I will stay till the hallowed day (...) ^^ronation
when all my Princes, Barons, and (...), will be here assembled, and then in
their prsence shall our nuptialles be solemnized. Now had the Emperor a Woman
captive, named Hippolita, who was a Marchant^ Daughter of Scicile, and better
skilled in all languages then any Lady in the Court, for which he made
special account of her, reposing great confidence in her, and acquainting her
with his cheifest secrets, wherefore he sent for her before Agriola, and said.
Hippolita I give you this Lady in keeping, commanding you to entreat her as
our own person, and that all means may be practiced, to cause her forsake
this sad mellancholy. In conference, you may show her what honor and
happiness she shall receive by falling into our han^es, and what incomparable
fortune it is to her, whom we shall please to accept for our Wife. All which
Hippo^ita (with great humility) promised to accomplish, and so conducted her
into a maruailous princely Chamber, the floor covered all over with cloth of
Tissue, and hung about with such sumptuous Tapistrie and bloth of Gol^, as
hardly might the richness thereof be valued. There Hippolita caused the
Princess to fit down in a Chair of state, which was purposely provided for
her, demanding her name, and of what country she was. The Princess
answered, that she was of England, but further of her state she would not
bewray. Hippolita speaking perfectly the English tongue, took great delight
daily to commune with her, and because Agriola should the better like of her
conversation, she told her that she was like wise a Christian: but by
constraint she followed the Law of Mahomet, and his Alchoran. In further
speeches she acquainted her with the estate of the Sultanes, in the Court of
the great Emperor of Asia: which communication served well to wear away the
time, albeit the Princess took small pleasure therein. Olimael in
consideration his noble present, was created high Admiral of the Mediterranean
sea, and furnished with greater store of Foystes and Galleys then (...) before.

Chap. II.
How the great Turk summoned all the Kings and Princes his Subjects, because
he minded to hold open Court: and how he married with the Princess Agriola
his prisoner.

HIppolita daily conuersing with Agriola, because she could not so well speak
her language, at length the Emperor came to her chamber, and because he might
the better behold the princess, he sat down in a Chair opposite to her,
an^ there he sat a long time, not able to content his eyes with looking on
her: for, speak to her he could not because she understood not the Turkish
language. Wherefore he commanded H^ppolita to request her name, and what her
Parents were, which to satisfy his mai^stie, she did, Agriola thus answering
her. In vain Lady seek you to know of me the thing which death cannot force
me bewray: let this suffice you, that I am a poor Gentlewoman, the most
unfortunate that ever lived, with which words she wept very grievously. The
Emperor moved with pity, departed to his Chamber so surprised and enflamed
with her love, as he could take no ^est one minute (...) the night,
considering with himself, that seeing she esteemed so little of the riches she
saw in his Palace, and refuse^ the offers made her by Hippolita, that
doubtless she was extract of some noble Image.

The next morning he called his four Secretaries, commanding them to write to
all the Princes of his Empire, that they should not fail to honor the day of
his coronation with their presence, and to bring with them their Queens and
Daughters, and this they should do on pain of displeasure: all which was
performed with present expedition. In the mean time, he caused sundry
sumptuous ornaments to be prepared, with all manner of precious Jewels could
be devised, and these he daily sent to Agriola, but all these presents,
promises, and munificent entertainment, could no way move her, not so much as
to grant him a gracious countenance. He likewise sent for the brauest Ladies in
his Court, that they should keep the Princess company: but she would be
conversant with none but Hippolita, of whom she had so prettily learned the
Arabian tongue, as many times she could indifferently answer the Emperor. But
when he beheld her continually so pensive, and that by no means she would
be comforted, he doubted least his presence did offend her, and therefore
he forbear so often to visit her. For so dearly he loved her, as for the
half of his Empire he would give her no occasion of discontent, hoping in
time (which is the Lord and conqueror of all things) to alter that humor,
and purchase her love, which he desired with earnest affection. But now at this
day, where may we find a Lady so vertuousand well governed, being captive as
Agriola was, that could not be won by such a mighty Emperor, consid^^ing her
youth and beauty, and the wonderful riches incessantly offered her. Yet the
highest Lord so protected her, that the more liberal the Turk was in honors
and persuasions, the more loyal continued her love to Trineus, whose perfect
image was engraven in her heart. And not fearing torments or death, she boldly
answered the Emperor that he travailed in vain, for she might not love him, in
that she was married to an husband, more noble every way then he, and none but
him she would love while she lived: yet made he no great account of her words,
considering what frailty commonly is in women. The day being come of this
great preparation, and all the Princes present to understand their soueraigne^
will: he being placed in his imperial seat, said. That he intended to take
to wife, one of the most beautiful Ladies in the world, and for that cause he
sent for them, to understand (...) they liked thereof. Their answer was, that
they liked well thereof, and would gladly honor her as well beseemed them. Then
sent he for Agriola, and before them all, said unto her: that it was his
pleasure to accept her for (...) wife, and therefore she should prepare her
self on the (...) to be married. The Princess abashed at these speeches, fell
down before him in a dead trance, where upon, by the Queens and Ladies
present, she was conuayed into her Chamber, where being again revived, she
began most pitiful and dolorous lamentations: so when all the company had
left her, that she was alone with Hippolita, falling down on her knees at her
beds ^^ete, she thus began.

O my God and benign Father, pity thy poor distressed creature, and forget
the offenses I have heretofore committed: for what is a sinner, unless thou in
mercy suffer her to come before thee? Will thou then vouchsafe (O wonderful
wordeman of the whole world) one eye of pity upon thy humble forsaken
seruant^ and suffer her not to fall into subjection, to the vewed enemy of thy
holy word, arming me so strongly in this temptation, that I no way injury my
Lord and husband Trineus, but rather grant this desolate spirit, may leave
this body and the world together. Ah my honorable Lord Trineus, where art
thou now? that thou art not here so defen^e the sham^ and wrong this Tyrant
offers thee? What? art thou dead? or have thou forg^tten me? No, no, so well am
I assured of thy fidelity, as no forment can divert thee from me. Yet if I
knew directly that thou art not living, the less would ^ee my fear to
follow thee: for then the greatest pleasure this Pagan could do (...), were to
make me happy only by death. But for the matter is uncertain, and that I
live in hope once more to see thee: I will patiently endure all afflictions
whatsoever, for so sweet a reward as is thy lou^. These sorrows of the
Princess so grieved Hippolita, as one could hardly judge who was most
passionate, yet at length she thus spoke to Agriola. I beseech you good Lady
to leave these grievous lamentations, and regard the high estate, honor and
dignity, that you shall have in marrying with my Lord. Never persuade me
(quoth the Princess) to manifest disloyalty: for such pre^erments, if they
be not gotten justly and by virtue, they ought not to be coueted, but to be
shunned as devilish Serpents. Thus spent they the whole night, and in the
morning came the Queens and Ladies newly come to the Court, to bid the
sorrowful Bride good morrow in her Chamber, attyring her in wonderful
gorgious vestures, after their Country manner* far beyond the royalty of
Helena, after her arrival at Troy. Between four Kings she was brought into
the great Hall, and from thence conducted to the Temple, where they were
espoused by the Mosti. To recount here thy royal solemnity in the temple, the
Majesty and unspeakable dignity at the palace, the excellent Comedies, rare
triumphs, Maskes, Momeries, Moriscoes, and such like courtly pleasures, would
be a matter too prolixious: for they are not to our purpose. Let it then
suffice ye, that after they were magnificently entreated at Dinner and Supper,
the daun^ing began, and God knows how the Turks, Moors, Arabes, and Medes,
set forth themselves in their d^uises, and sports before their Ladies, much
like the Satyrs and ^orned Faunes, giving new invasions on the Nymphs of
Diana. But all these maruayles, joys and follies, could not change the
Princess countenance, for she continuing in her pen^^uenesse, these sports
were worsse to her then the torment^ of death: above all, fearing the loss of
her chastity, which was a Jewel never to be recovered. The Pastimes ended by
the Queens and Ladies, she was conducted to the nuptial (...), so brave and
^^ately as the Prince Aeneas, when he came to Queen Dido of Carthage, and
there was the unfortunate Bride committed to her rest. Soon after came the
hasty Bridegroom, calling for Torches that he might be hold the Goddess
he honored, and as he was preparing himself to bed, he was troubled with
such fears, passions, and ap^plexie, as now he seemed more like a ghost then
a man. Perforce he was constrained to forsake the Chamber, when the extremity
of the fit somewhat asswaging, and his former louepassions freshly assayling
him, coming to the Princess again, heavily he thus spoke.

Ah, Agriola, Lady and sole Mistress of my heart, I think thou art some
Goddess, or (at least) exceeding all humanity: so strange is this adventure,
as never any man (I think) heard of the like. Alas, cannot thy anger be
appeased? nor thou induced to love him, who for thy sake endures most horrible
torments? I pray thee be not the cause of my death: or if thou needs wilt,
suffer me first to eni^y the fruits so my desires. Know, my Lord answered
Agriola, that with my will yo^ never shall enjoy it, and if perforce you seek
to dishonor me, assure your self, I am resolved rather to suffer endless
miseries, then to violate my faith to my loyal Husband: for such is my trust
in God, that he will not forget such as call on him. But in respect thou have
not been cruel to me, nor have exercised me, with any tyranny, I shall
suffer thee to lie upon the bed by me, as my Brother might do, and sometime
(though it be more then modesty) embrace thee in mine arms: but if farthe^
thou presumest, thou may not be permitted, but shall loose that favor, thy
self, and me together. Madame, quoth he, in granting me that courtesy,
you save my life, for I have many Concubines to qualify those passions, and
never will I attempt your dishonor while I live: if I but off^r the motion,
refuse me forever. I shall therefore account of you as my Sister, and death
shall not make me do contrary to your appointment. The young Princess glad of
this solemn promise, gave him a kiss or twain, and suffered him to embrace
her: but other kindness could be never obtain, contenting himself with this,
because he loved her so specially. At fifteen days end, the feasts being
ended, the Princes took their leave of the great Sultane, who with many rich
presents sent them home into their Countries. Thus remained Agriola with the
great Turk, and the Knight to whom Olimael had given Ptolome and Colmelio,
sailed with his prisoners into Aethiopia: and thenceforward used them not as
slaves, but as Gentlemen of good quality, especially Ptolome, whom he reputed
a hardy Knight, and a man borne to great enterprises.

Chap. III.
How Palmerin after his recreation, returned to the sea side, and seeing the
Ship and his company gone, made great lamentation, and what after followed.

BEfore in this History you have heard, how Palmerin walking on shore with his
Faulcon on his fist, desired to see the pleasantness of the Isle, and finding
so many delights to with-holde him, returned not toward the Ship till it was
near night: but when he came thither again, and could not see the Ship,
nor any one to question withal, he was greatly amazed, running here and
there, yet all to no purpose. Sometime (...) imagined that Trineus had betrayed
him, because he had acquainted him with his love toward his Sister: and then
again resolved himself on the contrary. All about he looked for his
companions, not knowing what to think: whether, they were carried away by
Pirates, or taken prisoners by the Inhabitants of the Island. In the end, having
compassed in his mind all imaginations he could, and seeing that by his
regard of pleasure he had lost his Friends, he entered into many sorrowful
lamentations, far (...) Cadmus when he lost his Soldiers by the horrible
Serpent, cursing and exclaiming on himself, as he had been guilty of the
death of his father. Alas (quoth he) why did I not remember these wretched
misfortunes by poor. Varnan? whose sorrows was likewise procured by a Hawke:
in hapl^sse hour was this wicked Bird given me. Ah treacherous and deceiving
strumpet, I think thou art some incorporate Fiende sent from Hell, to injury
the most constant Lovers: and therefore gentle O^le, or rather enchanted
Devil, thou shall never hereafter disple^^^ any other, so taking her by the
neck, he pulled her in (...), and said:

Ah sweet Lady Polynarda, how contrary is Fortune^ and how unhappily our
desir^s prevented? well am I assured, if Trineus come to the Court without me,
it will endanger your life, and the only thing that sheeldes me from death,
is comfortable hope to see you once again. Therefore divine mistress, I call
for your succor, that by your gracious assistante, I may endure these vehement
occasions. Ah gentle Princess Agriola, how have I deceived you? but in
requital of your wrong, no rest nor ease shall possess my soul, till I have
brought Trineus and you (...) as great joy, as by my means you have received
discomfort. In these complaints (...) laid him down (...), and so wasted the
time till morning cam^, when (...) no treatures to speak withal, nor any
mean for his to p^sse the Sea, he determined to pass through the Island till
he might meet some body to ^o^ferre with. Thus having no defense but his
sword under his arm, he walked along, and at length he met a Moore with four
Spanielles, and a Marlin on his fist: whom he humbly saluting, demanded the
name of the Country, and if there were any shipping near for his passage. The
Moore perceiving by his language that he was a Christian, in great anger
answered. Art thou come so far to seek thine own misfortune? by Mahomet I
shall welcome thee hither with a vengeance. So laying hand on his Semitary,
Palmerin perceiving by his gesture (though he understood not his talk) that he
wished him no good, wherefore drawing his sword, he gave the Moore such a
stroke on the head, as he cleaued it to his very teeth, and said. By God
villain, thou shall not take me prisoner, or send me into the sea to seek my
ransom, and so may all discourteous varlets be served, as resemble thee in
conditions. Thus leaving the Moore dead, he took another way, least if he
should be followed, he might fall into danger: but seeing he was unarmed,
and could not speak the Arabian tongue, he imagined that at length he must
needs be taken. Hereupon he returned back to the Moore, and taking his
garments, left his own there, and thence forward determined to counterfeit
himself dumb: by which subtlety he thought to escape unknown, and prevent
his imprisonment, till he found means to return to wards Allemaigne again.
The day stealling on apace, and dark night approaching, he came to a fair
Fountain, of the cleerest water (in his opinion) that ever he saw, where
laying him down to rest, consumed the night as quietly as he could. On the
morrow he began to remember his miseries, his dangers past, and such as (...)
imminent, the conceit whereof made him very melancholy: so after he had
eaten a little bread which he ^ound in the Moors budget, according to the
manner of Diogenes, he laid him down again and slept.

Chap. IIII.
How Palmerin counterfeiting himself dumb in the Isle of Calpha, was found by
certain Turks, as he lay a sleep by the Fountain: and how he was received
into the service of Alchidiana, Daughter to the Soldane of Babylon.

NOw that you may the more easily understand in that which follows, the full
intent of our discourse, you must call to memory how Gamezio, who was slain
before Constantinople by the Prince Florendos, as you have heard in the first
part of this History: was Son to the Soldane of Babylon named Mysos, and
brother to Maulicus, who at his death was a very young prince. Mysos
understanding by his Subjects, that Gamezio the hope of his declining age, was
gone by the summons of Atropos to the habitation of the Gods, could not
afterward enjoy the health of body, or quiet in mind: and therefore ere a
year was fully expired, he went to seek his son among his equalles in the
fields of Elysium. Before he took his journey wherein no creature returns
again, he charged his succeeding Son Maulicus, to revenge his brothers
death, being persuaded that himself should not be discharged of his
unfortunate remembrance in the other world, if he failed to accomplish his
latest commandment. Maulicus, not to hinder his departure, promised he would,
yet could he not fulfill it, being troubled in his own Kingdoms more then 20
years after. But after he had reduced the rebellious Provinces into obedience,
he married with the King of Armeniaes Daughter, by whom he had the Princess
Alchidiana, one of the most beautiful and gracious La^ies of her time: who
being come to age of experience, was so loved of her father, as he would never
suffer her out of his sight, so that he made (...) to all such as requested her
in marriage. Alchidiana, when she understood her own singularity, desired
the (...) of the most beautiful Ladies in Asia, because she held this opinion,
that when the fairest were present, beauty would then be most sple^dant. For
this cause he sent to Prince Guilhara^, Son to Polidia her mothers sist^r,
that he should bring his Sister Ardemia to the Court, who was counted the
Paragon through all the Monarchy of Babylon.

(...) (...) and defend thy self so woorthily as thou have done. Then was
she certifyed by an ancient Knight, that one of the squyres of her Chamber
smote him as he lay a sleep, which he revenged in such sort as she had seen.
Trust me (quoth she) the dumb man did as well be seemed him, wherefore, in
respect of his civility, and that he can so well correct the overboldness of
fools: I will intertaine him as one of our Court, forbidding any to wrong him,
as they ^ender my favor, and their own lives. So commanding burial for the
dead, and provision for the wounded, she went to her Pauilion, which was not
far off, willing Palmerin (by sign^s) to go with her, delivering him his
sword again, and saying he should he her servant. Humble graces did Palmerin
requi^e her withal, and in sign of his obeisance offered (...) would not
permit him, and taking (...): Look that hereafter thou go not from me, whereto
by signs be consented, knowing that by he^ means he (...) be safely protected.

(...) Princess Pauillion, but the Greyhounde (...) pace, as he caught her in
the presence of Alchidiana, (...) with (...) own hands took her from the
Dog, and gave her in keeping to one of her Pages. By this time it (...)
toward night, wherefore each one mounting on their Palfrayrs, set forward to
the City: the two Princesses having no other talk all the way, but of the
singular behavior of the (...) Knight. They riding fair and easily, because
Palmerin trauayled by them on foot, Ardemia beholding his goodly Sword,
demanded of him if he were a Knight, which he by signs made known, unto
her, whereof Alchidiana very joyful, said, that she would present him to
the Soldane her Father, and for this cause, the more she beheld him, the
greater pleasure she conceived in him. Being now come to the Gates of
Calpha, there stood many Knights ready with lighted Torches, to conduct the
Ladies and their train to the Palace, which was so rare and sumptuously
edifyed, as Palmerin was amazed to (...) such royalty.

All the way Alchidiana had the dumb knight by her site, giving him her hand
to alight from her Palfray, which he did with exceeding reverence, and nothing
discontented with his office: but many Kings and Princes there present,
murmured thereat, thinking him not worthy to come so near her, nor might he
so be suffered, but that the Princess somewhat (...) of him, would suffer none
to contrary her pleasure: and leaned on his arm all the while she went up
the stayres of the Palace, to give the (...) even to the Soldane, who stayed
his Daughters return in the great hall. Still leaned she on Palmerin, till
she came to her Father, who (...) in a magnificent Chair of estate, having the
resemblaunce of the firmament over his head, (after the Turkish manner) so
garnished with Rub^es and Dyamonds, which with the lights of the Torches shined
most gloriously: whereat Palmerin wondered, (...) the Princess with so brave
gesture, as many reputed* (...) some noble person, and other ((...)) thought
the woorst of him.

The Soldane, who loved his Daughter, as you have heard before, arose from his
Chair to welcome her home, demanding what sport she had on hunting, and if
she had brought any venison home with her? Certes my Lord, quoth she, we have
had better fortune then you think on: but before I declare the manner thereof
to you, will it please you to give me what I have found this day? The Soldane,
not able to deny his Daughter any thing, liberally granted her request. A
thousand thanks good Father, quoth she: this dumb Knight has your Majesty
given me, who (in his own defense) has this day slain certain of your
Knights, and hereof you may assure your self, that he is one of the most
hardy Gentlemen that ever came into these parts. Seeing it is your request
Daughter, quoth he, I could he well contented to grant it, but how shall I
answer ^he Freende^ of the murdered, to whom I have already promised, that
for his offense he shall be delivered to the Lions? So, which of these graunts
ought best to be kept: yours being my Daught^r, wherein nature rules, or
theirs being my Subjects, which the Law commands? I may not be i^dge
herein, said the Princess, notwithstanding, me thinks (under your highness
correction) that you have been but (...), to give a sentence so cruel, having
not heard or seen the party. And albeit he were guilty of blame, as he^ is
not, yet before his condemnation, he ought to be heard how he could clear
himself: but if he must die, I having assured him life, and taken him into my
defense: the disgrace is so great to me, as mine honor must remain for ^uer
condemned. And you my Lord and Father, whose authority may discharge me of
this reproach, if you refuse now to assist me, the grief hereof will be my
death. Th^se words she spoke with such affection, and so heavily weeping, as
would have moved a (...) heart to pity her: where^^^^ M^uli^us touched with
natural remorse, said: You shall peceyue Daughter what I have devised, to the
end my word may not be impeached. He shall be put into the Lions Den, and
suddenly taken out again, by this mean I shall keep my promise to his
accusers, and satisfy your earnest desire. And the better to content you
herein, his enemies shall be persuaded that he escaped the Lions with life,
and then will I give him safety through all my dominions. The Princess fearing
the bloodthirstie desire of the Lions, could not so content her self, which
Palmerin perceiving, that the Father and daughter thus contended for him, fell
down on his knee before the Soldane, making signs that he should accomplish
his promise, for he feared not the danger of his life. Maulicus maruailing
hereat, persuaded his daughter that being so hardy, he might escape:
therefore to content her self, for thing should be handled in such sort, as
the Knight should no way be endangered. These words somewhat contented the
Princess, causing Palmerin to be conducted to his chamber, charging him that
was appointed to attend on him, to see that he were very honorably used, and
in the morning to bring him again before her father. The Soldane and his
Knights spent all that evening in diverse judgments on the dumb Knight, each
one being glad of the Soldanes sentence: but Alchidiana was so pensive
(considering the dangerous hazard he should pass, as she (...) to her Chamber,
refusing all sustenaunce, and spending the time in ^oloro^s complaints,
desiring rather her own death, then the dumb knight should be any way harmed.

Chap. V.
How Palmerin is put into the Den among the Lions and Leopards, and having
killed three of them, escaped valiantly.

PAlmerin being brought to his Chamber, which was one of the most sumptuous in
all the Palace, accoridng as the Princess had appointed, he made sign to the
Gentlman that attended on him, to withdraw himself, for he was accustomed to
be alone in his chamber, which he immediately did, being loath to offend him.
Palmerin being alone by himself, ga^e thanks to the God of heaven, who in
midst of his misfortunes, caused such a gracious Lady to favor him so kindly,
as defended his life when he was in danger, and by whose means he conceived
good hope to escape his enemies hands, and to return safely toward Allemaigne.
His meditations ended, he betook himself to rest, and in the morning Linus
the Gentleman that had him in charge, came and presented him before the
Soldane, who commanded him to be carried presently to the Lions. Alchidiana
understanding that the dumb Knight was with her Father, sent him a rich Mantle
of scarlet, desiring him to wear it for her sake: which he putting about him,
went frankely with his keeper to the Lions Den, where the door being
opened, he boldly entered, desiring God to assist him in this peril. Palmerin
being in the Den, because none of the Lions should get forth to hurt any
other, how ever God disposed of him, made fast the door after him, and with
his sword drawn, and his Mantle wrapped about his arm, went to see how the
beasts would deal with him. The Lions coming about him, smelling on his
clothes would not touch him: but (as it were knowing the blood royal) lay
down at his feet and licked him, and afterward went to their places again.
But there were among them three Leopards, that furiously came and assailed
him, the foremost where of he paunched with his Sword, that he was able to
do no more harm. The other two, although they had torn his Mantle, and put
him in very great danger, as they that looked in at the windows and creuises
perceived, yet to their no little admiration, in the end he slew them both,
and so went forth of the Den again, to whom Linus came, and lovingly taking
him by the hand, brought him to the Soldane, to whom he discoursed his fight
with the Leopardes, and how gentle the Lions had been to him.

The Soldane greatly astonished hereat, made more estimation of him then he
did before, and because the Lions refused to touch him, reputed him of royal
parentage. Whereupon he sent for his Daughter, praying her to entreat him not
as a Knight, but as a noble and virtuous Prince, considering his behavior so
well deserved. The Princess entertained him very graciously, and hearing the
success of his happy fortune, spoke thus in the hearing of them all. Because
every one shall know, Sir knight, how much I honor your good gifts, I will
cause my Father so well to love you, as he shall repent himself a thousand
times of the ^aunger he put you to: and so veri^ lovingly embracing him,
desired pa^don on her own behalf, because she suffered him to be thrust to the
Lions. Palmerin in sign of atonement, and that he was nothing displeased,
kissed her hand, and sitting down in a Chair by her, beheld A^demia, who
resembled his Mistress so equal in beauty, and could not hold his eye from
her, so that he conceived such pleasure in his regard, as he judged it
sustenance enough to maintain life. But she that was ignorant of the cause,
presumed that he loved her, wherefore thenceforwart, she began so amorously to
affect him, as she enjoyed no rest but in his presence. Thus were these two
Ladies Alchidiana and Ardemia touched with one disease, and that so sharply to
the quick, that the least torment they endured (seeing he could neither
speak nor understand their language) was worse to them then death. And so it
fell out, that each of them thinking her self best beloved: concealed her
thoughts from the other, and would in no case be reputed amorous, least so her
desires should be discovered. Alchidiana for arguments of her love, gave him
horses, esquires, servants, and pages, so that the greatest Prince in the Court
was no better equipped then he: and in this fortune such was his mind, that for
all the honor and favor the Soldane and his daughter bare him, he did not
outreach himself in behavior, but was benign and full of courtesy, that
each one loved and desired to be familiar with him. And if any enterprise of
Ioustes or Tourneyes were in hand, Palmerin was the foremost in the field, and
carried the prize away from all whatsoever, which incited Maulicus to love him
in such sort, that he entertained him into such special credit, as he would
never resolve on any matter of importance, without his show of good liking. And
albeit the Princes of the Court showed him good countenance, yet Envy (that
never can rest in ambitious hearts) caused them in the end to raise slander
against him: which Palmerin perceived, but being unable to remedy, awaited
convenient time for his departure, notwithstanding the earnest affection
Alchidiana bare him. He knew likewise so well to disguise his matters, that so
often as the Princess would hold him in talk, he still feigned not to
understand her: which made her jealous toward Ardemia her Cousin, who by
Alchidianaes injuries and Palmerins refusal of her love, lost her life, as you
shall read in the chapters following.

Chap. VI.
How the Prince Maurice sent his Ambassadors to the Soldane, to desire safe
conduct for his coming to the Court: to try if he could find any Knight
there, able to deliver him of an extreme trouble that he dured by
enchauntment.

DUring the time that Palmerin was thus esteemed and beloved in the Court of
the great Monarch of Assiria, upon a Sunday after dinner, as the Soldane was in
the great Hall conferring with his Daughter, and many other great Princes and
Lords present: there entered a Moore Knight armed, except his Helmet and
Gauntlets, which were carried after him by two Squires, and making his solemn
reverence, humbled himself at Maulicus feet, saying. Most high and redoubted
Monarch, my sovereign Lord Maurice, sworn Prince of whole Pasmeria, kisseth
your highness hand, sending to require your gracious safe conduct, that
himself may come to your Court, to try among all your knights, if there be
any one so loyal and valiant, as can deliver him from a torment he endures, the
most cruel and strange that ever was heard of, and happened to him in this
sort.

The King of Pasmeria, great governor of the Moor^s, and father to my Lord,
being unable (through extreme age) to weilde the government of his Realm,
gave the administration thereof, and made his Lieutenant general, my Lord
Maurice, a Knight so hardy and puissant as any of his time, and so renowned for
his beauty, sagacitie, and brave lineaments of body, as there is none of the
Kings of Judea, Egypt, Ethiopia, and neighbor Countries round about, but
gladly desire his (...) and friendship. So that many have sent their
Ambassadors to him, presenting their Daughters and Kingdoms to him, the
greater part whereof he has hitherto refused, ^xcusing himself by his fathers
age and his own youth. But as often times it happens, Fortune enemy to all
good endeavors, not suffering him to remain in quiet, permitted that the
queen of Tharsus, the fairest of the Oriental pa^ts, a young Widow and rich,
as is very well known, after she had sent him many presents of incomparable
value, entreated him to come and see her, shaddowing in this message, the great
desire she had to mat^h with him. The Prince being benign and courteous,
would not deny her, but in short time after iourneyed to her. The Queen
entertaining him with great royalty, and seeing in him far more gracious and
beautiful gifts then before she heard reported: was so surprised with love, as
in steed of looking to be woo^d, her self was constrained to demand, knowing
so w^ll to declare her desirous and affectionate passions, as the Prince moved
with amorous pity, granted what she requested, without any further condition
or promise, presuming on himself, in respect of her great and favorable
entertainment, that he would not leave her for any other. But herein was she
deceived, for the young Prince having stayed with her t^nne or twelve days,
desired leave to depart, saying that he had received Letters from his Father,
which commanded his speedy return home again, promising her, (if so his
father consented) to take her in marriage, and that with such expe^ition as
might be. The Queen somewhat contented with this answer, thinking he would
perform what he promised, let him depart. He being come home into his own
Country, forgot his love to his new Friend, and by his Fathers commandment,
married with a young Princess, Daughter to the King Lycomedes. The Queen
hearing these news, was almost dead with conceit of grief, and conceived such
hatred against my Lord Maurice, as she determindd to be revenged on him,
whatsoever came after. And the better to compass her intent, she sent to
search out one of her knights, a learned Magitian, promising him, if he would
help her to be revenged on him that so deceived her, she would make him one of
the cheifest in her Realm. The Magitian, who evermore was desirous to please
her, promised her to work such a devise, that Maurice should endure such cruel
torments, as her self should be constrained to pity him. And to accomplish
this practice, he only desired the King her Fathers Crown, which was one of
the richest in the whole world: which Crown he coniured in such sort, as the
devil himself could not imagine the like, and coming therewith to the Queen,
said.

Madame, you must send this Crown to the Prince of Pasmeria, desiring him for
your sake he will wear it on his head, in the cheifest affairs of his
estate, which he immediately will accomplish: but this I dare assure you, that
hereby he shall suffer so many vexations, as he would endure a thousand
deaths if he could possible, to be delivered from this torment, which he never
shall be till the most loyal lover in the world take it from his head. The
Queen so joyful hereof as could be, sent the Crown to the prince, who
received it thankfully, and beholding it sumptuous, suddenly put it on his
head: but presently flew out of his head such a flame of fire, as it had been
the blaze that comes from a discharged Cannon. Then called he for aid and
succor, making the greatest lamentations that ever were heard, but all was to
no end, for no Knight or Lady there could do him any good, and so all the
whole day he remained in this cruel martyrdom, burning aline, yet not
perishing, resembling the Salamander in the extreme fire. When his people saw
that they could procure him no ease, they sent two of the greatest Lords of the
Realm to the Queen, who humbly entreated her to pity the Prince, and to
recompense the fault he had committed, he should take her to his Wife, and
endow her with those honorable possessions belonging to him. The Queen
entertained them very nobly, and after she had understood their message,
answered.

My Lord, the marriage between your master and me, is intolerable, and no
way can he now contract himself again, for I remembering his disloyalty,
and he the torments he suffers by my means, it were impossible that we
should lovingly live together, therefore in this matter you shall excuse me.
And let him know, that seeing he was so presumptuous contrary to his faith
and promise, to refuse me for his Wife, I now so much disdain and contemn him,
as my heart by no means can be induced to love him. And no other remedy is
there for his torments, but that he seek through Asia, Europe, and Africa, a
lover so perfect, who by his loyalty may cease the pains he suffers for
treachery and treason. With this short answer depart my Country, for your
Master is so worthy of favor, as for his sake I hate his people.

The Ambassadors maruailing at this fatal destenie, returned to their Lord,
to whom they reported the Queens answer, and what remained to ease his
affliction, which more and more increased his grief: wherefore seeing what he
was enjoined to do, the next day he left the Court, entending not to stay a
day in any place, till he should find a Knight so virtuous and loyal. Thus
has he travailed Ethiopia, India, Tartaria, and the greater part of your
realms, but as yet he has found none to remedy his misfortune: but if any
other disloyal Knight in trial touch the crown, his vexations are far more
greater then before. For this cause most mighty Lord, ha^ing heard the great
fame of valiant knights in your Court, especial of a stranger Knight being
dumb, who came hither but of very late time: he desires your majesty, his
assurance granted, to suffer him try his fortune here, if in your presence
^e may find any help, or else to seek further in other Princes Courts. These
are the principal points of my charge, may it please your highness to
consider of mine answer, how I shall return and certify my Master, that you
may like wise see an adventure maruailous.

Chap. VII.
How the Prince Maurice came to the Court of the Sold^ne of Babylon, where he
was delivered of his burning Crown that tormented him, by the loyalty of
Palmerin.

MAulicus wondering at this strange discourse, thus answered the Moore. You may
(my friend) return to your master when you please, and say from us, that he
shall be welcome to our court, with as safe a^^urance as our own person, as
well for his valor and bounty, which I have heard greatly esteemed, as for
that we are desirous to see so strange an adventure ended in our presence. And
we cannot sufficiently marvel, how he could be so forg^tfull of himself,
that after his faith so broken, he could extinguish her remembrance that loved
him so vn^eigne^ly: but hee^ein may we behold the soueraignitie of confident
love (...) then and certify him of our pleasures, and that we pray (...) god^
his (...) may be in such an hour, as he may depart hence to his own content:
yet am I greatly afraid, that he shall not find any Knight in our Court, but
has either forfaited or failed toward his Lady. The Moore kissing the
Sol^ans hand, and humbly taking his leave, returned to his Lord, leaving the
Soldane and his Knights, admyring this rare accident, so that he exhorted
every one to adventure his fortune at this Crown, to give the greater
assurance to their Ladies, of their loyal fidelity: but many of them were
herein deceived, for in steed of praise and glory, they received shame and
reproach, as you shall see hereafter.

The Prince advertised of the Soldans answer, in hope of good success set
forward on his journey, and the next day following he came to Calpha, where
Maulicus caused him to be honorably lodged in the City, because that day he
would not come to the Palace. On the morrow, after that Lethea, wife to the
Soldane, her Daughter Alchidiana, the fair Ardemia, with many other Ladies and
Princes were come into the Hall, to see the trial of this novelty: Prince
Maurice understanding how the Soldane with all his courtly assistants, stayed
his coming, went to the Palace accompanied with a hundred Knights, all clad
in mourning black, in sign of their continual sorrow for their Princes
misfortune. There he was very royally entertained, the Soldane causing him to
sit by him in a sumptuous Chair of estate, of purpose provided, and after
many welcomes and kind gratulations, the Soldane demanded how he felt
himself, and whether he sustained any ease of his torment. Ah my Lord quoth
the prince, I can not express to your majesty the pain which I feel, being
a thousand times worse to me then death, and every hour enforcing me to
despair, but I must endure it with what patience I can, till incomparable
loyalty discharge me of this burden. With these words he lamented
exceedingly, so that each one was moved to pity him, for such a burning
flame continued in the Crown, and so f^rious heat proceeded from his mouth,
as set the Hall in maruailou^ hotnesse, yet consumed he nothing at all, but
in every part was as formal as any other man. Beloved Couzin, said the
Soldane, for my self I will not enterprise to meddle with your Crown, for I
do not imagine my self so favored of love, as I can finish that wherein so
many have failed, nor would I willingly seek mine own dishonor, being far
unable to profit you: as for my knights, let them make proof of their loyalty
and spare not, and see which of them can win the honor of this adventure.
Hereupon Gui^^haran, brother to fair Ardemia first entered, and (...) to the
enchaunted Prince, said. Trust me my Lord, since I began my profession in love,
I never committed any prejudice to my Lady, therefore will I try to end this
enchaunt^ient.

Then earnestly beholding Alchidiana, for whose love only he came to Court,
he approached to the enchaunted Prince, and pul^ so hard as he could at the
Crown, but he crying aloude, said. For Gods sake Sir knight strive no
longer, for if by disloyalty I could be cured, I see you are able to give me
remedy. Alas, in all my life I never felt like pain by any Knight that tried
his fortune, great need have you to do severe penance, if you will be
favored by love any more, toward whom you have so haynously offended, for my
infirmity may not be helped, but by loyalty, firmness, faithful persuit,
constant perseverance, and such other honored virtues esteemed in love,
whereof you have not the least particular. Thus retired this new lover, more
ashamed then a Uirgin to be seen lightly disposed, and so sat down among
the other (...), whose fortune proved as effectual as the first, to (...)
own disgrace, and great torment of the languishing (...). The Kings and
ancient Princes seeing the young Knights could do no good, put themselves in
deuoire, each one conceiving so well of himself, as if their fortune served to
end the adventure, their years should carry the honor, and they be renowned
for ever by their Ladies: but their vain conceit and desire to accomplish an
impossibility, much abused them, so that they shamefully remained frustrate in
their intents, and the pains of the enchaunted Prince greatly augmented, who
thus sp^ke to them. Truly my Lords, it is the custom of your ancient and
au^acious opinions, to extol your loue^ and valor: but for any thing I see,
your old years have much less merited amorous mercy, then the indiscreete
and unconstant dealing of these young Princes. Then seeing that no other offered
to prove his virtue, delivering many grievous sighs, he said. Unhappie wretch
that I am, how much more had it been to my ease and benefit, if the Queen of
Tharsus (whom I so (...) offended) would have contented her self in her
revenge, to cause me be piece meal torn in sunder, then thus have delivered
me into this insupportable vexation, the end where of will never be
accomplished, seeing that in this honorable Court of my Lord the Soldane, I
find no one can give me comfort.

Palmerin hearing the lamentation of this amorous (...), fell into a profound
imagination, and after he had long regarded Ardemia, who so lively resembled
his Mistress Polynarda, said within himself. Ah sweet Madame and only
mistresre, vouchsafe at this instant to assist me, for by your succor I shall
now make proof of my faithful and inviolable loyalty, which never in ought
offended you, if not at Durace in affecting Laurana, whom I simply thought to
be the Lady, who was so often promised in my vi^ions. But seeing my thoughts
never sorted to effects, as also that I was deceived in your name: that ought
not be imputed to me for any trespass, and therefore (...) Goddess be
favorable to me. Then surprised with sudden joy, he began again earnestly
to be hold the Princess Ardemia, who imagining her self only beloved of
him, cast forth a bitter sigh; turning to Alchidiana, (...). Ah Madame and my
dear Couzin, what great fault has this cruel Queen committed, appointing
her Magique in such sort, as loyal and faithful Ladies may not be suffered
herein, for deliverance of this young and beautiful Prince^ doubtless he
should sooner receive help by them then by Knights, (...) much more loyally
do they love, then men, and are in their affections firm and constant.
Alchidiana, who felt her self touched with this intricate fury, whereof the
(...) Ardemia complained, suddenly coniectured, whereto her sighs and
faultering speeches tended, which raised private conceit, and such a vehement
attaint of iealous^^, as she would not answer any word, but feigning to
smell some discontented favor, turned her face the contrary way. Palmerin
looking round about him, and seeing no one would meddle with the (...), fell on
his knee before the (...), craving (...).

(...) well be coniectured, prostrated himself at Palmerins feet, and with
unspeakable joy thus said. Most noble and fortunate Knight, how much am I bound
and indebted to thee? right happy was the hour of thy birth, but much more
happy my journey to see thee: let my word suffice, I so far deliver my self
yours, as my self, my Subjects, my possessions, or whatsoever else is mine, I
freely offer to your disposition. Palmerin, who ever bare the most noble mind
of a Knight, was displeased that so great a Prince should honor him with such
reverence, wherefore with great humility he took him up in his arms,
causing him to sit down where before he did: but the Soldane and all his
Lords greatly amazed, not so much at his courtesy, as his (...)

Chap. VIII.
How the ^ayre Princess Ardemia, enduring extreme passions and torments in
love, made offer of her affections to Palmerin, which he refused: wherewith the
Princess (through extreme conceit of grief and despite) suddenly died.

EA^^^ye may be co^iectured, the great pleasure of the two Ladies, Alchidiana
and Ardemia, beholding the man (...) they loved as their lives, to have the
honor of the enchaunted (...): for eac^ of them severally persuaded her self,
that he had thus adventured in ho^or of he^ love. And as they returned from the
Hall to their chambers, Alchidiana came and took Palmerin by the hand, and
walking on with him, thus spoke. Ah gentle knight, how are you to be regarded
above all other? I know not why the (...) should deprive you of speech:
except that in all things, this on^lie excepted, you should be perfectly
resembled to the^. Oh how happy is she, that might adventure to make you her
Servant, doubtless, if in her appear so singular perfections, as apparently
show themselves in you: well might it be reputed a rare conjunction, when the
cele^tiall (...) governing (...) affections, has united you in ^o amiable
alliance.

The Gentlemen that attended on the Princess, great^^^ murmured at this
private familiarity: but she (...) in her affections, as virginal (...) now
forgotten, and earelesse of regard, openly showed her desires. Thus were these
two Ladies now, much more amorous of the dumb Knight then before: so that they
were not well, but either in his company^, or thinking on him. Alchidiana
remaining jealous of her Cousin, seemed not to love her as she was wont, but
devised all the means she could, that she might be sent to her Fathers Court
again: yet she that little made account thereof, sought opportunity to
bewraye her love to Palmerin, and by hap seeing Alchidiana in the Gallerie,
conferring with two of her Ladies, she entered alone into her Cozins Chamber,
where sitting down on the bed, she compassed many imaginations, how she
might discover to the dumb Knight, the secret fire that was kindled in her
bre^^. So long she stayed there, till Palmerin came, because about that time
he was wont to visit the Prin^esse Alchidiana, Ardemia so glad hereof as
could be possible, suddenly started up, and saluting him with more then
common reuer^nce, taking him by the hand, and causing him to fit down by her
upon the bed. Then enflamed with wonderful passions, surpassing Pasiphaes
desire to the brutish Bull, when she met him in the wood made by Dedalus,
she beheld him with such a piercing countunaunce, as the least glimse whereof,
was able to confound the reason of the most constant person, as the aspect of
the Sun in the (...) of Leo, does the eyes of the beholders, and of force to
warm the coldest complexion, although it were an (...) himself in her
presence. Then delivering three or four bitter sighs, fetched from the very
bottom of her heart, as cruel as y^ (...): she took a rich Diamond from her
finger, and put it on Palmerins, with these words.

Sweet Friends, and only comfort of my soul, let me entreat you to wear
this as an argument of my love, thereby to know, how well you esteem of me,
assuring you, that I am so devoted yours, as if you vouchsafe to (...) me the
favor and honor, by iournying to the Court of my Father with me, I never
will have any Husband but you, and there shall such account be made of you, as
well beseemes a Knight so noble and virtuous. Ah divine defense of my life, and
more worthy to be loved then Love himself, misdeeme not of these speeches
so aduenturouslye uttered, by a young Lady and unmarried: for the love I bear
you is such, as I am constrained (forgetting the decent regard of a bashful
Uirgin, who naturally is shamefas^e) to esteem of you honestlye, and as is
conuenable to (...) estate. Then seeing the Gods, the place, the occasion, and
the time, permits me to bewraye, that which I dare not otherwise manifest: have
then fair Knight some pity on me, and let me enjoy assurance of grace,
for which I (...) in ceaselesse torments. With which words she embraced him,
and sealed so many sweet kisses on his hand, as apparently deciphered her
earnest affection.

Palmerin amazed at this strange accident, because she was a Pagan, and
contrary to him in faith, that making (...) answer, but following the example
of chaste Joseph, who refused Zephira Wife to Putiphar, great prou^st to the
King of Aegipt: started from her suddenly, and moved with displeasure,
departed the Chamber, thinking in himself, that such occasions more overrule
the hearts of men, then all other matters that might be devised, and (...) the
practices of ^ellish P^uto. Then calling to his Lady for assistance, said to
himself. Ah sweet Mistress, succor now your servant, for I rather desire a
thousand deaths, then to violate the chaste honor of my love, or to give that
favor to this Lady which is only yours. Alchidiana, by chance^ seeing
Palmerin when he entered her Chamber, and (...) him now to depart again:
imagined presently the (...) of the cause, wherefore entering the guarderobe
which was adjoining to her Chamber, she closely stood and (...) all that had
passed, and at his coming forth stayed him in this manner.

Notwithout great cause (good Knight) (...) thou take the fatal Crown from
the head of Maurice, for in thee is more ^^rmnesse and continency, then is in
the disloyal Ardemia, unchaste desires and villainie: but in unfit nine did
she rip open her vnmaidenlike affections, for I will publish her shame to
every one, and cause her to be less esteemed then a known offender.

Palmerin fearing that in her choler she would do no less then she said,
fell on his knee before her, entreating her by signs to forbear, otherwise it
would be his death. She seeing him so fair and gracious, and thus to humble
himself at her feet, quallified her displeasure, promising to keep it in
secret. So Palmerin withdrewe himself to his Chamber, leaving the two Ladies
now together: but Ardemia agreeued at the dumb Knights refusal, would not
reveal her wrong to Alchidiana, (who so soon as Palmerin was out of hearing)
thus began. Why? shameless Ardemia, think thou thy beauty of such value,
that the Knight, to whom my Father and I have done so great honors, would
leave us, and depart with thee? trust me^ thou art far from thine account:
for if thou vauntest to do him such honor in thy Fathers Court, as his
nobility deserves, it consists in my power to exalt him more in one hour,
then thou can do in a thousand years, might thou live so long. I did
never think that such audacious and incontinent tempting a man, could any way
enter thy heart: but if such be thy disposition, thou ought rather to abide
in thy Fathers Court, where thou may have leisure to follow thy base
affection, with some of the (...) or youths attending on thy Father, then to
offer the (...) here in my Chamber. Hence, hence, forth of my presence, for I
will not keep company with such an intemperate Woman. What regard had thou
of thy great lineage, or the place from whence thou art descended? Yea, what
comfort will it be to me when I shall hear, that a Lady, issued of the blood
royal, should be more shameless and impudent then a (...), a villain, or an
high way beggar? Many other such like hard speeches used Alchidiana, all which
grieved her not so much, as to (...) of him, whom she reputed as passionate for
her love, as she was for his.

These high words of the Princess, caused the Ladies attending on Ardemia to
enter the Chamber, which ma^e her then break off, because she would not have
every one know the matter: and they seeing their Mistress so sad and
discomforted, brought her to her own Chamber, where on her bed she sorrowed
so impatiently, as each one (...) she would (...) her self, and feign she
would, but that their presence hindered her: therefore she deferred it till
better opportunity. And because she had spent the most part of her younger
years, in reading the works of (...), as well Greeks as Arabians, she
remembered the mou^nfull Tragedy of Biblis, which caused her to frame a Dittie,
that she had translated from the Greek (...) of Sapho, into her vulgar
speech: and turning toward her Ladies and Gentlewomen, she began in this
manner.

The lamentable Dittie of Ardemia, dying for love.
MVsenot (fair virgins) at Ardemia,
Although her end be hard and dolorous:
For death is pleasant as mine elders say,
To any Lady sometime amorous.
For as the Swan in cold Meander glide,
By mournful notes foretelles her speedy death:
So my complaint does bid me to provide,
For sweetest love makes have to stop my breath.
The ill that endless and incessantly
Torments my heart, is fair and choysest beauty:
And this unhappy awkwarde desteny,
Falls to my lot through spotless loyalty.
For fond conceit that ouer-rulde my wit,
More wretched then fair Biblis makes me:
And he I love more stony hard is knit,
Then Caunus, who could ken no courtesy.
Yet Bibli^ oftentimes could ease her heart,
By sweet devising with her lovely friend:
But he I honor, recks not of my smart,
Nor will vouchsafe one gracious look to lend.
And as her sorrows cheefely did arise,
Because the secrets of her love were known:
So I reueald, each one will me despise,
Which death can stint ere it too far be blown.
Unhappy wretch, that could not this foresee,
And be more chary of so choice a thing:
But all too late I wish the remedy,
Therefore my folly does due guerdon bring.
if love that is esteemde a power divine,
Unto his Servant give so sharpereward:
What merit may vile hatred then resign,
Unto his vassayles that his Laws regard?
Often have I heard mine ancient elders say,
That such as love not, are unworthy life:
Yet does my love imagine my decay,
And throws my hope into whole worlds of strife.
And yet the pains I wish for my mischaunce,
May not be valued with my present woe:
For to compare them is mere dalliaunce,
And neither sense or reason should ^ sho^e.
Life is to me loathsome and burdenous,
All pleasure seems to me tormenting hell?
Ah poor refused, and abused thus,
Must thou needs die for loving all too well?
O sacred Venus, patr^nesse of love,
In this distress will thou not pity me?
And thy fair Son that thus his shaft did prove,
Will he forsake me in this ieopardie?
If you forsake me in this just request,
And will not favor what you did procure:
Give leave to him that brings all to rest,
And he will ease the torments I endure.
You fatal Sisters that have spunne my thread,
And now think good it should be cut in twain:
Fulfill the task as you are destenied,
And let my heart abide no longer pain.
Come sweetest death, expected too too long,
End all the evils unhappy love begun:
If thou delay, I challenge thee of wrong,
Have then good death, that love and life were done.
Her complaints thus finished, she commanded her Ladies to depart the
Chamber, and being alone by her self, she again began to consider, the
rigorous refusal of Palmerin, the conceit whereof grieved her so extremely,
as also the reproachful words of her Cousin: that making a conscience of her
sorrows, and raging with extreamitie of this despite, brake the veins of her
heart in sunder, and the artiries of her body, as the blood issued forth at
many places abundantly, and therewithal in short time she was strangled.

The nxet morning, her cheifest Lady that attended on her, and loved her
exceedingly, came to the bed side to see how she fared: but finding her
dead* and so (...) with her own blood, gave such a loud shrieke, as
Alchidiana and her D^moselles, affrighted at the noise, ran in all haste to
the Chamber. The Princess knowing the cause of this mischaunce, was marvelous
sorrowful, assuring her self, that the words she spoke in her anger,
occasioned this bloody (...). And the ^umor of this mishop was so soon spread
through the Palace, as all the Ladies, Damoselles, Knights, Squires, and
other, come to behold the hard fortune of Ardemia. What lamentation was made
on all sides, is not to be expressed: especially the Ladies attendant on
Ardemia, and her Broth^r Gu^^haran, who brought her with him thither: but her
Gouernesse, not able to endure the burden of her heaviness, without fear of
dread of any, thus openly complained. Ah sweet Princess A^demia, the flower
of beauty, how dear have thou bought this precious gift? for I know
assuredly, that for this cause only thy death happened: unhappy was the
hour, when thou did leave thy Fathers Court, to accompany the Princess
Alchidiana. After her mones and the funeral pomp accomplished, the Soldane
erected for her a most beautiful T^mbe, with a sumptuous Coronet on the top
thereof, being vpheld by two inestimable Pill^rs of engraven and gilded
Alablaster, the like whereof were never seen, since the first King of Greece.
Yet was he ignorant in the cause of her death, and Palmerin, not imagining
whence this inconvenience did arise, was so sorrowful for the death of the
Princess, as day and night he mourned for her, and at length remembering her
words to him, and doubting his unkindness to be the cause of her death, said
within himself:

Alas fair Princess, must I (at the first motion) drive thee to despair? had
I dissembled a little, or temporized the matter, thou had not fallen into
this extremity, but my only wilful indiscretion, is cause of thy loss. O
Female sex, how are you subject to casual passions? Yet need I not wonder
at this present mishappe, for from the beginning of the world, the Woman has
been so suddein and voluntary to the effect of her desires, were they good or
evil, but especially in the action of love: as neither fear, honor, shame,
torments, no nor death, could divert her from her vndiscre^te fantasies. Hereof
bear record Hyp^^mnestra, Myrrha, Deianira, Scylla, (...) Phyllis, Salmacis,
Hero and Dydo, whose deathe^ were procured only by lavish love. O divine
wisdom, that have suffered me to fall into this lucklesse accident, protect
me from any further disaduauntage: seeing thou have taken her hence, who gave
some ease to mine (...) that so lively she resembled my sweet Mistress,
(...) desire to serve with continual loyalty. I n^we (...) my self, that
this love was not accompanied with virtue, and that for my good it has so
chanced: forgette (...) not then, but so enable me, as in such badde occasions
(...) not from my duty. And such is my confidence in thy promises, as no
temptation shall prevail against me: but this ^aptiuitie once discharged, I
hope to direct my course pleasing in thy sight, and to (...) such gracious
service, as thy name (...) and glorified for ever. So long continued he in this
silent contemplation, as Alchidiana perceived him, which greatly displeased
her: but fearing any way to (...) Palmerin, she durst not say what she
thought, living in hope, that her Cousin being dead, she should now compass the
effect of her desires. Ardemia enterred in her honorable Tomb, Guilharan her
Brother with his train, and the Ladies that attended on his Sister, returned
into Armenia, where great sorrow was made for the death of the Princess, and
the renown of her beauty, blazed the report of her death through every region.

Chap. IX
How Amarano of Nigrea, eldest son to the king of Phrygia, understanding the
death of the fair Princess Ardemia* who was newly promised him in marriage:
made many grievous lame^tations for her loss. And how Alchidiana discovered
her amorous affections to Palme^in.

SO far was spread the report, of the strange death of the Princess
Ardemia, as (...) came to the hearing of (...) eldest son to the king of
Ph^ygia, the most valiant and redoubt^d knight of y^ (...): as well for his
great (...) and deeds of Arms, which he before that time accompli^^^d in
Asia, as for his affable nature, virtue and courtesy. This young Prince, being
in the King his fathers Court, and hearing commended beyond al other Ladies of
the East, the fair Ardemia Daughter to the King of Armenia, at the very
sound of the Trompe of this blazing Goddess, and setting the news down for
true, from her affecting speech, he became so amorous of her, as he had no
content but in thinking on her. Hereupon, he sent his Ambassadors to her
Father, to request her in marriage, whereto right willingly he condiscended, and
now at the instant, when he intended to go visit her, news came to the Court
of her admirable death, which for a while was (...) from him, because each one
doubted the conceit (...) would cause his death. For they knowing the love he
(...) her to be so vehement, as he understanding her strange kind of death,
they thought it impossible, but it would (...) to very scandalous
inconvenience, yet in the end he (...) thereof: but to set down here the
grief, tears and complaints of this young Prince, is more then I am able:
(...) it therefore suffice you, that his sorrows were such, as every hour his
death was likewise expected. It was likewise told him, how through the envy
of Alchidiana, she dyed, and that (for certainty) she was one of the
cheifest causes thereof: which moved him then into such an alteration, as he
swore by the great Prophet Mahomet, to revenge her injury, so that the Solda^e
should for ever remember the danger in suffering so great a treason. In
conclusion, he intended to take with him, two hundred chosen Knights, all clad
in mourning for the grief of their Master, and ^oure of his Brethren, Knights
of great hardiness and so well they iourneied, as they ^ame within twenty
miles of the (...) Court. But that we may not too far (...) from our
intent, Alchidiana, joyful (as you have heard) for the departure of Guilharan
and his (...) Palmerin (...) to all lovers, such account she made of her
beauty and riches, as she imagined that Palmerin would not disdain her: but
rather would repute himself happy, to have that at his pleasure, whereof so
many Kings and great Lords had been denied. And in this opinion, the next
time that Palmerin came to her Chamber, she began with him in this manner.

Now Sir Knight, what think you of the death of Ardem^a, who so falselye would
have seduced you to go with her hence? did she not commit great treason
against me if she had prevailed? but right well is she rewarded, and as I
desired. Think then no more of her presumptuous folly, or the ridiculous
conceit of her vain love, which she made her pretense, to cause you forsake
my Fathers Court: where you have received so many special honors, chiefly
of his Daughter, who loves you dearly, and in^^nds to make you Lord over all
her possessions. Believe me Sir Knight, if hitherto I deferred to acquaint you
heerewith, it was in respect I doubted her: but now she being gone, esteem
henceforth of me as your own, and to begin this alliance, I honor you with
all that is mine, and my self to be disposed at your pleasure. For my heart
which is only subject to you, applies it self to your lyking, and can wish
nothing but what you will (...). How long have I desired this happy day? how
often have I contemned and despised my self, in not daring to break the seal
of my affections, which now I (...) adventured to your knowledge? As for that
which now troubles me, is the want of your speech, which the Gods have
deprived you off, being envious of your manifold perfections. Alas my Lord,
why did they not endue ^hee with that benifit, that in declaring my desires,
thy answers might return reciprocal pleasure.

Some in their love delight themselves, with embracing, kissing, and such
ceremonial behavior: as for me, amo^rous, private and (...), I repute a
(...) content. Yet has Love one shaft in his (...) then all these, being the
only argument of each others resolution: in respect whereof, I commit my
honor into your protection, prizing, esteeming, and choosing you above all men
in the world beside. Palmerin exceedingly abashed at these unseemly speeches,
knew what signs to make for his answer, and having recourse to his only
comforter, li^ting his eyes to heaven, thus privately inuocated. My God,
deliver me from this enemy, and suffer me not to fall in consent to this
temptation, for I think her a Devil incarnate, and sent to deceive me.
Impossible is it that a maiden, by nature modest and bashful, would let slip
such effronted words and audacious. The conceit hereof so vexed and offended
him, as the Princess feared he would have dyed: not with conceit that like hap
might come to Alchidiana, as did to Ardemia, but because he should so wickedly
sin against his own soul, and falsefie his love to his sweetest Mistress.
Yet knowing that this sadness would not satisfy the Princess, he feigned to
swoune, his color changing in such sort, as one would have judged him past
recovery. Alchidiana was so grieved heereat, as we could not imagine what to
say: but seeing that Palmerin seemed now not to understand her, and before
had by signs (...) revealed his meaning, said. By our great God, it may well
be^ said, that this man is a huge lump of flesh, which the devil has
enchaunted to torment me withal, or else some other shaddowe and resemblaunce:
for he refuses what all men desire, yea, and often despair, because they
cannot (...) it. But fearing least her end would imitate her Cozins, or that
the dumb Knight should die in her presence, she (...) presume no further: but
threw her self down upon a Pallet, not able to speak her stomach was so
enraged. Which Palmerin perceiving, arose out of his feigned trance, and
giving a great sighe, departed the Chamber, (...) own. The Princess seeing
him gone, (...) to (...) and lament very greeuouslye, and in midst of her
n^elancholy, fell into these speeches. You Gods, how can you suffer one so
contrary to nature, as is this dumb Knight, ^o live among men? Can you behold
that he whom I delivered from death, brought into y^ grace of my father, and to
whom I have done more honor then had he been mine own Brother, will not
regard me? but against all reason, disdaineth, refuses, makes no reckoning
of my dolours, and sets at naught my earnest entreaties? Ah indiscreet and
careless Girl, thy folly at this time too much ouerruled thee, that knowing
thine own estate and high lineage, would submit thy self to love one
unknown to thee, and of whom thou can have no answer, more then of a
senseless stock or stone. If I can now learn to hate thee, it will be some
comfort to me: but the more he iniurieth me, the more am I devoted to his
love. Then again she contraryed her self in this sort. Yet seeing it is so,
ungrateful* wretch that thou a^t, I will cause thee (ere it be long) to repent
thy (...). In this anger she continued all the day, not (...) forth of her
Chamber, intending (...) utterly to despise him: but the first time she saw
him again, she reputed him so lovely, fair and gracious, that (to dye) she
could not with him any harm, but loved him much better then before. Yet to
cover her own inconstancy, she sent him no more presents, nor did him such
(...) as she was accustomed, which Palmerin well perceived: but he could
dissemble it in such sort, as the Princess hardly might decipher him. For he
(...) had made to his deceased Father, to send his Brethren to Constantinople,
in whose company he might travail thither, and so escape the Turks and
Moorish (...).

Chap. X.
How Amarano Prince of Nigrea, came to the Soldans court, to accuse A^chidiana,
as causer of the death of the fair Princess Ardemia her Cousin.

DUring the time that the Prince^^^ A^chidiana (...) the Princess Ardemia, and
if he made such lamentat^ons, when he but heard of her death, what judgment
may be set down of his mo^^s, being now at the Sepulcher of his best
beloved. Ah inconstant Fortune, quoth he, why would thou not permit me to
see her living? Ah Ardemia, accomplished with admirable beauty, great was her
sin, wh^ envying thy perfections, procured thy cruel death yet this is my
comfort, that I shall come time enough to revenge thy undeserved (...), and he
that dare gainesay me, with her the author of thy tragedy, shall receyu^
such condign punishment, as shall remain for ever in mem^ri.

These complaint^ delivered with exceeding sorrow, his Brethren persuaded him,
that such behavior (...)

(...) I have left my Country, and adventured into your presence, to accuse
your Daughter Alchidiana, whom (^o please you) to call before this assembly, I
will charge, (...) she by false and spightfull hatred, as a most cruel and
disloyal Lady, traitorously murdered her Cousin the Princess Ardemia. And
because this v^^lainie has hitherto been concealed very secret, in respect
it could not easily be verified: I am here ready to prove in open (...),
against any of your Knights that dare maintain her cause* how the treason
before rehearsed, was committed by her: in revenge whereof, she ought to be
rewarded with sharp and shameful death.

(...) part whereof (seeing the pride of the Prince of Nig^^a) wo^ld furiously
have run upon him, saying, that he should repent his folly: but the Soldane
offended thereat, caused a Herald presently to proclayme, that on pain of
death, no one should harm or offend the Prince, nor any in his company, and
whosoever did otherwise, should presently die for breaking his commandment:
then ^raming his speeches to the Prince, said. Amarano, now may thou behold
my Daughter before thee: disburden the grief of thy mind to her, and justice
shall be done thee to thine own desire. Imagine, quoth the Prince, that such
as know you Madame Aldhidiana, will not a little marvel, seeing you
accomplished with such gracious beauty, that you should so far forget your
self, as to commit treason. But because a matter so unlikely, demands as
hard a proof, I will auerre with mine own person in Combat, against any one
that dare support your quarrel, that you are guilty in the accusation already
alleged, and principal cause of the death of the Arminian Princess your
Cousin. To revenge such famous wrong, I have forsaken my country, traveling
night and day, and have presented my accusation before your Father, with this
condition: that if your Knight shall be vanquished, you are to be punished as
a cause of such weight requires. If it he may fortune to be foiled, and your
Champion victor, I shall yield my self as conquered, and demand no better
recompense, for it can not grieve me to remain with her body, whose very
remembrance (...) in this manner. Alchidiana, you have heard the speeches of
the Prince, advise your self well of your answer^ for which of you both shall
be sound attainted in the crime, be it Le^e Maiestaris, or other (...)

Chap. XI.
How Pa^merin seeing that none of the Soldans Knights would adventure for
Alchidiana against Amarano, eaterprised himself her cause in combat. And how
the Queen of Tharsus sent him a sumptuous helmet.

ALchidiana having heard the (...) of Amarano, and that he (...) sp^ken (...)
of her in the present of the (...) with maruailous anger and disdain,
returned him this answer. Amarano the most rash and (...). Knight that ever I
saw, I wonder how thy folly could make thee so audacious, to come and accuse
me of treason (against all truth) before my Father and his (...). But thy
speeches well noted and consider^^, show nothing but careless youth, (...),
and too va^nglorious conceit: chiefly in this, that thou armed (...), and
accompanied with so many well appointed Knights, come in this sort to molest
a poor maiden, who never to thee or thine committed any offense, but all
serviceable honor, especially to her, on whose behalf than offerest the
combat. As for the valor thou reputest in thy self, that (...) which this
slander does encourage thee withal, (...) thy hartinesse and resolution of
heart, thou ought rather oppose against a Knight able to answer thee, then
a siely Uirgin, who has no weapon but her honor wherewith to defend her
self. I confess I am a Lady, but not traitorous or false, as thou auouchest,
yet of so noble courage, as were I of thy sex, thou never should depart
this Hall, before I had that conspyring head from thy shoulders, to witness
thy falshoode and maleuolent spirit. Notwithstanding, as I am, so please my
Lord and Father, with a Kitchen cudgel I shall let thee know, that thou
dotest in thy speeches, and against thine own conscience chargest me, with the
murder of my Cousin. Examine thy thoughts, what likely reason might induce me
to such an offense? If she was fair, thanks to our Gods, mine own talent is
so good, as I need not envy her beauty. If she made account of her rich
dowry, I being sole heir to the Signories of the Soldane, might judge my
self far beyond her, being desired in marriage by many Kings and Princes,
whereof I am well assured she never had the like. I know not then what cause
should any way induce me, to request her death. But what need I make such
pr^^estations to thee? seeing that by some one of my Fathers (...) thy pride
will be abated, and I revenged of the injury thou have done me. Amarano not
aunswering her a (...), spoke to the Soldane in this sort.

It is not decent my Lord, that a Prince or Knight of quality, should stay on
the words of a Woman so little considerate, who more by anger then virtue,
thinks to reprove and annihilate a (...) accusation. Wherefore, according to
the agreement (...) determined, call for the knight that dare undertake the
quarrel of your daughter, to whom I will manifest in plain Combat, that what
I have, said, is truth: and if he be vanquished, your Daughter Alchidiana,
and he shall be burned together, as the greatness of the offense well
deserves: contrariwise, if Fortune deny me success, I will request no other
justice, then what shall please you to appoint for me. Maulicus seeing that
well he could not deny the Prince, though to his grief, pronouced the
sentence, that his Daughter that day should present a Knight, to sustain her
cause, according to his conditions alleged. This hard prescription, made never
a Knight willing to adventure the Combatte, so much they feared Amarano, for
the great report they heard of his prowess, but stood all silent, as though
themselves were condemned to death. Alchidiana seeing the courage fail of so
many Knights, whom she esteemed for men of great account, knew not to whom
she should have recourse: and therefore overcome with exceeding sorrow, but
that her Ladies assisted her, had twice or thrice swouned before her Father.
Palmerin beholding her, and knowing that his refusal was greater cause of
Ardemiaes ^eath, then the injurious words of Alchidiana, pityed her estate,
and having before his eyes the love she bare him, the great honors was done
him for her sake, and the pustillanimitie o^ the Soldanes Knights, was so
moved, (...) forgetting all danger, and his dissembled dumbness, which
hitherto he had so cunningly observed, as though he had been borne in that
Country, he thus began in the Arabian tongue. (...), unworthy henceforth
the name of Knights, how can your hearts endure, that a proud and presumptuous
Prince shall come into your (...) to accuse your Lady and Mistress, and not
one of you daring to defend her right? By the celestial powers, (...) may you
be accounted heartlesse men, and (in suffering this wrong) to be deprived of
all noble titles, and to be sold in the market as slaves and villains.
Think you the Prince Amarano is come hither for any other intent, then to
make trial of his great hardiness? Can you be destitute of reason, and so
easily abused, as to think (...) Princess Alchidiana, whom nature has so
worthily (...) with beauty, and with whom no other may make comparison, could
be provoked to murder Ardemia, for this only occasion, because she was fair?
And you Lord Amarano, for a matter so slender, have you enterprised to blame a
Lady so virtuous, as is the Princess Alchidiana? I accept the Combat on her
behalf, auouching, that shamefully and without reason you have accused her,
behold me ready likewise to maintain in open field, that falsely and
maliciously thou lie in thy throat: in witness whereof, there is my gage,
and I beseech your highness affoorde us presently Judges, that may discern
the issue of our Combat. I take thy offer, quoth the Prince, and before the Sun
set, will give thee the payment that belongs to such a frollick^ companion.

Who can now imagine the joy of Maulicus and his Daughter, seeing him whom
they reputed (...) by nature, thus to recover his speech? assuredly they were
all so amazed, that they thought Mahomet had come from the (...) to perform
this miracle. The Soldane thus surprised with unspeakable comfort, forgetting
the majesty of his person, (...) Palmerin in his arms, saying: Ah, (...)
Knight, h^we may this be? dream I? or does but my fancy delude me with your
speech? O Maho^et, for ever be thou praised for this great grace. By the
highest God, I am more joyful of this good fortune, then (...) I (...) the
fairest Island in the Mediter^^^ean Sea. Now will I dismay ^o longer (...)
Daughters fortune, seeing that you take her quarrel in hand, and for her sake
will com^at with Amarano: with all my heart I grant you the Field, and think
that my Daughter will not deny it. But tell me, noble Friend, how you have
so happily recovered your speech. Palmerin abashed that he had so forgotten
himself, knew not what excuse to make, nevertheless, ^eeing now there was
no remedy, and that the (...) thrown could not be recalled, imagine^ some
likely ^^militude of his sudden speech, saying: I promise you, my Lord, that
the cer^itude of your Daughters i^^ocencie, and the great grief I conceived,
seeing your Knights so cowardly and faint in courage, moved me into such
cho^ler, as the Catarr^, which of long time has hind^red my speech, dissolved
it self, and ^^th given my tongue liberty to reveal, what I was enforced to
bewraye before by signs. And this is not a thing altogether strange, for I
have heretofore read in Histories, that a Knight called Aegle Samien, dumb
from his birth, when one of his companions would usurp the honor of a
victory, which justly appertained to him, was so enraged and incensed with
displeasure, as that very passion, with the help of the Gods, restored his
speech. And thus has it happened to me, for which I honor their names with
immortal thanks, not so much for my speaking, as that I may now declare my
earnest aff^^^ion to do you service, and fair Alchidiana your Daughter, to
whom I am so greatly indebted, for the manifold honors she has doo^^ me
without d^sert, as I shall never be able to recompense. Ah my noble friend
quoth the Soldane, this liberal offer for the defense of (...) Daughters
honor contents me in such sort, as both she and I (...) to requite your
pains. Amarano (...) at the brave disposition of Palmerin, but specially at
the great honor Maulicus did him, knew not well what to think: and did not
fear and reproach overrule him, I think he^ would have deferred the Combat
till another year. Notwithstanding, to cover his new opinion, he be thought
him of a pretty subt^ltie, and said. I beseech your Maiesti^ to tell me of
whence this dumb Knight is, to whom ou^ Gods (by miracles) have restored such
brauing language. I^ is necessary that I know what he is, and whence he is
descended, because the fight being enterprises for two such Princesses, as
sometime was fair Ardemia and your Daughter present: if he be not the Son
of a King, as ^ am, he may not be permitted the Field with me. Amarano,
answered the Soldane, I know not what he is, for (...) this time he has
continued dumb in our Court: to him therefore you shall frame your demand,
for this opinion I hold of him, as he will answer you nothing but truth* but
if you go about so cra^tily to excuse your self, each one may judge that in
you which but ill beseemes (...) of a noble man, that is, to be double in your
speech. And (which is more) he being a Knight as good as your self, you may
not refuse him, because you demanded the Combat against any Knight in my
Court, and in your challenge made no exception. Persuade your self (quoth the
Prince) that if he be not the son of a King, he shall not enter the Field
against me: therefore if he be none such, he has not to meddle with Arms
in this cause, and so the fight on his behalf is finished. If thou make such
doubt, said the Soldane, ask him the question thy self, I hope he is able to
resolve thee in these subtle cauils and sophistical questions.

During this contention, there entered the Hall a fair young Damsel, bearing
between her hands a goodly Helmet, the richest and most beautiful that ever
was seen, and falling on her knees before the Soldane, with such gracious
salutations as stood with her duty, she demanded which was Amarano of
Nigrea, who had accused his Daughter, and which was likewise the dumb knight*
who enterprised her defense. Maulicus without any other inquisition, showed
them both to her, whereupon the Damsel arose, and coming to the Prince, thus
began. Amarano of Nigrea, the Queen of Tharsus my Lady and mistress being
certain that this day thou would be in this place, sent me hither to
advertise thee, that the dumb knight is of higher lineage then thou art, and
such a one he is, as the greatest Lord or Prince may not compare with him in
bounty. And if thou will know the certainty of his descent, more then any
other as yet does: she advises thee (for thy profit) to desist from the
Combat whereto thou have challenged him, in defense of thy false accusation
against Alchidiana. And further she does admonish thee, that if thou do not
as she commands, the knight late dumb, surpassing all other in knightly
chivalry, shall overcome thee, and thou shall not be able to stand against
him. Damsel, quoth the Prince, you may answer your mistress, that ouerlate
she sent me her counsel, and I am not accustomed to give credit to such
sorcerers: besides, I will not loose mine honor at the simple words of a
Woman I know not. And it does not a little content me, that this knight is
such an one as he should be, wherefore, being so sure of his bounty, I am the
more desirous to Combatte with him, to make experience of his renown: yet this
I still maintain, that what I have spoken is true, and thereon we will
presently enter the Feeld, so please the Soldane to give consent. Maulicus
seeing the day was too far spent, adiornde if till the day following,
wherefore the Prince withdrew himself to his lodging, reposing great
confidence in his own strength, and after his departure, the Soldane taking
Palmerin by the hand, said. I know not my Lord how I may acknowledge the
honor you do my Daughter, whom I esteem as mine own self: but if the Gods
afford me life, I will devise some rich recompense, as I hope shall return
your own content. Then the Damsel sent from the Queen of Tharsus,
approaching to Palmerin, presented him the Helmet, saying. Noble and virtuous
knight, the Queen saluteth you with this taken of her good will, in
remembrance of your special loyalty, whereby you delivered the Prince
Maurice, for which she so much remains yours, as you shall command her any
service hence forward, albeit she could have wished him longer torment, that
proved so unfaithful to her. She likewise desires you to wear this Helmet in
fight with Amarano, for it will greatly avail you, and more then anyother: for
such is her hope, that after you know this present service, you will not deny
her one request, which one day she intends to crave of you. Palmerin taking
the Helmet, answered.

Fair Uirgin, most humbly thank the Queen on my behalf, and tell her that
wheresoever I am, she shall find me ready to fulfill any thing she will
command. The Damsel departed, and made such speed, as in short time she
came to the Queen her Mistres, whom she acquainted with her whole message:
whereof she was very joyful, especially of Palmerins great courtesy, whom she
began to aff^ct very greatly.

Chap. XII.
How Palmerin entered the Combat with the Prince Arma^ano of Nigrea* whom he
slew, and the great honors the Soldane and his Daughter did him.

THe Princess Alchidiana hearing the words which the Queen of Tharsus
cano^ell reported before the Soldane her Father, being likewise glad that
Palmerin was of so noble parentage, and so ^enowned in the region far thence
distant, began to love him more extremely then ever she did before, and
resolved with her self, that seeing for her sake he vndert^ke the Combat,
he bare her more secret affection then he durst bewray, and in this opinion
she practiced how to co^ferre with him again, which this day she could not
compass, because he was continually with the Souldane. But when Palmerin
took his leave for that night, the Princess had a little leisure to thank
him for his honorable kindness, and how glad she was that the Gods had restored
his speech again. Soon after she sent him a most sumptuous golden Armor,
desiring him (for her sake) to wear it in the Combat: which Palmerin
thankfully accepting, assure^ the messenger that he would sufficiently revenge
his Ladies injury. In mean time, the Soldane commanded his Knight Marshall to
see the field prepared in readiness, and the Scaffolds for the Ladies
provided, and to have two thousand Armed men in place, for defenc^ of his own
person. All which the next morning was duly executed, the Soldane appointed
two Kings, and Amarano his two brethren, Judges of the field: who going to
their te^t, and all the nobility to their appointed places, expected now the
issue of the fight. The Ladies came to their standing, among whom Alchidiana
showed like fair Vesper among the other stars, and soon after came the two
Combattants, so bravely and richly appointed, as nothing wanted that could ^e
imagined, especially Palmerin, before whom a King bare his Helmet, and the
great Admiral of Assiria his Sword, and so bravely did he manage his Horse,
with such sightly behavior and gallant countenance, that each one judged he
had learned his knowledge before he came thither into Turkey: and cause
Maulicus to persuade himself, that the victory was destenied to him. In the
end, that they might the sooner begin the Combat, the Judges took their
seats, commanding silence through the field, which was pestered with
wonderful resort of people: and then the Heralds fulfilling their charge, gave
liberty to the Champions to do their deuoire. Palmerin clasping his Helmet,
gave the Spurs to his Horse, and encountered Amarano with such fury, as they
were (...) dismounted headlong to the ground: but Palmerin (...) to be so
^oyled before the Soldane, recovered himself quickly, and aduaunting his
sheeld, gave Amarano such a found stroke on the head with his Sword, as made
him stagger in great amazednes. Notwithstanding, his courage (...), as well
declared he had (...) ^^rokes. Which when the Pol^^ces two Brethren be held,
they were mar^ailously ^bashed, for they imagined that through the East parts,
(...) Knight might be sound to equal him, wherefore one of them said. I
thought my brother would have dispatched this companion at the first encounter,
but seeing he has held out so long: no doubt be^ is more expert in Arms, then
we at first made account of him.

The two Kings were somewhat moved with these words, willing him to be silent,
until such time as the end was determined. Amarano hearing what his brother
had spoken, offended with himself because he could not overcome Palmerin,
began to encourage himself, and albeit he was sore wounded in many places on
his body, yet he followed his intent so nobly, as taking his sword in both his
hands, he stroke Palmerin so violently on the Helmet, as made him set one of
his knees to the ground to save himself. But he perceiving that if he had
many such blows, it would return his disadvantage, intended to play double or
quitte, and remembering the honor of his Mistress Polynarda, he ran with
such valor on Amarano, as clea^ing his Sheelde in two peec^s, cut away a great
part of his arm. The Prince feeling himself so maimed, began to faint,
hardly enduring to defend his enemies strokes, which Palmerin perceived, and
chased him about which way him listed, first here, then there, where best the
Prince had hope of safety: but all these delays little auayled him, for
Palmerin left not till he got him down, when Amarano thinking to hel^e
himself, drew a little packet Dagger, and therewith thurst Palmerin under the
short ribs, which wound so moved him, as renting his Helmet from his head
immediately smote it from his shoulders, Pa^merin being then so glad and well
disposed, as though he ha^ but no w^^e entered the field, took the head of
his enemis by the hair, and presented it to the Princess Alchidiana, (...).
Madame, I now think my self acquite^ of the promise, which I made to my
gracious Lord your Father, for here is that conspyring head that first accused
you: bethink your self therefore, if there be anything else to be (...) for
you, because I remain here ready to accomplish it.

The Princess exceeding joyful for this worthy victory, answered. Truly my
Lord, you have done so much for me, that although my Father, my self, and
all my friends should bequeath our lives to your service, yet could we not
recompense the very least of your noble courtesies, cheefely this one,
surpassing all the other, and beyond our abilities to remunerate. Yet let me
entreat you to carry the Traitors head to the Judges, that they may censure
my innocence in this slander, and whether the accuser has not received
condign punishment. Which he did, and threw the head before the Princes
brethren, whose greef^ exceeded measure for their brothers ill fortune, and
taking ^ppe the head with the body likewise, they caused it to be sorrowfully
conveyed forth of the field. Immediately was Palmerins Horse brought him,
whereon he mounted, and was conducted with great pomp by the two Kings that
were the Judges, and other mighty Princes, as well Ca^^ffes, Agaz, as
Taborlanes, to the gate of the Palace, where the Soldane (to do him the
greater honor) attended in person his coming, the like he never did before
to any king or Prince, how mighty soever he was, and therefore his Subjects
maruailed not a little hereat. Palmerin would have (...) him reverence on his
knee, but he would not suffer him, for taking him in his arms, he thus said.
For ever (gentle Knight) be the honor of thy victory against our (...), and
the false accuser of our Daughter* for which I (...) so bound to thee, that all
the dignities (...) I am able to give thee, may not counteruaile (...) des^rts:
therefore I will remain so much at thy disposition, as I and mine shall be at
your command. So (...) him by the (...), he conducted him to his Chamber, (...)
where himself h^lpe to v^arme him, commanding his Chirurgio^s to be so
careful of him, as of his own person. Thus leaving him to have his wounds
dressed, he returned to the great Hall, where he found his nobility attending
his coming, to whom he said. What think you my Lords of our state, if our
Champion had been foiled? I had been the most forlorn and abject Lord in
all Assiria, to have been forced to do justice on mine own Daughter. But
thanks to our Gods, he delivered me from that ^aunger, therefore marvel
not, if (beyond my custom) I welcomed him with reverence and honor: for one
that renowmeth himself by virtue and prowess through the whole world, ought
to be so entertained, rather then such as live in vain pomp and glory,
whispering deceitful tales into Ladies ears. Neither can you (in my
judgment) honor him sufficiently, because my Daughter and me he has
sheelded from death, expulsed our ignominious slander, and slain our false
accusing enemy, to make us live in perpetual fame and memory. The most part of
them well (...) his words, and confounded with the remembrance (...) their
shame, when they (...) not enterprise the Combat for their Lady, knew not what
to answer, but fearing to grow in further offense, sought how to change his
mind to some other talk.

Alchidiana being all this while in her Chamber, prepared her self to go
visit (...), not knowing how to shape her (...), for fresh bewraying of (...):
for the Goddess Juno, when she stood before Sir Paris for sentence of her
beauty, was not more sumptuously adorned then the Princess. Now be (...)
she to dispute in her thoughts, the honorable grace^ of Palmerin, his
nobility so far renowned, his knightly prowess and magnanimity, whereof
herself had so good experience, as she resolved never to have any other
Husband. Then (...) she of her Ladies, how she might (...) her Knight, if her
head ^yre (...) orderly, if her (...) were tressed as they ought, and if her
garments were brave enough. For conclusion, the lovely Maiden knew not how to
dispose of herself, to gain his love she so earnestly longed for.

In this equipage she goes to see her Friend, and in his Chamber she finds
her Mother, who hindered her languishing Daughter, from discovering her
sickness to him, that only had the power to help her: wherefore living in
hope of some better opportunity, for this time she smothered her greefes so well
as she could, finding other talk with her Ladies, least her mother should
suspect her.

Chap. XIII.
How the brethren of Amarano, would have buried his body in the Tomb with
Ardemia, which Alchidiana would not suffer, but constrained them to carry him
home again into his Country.

AMarano thus slain, his Brethren) according to his charge thus given them,
before he entered the Combat) took his body, and with great mourning they
brought it to the Princess Ardemiaes Tomb, thinking to bury him there with
her: but Alchidmia advertised hereof came presently and entreated her Father,
that he would send an Herald to the Brethren of the vanquished Prince, to
charge them not to leave the body of Amarano in his Dominions, for if they
did, he would cause it to be burned as a Traitor deserved. Moreover, that they
themselves should depart within four and twenty hours, on pain of the
danger should ensue by their default. For good Father (quoth she) if you
should permit their boldness, it will be great blame and dishonor to you:
in that it is commonly known, with what great pride and arrogancy he came to
your Court, thinking to injury your good report, and either to shut me from
your presence for ever, or else with open scandale to end my life. The Soldane
well regarding her words, willingly granted her request, whereupon the
Princess Brethren were certified of the Soldanes pleasure, by a Trumpet:
whereat they maruailed not a little: but seeing they could no way remedy it,
they said. Herald, it is reason that your Lord should be obeyed within his
own territories, nevertheless you may say unto him, that the cruelty he
shows to a dead body, is very great, and against all equity, which he
hereafter happily may repent. So opening the Tomb again, they took forth
their Brothers body, and the Princess Ardemiaes likewise, conuaying them into
a Litter of Cipres, to keep them from corrupting, and thus returned with them
to Phrygia, where the Princes death was greatly lamented, but chiefly by the
aged King his Father, who seeing his Son dead before him, after many dolorous
passions, thus complained. Ah Fortune, how cruel do thou show thy self to
the mighty, as well as the meanest? Ah my Son Amarano, too dear have thou
bought thy love to Ardemia. Wretched and despised old man, how unfortunate
art thou among all other? For when thou perswadest thy self to have joy and
comfort by thy Sons, thou find the chief cause of sorrow and discontent.
O death, thou suffer me too importunate. Yet if the Soldane had granted
thee burial, where thou did desire it before thy death, the less had
been my grief. But soon shall I cause him repent his hard dealing, and
revenge thy death with sufficient requital. The second brother to Amarano,
named Gramiel, seeing his father in such extreme heaviness, assayed by all
means he could to comfort him: promising in the presence of all his Knights,
with all possible speed to revenge his Brothers death, and so did all the six
Brethren solemnly vow together. Which speeches did somewhat comfort the aged
King, who commanded the bodies of the two lovers to be taken from his
presence, and for a perpetual memory of his Sons death, he caused a
sumptuous monument to be made of marble and Porphire, whereon was graven the
cause of their unhappy death. All this while, Gramiell, who undertook his
Brothers revenge, gave charge to the people round about him, as also to the
Kings and Princes of Suria, who were then enemies to the Soldane, to prepare
themselves in readiness, so that within a Months space, he had assembled a
power of five thousand hardy Soldiers, himself being appointed leader and
general over them. In this sort they took themselves to the Feelde, hoping to
ruinate the Soldanes Country with fire and sword: but they were better
entertained then they expected, as hereafter shall be largely discoursed.

Chap. XIIII.
How Alchidiana overcome by vehemency of her love, offered her self to
Palmerin as his wife, and of the answer he made her.

Remembering what has past in the chapters before, we may not forget, how by
the message of the Queen of Tharsus sent to the Soldanes Court: Alchidiana
(who began as it were to despise Palmerin) was constrained to renew her love:
thus conferring with her self, that if so great a person as the Queen of
Tharsus, commended, esteemed and honored him, having never seen him, the
better mean had she, being daily in his company, to practice the
furtheraunce of her earnest desires. She therefore continually awayted
opportunity, to discover the fire newly raked from the embers, and which day
and night consumed her with languishing: but so well it came to pass, that not
many days after the Combat with Amarano, he came to visit her in her
Chamber, right joyful of the talk he had with the Sultan, as concerning the
provision of his strength, to go ruinate the City of Constantinople, which
gave him hope of his return to Allemaigne. Alchidiana, having courteously
saluted him, and showing better countenance then before she did, caused him
to sit down by her, and soon after began in this sort.

I desire you, Sir Knight, by the reverence you bear our God^, and the ^ayth
you owe to her, for whose love you took the enchaunted Crown from the Prince
Maurice: to tell me your name, what your Parents be, and of whence you are. For
I swear to you by the honor of a Princess, that the guerdon you shall
receive in so doing, is my heart, having once conquered those desires that
long have tormented me: intending to make you Lord of my self, and all the
possessions of the Soldane my Father, without any sinister meaning, you may
believe me. Consider therefore good Knight, that without fear or
dissimulation, I have told you what nearest concerns me, if then you desire
not my present death, make answer as honorable duty requires, ballancing
in your own thoughts, how vehemently the impressions (...) love have touched
me: in respect that now I have twice for your sake, exceeded the limits of mine
own regar^, (...) of my passions. But seeing our Gods have been so
favorable, as to restore the thing was erst taken from you, and likewise has
brought you into her company, who loves you dearer then her own life: show
not your self so hard of nature, to fly the hour that Love and Fortune
presents you withal. Therefore ^y only beloved Lord, in recompense of your
sharp Combat with proud Amarano, receive me as your wife, whom you have
woorthily deserved.

Palmerin seeing himself assailed by so fair an enemy, who could sooner
bring in subjection an other Hercules, then ever did Iole, and as easily give
life to a statue of Marble, as Venus sometime did, at the request of Pigmalion
the Caruer: was in marvelous affliction, having before him, on the one side,
fear to offend God, on the other, the loyalty he ought his Mistress, and
then the (...) death of Alchidiana, if he denied her. In the end, remembering
what the Sultan had spoken, concerning his voyage to Constantinople, he
devised by this mean to (...) her such answer, as she should rest contented,
and neither God nor his Mistress be offended, he thus began. (...) and most
excellent Princess, (...) I am assuredly pe^waded, that there is not any
Mon^rce or Prin^h so noble in all Asia, but might reckon himself among the
happiest, in respect of your perfections and invaluable riches, to espouse you
as his wife. By far greater reason, I that am poor, a Knight errant,
unknown, and whose life you have saved, may say, and name my self above all
other in fortune. But knowing my self to simple, and of so slender deserving
toward you, I esteem it impossible for the Gods, and nature likewise, to
lift me to so wonderful (...) of happiness. Wherefore, seeing the cause
such, and greater then I can desire or imagine: likewise that it is (...) to
your commandment, (...) I were (...) any favor of Fortune, and to be (...)
among the most ungrateful Knights in the world, i^ may any thing I should
disobey your pleasure. My reason is, that you (being reckoned as chief among
the most perfect and accomplished Ladies) deigne so much to abase your self,
as to make me Lord of your love, which has been desired by so many worthy
personages.

For these causes, most gracious Mistress, I am bound to love you above all
other Ladies living, which henceforth I hope to do, and loyally to serve you
with my uttermost endeavors. And as I ought (sweet Madame) to love none but
you, so is my duty to hold your regard in cheifest commendation: therefore
will I with such secrecy, as so honorable a conquest will permit, conceal
this extraordinary gra^e. And had I not this morning made promise to your
Father, to accompany his power Constantinople, there to revenge the death of
your deceassed uncle Gamezio, soon should our love sort to wished effect, and
I gather that sweet flower, which above all other would beautify my Garland.
Notwithstanding, my hope is such, that in this voyage I shall do such service
to the Soldane your Father, as at my return he will recompense me to your
content, and good lyking of his Princes and Subjects: which may no way now be
moved, least his mind otherwise busied, should conceive displeasure against
me, and so all our fortune for ever squandered. In this respect (sweet Madame)
if ever hereafter I shall do you service, let me entreat you to patience till
my return, resolving your self in the mean while, that I am more yours then
mine own, and dedicate my life to your gracious service. As concerning the
rest of (...) demand, my name is Palmerin d'Oliua, and what my Parents are,
the Queen of Tharsus within these three days will tell me more, then hitherto
I could understand by any, when you shall understand more of my estate and
Country also: but so far as I yet gather by mine own knowledge, my ^iscent
is from Persia.

This excuse he made, because Alchidiana should not suspect him to be a
Christian: and with this answer she was so joyful and contented, as nothing
was able to inspyre more cheerful life into her languishing soul, which
Palmerin perceiving, and the better to continue her in this opinion, very
often he kissed her hand in sign of his affectionate obeysaunce, and in this
sort he departed to his own Chamber, leaving the Princess triumphing of her
conquest.

He was no sooner come into his Chamber, but solicited with the remembrance of
his Lady Polinarda, he imagined how she blamed him with mournful complaint^
for his late promises: which thought so diversely afflicted him, as he spent all
the rest of the day in tears, and as she had been present, humbly
requesting her to pardon what had past him, in respect he did it not
willingly, nor gave any consent with his heart thereto, but dissembled the
matter, least the Princes by his denial should fall into despair: and rather
then he would violate his solemn vow to his gracious Goddess, he would
adventure on infinit^ dangers. Yet did this feigned answer to Alchidiana
greatly avail him, and caused him to be more honored then even he was
before: as also to be continually accompanied with her presence, whose only
delight was in daily beholding him.

Chap. XV.
How the Soldane having determined to send his army to Constantinople, would
elect Palmerin his Lieutenant general: which he refused, entreating him to
give the charge to the old King of Balisarca.

NOw was the Sultan continually mindful of the promise he made to his
deceassed Father Misos, to revenge the death of his Brother Gamezio: wherefore
seeing all his dominions in peace, and that he had with him the valiant
Palmerin, he concluded to levy a mighty Army, to (...) that which duty
daily called for. And having provided a huge number of Galions, (...), Gallyes
and other v^ssels, he sent abroad to advertise all the Kings, Princes,
Califfes, and Toborlanes his Subjects, of his will and pleasure: who likewise
gathering their forces together, were numbered to be above an hundred and
fifty thousand fighting men. All this while the Soldane so favored Palmerin,
as he had bestowed on him (...), which he made but slender account of, (...)
continually expected time to see his Polynarda, Alchidinia likewise building on
his passed promises, daily presented him with many rich gifts, and practiced
all the devises she could to please his fancy: for so devoutly did the
Princesss love him, as she rather desired her own death, then to give him the
least occasion of dislyking. And Palmerin by fair and affecting speeches,
persuaded such settled opinions in her, as she held his promises with greater
pertinacie, then ever did any Logitian maintain^ his Aristotle. By this time
were the men of Arms come from all places, wherefore the Soldane calling to
Palmerin, began with him in this manner. Sir Palmerin, considering how much I
am indebted to you, my affections are so resolutely persuaded, that I esteem
of you as you were my Son, and much more then I am able to utter: not so much
for services you have done me from time to time, as for the incomparable
deeds of arms and chivalry, which makes you honored through the whole
world. Having now determined to send my forces to Constantinople, my only
hope I repose in you, and well it likes me that you bear the office of my
Lieutenant General, and principal governor of the Kings and Princes in this
expedition. Therefore my noble and approved good Friend, using your wonted
magnanimity and discretion, my people shall think well of my appointment,
referring the honor of their victory, to the general havoc and confusion of
their enemies.

Now I perceive (my gracious Lord) answered Palmerin, that by your manifold
favors and courtesies, you would deprive me of acknowledging mine own duty:
notwithstanding, in respect it is your pleasure, I would adventure the
uttermost of my life for you, which I cannot with greater honor loose, then in
your noble service. Yet, may it be spoken within compass of your highness
control, me thinks you should rather give this charge to the King of
Balisarca, a man wise, experienced, and far more skillful in Arms then I am.
Beside, your people having a man of their own nation for their head, will obey
him more willingly, and serve with much more cheerful co^rage, then under him
whom they know not, but only by your Princely and liberal bounty, which has
been such, that from the meanest estate, where fortune held me as altogether
despised, your Majesty has lifted me to the highest earthly honor. Thus
speak I, dread Lord, as not gain saying your commandment, but for this
consideration, that taking this honorable charge, the Soldiers may mutiny
against me, and so your service be altogether disappointed.

And think you (quoth the Soldane) that my people will be more obedient to the
King of Ba^isarca then to you? Yea doubtless my Lord, said Palmerin, that is
my opinion. Know then, quoth the Soldane, that for this counsel you have given
me, my love is nothing diminished toward you: for I see by this noble
regard, how deservedly you gain the favors of Kings and great personages: it
shall be therefore as you have appointed. This counsel gave Palmerin, not for
any good he wished to Maulicus, or the King of Balisarca, but (desiring nothing
more, then the ruin and general destruction of these Heathen hounds, sworn
enemies to Christ and his Servants) to rid himself of that charge, which
would bring him so great and shameful report, to ^ight against his Lord and
maker: therefore premeditating on all these inconveniences, he but expected the
mean to get footing in Christendom again. Maulicus thus contented with his
answer, the King of Balisarca was appointed general of his Army, yet he
gave commandment that Palmerin should be reverenced among them, as the second
person to himself, and on pain of death none to offend him. As all this
strength was ready to take shipping, news came to the Court of Gramiell and
his brethren, what slaughter and spoil they made through all Assiria, whereat
the Souldane being greatly offended, seeing his provision against Christendom
thus changed, came to Palmerin, and said. My Son, what think you of our
enemies? What shall I do to these followers of their Brother in pride? I pray
you counsel me in this necessity. Palmerin perceiving his desire prevented,
was overcome with maruailous passions: yet to hide his discontent from the
Soldane, he thus answered. Seeing it has so fallen out my Lord, that without
any summons our enemies have presumed upon us, I think it most expedient that
your Army provided in so good readiness, begin first with these arrogant
inuaders: for I doubt not, their attempt being so treacherous, and the courage
of our men so resolute, but they shall dearly buy their presumptuous
adventure. A matter soon begun, will be as soon ended, and our shipping
ready, we may afterward set forward to Constantinople, for this will be a
good whetting to our stomachs, to deal with our enemies of greater multitude.
This counsel was accepted, wherefore it was immediately proclaimed through the
field, that every man should be ready to depart within three days.

Chap. XVI.
How the Prince Olorico, son to the King of Arabia, came and offered his
service to the Soldane, bringing with him five hundred armed Knights, and of
his entertainment.

SOmewhat before the Soldanes Army was ready to depart, the Prince Olorico,
eldest son to the King of Arabia, came to the Court, and with him five
hundred Knights, so hardy, brave, and comely personages, as both for the Court
and the war, better might not be imagined. This young prince reputed among the
most valiant of his time, hearing report of the rare beauty of Alchidiana,
under color of offering the Soldane his assistance, determined to behave
himself so bravely in his court, that by his liberality and honorable
actions, he would obtain the Princess to his Wife, wherefore being come to
the Court, and having done his obeisance to the Soldane, he began in this
manner.

Right mighty Lord of all Assiria and Palestine, having of long time heard
your great forwardness to the increasing of our faith, cheefely of the last
honorable council you held, to revenge the death of your famous deceased
Brother Gamezio, whom our Gods now entertain at their celestial banquets: I
took my self to travail, with advised resolution to do you such service as
might stand with my ability, and your pleasure to command. And for I now
behold, that my arrival is in a time so fortunate, I celebrate their names
with immortal thanks, assuring your Majesty so far to stretch my
endeouurs, as the son that is beunde by duty to his Father. The Soldane who
had heard great report of his bounty and valor, his Father likewise being
one of his friends and confederates: after he had made him very gracious
welcome, thanked him for the succor he brought him, and henceforth he would
not esteem of him as a stranger, but as his Son and most especial Friend.
All this while Palmerin noted the behauior of the young Prince, and judging by
his complexion that he was of better nature then the other Assirians, began
to affect him, so that after the Soldane had given them all the good night,
Palmerin accompanied the Prince to his Chamber, where they could devise no
other conference, but of this new and warlike enterprise, which made Olorico
demand of Palmerin, if he should go in those affairs. That will I verily
(quoth he) if sickness or prison do not withhold me. Let me entreat you
then, fay^e the Prince, to do me so much honor, as to accept me for your
companion. Whereto Palmerin right soon condiscended, and then began such a
league of am^^y between them, that it endured to the death, as you shall read
hereafter. But because it was now late, they took their leave of each other
till the next morning, when Maulicus would have Olorico dine at his Table with
Palmerin, where wanted no provision that beseemed so great a person, being now
set forth in most rich and honorable pomp. The Tables being withdrawn, the
Prince began the dance, thinking to see fair Alchidiana: but he was
deceived, for she kept her Chamber in her amorous opinions, and would not be
seen till the appointed day, when the Army should make show in open field.

This day the Soldane went to order the battle, and to appoint the wings and
squadrons, which made Alchidiana likewise take delight so walk abroad with
Palmerin, who was now in maruailous sumptuous Armor, bearing a sheeld of
Sinople, with a bar of Gold figured therein, signifying his inward joy, that
in so short time he should get from these barbarous and unchristian helhounds.
Before them went two young Lords bareheaded, and behind a great number of
Ladies and Knights, so rich in apparrel^ as could be devised. Being thus
brought to their Palfrayes. Palmerin began to carri^e and brave with his
Horse before the Princess, who took no little delight in her supposed lover,
and riding along with him, fell into many discourses, nothing tending to
Religion as I guess, but such devout service as love teaches his Scholars. In
the midst of their communication, came the Prince Olorico, so altered with his
affection to the Princess, that they which have felt like assaults, might
easily judge the cause of his passions. Having made two or three humble
reuerences to her, he offered to kiss her hand: which she would not permit
him, excusing the matter so modestly, and wishing his welfare as her own, that
he imagined himself greatly favored.

Palmerin regarding the afflictions of this new come lover, and that he might
give him the better mean, to devise with her so privately as he desired, turned
his Horse to the other side of the Princess, thus speaking to her. What think
you (Madame) of the gentle succor which my Lord Olorico has brought your
Father? believe me, the courtesse is so surpassing great, as your self ought
especially to thank him, if it were but for his forwardness, in qualifying
the haughty courage of Amaranos brethren. Doubtless (quoth she) his company
is to be esteemed, and among ten thousand Knights, hardly may be found so
brave men as is in his troop, in recompense whereof, I will not deny the
Prince any thing, that he with honor will request of me. Olorico perceiving
this sudden invention of Palmerin, returned him many thanks, and after the
accustomed dissimulations used in such causes, albeit Love had for a while
deprived him of speech: earnestly beholding the rare beauty of the Princess,
he thus began. Madame, although I should do to my Lord your Father all the
services that a Knight is able to yield his gracious patron, yet the very
least of these favors, which it has pleased your excellency to bestow on
me, may be reckoned for much more then deserved recompense. Wherefore being
persuaded that my service is placed in your good conceit, I shall not
henceforth fear to put my life in hazard, so much I desire to see these
present promises accomplished: whereof you Sir Palmerin, being esteemed among
the most famous persons living, shall bear me witness, when time grants
convenient opportunity. I have promised nothing, said the Princess, but what
I will right gladly accomplish, requiring nothing but your good opinion, which
so many choice Ladies have heretofore desired. And I demand no better pay
(quoth the Prince) then her gracious favor whom I desire to please. Thus
beguiled they the time, till the Army marched forward in array, which they
fair and softly followed, till ten Pages belonging to the Princess, leading
ten goodly Coursers most richly caparassoned, came before them. Another Page
brought a seemly Lance, the bandrole whereof was the Princess colors, and a
Golden Sheeld, wherein was portraied the head of Amarano, held up by the
hair by a Knights hands signifying the victory of Palmerin against him: the
Sheeld being bordered round about with Pearls, Rubyes, Emeraulds,
Crisolites, and other precious stones of inestimable value, then began the
Princess thus to Palmerin.

My noble Friend, in this war I desire you to be my Knight, and for my sake
to bear this Lance and Sheeld, that the proud Brethren may see the shame of
Amarano. And such is my hope, that as you served the eldest, so will you deal
with the other, while one of them remains alive. These Horses likewise for the
war I bestow upon you, they being accounted the very best in Turkey, and
these will serve you well when you are in field: our Gods bearing me witness
(fair Friend) that did not my estate hinder me, and the regard of mine honor
withhold me, with right good will would I bear you company, to see your noble
and Knightly deeds of arms. And this I dare boldly say, that Hipsicratea
never followed her Husband Mithredates with greater affection, were he on sea,
or on land, on Horseback, or on foot, then I could do the noble Palmerin
d'Oliua. Notwithstanding, though my body may not be there, yet shall my spirit
be continually present, to comfort my languishing life, which will be but a
shadow of death to me till your return. But because I see many eyes are fixed
on us, all the Kings likewise taking their leave, of my father, I will leave
you to the protection of our Gods who send you happily and right soon again.
These words were coupled with such sighs and tears, as she had fallen from
her horse, but that one of her Ladies of honor stayed her.

Palmerin after he had with great kindness thanked her, kissed her hand,
saying. Persuade your self sweet Madame, your sheeld shall be shown in such
place, where his Brethren that de^ract your honor, shall easily see it, though
but little to their advantage. Thus took they leave of each other, and O^orico
likewise had the Princess farewell: then doing their duty to the Soldane,
followed the army, leaving him and Alchidiana sorrowful for their departure.

Chap. XVII.
How the prince Olorico being with Palmerin in his Tent, demanded of him if
he loved the princess Alchidiana, and of the answer he made him.

THese two Princes Palmerin and Olorico, conferring still as they rode, with
what grief and sorrow Alchidiana parted from them, and falling from one
imagination to another, they concluded to lodge together in one tent. And
because Palmerin was the better and more richly provided of all things
necessary for the field, Olorico was the more glad of his company: so the day
being spent, and the Tents pitched in a goodly plain, Palmerin invited the
Prince of Arabia to suppe with him, for the Souldane had appointed him such
honorable provision, as better he could not for his own son. The Tables
withdrawn, and spending the time a while at Chesse play, they went to bed,
where Olorico (not able to sleep) began in this manner to his friendly
companion.

Most fortunate Palmerin, how much more could I wish to resemble you, then the
greatest King or Lord in the world, to be likewise beloved of her, who in
beauty, good grace, and sweet speech, has not her like. And because my good
Friend and Brother, I have noted the specia^^ love of the Princess Alchidiana
toward you, let me entreat you to tell me, who she is you above all other
love, and intend to make your espoused Wife: vowing to you on the word of a
Prince, whosoever it be, to conceal it with secrecy, and to dissuade my
self from my love newly begun for your sake, albeit I died therefore. For
your noble mind and brave gentilitie, has gained such sovereignty over me,
as all other pleasures whatsoever I despise, only to have your company and
favor. Thus quallifying the passions, which day and night do secretly torment
me, I will set down such order, as my Father shall not need to send his
Ambassadors, nor employ any of my Friends to demand her for me: albeit for
this only cause, I left my Country in such sort as you have seen. Palmerin
hearing the words of the young Prince, and perceiving him wounded with her
love, whom he desired to be furthest from, smyling said. My Lord Olori^o, I
swear to you by the honor of my Knighthoode, I never thought of the love
which you demand, nor have I any desire to follow that humor. But true it
is, that I would do so much for her, as a Knight may for his Lady, for so
she well deserves, her favor and gentle behavior woorthye far better
ability: wherefore my dear Freende, if you will believe me, give not over
your intent, but practice to gain her to your Wife: and I promise you that I
will so move the matter to the Soldane and her, as happily may effect the
end of your desires. Yet let me entreat you to continue so just a Freende to
her, as her high calling well deserves: otherwise I had rather die the death,
then once to speak a word on your behalf. These news so cheered the Prince,
as embracing him many times, and returning him manifold thanks, he said.
Assuredly my noble Friend, I am greatly beholding to my father, who gave me my
present being: but much more owe I to you, because my estate had now ended, but
that your gracious speeches called me again to (...). My second self, having
thus lost my liberty, I despair of attaining what you have promised, and
endure a death more then mortal: but that you breath hope of success into me,
assuring me of immediate felicity and joyful days hereafter, which no
father, but so good a freende was able to do. After other such like speeches,
the Prince slept, but Palmerin touched in another sort, was solliced with the
remembrance of his lost friends: and perceiving his companion slept soundly,
he began thus to deliver his sorrows. Ah unfortunate and wretched Palmerin,
how can thy mind so long bear this yoke of servitude, only standing in fear
of death? Have thou so forgot those two perfect lovers, Trineus and Agriola,
with thy true friend Ptolome not knowing whether they be alive or dead? what?
will thou not search for them? The Emperor of Allemaigne, has not he good
cause to complain of thee, yea, and to blame thee, if his son be not
returned? Dare thou present thy self before him? Ah touch of loyalty, fair
Agriola, how iustlye may thou call me thine enemy, inuenter and first
motion of thy misfortunes? O wretched and miserable that I am, for leaving thee
so discourteouslye, I well deserve a million of torments, far worse then
those exercised by the cruel Dyonise on the Scicilians. Nor could they be
sufficient to expiate my heinous guilt, in that forgetting thee fair
Princess, I live in daily delights among these Moors and Tartars. But were I
such as I ought to be, mindful of a fault so foullie committed, I should not
live one hour in rest or quiet, till I had found my dearest Friends again.
Ah disloyal Traitor, how can thou thus waste thy time here slothfullie,
knowing the great and continual trauails, thy Lady and Mistress endures for
thee? But I vow to God, this war finished, I will not abide in the Soldanes
Court ten days, but intend to set forward to see the Jewel of of my
welfare. And were it not to my perpetual discredit, as also that I should be
judged a faynting coward, I would begin my journey presently.

Thus all the night continued Palmerin such like complaints, considering his
Friends misfortune and his own, with such deep impressions, as thence
forward he lived in marvelous melancholy, and would not delight himself,
(...) before he was accustomed.

Chap. XVIII.
Of the Combat between Palmerin, and two of A^aranoes, Brethren, whom he
valiantly overcame, and killed

FOllowing the true discourse of our history, the King of Balisarca,
Lieuetenant general of the whole Army, caused the next morning to be
proclaimed by sound of Trompet, that every man should attend on his Ensign:
and not go robbing and forraging the Uillages, on pain of death to be
inflicted on the offender. So marching on in good array, in short time after
they encamped themselves before a city, where the enemies kept themselves in
garrison: and planting themselves there for their advantage, the next morning
they determined to give the assault. All y^ night they were ordering the manner
of their battery, the Pyoners making Trenches, and such defenses as are
requisite in warlike occasions.

Every thing in due and perfect order, at Sun rising they began to assail
the City round about: following their intent with such courage and
alacrity, as with scaling Ladders and other Engines, in less then two h^wres
they got upon the walls, and (in despite of their enemies) entered the
City, murdering and expulsing the Phrygians, and sharing the spoil among
themselves. All other Cities, Towns and Uillages, that were taken by the
enemy, within six days after were recovered, they not daring to withstand
the Soldans power. Gramiell, Amaranoes eldest Brother amazed heereat, having
undertaken to revenge his Brothers death, with his men betook himself to open
Field, determining to give the Assirians, battle, and that way to make
trial of their fortune, in which resolution they came within half a days
journey of their enemies.

The King of Balisarca advertised hereof, dislodged immediately, taking
advantage of a little Mountain, which was in the open sight of the enemy.
And Palmerin who desired nothing more then the fight, that he might accomplish
his promise to the Princess Alchidiana, when he received of her his rich
Sheelde and Lance: persuaded the General, that he should the next morning
summon the Brethren of Amarano, that within four and twenty hours, they
should depart the Soldanes confines, or else endure the danger of the Sword.
The King of Balisarca aduising heereon in counsel, found it very necessary
and expedient: wherefore calling his Son, Sir Pa^merin, and the Prince
Olorico, he committed the charge thereof to their present dispatch. They
being come to the Army of Gramie^l, were immediately conducted to the Princes
Tent, who was then deliberating with his Brethren, and other Captains of the
Army. So soon as he understood the arrival of these Ambassadors, he caused
them to come before him, and their message being delivered, the Phrygian
Princes, who were of marvelous haughty disposition, answered, that they
would not obey any such commandment. Moreover, they intended to chase thence
the Soldanes Lieuetenant, even to the very Gates of his own City: for that
(contrary to all equity) he withstoode the burial of their Brothers body
in his kingdom. Gueresin, Son to the King of B^lisarca, could not suffer
such injury to his Lord in his presence, wherefore he said: that the Soldane
had done them no wrong, but received their Brother and his train with greater
honor then they deserved, and that none of them should have the like again.
So went he forth of the Pauillion, Gramiell and two of his Brethren following
him, whereof the one had been in Asiria with his Brother Amarano: who seeing
Palmerin, that all this while kept himself without the Tent, and marking his
Sheeld, wherein mockage was painted his Brothers head: he knew him immediately,
and in great rage pulling himself by the hair, said.

Uillaine that I am, how can I suffer in my presence the Traitor that murdered
my Brother? Bold and presumptuous catife, how durst thou adventure before me,
thus to deride me with thy villainie? Trust me, said Palmerin, I dare come
before thee with better assurance of my self, Then thy Brother had when he
entered Combat with me. Whereore, if thou be such a Gallant, as thou would
have me judge thee by these brauadoes, and likewise have any stomach to
revenge thy Brothers shame: Arm thy self, and an other of thy Brethren with
thee, and come to me in place convenient, where I my self will justify to you
both, that Amarano was woorthilye slain, and as such a false accusing Traitor
well deserved. I desire nothing more, said Orinella, for so was he called
that gave these hot speeches, but my Brother shall not deal with thee, till
I have tried my fortune alone: and if I fail of my purpose, then shall he
afterward Combat with thee, this provided, that thou assure me from any in
thy company, but thine own person. That will I upon my Knighthoode, said
Palmerin, thou perfourming as much on thy behalf: yet I think before the
sport be done that thou will wi^h thy fellow with thee. Thus Palmeriu,
Olorico, and Gueresin withdrewe themselves, Orinello and his brother presently
going to Arm them. and accompanied with many Knights, came into the field,
Palmerin likewise as ready as the foremost, came in with a good train of
Soldiers he had brought with him, least any treason should be wrought
against him. Olorico, showed himself greatly discontented, because he might
not accompany his Freende in the Combat: but Palmerin persuaded him, that more
needful occasions were reserved for him, which should return him greater
honor, and whom he should court in better sort then ever he did, the Ladies of
Arabia. Gramiell being very richly armed, would needs come see his Brethrens
Combat, which he had good hope would sort to their honor: but Palmerin seeing
Orinello ready to the carrire, encountered his enemy with such puissance, as
his Lance passing through his boyd, caused him fall dead from his horse
without moving either hand or foot.

Having performed his course, he returned to take his Lance out of his
enemies body, striking him with the great Trunchion end on the stomach, to
see if any life was left in him: but seeing his soul was departed to Lucifers
Palace, he coutched his stafe to receive the other Brother, who met him with
such strength, as he was well near dismounted, yet in the end he was sent
after his Brother, though many hardy strokes first passed between them.
Hereupon was such a sudden cry on all sides, some with joy, and other with
sorrow, as made the air resound their voices. And I think that the Greeks
when they received their liberty by Quintus Elaminius, made not the like
clamor: when (as Valerius rehearses) the Byrds fell from the air with the
fury of their cries. In the mean while, the King of Balisarca, having heard
hereof, came into the Field, accompanied with mani^ Lords, and conducted
Palmerin with great honor and tryumphe back to his Tent: especially the
Prince Olorico, who exceeding joyful for the good fortune of his companion,
embracing him, said. Ah gentle Palmerin, how bravely have you accomplished
your promise to the Princess? the like success heaven grant you in laboring
my cause. Believe me good Prince, quoth Palmerin, so well will I imploye my
self in that action, as I hope you shall have cause to thank me. Now to
return to Gramiell, he caused his Brethrens bodies to be conuaied thence, and
embalmed them in two Chests of lead, referring their Funeral till his
return: and with the tears in his eyes, he thus began to encite his people.
Not knowing how (my loving Friends and Countrymen) to animate your minds
sufficiently, with remembrance of the tirannie, exercised by the Soldane on
the body of my Brother and your Prince: unhappy occasion presents you with a
fresh memory of revenge, seeing these two young Princes, the beloved Sons of
your King, so shamefullye slain in your presence. For this cause, dear
Friends, that each of you may take a new courageous spirit, to morrow to
encounter these effeminate Assirians: let us all be resolute together, and
cause them to understand, that you, who have lead your lives in the Deserts of
Africa, much better know how to manage Arms, then such loyterers in their
Mistresses Chambers, who can do nothing but before their Ladies.

Heerevpon two hundred Knights aduaunsed themselves before him, swearing and
undertaking, to bring Palmerins body to him the day following: and therefore
all that might they prepared themselves, strengthening their Sheeldes and
Armor, and all other things necessary for the fight, thinking the next
morning by Sun rising to bid them battle, these knights inuenting to
ambush th^mselues, as you shall hear. Palmerin being brought thus honorablye
to his Tent, called for the Chirurgions to visit his wounds, which they found
so easy to be cured, as they assured him of speedy recovery. He then
^mmoning the whole Counsel together, advised them, that in his opinion he
thought it expedient, to dislodge that place about midnight with bag and
baggadge, and so to coast the Mountain, feigning a fearful departure. For
(quoth he) the enemy advertised of our retire, will imagine that we despair
of our success, by reason of the death of the two slain Princes.

Thus our dissembled flight, will cause them disorderly to pursue us, which we
will suffer, till espying our advantage: when returning valiantly upon them, I
dare gadge my life we shall either kill them down right before us, or at least
drive them to a shameful foil. This devise was generally allowed for good,
and at the hour appointed was executed. By chance this morning Gramiell came
among his men very early, and understanding the Soldans power was departed
with such silence: presentlye cried alarm, charging all his men to follow
them, for he doubted they would enter a City near at hand, which was so
stronglye fortefied, as they should never entise them forth to skirmish,
therefore he desired to prevent them of that help.

Hereupon the Horsemen galloped after them amain, crying: upon them (my
Friends) upon them, the day is ours. Palmerin, the Prince Olorico, the King of
Balisarca, Gueresin his Son, with a thousand men at Arms, seeing how they
were disordered: returned upon them, and made such a slaughter among the
Phrygians, as the Field was covered all over with their bodies. Gramiell,
seeing, that of the first sallie not one came back again, set forward with
his battle, wherein he had a thousand Horsemen, and furiouslye runnning on
the Soldans power: by misfortune he met with the Prince Olorico, to whom he
gave such a cruel stroke on the head, as had almost set him beside his
Saddle. Olorico greatly discontented heereat turned valiantly toward his
eneme, and between them continued a very dangerous fight: but in the end,
Gramiells Helmet being cut from his head, he began to despair, when
Olorico following his intent, nobly at one blow smote his head from his
shoulders. This mishap was seen by one of his younger Brethren, who running
fiercely with his Lance against Olorico, was suddainlye prevented by
Palmerin, in that he stroke him beside his Horse, where he was trodden to
death with the trampling of the Horses.

Then came forth the two hundred swoorne Knights from their ambush, who had
undertaken Palmerins death, and him they hemde in so subtillie, as he was
brought into very great danger, Which the Prince of Arabia beholding, made way
through the thickest to assist his Freende, after whom followed Gueresin with
an hundred Knights: without which supply, both Palmerin and Olorico had been
slain, for their Horses were killed under them, and they enforced to fight on
foot. But when they beheld this fortunate succor, their courage nobly
increased, and then began the sharpest encounter, for the wings on either
side approached, the Archers and Crossebowes likewise, sending their Arrows as
thick as hayle among them, so that the battle endured till dark night. Then
the Brethren sounded the retraite, for which the King of Balisarca was not
sorry, having so ouertrauailed himself that day, as he could no longer ^itte
on Horseback: notwithstanding, before he would enter his Tent, he saw the
Field^ assured, the watch placed, and all the Soldiers planted in good order.

Chap. XIX
How the Brethren of Gramiell, with all their train, took themselves to
flight, and how Palmerin suddenly pursued them with his power, and took them
prisoners.

Immediately after that these two Phrigian princes had thus sou^ded the
retrait, and considered how they had lost five of their brethren, three in
single fight with Palmerin, and the other in the battle, the greatest part of
their power likewise almost utterly dismayed: to know the certainty of their
strength, they commanded a division to be made of the whole and wounded, and
seeing how small their number was, they concluded not to stay in any place, til
they came to the Realm of Pasmeria, whereof Maurice was King, and their
kiseman, from whom Palmerin took the enchaunted Crown, where they thought to
supply their want, with men active and able to Arms.

The next day, the king of Balisarca raunged a thousand men in order, to give a
fresh assault on the enemy: but he was suddenly advertised by his espiall,
how the Phrygians were fled. He not a little glad of these news, sent word
to Palmerin thereof, who though he was sore wounded, Armed himself,
commanding his Captains to provide six thousand men presently, to go see
the certainty of these tidings. With this strength he joined the Kings power,
and so went to the ememies Camp, where they found no resistanuce, nor any but
such as lay greeuonslye wounded, of whom he enquired which way the cowards
were fled: which the poor Soldiers reporting to him, he vowed to follow
till he ouertooke them. The resolution agreede upon, between the King of
Balisarca, and him with ten thousand light Horsemen he determined to pursue
them: and the King to stay there with the rest of the Army, to recover the
Towns again to the Soldane, which before had been taken of the enemy, and
to be in readiness with assistaunce, if he should happen to stand in any
need.

While Palmerin made election of his company, a horseman was dispatched with
these news to the Soldane, how the enemies had been foiled, and of their
flight. The messenger being come before Maulicus, and the Letter open and
read, how valiantly Palmerin dealt with his enemies: before all his nobility,
the Soldane said. By all the Oracles of Delphos, I may well persuade my self,
that whersoeuer Palmerin is for us, we are assured of the victory. The
Princess having heard these news, sent for the messenger, and after she
understood by him, how Palmerin bare her Sheelde in the face of her enemies,
and had slain in Combat two of Amaranos Brethren: she was marvelous joyful,
and rewarded the Messenger so well for his pains, as for ever he might extol
the bounty of the Princess.

The Messenger dispatched again with the Soldans Letters, brought speedy
answer to the King of Balisarca and Palmerin, of their packet: wherein the
Soldane hartylie thanked them, desiring them to follow their fortune. Palmerin
understanding the will of the Soldane and Alchidiana, and how they desired him
to pursue the Brethren of Gramiell: determined to set forward next morning,
aduertising the Prince Olorico thereof, that he might put himself in
readiness. But notwithstanding all their diligence, their enemies got before
them into Pasmeria, where they rested themselves, in hope to be assisted by
their Cousin Maurice. And he was given to understand, how the dumb Knight named
Palmerin, followed them: wherefore he commanded them to depart his Realm, for
he would not aid them against his dearest Freende. This repulse drove them
into great despair, yet seeing they could not help it, they were constrained
to make a virtue of necessity, and so secretly as they could devise, by
little and little stole toward their own Country. Maurice hearing how
Palmerin was come into his Realm, rode three or four days journey to meet
him, and entertaining him with exceeding honor, offered himself, his people
and substance to his service. Palmerin very thankful for the Princes
kindness^, would nothing but certain Horses of him, because diverse of his
own had miscarried. By this time were the Brethren entered the confines, which
belonged to the Admiral of Tharsus, where they had done very much harm, by
exactions and great misusing of the people. This Admiral was a very gentle
Knight, and named Alfarano, which seeing what injury they did him, and
understanding that they had been conquered, and now fl^dde without any place
of assurance: leueyed an host of hardy Soldiers, wherewith he intended to
keep a strait, through which they must of necessity pass, being so narrow
as they could pass but two together: and no way else could^ they escape him,
except they would climb the tops of the Mountains.

In this place lay the Admiral ambushed, with so many men as he thought
convenient, and within three days after, Pa^merin with his power came to
assist them. The Phrygians having heard hereof, were greatly amazed at this
unexpected adventure, and had no other help but to climb the Mountain, where
in wholes and Caves they were glad to hide themselves: and there they continued
five or six days in safety, albeit they were ready to die for want of
sustenaunce. Palmerin foreseeing the incommoditie of the place, and that they
could not escape him, nor needed he any further to follow them: caused the
Mountain to be environed on all sides, thinking the end hereof would be
such, as indeed it afterward proved to be. For these poor distressed men,
having neither food or other provision, came forth of their Caves, and
assembled together on the side of the Mountain, where entering into conference
of their estate, some gave counsel to go fight it out, but other (better
advised) would not consent thereto, for better is it (quoth they) to yield our
selves to the mercy of our enemies, then to adventure our fortune where no hope
of success is to be expected.

Heereuppon they concluded, and the two Brethren of Gramiell were the first
that unarmed themselves, and coming in this manner to Palmerins Tent, thus
they began. Noble Knight Palmerin, more fortunate then any man in the world,
we, Brethren to the renowned Prince Amarano, whom thou have with thine own
hand slain, and three other of our brethren likewise, whereof the noble
Orinello deserves speech, all sons to a King, and themselves heretofore
worthy accomplished Princes, though now ^oyled and consorted with the dead:
we (noble Lord) more certain of thy clemency and courtesy, then any
successiue end of a battle so unreasonable and desperate, come to yield our
bodies and goods to thy disposing, desiring thee to pity our estate, and
regard the works of Fortune, so whom thou art Subject as well as we. Beside,
that the more shall greater persons be praised for honorable favor, then by
using rigor and unnatural cruelty, which makes them every where hated and
despised. When Palmerin saw them so humble, considering his own estate, and
how time might frown on him, returned them this answer. Now (my Lords) have
you done wisely, to lay by Arms, and submit your selves, for otherwise your
destruction was at hand. Notwithstanding, in respect you have thus yielded
your selves to me, I entertain you into my safe defense, assuring you peace
with the Soldane, so that you swear your faithful love, and do him homage.
So gave he them in keeping to one of his Knights, whom he especially
trusted, and returning to Alfarano, in recompense of his wrongs and loss
sustained by the Phrygians, gave him all their spoil, and the ^aun^^me of all
the Knights taken prisoners. The Admiral humblye kissing his hand, desire^
him to rest himself in one of his Cities, which was within five or six miles
of the place: which gentle offer Palmerin would not refuse, because he was sore
wearied with travail: wherefore by the Admiralles appointment, the Palace was
provided for Palmerin and his Freende Olorico.

Chap. XX.
How the Queen of Tharsus came to see Palmerin, in the City belonging to
Alfarano her Admiral, where by the mean of an enchaunted drink, she
accomplished her pleasure with him.

HHere our History wills us to remember, how in our former discourse was
mentioned, that the Queen of Tharsus sent a rich Helmet to Palmerin, and at
the Damoselles return, was acquainted with his singular composed feature, rare
courtesse, and Knightly chivalry: the report whereof, caused her amorously to
affe^t him, and in such vehement manner, as she determined her onwn death,
unless she might enjoy his lovely company.

Which the better to compass, she discovered her desires to a cunning
Magitian, he by whose means she (...) the Helmet to Palmerin: who gave her
such an (...) powder, as Palmerin drinking it in wine or otherwise, should
soon after become so forgetful of himself, as the Queen might accomplish
whatsoever she desired. He likewise did reveal to her, the several loves of
Palmerin and Olorico, which tale made her more earnest in following her intent.
And understanding his arrival in the Realm of Pa^meria, concluded in person
to go see him: furnishing her self with all things necessary, both rich
Tapestry, and great store of Gold and Silver plate, habillements, precious
stones, rings and invaluable Jewels. With these she adorned her Knights,
Ladies and Gentlewomen to the uttermost, and when she had finished her train
to her own liking, she set forward with such expedition, as within three
days she arrived at the City where he was, but first she advertised her
Admiral of her coming, that he should imagine nothing by her sudden
presence. The Admiral so joyful hereof as could be devised, in that by this
mean he should the more honorably entertain his guestes: acquainted
Palmerin and the Prince Olorico therewith, who likewise were exceeding glad of
the news, especially Palmerin, desirous to know by her his offspring.

Therefore in most magnificent order with their men at Arms, and the Admiral
Alfarano, they rode to meet the Queen for her greater honor: who by the
special intelligence was given her, knew Palmerin among them all, in that he
marched foremost with the Prince Olorico and the Admiral of Tharsus. She
regarding in him far more singularities, then sparing report had acquainted
her withal: after that Palmerin had saluted her with very great reuer^nce, as
he was not to learn courtly^ courtesy, the Queen requited him with a sweet
kiss, and thus began. Sir Knight, the fairest beyond all other that ever I
saw, well worthy are you to be esteemed among the most happy, being able
to win the love of Ladies that never saw you. Advise your self well of this
great favor, and what a precious Jewel you receive of them, in requital of
your service, or acceptaunce of any amorous contentment. Then wonder not not,
(Gentle Knight) if to see you I have left my Country for beside your great
valor, bounty and loyal^ie, which never can be sufficiently commended, your
beauty, affability and most rare perfections, deserve not only the love of
the greatest Lady and Princess, but their continual service likewise, if
they but consider their own duties. If then your virtues and gifts of nature
are of such value and merit, what may she imagine of her self, who is your
only Lady and Mistress, and above all other is honored with your faithful
service, as well records the memory of the burning Crown? Palmerin hearing
himself so commended by such an excellent Queen, blushed with bashfulnesse,
and humbly shaped this answer. Madame, so far unable am I, to deserve the
love and good will you bear me, as never will Fortune favor me sufficiently,
to recompense the least part of this princely kindness. Yet hereof (fair
Queen) you may assure your self, that you have a Knight so forward in your
service, as nothing shall with-holde him from executing your commandment,
though the penalty of my life were joined thereon. Trust me (quoth the Queen)
your behavior promises no less then you speak off, and if I have taken any
pain for you, I think my self now thorowlye satisfied: let it suffice you
then, that I account my fortune not the least, having gained such place in your
good opinion. These and such like speeches passed between them, till they came
to Alfaranos Palace, where they spent the rest of the day in diversity of
pleasures: the Queen entreating Palmerin and Olorico the next day to dine
with her in her lodging, where she intended honorably to feast them. The next
day at ten of the clock, these two young Princes came to see her, finding her
in a goodly Hall, which was richly hanged with does of Gold, and therein
^^oode a Cupboorde, garnished with the most costly plate that ever was seen,
for the basest piece was clean gold, imb^lished with precious stones, beside
diverse other inestimable strange Cups, and Glasses of Agatha. What their
service at Dinner was, I leave to the judgment of Ladies desirous of favor.
Yet this I dare say, that the ^iands were so rare and exquisite, and abounding
in such plenty, as though s^ee had them daily at command. The Tables
withdrawn, the Qu^^ne took each of the Princess^ by the hand^, and ^^tting
down between them, with a sweet s^iling countenance began thus.

I pray you gentle Knights, to tell me which of you is most affected to the
service of Love, and follows it with greatest endeavor: gladly would I be
resolved by you, albeeit I know the certainty as well as your selves. Madam
(quoth Palmerin) if you have such knowledge of our affections, well may our
answer he excused. Uerie true, said the Queen, especially you, of whose
loyalty the Prince Maurice is so notable a witness. Notwithstanding which of
you does most mistrust the attainment of her grace, to whom he is most denoted
in love, let him not give over the pursui^ of his desire: but rather let me
entreat you to continue your love with much more seruencie, as to those
renowned Ladies, who by their virtues and graces, do woorthily cha^lenge you
from all other: for I dare assure you such a successiue end of your love, as
with especial content you shall finish your (...) desires.

If the (...) joyful of this assurance, it is no question to be dema^^ded,
chiefly Olorico, who till then disp^^^ed: but now so happily resolved, gave
place to Palmerin, who was desirous to confer more privately with the Queen,
therefore in the mean time he devised with (...) Lady, and Palmerin seeing the
occasion so fit, began his tale in this manner. I cannot forget, fair Queen,
when you sent your (...) to me at the Soldans court, that after her message
(...) she said to me, y^ you were acquainted with further secrets concerning
my estate. For this cause, I entreat your highness, if you do not imagine
me too importunate, that it might please you to acquaint me with my Father
and Mother, for that above all other things I most desire. The Queen amazed at
this demand, thus answered. Know (gentle Knight) that what the Lady in this
matter said to you, as also what my self even now promised you, comes not
from me, for one of my Knights acquainted me therewith, he being the most
skillful in the Magical sciences that is in all Turkey. As now he is returned
into his own Country, and no other answer could I get of him: but that you
are the Son of the most loyal redoubted and valiant Prince in the world,
whom before you have any further knowledge of, you shall deliver from death,
and that very shortly. Beside you love a Lady, who in all perfections of
nature, fortune or spirit, has not her equal.

In sooth (quoth Palmerin) I shall account my self right happy, to deliver my
Father from such danger, and Heaven I beseech that it may so be. On these
terms came Alfarano, and the dancing began, which constrained them to break
of talk, and step into the dance, in which delight they spent the time till
Supper was summoned, till which advertisement, they were so well, as was Ogyer
the Dane in Faeria. For never was Dido such an affectionate ^^ditrice of
Aeneas, recounting the ruin of the Trojans, then was the Queen of Tharsus to
Palmerin: toward when her heart was so enthralled, and with secret fire so
wasted and consumed, as does the Wax before the fire. Being s^t at the
Banquet, Palmerin and Olorico on the one side, and the Queen and Alfarano on
the other, the Tasters attending on them were two Ladies, who had in charge to
give the one the sleeping and dangerous drink, and to the other, the amorous
and delicate, yet in effect to provoke forgetfulness. So well did the Ladies
discharge their office, and the Princes took this mixed drink so
substantially, as they could hardly forbear sleeping at the Tables wherefore
every one arysing, the Queen (...) the (...) to Alfarano, who presently went
to his lodging. The^ ^ere these two sleepie Princes conducted to their chamber,
where being in bed, they slept soundly, and the Queen coming to them,
accompanied with those trusty Ladies that waited at Supper, took the Prince
Olorico, conuaying him to another bed, for he was so charmed as he could not
awake.

Afterward the Ladies departed, and the Queen went to bed to Palmerin, whom
she abused at her own pleasure. A matter not to be esteemed fabulous, in that
other have been brought into the like case, as well may witness Brangiena,
who endured these sweet skirmishes, because she should not manifest the
History of Ysuel her Mistress, and Tristram. The Queen having satisfied her
unchaste desire, caused Olorico to be brought into his place again, and then
returned to her own Chamber. But now this enchauntment loosing his operation,
a fantasy appeared to Palmerin, resembling his Lady Polynarda, who said: Ah
Palmerin, disloyal Traitor and adulterer, how much are they deceived, that
repute thee a loyal and faithful Lover? Ah wretch unworthy of so good a
name, having so injuriously forgotten me. Do thou not consider thy great
offense, committed against the God of heaven: meddling with a Woman more brute
then brutishness it self, and thy disloyal treason against my self? Be
assured, that if thou presently forsake not her company, I will never forget
thy fault, but chastise thee continually as a dissembling reprobate. So she
departed, Palmerin entreating her to pardon this iuiurie, which she would not
hear, but floong away in great anger: and he awaking, brake forth into these
speeches.

Ah unhappy wretch that I am, thus to loose the gracious favor of my
Mistress. These words awaked the Prince Olorico, who embracing him in his
arms demau^ed the cause of his sorrow; but Palmerin was so surprised wish
(...) he would make no answer, but fell from the Bed in a swoune. Olorico
fearing he was dead, cried out for help, whereat the Queen arose, and casting
her night Mantle about her, came to know the occasion of this clamor: and
finding Palmerin breathless, she called for so many present remedies, as
extinguished the passionate fit. Palmerin seeing the Queen so near him,
clothed himself immediately, and departed the Chamber, commanding all his
people to provide themselves, for he would depart thence within an hours
space. Neither could the earnest entreaties of the Queen, nor courteous
persuasions of Alfarano, cause him to stay till Dinner time: but his carriage
being sent before, and his men attending him, he came to take his leave of
the Queen, who very sorrowful for this strange accident, said to him at his
departure. Noble Palmerin, my heart attainted with such extreme grief, as the
sight of you does somewhat remedy; expected further hope of ease by your
presence: but seeing your departure may not be withstoode, I pray you
vouchsafe to wear this King for my sake, and keep it safely, till my
messenger bring you another like unto it. Madame (quoth Palmerin) being unable
to remunerate the great honors you have done me, I will not deny you so small
a request, that I may the better fulfill the bond of allegiaunce, wherein I
stand bound to you while I live. Go then in the safe protection of the Gods,
quoth she, for thou have left me such a recompense, as all my life time will
be joyful to me. Palmerin not understanding ^er dark speeches, departed,
putting the King on his finger, being the most rich and curious piece of work
that ever was seen: for in it was a goodly great Rubie, cut in faces, so
lively as could be de^ised, which shone so brightly, as in the night time it
sparckled great light. The Queen like wise, (...) she had given great riches
to the Admiral, returned to her Country, leading thenceforwarde a very
chaste and continent life, ^nely for his sake, by whom (...) self conceived
with Child. And at the time appointed, b^ nature, she was delivered of a
goodly Son, resembling his Father in brave constitution: whom the mother
caused to be named Palmendos, as well in memory of his father Palmerin, as
also of his Graundsire Florendos, from them deriuing his name, as being the
only flower of Chivalry. And as Palmerin was virtuous, so did his Son
follow him in all bounty, prudence, magnanimity, loyalty, liberality,
courtesse and humanity: in brief, he had all the noble virtues that a Child
might receive from his father, as you may at large perceive in his History.
But because his deeds as yet serve not to our purpose, we will leave him
growing under his mothers charge, and return to them whom lately we left.

Chap. XXI.
How Palmerin, to color his intended and desirous voyage into Christendom,
persuaded the Soldane to send his Army to Constantinople, and what followed
thereon.

Greatly desirous was Palmerin to return toward the Soldane, and therefore
would not make his way by Pasmeria, but iourneyed thitherwarde, where the King
of Balisarca stayed his coming, who came to meet him with all the Lords and
Captains of his Army. Thus having brought the Country in quiet obeysaunce of
the Soldane, with their prisoners they returned toward his Majesty, sending
word before of their speedy coming. The Soldane was not a little joyful of
these tidings, as also of the fortunate victory against his enemies, wherefore
he left the City of Calpha, and determined to meet them at a Castle of
pleasure, which he had lately edifyed, cheefely because he would see the good
order of his Army, which was now conducted in better equipage, then before was
wont to be seen in Assiria. The King of Balisarca caused the captives to be
led before, who (by his commandment) when they came in the Soldanes
presence, threw their Armor to the ground, and three times fell on their knees
kissing the ground, prostrating themselves before him with great reverence. All
these ceremonies finished, Palmerin, the Prince Olorico, with the other
Governors of the Feelde, came, and kissing his highness hand, he
entertained them very graciously: and after he had embraced Palmerin, he
would needs ride between him and the King of Balisarca. In this order rode
thy on to the Palace Gate, where his Lady Lethea and Alchidinia her Daughter,
trickt up in vestures of surpassing value, attended their coming: and after
the accustomed reuerences on all sides, entered the great Hall, where the
Princess taking Palmerin by the hand, before her Father and all his Barons,
thus spoke.

Sir Palmerin, so well is your prowess and haughty deeds of Arms known to
every one, as my praise cannot extol them to advantage: notwithstanding I
dare say before my Father, and all his Lords here present, that he is so much
indebted to you, as he can n^uer return sufficient recompense. These words
uttered with such affection, were noted by every one, especially the Prince
Olorico, when Palmerin made this answer to the Princess. Madame, here may
you behold the Prince of Arabia, one of the best Knights that ever I knew, and
who has done more service to your Father and you in this war, then any
other beside: for with his own hand he slew Gramiell, who was chief leader
of the Phrygian Army. Beside, such and so many have been his rare exploytes,
as no one that I know may be equalled with him. And all this he admitteh to
your favor, wherein he earnestly desires to continue, so please you to
accept him for your Knight: delivering this assurance before hand, that
hereafter he will adventure his life in your cause, whersoeuer it shall like
you to command him. For this cause (Madame) you may not refuse him, being the
man that among all the Assirians, does best deserve to be your servant.
Alchidinia, who well understood to what end his speeches tended, and the
occasion why Palmerin thus spoke, advised her self well, and returned this
answer.

So help me our Gods, I know well that the Prince Olorico is so puyssant and
renowned, as any man of whom I yet heard: notwithstanding, I hope the Soldane
my Father will not be ungrateful in the knowledge thereof, and that
sufficiently I dare awarrant ye. But I desire you fair sir, to tell me how
the Queen of Tharsus entreated you, and what is your opinion of her? In good
faith, Madam, answered Palmerin, she is one of the most honest and virtuous
Ladies that ever I came in company withal, and to whom I greatly desire to do
any service. You have good reason, quoth the Princess, in that she came so
far to see you, and discover her love: which other could as well accomplish,
as good, or rather in honor beyond her, if they might hope of any ease in
their passionate desires. Palmerin feigning to understand her meaning, entered
into other kind of talk, until supper time, which finished, each one
returned to their Chamber, when the Prince seeing himself alone with his
Friend, thus said. Ah my dear Freende Palme^in, how worthily may you be said
to be without compare, in all perfections that a Knight ought to have, love
only excepted? yet herein (if I be not deceived) you do for me against all
reason, for a thousand times are you more beloved, then your self can love
any. Notwithstanding, for this default, if so it may be named, and for (...)
words this day used in my presence to Achidinia, I remain vowed to your
service: for in truth you know not the good you did me, supporting my
imperfection of speech when I was before my Mistress. Yet know I not whence
such imbecilitie should proceed, if not by being ravished with regard of her
celestial countenance, my over labored spiri^e forsook me, and being too
much tormented in this languishing body, abandoned all the parts sensatiue,
placing it self only in mine eyes, which never could imagine themselves
satisfied, contemplating beauty of so rare and especial estimation. And were
it not that my hope only consists in you, comparing my small desert, and the
excellency of my Lady, long ere this had my soul forsook her unfortunate
habitation, which so indiscreetlie fell into these oppressing passions. And
this I earnestly entreat you to let her understand: in that I fear least she
impute my happy alteration, to want of wisdom and civility. Trust me, quoth
Palmerin, I promise you my uttermost ability, and so much will I do, as one
Friend may for another, to discharge my self of the promise which heretofore
I made you.

And let me entreat you on mine own behalf, to remove that opinion of
special love, which you report the Princess bears me, being not such as you
do imagine: for (noble Prince, and my dear Freende) you need not despair of
the benefit whereof I have so solemnly assured you. After many other speeches,
they slept till the next morning, when clothing themselves in their richest
garments, they went and gave the good morrow to the Soldane, who very
honorably thanked them: and Palmerin espying convenient occasion, thus began.

My Lord, you have sufficient experience, that by the bounty and great favor
of the Gods, you have obtained victory against your enemies, to the no little
content of your Subjects: all which being so happily finished, base were the
thought, to fear the perfection of higher enterprises. Therefore my Lord, I
think it expedient, so it may stand with your good liking, considering your
provision for the sea is in such readiness, your people likewise acquainted
with your intent, before we meddle with the Brethren of Amarano, came daily in
troops to offer their service: that now you send your Army to Constantinople,
for your answer once heard, right soon will we embarke our selves, and set
forward on our voyage. For the rest, I pray you deliver these prisoners to be
used as your slaves: but as for the Princes, I think (having seen the fortune
of their Brethren, and their own badde success in Arms) that they will serve
you with continual loyalty. My Son, quoth the Soldane, let all be done as
you have appointed, for such is my confidence in you, that your intent cannot
but sort to good end: wherefore my Galleys and al things ready furnished,
depart when you please, having first sent your Soldiers abroad.

The Prince Olorico being present, offered again to go in this voyage, with
like number of men, as he brought against the Brethren of Amarano: for which
the Soldane greatly thanked him, promising him such satisfaction at his
return, as should agree with his own content. Alchidiana taking in ill part
the words of Palmerin on the Prince Oloricos behalf, sent for him to come
speak with her, which he did, and finding her very sad and melancholy, he
demanded if any one had done her displeasure, and what the cause might be of
her pensiveness. Ah my dear friend, quoth she, how can I but be agreeued,
seeing no one Lady in the world, has so many contrary fortunes as my self?
Alas, my heart has chosen you for my only Lords and Friend, thinking to find
place worthy my conceit, and that your love would answer me with the like:
but in ought I can perceive, I am too much beguiled, for you, either as
ungrateful or careless, use affecting speeches to me, importing no other
end, but that in leaving you, I should take the Prince Olorico for my Husband.
Do you imagine me so mutable and inconstant, that I will or can love any other
but you? or that my affection entirely settled so high, can brook such a
downfall, as to like the man so much inferior to me? And (which most of all
offends me) not contented to mock me, in disdaining my known love, so
discourteously would persuade me to choose another? Let all our Gods be judge,
if I have not just cause to complain of you, albeit I have greater cause to
hate and despise my own self: for in that I have more then deserved your
love, yet (as too much unwise) I cannot consider, that in the heart of an
ungrateful person, love has no place of certain abiding. But seeing our gods
have in such sort subjected me, as (against my will) I am constrained to love
mine enemy: in vain were it for me to resist against them, that they
beholding the unspotted love of the one, may in the end punish the ingratitude
of the other. Th^s thinking to continue longer speech, so many violent sighs
intercepted her, as she was not able to proffer one word more, whereby Palmerin
enforced, thus answered. I beseech you Madame, cross me not with these
needelesse words, for although the Prince is so worthy to be loved, as any man
that ever I saw: yet were I very much unprovided of wit, and a mere stranger
of good consideration, if I would refuse that special felicity, then which I
can desire no greater.

I know (sweet Lady) that you love me entirely, persuade your self then,
that my loyalty is no less, nor can death make me gainesay the promises I
have made you: and were it not to the great disadvantage of mine honor, to
leave the honorable war your Father has intended, which might procure each
one to misconceiue of me, assure your self, that I would forsake dignities,
Arms, and all, to do you the service you worthily deserve: all which at my
return, fear not, shall be effected. So well could Palmerin dissemble the
matter, as the Princess was somewhat better pacified, and taking his leave of
her, returned to the Soldane: before whom he caused to be brought, the
Princes and Lords that were prisoners, and at his request Maulicus gave them
liberty, with this charge notwithstanding, that they should serve him in his
war. Which that they might the better accomplish, he commanded them horse,
armor, and all other things necessary, making all possible speed could be
devised, that his army might set forwards to sea.

Chap. XXII.
How Palmerin sailing with the Soldanes army, was brought by tempest into the
Sea of Allemaigne, where he took landing with the prince Olorico.

QUickly Palmein consented to embarke the Army, desiring the Prince Olorico to
accompany him to the Haven, to make choice of the best vessel for themselves:
and suruaying them all, they found a goodly Carricke, new and very well
appointed, wherein many prisoners lay chained, which had been taken by the
Soldanes galleys, and other Rouers of the Moors, of whom Palmerin demanded
what people they were, they answered that they were christians, and had long
time lived there in that thraldom. Palmerin not a little glad of these news,
asked of what Country they were, whereupon one of them that could well sp^ake
the Arabian tongue, answered. We are all of Allemaigne, to whom Fortune has
exceeded in cruelty. These words were maruailous welcome to Palmerin, and for
which inwardly he thanked his God: but the better to dissemble his joy, he thus
spoke. This Country should seem to be very far from hence, because I never
heard thereof before. So finding this vessel fit for his purpose, he
appointed it for himself and the Prince Olorico, discharging all other that
were therein, two Knights only excepted, to whose charge he committed the
Christians: causing his Horses, Tents, and all other necessaries, to be carried
abroad, as well the Prince Oloricos as his own, accomplishing every thing in
such order, as within three days after the Soldiers were ready to depart:
and now the day is come to launch away, when the Soldane and other Taborlanes,
accompanied the King of Balisarca to the Haven. But the fair Alchidiana would
not be seen, by reason of her great grief for her Friends departure: for
when she came to take her leave of Palmerin in his Chamber, she fell (in a
manner) dead at his feet, soon after she delivered these lamentable speeches.

This is no common farewell my beloved Lord, which you now take of me, but say
it is my very last adieu: for my heart persuades me that I shall never see you
more, because the extremities of my sorrows are such, as well I know I cannot
long endure. Adieu my sweet Freende, who in steed of my joy and comfort,
leauest me in despair, which never can have end but by immediate death. God
Madame say not so, quoth Palmerin, for I hope right soon to see you again. So
leaving her, Olorico and he went toward the Haven: the Prince being so
passionate to leave her sight, by whose sweet looks his life was maintained:
as had not his friendly companion comforted him, unable was he to depart the
Palace. But being now come to the Port, and feeling the wind and sea
serviceable, loath to trifle the time with any longer stay, they came to take
their leave of the Souldane, who took great care for their contentment, and
many times embracing Palmerin, commending to him the disposition of all his
affairs, said. My noble Son and friend, I vow to you in presence of our
Gods, that if you return hither again with victory, with such honors I will
endowe you, as shall be sufficient for the whole world to talk on. Palmerin
humbly kissing his hand, went aboard, the Mariners hoysing sail, launched
forth into the Sea, with such a brave noise of Drums, Trompets, Clarions,
Cornets, Fifes, and other instruments, as though Heaven and earth would have
encountered together. Palmerin thus floting on the government of Neptune,
imagined how with safety he might forsake his company, wherefore he commanded
to unbind all the Christians. For (quoth he to Olorico) seeing they are
Mariners, and well skilled in the art of Navigations, they may stand us in good
steed, if time so require, or any sudden tempest should assail us: but the
better to beguile his own people, he caused them to swear their faithful
service to him.

The neght being come, and he seeing that every one slept soundly, called two
of the Christians, and in the Allemaigne tongue thus began. My Friends, give
thanks to God for your fortune, in that you Christians have found one of your
faith and religion, who has good hope shortly to deliver you from these
heathen helhoundes: therefore set fear apart, and regard well your Quadrant,
if you can compass any mean to get the coast of Allemaigne. The Christians
more glad then can be expressed, answered, that they would accomplish his
commandment, and therefore he should repose his trust in them. About midnight,
as God would, began a great tempest and blustering of wind, so that in
despite of the Pylots and Mariners, the Fleet was severed in many parts: but
the Christians perceiving that this wind served well for their avail, kn^w so
well how to order their course, that in short time they got far enough from
their company, and thus continued the wind for ten or twelve days, for
which Palmerin devoutly (...) God.

So happily strained Palmerin with his Allemaignes, that one of them at length
told him they were near the straites of Gibraltare, for which Palmerin not a
little joyful, said, that they might pass Spain without any fear, and so
the sooner reach Allemaigne. But when they began to coast the straight the
Turkish mariners were amazed, saying that the Christians knew not their
course, being more then eight hundred thousand leagues forth of their
compass.

Palmerin fearing to be discovered before he came to his intent, answered in
choler, that the Christians knew their course much better then they did, and
they to prate no more on pain of their lives: which threatening presently drove
them all to silence. Afterward they sailed with so good wind, as they took
landing at a Port in Allemaigne, which at this day is called Tolledo, when the
Christians said to Palmerin, how that was the place where they were borne,
where (if so he pleased) they desired their liberty. Palmerin assuring them of
their request, answered that he himself would land there, and therefore went
first on shore, feigning to seek fresh water, and all ihings accomplished to
his own desire, he caused his Horse to be brought forth, and Oloricos
likewise, who was importunate to bear him company. No sooner was Palmerin on
shore, but he kneeled down, giving thanks to God for his safe deliverance. The
Merchants and Marrines of the City, seeing them whom they thought lost in the
Sea more then ten years before, were greatly abashed, welcomming them home
with exceeding joy, but they answered, that they ought rather to thank the
Knight in green Armor, for he delivered us from the Moors and Infidels,
without request of any ransom.

Olorico amazed at these signs of joy, as also when he saw Palmerin pray,
knew not well what to think, which Palmerin presently perceiving, and to
resolve him of all doubts whatsoever, said. No longer need I know my good Lord
and Friend, to hide the affairs and secrets of my heart from you, know
therefore that I am a Christian, and a Gentleman of the Emperors Court of
Allemaigne. But that which most of all greeueth me, is, that I am constrained
to forsake your company, and return again to my Lord, for too much should I
offend my God, to go with you to the Soldanes service. Wherefore my loving
friend, let me entreat you to hold me excused, swearing to you by the faith
of a Knight, that whether else it shall like you to go, I will accomplish your
mind in any thing. I entreat you likewise, to entertain al my Squires and
Gentlemen into your service, and among them to share all my treasure in the
Ship, because I will have nothing with me but my Horse and armor. And
notwithstanding all this, fear nor to present your self before the Soldane
and Alchidiana: for to them will I write such matter of you, as they shall
accept you in my place, and with as great honor as ever they did me. If
heaven so favor me as I may come to the knowledge of my father, I will
certify you with the truth of all. As for my counterfeiting to be dumb, was
only but to awaite opportunity, when with safety I might escape thence.

If Olorico at the first was amazed, what may be judged of him now?
notwithstanding, he loved Palmerin so perfectly, as he returned him this
answer. Although Sir Palmerin, we are of contrary faith and opinion, yet has
your nobleness and humanity gained such privilege over me, that as you have
long time lived a Christian among the Turks, so for your sake will I live a
Turk among the Christians, dissembling in like sort as you did, and never
shall any occasion force me to forsake you, till you have found your Father,
and know if he be descended of the Soldanes blood. No honor will it be for me
now, to return again to the Assirian Princes, and as for my people, I force
not though they go back again with my treasure: for on my Knighthood, I will
be no richer then you, nor will reserve any thing with me, then what belongs
to a Knight errant, which is Horse and Armor. For the rest, let Fortune do the
worst she can, I hope for all this, one day to be King of Arabia. Then noble
friend, be not offended, for I will bear you company, if death and strong
imprisonment do not withhold me. Palemrin embraicng him, said.

Ah worthy Prince, so noble is your mind, and repleate with fidelity, as
persuade your self to find me your loyal Brother, and fellow in Armee, never
to forsake you while I can lift my Sword, so please you to abide with me. So
calling the cheifest of them in the ship, they said as much to them as you
have heard, commanding them not to stir from Arabia before they heard some
other tidings. As for their strange conceit at these news, I bequeath to your
judgments, yet durst they not gainsay their Masters, but launching into the
deep, sailed back again into their own Country.

Palmerin and Olorico for this night lodged in the City, to refresh
themselves, and the next morning, after they had taken leave of the Merchants,
they delivered, they set forward on their journey. Continuing their travail
three days together, at length they met a Knight, who seeing them armed
after the Turkish manner, said. Gentlemen, God save ye, if I should not seem
troublesome to you because I judge you to be strangers, I would gladly know if
you could tell me any tidings of two Knights, which long since left this
Country. How were they named? (quoth Palmerin) Sir said the Knight, one of
them is Trineus, Some to our dread Lord the Emperor, and the other, the most
valiant Palmerin d' Oliua. Two years and more since they left the Court,
without any news what became of them, saving that we heard they were a while
with the King of England, and thence they conuayed his Daughter, the Emperous
continuing so sorrowful for their loss, as every hour his death is expected.
May it be (quoth Palmerin) that all this while Trineus is not returned? What
danger will noble Allemaigne receive, by loosing their young Prince? Overcome
with exceeding grief and sorrow by report of these unhappy tidings, to
himself he began in this manner.

What shall I do? dare I be so presumptuous, as to present my self before my
Mistress? what sufficient excuse can I make for the love of her brother?
Doubtless, if it were such a hell to me, to find the mean for my departure,
from that long captivity in the Soldanes Court, much more will it be to me now
in the search of the Prince, for without him I dare not approach the Emperors
presence. While he thus secretly discoursed with himself, he became so
exceeding passionate, as Olorico thought he had lost his senses: which was the
cause, that without any further inquiry, the Allemaigne Knight departed from
them: when Olorico, amazed at this sudden alteration, said. How now Sir
Palmerin, what has moved you to this heaviness? I beseech you conceal not
the cause from me: for if it be by any offense, that the Knight offered which
spoke to you, soon shall I deliver him his penance. Therefore tell me I pray
you, for undoubtedly I will not suffer you to rest, until you have acquainted
me with the truth. Palmerin knowing how deerly y^ Prince loved him, and that
for his sake he had left Country, parents and friends, reposing on his
loyalty, imparted his love to him, as also the less of Trineus and the
Princess Agriola, Olorico then labored to persuade him, aduising him to
compass some secret speech with his Lady, of whom he might learn how to
recover her lost brother, and the fair Agriola of England again. Palmerin
following this counsel, pacified himself, and kept himself so closely as he
could, from being known to any.

Chap. XX.
How Palmerin by the means of Vrbanillo his Dwarf, spoke with his Lady
Polynarda, with whom he stayed five days, to recompense some part of his long
absence, and to the great contentment of them both.

SUch expedition in their journey made these noble companions, that at length
they arrived near a castle, which was four leagues from Gaunt, where the
Emperor as then was, disposed to hunting for the delight of the Ladies: but
cheefely to expel his own melancholy, for the loss of his son, as also to
recreate the Princess Polynarda, who shadowing the cause by her Brothers
absence, lamented continually for her noble Friend Palmerin, of whom she
could understand no tidings, albeit she had travailed her very uttermost
endeavors, which forced her to so many extreme imaginations, as the very
least was worse then death it self.

The Emperors train lodging each way about the Castle, hindered our two
Knights from any good hostage, so that they were constrained to abide in a
little simple house, where they demanded of a Courtier that lay there, what
time the Emperor would depart thence, who answered, that his highness was
minded that day to return to Gaunt, to confer with the Princes electours of
special affairs concerning the Empire. Palmerin joyful hereof, caused his
Horse to be brideled, and accompanied with Olorico, went and ambushed
themselves in a little thicket, near the high way where the Emperor must
needs pass, to the end he might behold his Lady Polynarda, Palmerin
attending her coming who was the only support of his life, his heart leapt
with conceit of his joy to come, yet trembled likewise because he durst not
present himself before the imperial majesty, without the noble Trineus.

Soon after, by the Guarde of Archers that came foremost, he well perceived
the Emperor was at hand, when remembering the honors and fa^ours he had
received in his Court, the tears trickled down his cheeks, cheefely for want
of his highness son, who was so especially committed to his trust, then
followed the Empress, and with her the fair Princess Polynarda, clothed all
in black, witnessing by her outward habit, the secret sorrows of her heart.
Her thoughts still hammering on her private greefes, yet assailed with a sudden
motion, she gave such a sigh as Palmerin easily heard it, which troubled him
in such sort, as without the assurance of Olorico, he had fallen down from
his Horse. Polynarda beholding his sudden alteration, without any regard of
her Mother, called Vrbanillo the Dwarf to her, who since his coming from
England never boudged from her, and to him she said. Have thou heretofore
(Vrbanillo) seen these two Knights, which shadow themselves in the wood side
while we pass by? No trust me Madame (quoth the Dwarf) I never saw them to
my remembrance. I pray thee, said she, ride to them so fast as thou can, and
demand of them from me, of whence they are, and if they can tell any tidings
of thy master, and my Brother Trineus. The Dwarf, who was more then a Doctor
in such affairs, dissembling that his Horse would stale, suffered the train
to pass by, and then rode toward the knights, who were devising on the
Princess beauty. Palmerin well knowing Vrbanillo, and seeing him come in such
have, was not a little glad, thinking now he should hear some news of his
Mistress, wherefore he said is Olorico. I pray you let us go meet this
Horseman, for I think his return is only to us. Now was the Dwarffe come to
them, and having humbly saluted them, said. I beseech you fair Knights to tell
me whether you belong to the Emperor, or are strangers, for the Lady whom I
serve, is very desirous to know, and that for matters nearly concerning her,
whereof if you can any way truly resolve her, your reward shall answer your
own contentment? What Vrbanillo? quoth Palmerin, lifting up his Beuer, did
thou not know thy Master? Oh Heaven, (quoth the Dwarffe,) praised by thy
maker for ever for this adventure. And moved with extreme joy, he fell at this
Masters feet, saying. Ah my Lord, what comfort will this be to the Princess
Polynarda, when she shall understand your presen^^? and not without just
cause: for by this mean is she delivered from the greatest torments in the
world. And that nothing may want to furnish this long expected joy, tell me if
the Knight in your company, be the Prince Trineus or no? It is not he, quoth
Palmerin, for it is more then a year since, that of him, and fair English
Agriola (after that I unfortunate lost them) heard any certain report. For
this cause Vrbanillo, it behooues thee to be faithful and secret, not
discovering my being here to any but my Lady, of whom thou must learn, by
what means I may best come to see her. The Dwarffe taking his leave of his
Master, turned his Horse to be gone: but coming back suddenly again,
said. Is this Sir Ptolome that is with you? Madame Brionella will not be a
little glad to hear of him likewise. Nor is it he, (quoth Palmerin) I lost him
in company with the rest. God will restore them one day again, said the
Dwarffe, so giving the spurs to his horse, he galloped till he came to the
Princess, who seeing him returned in such haste, knew not well what to think:
(...) fearing to be discovered by a k^ight that accompanied her, determined not
to request his tidings, until she came home into her Chamber. But never was
poor Lover in greater agony, when she expected her friend in some private
place, then was the fair Princess at this present: wherefore, so soon as
she came to her Chamber, she called for the Dwarffe, who being come, she
said, I pray thee Vrbanillo, by the reverend duty thou owe me, whence are
the two Knights, and what answer did they make thee? They are such sweet
Madam, quoth the Dwarffe, as when all the men in the world could tell no
tidings of, my self by happy fortune have found: for by them I bring you the
Key of Paradise, if your self will but find the mean to enter. Tush, I pray
thee quoth the Princess, jest not with me in this sort, for now is no time of
sport or meriment: tell me who they are I desire thee? Know then fair Madam,
quoth he, that one of them is my Master Palmerin, who thus concealeth him,
because he has not brought the Prince your brother with him, and he (humbly
kissing your hand) commends him to your gracious favor, desiring you to send
him answer, how he may secretly speak with you, because he would not be known
to the Emperor, or any other of y^ Court. How welcome these long expected news
were to the Princess, I leave to the opinion of long absent friends. O
heavens, quoth she, does Palmerin live, and is so near at hand? now has my
heart his only desired comfort: and such is my hope, that seeing he is come, my
brother (by his means) shall not be long hence, to such good fortune are all
his actions destenied. Presently she ran to tell Brionella these news, who
likewise was exceeding joyful, because she imagined Palmerins companion to be
her Ptolome. Whereupon they concluded together, that Palmerin should the night
following come to the Gardein, where first his sweet Amors were solicited,
and by a L^dder of Cords he should ascend their Chamber. This resolution set
down, the Dwarffe departed to execute his charge, when Polinarda thus began to
Brionella. Ah my dear friend, how impossible is it for me to hide the joy my
heart conceiueth, that was so late in such surpassing heaviness?

What will my Ladies now think, when they behold their Mistress so pleasant?
Let them speak what please them, (quoth Brionella) should you render them
account of your behavior? yet thus I think, that your discretion is so good,
when you have seen the only comforts for your cares, that you can so well
dissemble your thoughts, as the most wary eye can hardly discern you. Well
have you said, (quoth the Princess) if love could be governed by wisdom: but
the pleasure which the wisest have received by his rules, has in the end
discovered (...) and folly. Such were the speech between these two Ladies,
attending the night in good devotion, when each one thought to see her Lord
and best believed, that their lo^y sorrows might somewhat be qualified.

The Dwarf being gone on his message as you have heard, the Knights repeted
themselves on the green (...) till Sun setting, that they might the more
(...) enter the City: and the time being come that they would set
forward, Palmerin said to Olorico. My Lord, (...) will take this by way which
leads to the City, (...) intend before I depart, to hear same n^wes from
my Mistress. Go which way you please (quoth the Prince) yet mu^^ I needs
marvel at you, that you would be so long absent from such an excellent
Princess: trust me, Alchidiana is fair, yet may not she be equalled with
your lady. The greefes I have endured, said Palmerin, by my long absence, are
not to be spoken off: yet could I no way (...) my return sooner. By this time
they were come to the City, and to a lodging appointed them by Vibanillo, who
being now come to his Master, delivered the message he was commanded.
Palmerin understanding his Mistress^ pleasure, presently unarmed himself, and
wrapped a scarlet Mantle about him, taking his tru^^ie Sword under his Arm:
he entreated Olorico, to stay there till he returned, or heard further
tidings from him, leaving Vrbanillo in his company, with charge to use him as
his own person. He being come to the walls of lovely Paradise, sound the
Ladder reatie prepared for him, whereby he made a speedy passage: and finding
Brionella there staying his coming, embracing her sweetly, said. Trust me
Lady, the want of Sir Ptolome your Freende, does not a little grieve me: but
by the grace of God, ere it be long I hope to bring him with me. Ah my Lord
quoth the, right happy is your coming: for your presence has been here
most of all desired. But albeit she set a good countenance on this
answer, yet were her secret sor^owes innumerable, being deceived of the
comfort she (...). Palmerin who thought he stayed too long from his desire,
would trifle no further time, but entered his Ladies Chamber: who angerly had
thrown her self on a Pallet, because he stayed to speak with Brionella,
then falling on his knee before her, he offered to (...) her hand, which with
dissembling disdain she would not suffer him, saying. Truly you shall
receive no favor of me, before I know certainly who you are: for I stand in
doubt to be deceived, and that you ar^ some other then my Palmerin, seeing you
have been so long time from me, and (which is more would never vouchsafe to
send to me.

Then taking a light in her hand, and (...) beholding him, hardly could (...)
set it from her again: when welcomming him with an infinite number of sweet
kisses, (...) said. Now know I well (...) is my Palmerin: what Country might
be so (...), or fortune so contrary, that could withholde you all this while
from me? O that it might have stood with mine honor, for my self to seek you
forth: with good will could I have endured the travail, yea much more then
you have done for me. How often (considering the dangers of the Sea) has
very death surprised me^ and into how many sundry opinions have I fallen,
sometime to disguis^ my self into a man's attire, to enter the e^tate of a
Knight errant, and beg^^ne a search which never should be ended, till I
found you? For this has been received as a general rule, that by (...) long
sufferance and expectation, one may endure a thousand deaths: and think not
but the very least of my afflictions, have been of force to deprive my life.
Consider that grief, desire, remembrance, languor, sorrow, hope, suspicion,
tears, complaints, and other such like passions common in love, continually
beat upon the heart with burning affection: and to such inconvenience their
issue grows, as the vital spirit is chased from the body. For Gods sake
Madame, quoth Palmerin, leave these wounding speeches, and suffer me to take a
little life, in b^holding that which is no less diuin^ the humane, for my
offense deserves not these accusations. The^ discovered he all his fortunes
passed, which drove the Princess to no little admiration, when she said.

Believe me my Lord, seeing that by your means my Brother Trineus is lost, for
my love, and to satisfy your promise to my Lord and Father, you must needs
go find him again. That shall I Madame, quoth Palmerin, but before I begin
this journey, let me entreat that favorable regard: which is the comfort in
love, and unites life and soul together, which heretofore you have granted,
and I hope will not now deny me. What may I judge (quoth she) of your
constancy since your absence? for not long since I was solicited with a
vision, which told me that you committed breach of loyalty with a Queen, to
my no little grief: although full often I reproved you therefore, to cause you
forsake that sins, when me seemed the Queen thus answered. Be thou assured
Polynarda, that although Palmerin esteem thee above all other, yet shall he
leave some part of his love with me. Hearing these words, I brake forth into
tears, wherewith you seemed to be moved, and so forsaking her, followed me: and
herewith I awaked, finding (indeed) my face besprent with tears, and my heart
overcome with insupportable grief. Palmerin abashed hereat, remembered what
entertainment the Queen of Tharsus made him at the Banquet, of her sundry
delights and great favors for his arrival, her piercing, amorous, and
alluring speeches, wherewith incessantly she did solicit him: and such was
conceit, as he verily persuaded himself, that by enchaunted practices she had
abused him, whereupon he said. I swear^ to you Madame, by the religious vows of
our love, that never did. I commit such wrong against you: if the Queen of
Tharsus of whom you have spoken, did not one night deceive me by an enchaunted
drink, which unwittingly I received as I sat at supper, causing me to loose
both sense and understanding: and so acquainted her with his dream that night
likewise.

Doubtless my Lord, quoth she, considering the extremity of her affection,
she practiced some means to compass her desire: but seeing it fell out in
that sort, and believing you would not willingly offend me, I am contented to
pardon that fault. In these and such like speeches, they spent that night, and
four more afterward, all which time Palmerin was kept unseen in her Chamber:
till his departing time being come, when the Prince attiring her self in her
w^nted mourning garments, and shaping her countenance to her former sorrow,
throwded her pleasures past, and thus we will leave them, returning to our
Affirian^ sailing on the Sea.

Chap. XXIIII.
How after the tempest was past, the soldans Army assembled together, and came
against Constantinople, where by the Emperors power they were discomfited: and
the King of Balisarca, his son Gueresin, and (...) other great Lords of
Turkey slain.

THe tempest which had thrown Palmerin on Hercu^es pillars, after many long and
contagious storms, began n^w to cease, the Sea being fair and calm, and the
winds very quiet, whereupon the king of Balisarca General of the Army, in
short time assembled together the most part of his Fleet, and came upon the
Coast of Natolia, where he attended the rest of his Foystes and Galleyes. And
having there ^^ayed about fifteen days, among all the Ships that came, he
could hear no ^^dings of Palmerins Carrick: the long slay whereof caused him to
doubt, least he had unhappily (...) in the Sea, and overcome with exceeding
grief, he thus began.

Ah gentle Palmerin, the flower of all Chivalry, in lucklesse hour did thon
betal^e thy self to the Sea: what answer shall I make the Soldane for the
(...) the Prince Olorico, being so especially committed to my trust? Now
cannot Fortune (...) so favorable to us as she would: for by thy loss I
utterly despair of expected victory. To cut off these (...) complaints, he
was counseled by the Lords, Knights and ancient Captains, to set forward
to Constantinople, to discharge themselves of their promise to the Soldane,
least in returning without dealing with the enemy, they should be reputed for
fearful and faintharted ^owards. Setting their sails to the wind, at length
they came to the Bosphor. Now was the Emperor veri^ aged and sickly, having
altogether committed the superintendaunce of the Empire, to his son Caniano,
who had a son aged ^eaurnteene years, named Cariteos. And being advertised of
the coming of so many Assiri^ns, Turks, and Moors, he sent to all the
Christian Princes for succor: the greater part whereof, was there as now
arrived, with resolute determination, to welcome these Infidels.

When the Emperors scoutes had espied the enemi^ to enter the straight, young
Cariteos beholding the Knights on all sides, some on the walls, and other in
the Field, came and kneeled before his Graundfather, earnes^lye desiring him
to grant him his Knighthood. For my Lord, quoth he, a better time and occasion
cannot be then new. The aged Emperor granted his request, and with the
tears in his eyes, said. In the name of God, my Son, may thou receive thy
order, and to the glorious maintenance of the Christian faith: albeit thy
youth forbids thee to venture so soon.

Presentlye arose the young Knight Cariteos, and clasping on his Helmet, was the
first that went forth of the City, accompanied with ten thousand Horsemen,
and twenty thousand Footmen, to hinder the landing of the enemies: which a
great while he did with such valor, as the Haven was channged with the blood
of the slaughtred. The King of Balisarca hearing thereof, commanded his
Archers to their task, (...) shafts (...) so thick in such multitude, as it
were the Hayle that falls from the Cleudes: and on the other side he got
thi^tie thousand men on land, who assailed the Christians so (...), as young
Cariteos was slain, and a great (...) of noble personages, which was the cause
that the Christians retired to the very Gates of the City. The Prince Caniano
advertised of his sons death, and the great danger wherein the (...), issued
forth of the City with eight thousand Horsemen, and four thousand hardy
Archers, who like hungry Tigers ran upon the Turks, beating them to the
earth in such heaps, as twelve thousand of them were slain at this encounter,
and the rest repulsed back to their ships, where many entered for sauegard of
their lives, and a great number were miserably drown^d in the Sea.

At this mishap the King of Balisarca was greatly e^^ged, who with his power
presently went on shore: the fight enduring so cruel and bloody three hours
space, as neither side could be reputed likeliest of victory. In this
encounter ended their lives, the King of Balisarca, his Son Gueresin, and a
great number of Cailiffes and Taborlanes of Turkey: and of the Christians, the
Prince Caniano, with diverse other great Princes and Lords, whose deaths are to
this day lamented in Greece: yet were the Pagans and Christians so animated one
against another, as dark night was the cause of their separation. When the
Emperor understood the death of his Son and Nephew, he was ready to die
with conceit of grief: but seeing the necessity of the time required other
matter, then sorrowing tears and unprofitable lamentations, he presently
dispatched Posts and Messengers, to haste^ the succor was coming from
Christendom. In short time arrived a mighty Christian power, and despite of
the Turks entered the City, when the Emperor presently sent ten thousand
into the Field, and provided a signal for the other, to set fire among the
Turkishe Fleet, at what time they received the sign from the City. The
Infidelles seeing the Christians to sallie abroad, left their Ships and came
to meet them: whereupon the Christians divided themselves into squadrons, and
running furiously on the Moors, Arabies, and Assirians, made such havoc and
slaughter of them, as happy was he could best defend himself. Then suddenly
was the signal of fire made, on the highest steeple in Constantinople, to the
Emperors power wasting on the Sea: which immediately launching among the
Turkish Fleet, suncke the greater part of them, and burned the rest with their
wild fire. When the Turks beheld this stratageme, and that they were now
destitute of any help, they began to faint: so that at the coming of the
Emperor, who came himself upon them, with a fresh sallie of five thousand men,
they were all slain, except a few that escaped into Galleyes, that brake from
the rest upon fight of the policy. Great was the spoil gotten by this
conquest, which the Christians taking with them, entered Constantinople, where
they gave God thanks for their happy victory.

But although the Emperor saw his enemies vanquished, after the Princes were
departed that came to his succor, right greeueus was the loss of his Sons
to him: wherefore his Lords advised him, to send for his da^ghter the Queen
Griana, and King Tarisius her husband, and to commit the government of the
Empire to him. For the accomplishment of this general determination, the Duke
of Pera was appointed Lord Ambassador, being one of the most ancient Princes
of Greece: who accompanied with many noble Gentlemen, made such expedition in
his journey, as he arrived in Hungaria, before the King and his Queen Oriana,
whose sorrows may not be expressed for the death of her brother. When they
understood the Emperors pleasure, they resolved on their obedience, which
caused the King to send for two of his Nephews, who were sons to the
Duchess of Ormeda his sister, the one named Promptaleon, and the other Oudin,
to be his Lieutenants in Hungaria during his absence. Upon their presence,
before the Ambassador of Constantinople the King Tarisius took their oaths,
for their loyal and faithful government. But because we must now revive
matter long expected, as concerning the noble Prince Florendos of Macedon, I am
loath to spend any further time in vain, and will now report what happened at
Buda, during the time of this determination.

Chap. XXV.
How the Prince Florendos of Macedon, accompanied with none but his Cousin
Frenato, departed from his Country in a Pilgrims habit, iourneying in
Hungaria, where he killed the King Tarisius: and how he and the Queen Griana
were taken prisoners.

LOrdings, let us now remember how after that Palmerin was departed from
Macedon, having recovered the health of the old king Primaleon, Father to the
noble Prince Florendos, who during the time of Palmerins presence, was somewhat
more pleasant then of long time he had been, appeasing his complaints for the
Princess Griana, by the happy tidings of the ancient knight, that sent the
sheeld to Palmerin at his knighting. But now Florendos hearing no news of him,
returned to his former heaviness, and languished much more then ever he did: so
that when the Macedonian Princes and Lords pressed him with continual request
of marriage, that he might have issue to succeed in the Kingdom, he was
constrained by their importunity, to make them promise of their request,
craving a years respite before, in which time he intended to make a devout
voyage, whereto they consented in respect of his promise. Now did he not
demand this time of his Subjects, for any desire he had to be a Pilgrim, or
any superstitious zeals to the Spanishe Leather Cape, Shoes, Frocke, and such
like: but for he longed to see his sweet mistress Griana, whom he served in
heart with such loyal affection, as till death he would not marry with out
her consent and license.

The day being come that he would depart, he took his leave of all the
Princes, Lords and Gentlemen, and accompanied with Frenato Father to P^olome,
both caped after the manner of Pilgrims: mounted on two Palfrayes of small
value, and without any weapons, except each of them a little short Dagger,
departed the City, making such haste in their journey, as they arrived at
Buda, where as then the King kept his Court, providing to set forward to
Constantinople. There were they lodged in one of the best Osteries in the
City, and the next morning went to the great Church, where the Queen was
ever wont to hear divine service: and so well it fortuned, that at the time
these two Pilgrims entered the Church, the Queen her self was in the Chapel.
Florendos who was maruaileusly disguised, stood not in doubt to be known:
but seeing the Chaplain had begun service, hypocritically he approached to
Aulta^ with holy devotion, to the end he might the better behold the
Queen. Regarding her sweet countenance, he remembering the courtesies he
sometime received of her, and what exceeding affection as then she bare him:
but now being in the custody of another, and he out of hope to have any more
gracious pity, his spirits were so wonderfully troubled, and so many
passionate sighs he breathes from his heart, as he fell down in a swoune,
that every one reputed him for dead. The Queen, who many times had noted his
pit^ious looks, commanded Tolomestra one of her Ladies, she that had the
charge of her in the Tower of Constantinople, that she should go understand
the Pilgrims disease, and do the best to recover him again, which Frenato had
done before she came.

Tolomestra demanded of Frenata, the cause of his sicknes^^, who answered.
Madame, we are newly come from the holy voyage of Ierusa^em, and he (who was
wont to endure many vehement alterations, which the contrary airs by the way
do^ breed) feelyng the fresh coolness of this Church, has therewit been
overcome as it should appear.

My friends, quoth Tolomestra, withdraw your selves to the Court, and enquire
for the Gallery, in which place the Queen does daily give her alms: there
shall be provided some remedy for you, and I will give you certain precious
Drugges, which shall hereafter comfort you, when any such humor offends
you. A thousand thanks (good Lady) said Frenato, we will do as you have
commanded us. Service being ended, they went to the Gallery, whither soon
after came the Queen, and opening the Casement of her Window as she was wont,
stood to behold the Alms given to the poor Pilgrims. Frenato and his
companion had gotten so near the Window, that the Queen might easily hear
any thing they said. After most humble reverence made, Florendos thus began.
Most excellent Queen, renowned beyond all other Ladies, among so many of your
daily charities, may it please you to pity the most poor and miserable
Knight in the world? The Queen at these words knew him, and was in such
fear least the King should know of his being there, as she could hardly
sustain her self, but satte down on a Pallet by Tolomestra, who seeing her
sudden alteration, said. What ayle you Madame, that your color changes in
such sort?

Ah my trusty friend (quoth the Qu^^^e) the Pylgrime that swouned in the
Church, is the (...) Florendos of Macedon. I pray thee go to him, and (...)
him presently to depart hence: for if the King come to the knowledge of him,
all the world cannot sheelde him from death. For the rest, will him follow no
further, what he lost by his own default: and that the savor heretofore
granted, my duty and honor now forbids me. Tolomestra entering the
Gallerie, said the message to the Prince Florendos, who understanding this
sharp answer, shed many tears with grief, saying. Ah my dear Friend
Tolemestra, desire my gracious mystresse Griana, that in requital of so many
tormenting passions, which now twenty years I have patiently endured, she
will afford me once so speak with her, and kiss her hand before I depart.
Tolomestra brought this answer to the Queen, persuading her to hear him
speak, which she might do with safety, under color of requesting to know
the maruales of Palestine, with the precious and worthy monuments of the holy
City.

I am content to grant so much (quoth the Queen) but I greatly fear the
issue of his speeches, go then and cause him secretly to enter. Ah gentle
habit, where-under many do often begin their delight, which in the end
proves woorsse then Tragical. The two Pilgrims being entered, Florendos ^ell
on his knee before his Lady, and kissing her hand, said.

O my God, thy name be praised through all worlds, permitting me to kiss
these hands so long time desired. See here sweet Mistress your Florendos,
that with such loyalty has loved you, and hitherto has kept the faith, which
he vowed to you at Constantinople in your fathers Palace, and which no death
can make me falsify or change, unless you please to suffer me take another
wise, wherein I shall satisfy the importunate requests, which daily the Lords
of Macedon make to me for marriage, that I might leave them an heir of my
lineage. Which is a matter so gree^ous to me, in that I failed of you to whom I
first gave my faith, as I resolved never to take any other, which I know not
how I shall perform without loss of my life. As he thought to have proceeded
further in speeches, and the Queen having not answered one word, unhappily
the King entered, which the Queen beholding, swouned with fear. But she was
immediately recovered by her Ladies. When the King seeing her in such estate,
and in what secrecy the two Pilgrim^ talked with her, he gathered some
suspicion, and overcome likewise with the force of jealousy, said.

Madame, what make you here at this time? and in so slender company of Ladies,
how dare you stand talking with these Strangers? I would gladly know the
matter, and what has made them so bold to enter your Chamber? Florendos seeing
his affairs to grow from badde to woorsse, and that his Lady was so
threatened, entering into choler, he drew his Dagger from under his Frocke, and
taking the King by the bosom, said: Tarisius, I will not hyde from thee who I
am: it is more then twenty years since I promised thy death, and now I am
come in person to perform it. With these words he stabde the Dagger to his
heart, and down fell Tarisius dead at his feet: which when the Queen saw,
she on the other side fell in swoune again. Frenato greatly amazed hereat,
said to Florendos. For Gods sake my Lord let us shift for our selves, before
this misfortune be blazed abroad. Content thy self, said Florendos, never
shall it be reported that I left my Lady to suffer for mine offense: or that
for the fear of death, which is the end of all mishaps, I will endure such
intolerable anguishes and torments.

Now by ill fortune one of the Pages of honor attended on the King, and having
seen this homicide, hastili^ ran down the stayres, crying aloude. Arm ye
Knights, arm ye, and revenge the Kings death, who by a traiterous Pilgrim is
slain in the Queens Chamber. Cardino one of the Queens Squires, her brother
that carried young Palmerin to the mountain, had no leisure to take any other
arms then a Sword and Sheelde, wherefore he was the first that came to the
Queens Chamber, where he found Florendos guarding the entrance, who
presently knew him, saying. Depart my good Friend Cardyno, unless for the
Queens love I shall take thy life from thee. And what art thou (said Cardyno)
that know me so well? I am thy Friend (quoth the Prince) the most
unfortunate Florendos.

Strange it is my Lord, quoth Cardyno, that you durst venture into this Court:
but take here my Swoorde and Sheelde, and defend your self, for I think you
will stand in great need thereof. In the means while, I will go advertise the
Duke of Pera of this mishap, he is your good friend, and by his means you may
have some succor: for oftentimes have I heard him say at Constantinople, that
he wished you as well as my Lord the Emperor. Dispatch then said Florendos,
that thou be not found here with me, assuring thee, if I may escape this
danger, I will acknowledge this service to thine own content. Florendos armed
himself with the Sword and Sheeld, whereof he was so glad, as if he had
been backed with many trusty friends: vowing before he died, to make such a
spoil among his enemies, as should remain for an after memory. Cardyno went
with all diligence to the Duke, and secretly acquainted him with all this
misfortune: whereat the Duke greatly amazed, answered, I will do my uttermost
for his safety, because full well he has deserved it. And so accompanied with
many Grecian Knights, he went to y^ Queens Chamber: and thrusting through the
throng in despite of them that guarded the stayres, be got to the Chamber. At
the entrance whereof he found Florendos defending himself with such manly
courage, as nine or ten lay slain at his feet.

The Duke and his men caused the Hungarians to withdraw themselves, saying:
that himself would not suffer the matter so to escape, for the offense ought
to be punished by justice, after the truth were known and thorowlie
understood. Hereupon the kings two Nephews came in great rage, saying to the
Duke of Pera, that the Queen and the Pilgrim ought presently to die. What?
quoth the Duke, depart you likewise, your wills shall not here stand for
Law, nor is the Queen to be entreated with such rigor.

So drawing his swoorde, and his Knights likewise, resisted the Hungarians, so
that many of them were slain, until certain Gentlemen came, who loving and
esteeming the Queen, appeased this tumult. Then was it agreed upon, that the
Duke should take him into his charge, who had murdered the King, on whom such
punishment should be inflicted as the cause required: and hereupon the Duke
took his oath before all the company. In this sort the Kings Nephews were
quieted, who presently departed the Chamber, causing the dead and wounded to
be conuayed thence, that the people might receive no further occasion of
offense, and the Duke coming to the Prince Florendos, said.

Yield your self to me my Lord, and I will promise you on the faith of a
Prince, that I will maintain both your right and the Queens, whatsoever
danger I hazard thereby. If you will not, assure your self, that your bodies
cannot suffice the villainous surie of these people, for they have confidently
sworn your deaths I know my Lord, (quoth Florendos) that you speak the
truth, and I repose my trust on your nobility, which is such, as you will not
suffer any injury to the man being in your gu^^rde: I yield my self to you,
and earnestly entreat you not to imprison the Queen, for (on mine honor) she
is guiltless. And if any offense has been committed, it was by me: yet not
without just cause, and in defense of mine own life. My coming hither-was,
because I am newly returned from Jerusalem, and remembering the manifold
honors, which sometime I received of my Lady in the Emperor her Fathers
Court: in my passing by, I was destrous to do my duty to her. At the instant
time I was saluting her, the King came into the Chamber, who moved with an
ancient hatred, which you very well know, would have slain me, but I
preventing his intent with the aid of my weapon, bestowed that on him which he
wished to me. I believe well what you have said, quoth the Duke, yet must you
needs abide trial in this case.

Frenato perceiving his Cousin in such danger, sought about the Chamber for
some weapon to defend him: and finding the Kings Sword by the Queens bed
side, showed it to the Duke, that he might give the better credit to the
Princes words. Yet notwithstanding all their excuses, these two Pilgrims were
taken into sure custody, and shut up both together in a strong Tower, which
was very long before they could accomplish, because in leading them thither,
many sought means to kill them, and they had done it, but that the Duke very
strongly defended them.

Chap. XXVI.
The sorrowful complaints made by the Queen Griana, seeing her Hu^band dead,
and her friend taken. And how the Duke of Pera conveyed her to Constantinople,
causing Florendos and Frenato to be brought thither by five hundred armed
Knights.

Very sorrowful was the Queen Griana, seeing so many misfortunes succeed
one another, as every hour her death was expected: and sa^s she would have
committed violence on her self, but that Cardyno with diverse Knights attended
on her, that none of the Kings kindred should offend her, while the Duke of
Pera led Florendos and Frenato to the Tower. At whose return, as he thought to
comfort her, she fell on her knees before him saying: Ah noble Duke of Pera,
if ever pity had place within your heart, for Gods sake make an end of my
unfortunate life: and execute on me (without any favor) the sharpest rigor of
equal justice, not suffering longer life to a woman so despised and miserable.

O God, do thou permit a happy life, to enjoy so bad an end? Thou that
only know the inward secrets of the heart, seeing I stand suspected in this
treason, let my speedy death deliver mine innocence. Ah inconstant Fortune,
that in my younger years was so adverse to me, how might I credit thy
continual malice but by this strange and unexpected accident? Ah gentle
Prince Florendos, it was not for love that thou came to see me, but for a
secret hatred more then deadly, seeing that by thee (and that with great shame)
I shall remain for ever defamed. Where was that loyalty, and the great fear
to offend me, which sometime thou seemedst to have? Know thou not that in a
royal and noble mind, one only note of infamy is an extreme torment?
Doubtless, if thou would well consider the wrong thou have done me, thou
shall find it to exceed all other worldly injuries. But I may persuade my
self, that my destiny was such, for being long since by thee dishonored, it
must fall out for a final conclusion, that by thee also I shall receive death.

In this manner the Queen complained, with such effuse of tears and bitter
sighs, as the Duke pitying her case, said. I beseech you Madame, to endure
this mishap patiently, seeing now it cannot be recalled, and consider that
these tears and lamentations can yield ye no amends, but rather threaten
danger, and will in the end not only weaken your body, but hazard
desperation. The King is dead, he must be buried: Florendos has offended, he
shall be punished: your people are wounded, they must be cured. Offend not
then your self with these bootlesse regr^^tes: but command that the proof of
your innocence be followed. Hereupon the Duke caused preparation for the
funeral pomp, and brought the king to the bed of honor, not without many
tears and lamentations of his Subjects. When the obsequies were finished,
Promptaleon and Oudin came and exclaimed on the Duke, because he brought not
the Queen and Florendos to open punishment. My friends, quoth the Duke, have I
not heretofore told you, that we must not inconsiderate^y put such persons to
death* let the Council be called together, and as they determine I will
proceed.

Then were all the Princes and Lords assembled, among whom the Duke was
entreated to speak his opinion, which he did in this manner. I think it
con^enient under correction of you my noble Lords, that the Prince Florendos,
and the Queen, ought to be sent to my Lord the Emperor, and there to have
justice extended on them, as well for the sure^ie of your own persons, as for
the conservation of the Realm. For except justice and by probable causes you
condemn the Prince Florendos, hardly may you persuade the Macedonian Princes:
beside, the Lords may say, that without hearing he was cut off, and likewise
by his open enemies. Again think you that the Emperor will let pass in
silence so great a wrong, to punish his Daughter, and not arquaint him with her
offense? Considering this indifferently, you shall fin^ your selves on either
side endangered: your goods will be spoiled, your lives endamaged, for hardly
can you resist against such power. So well could the Duke set forth his
discourse, with confirmation of Hystories both ancient and modern, that in
despite of the Kings Nephews it was concluded, how the prisoners should be
sent to Constantiople. If they were hereat offended, it is not to be doubted,
but hearing the Counsu^les resolution, prepared themselves to go to the
Emperor, determining a sharp and severe accusation: trusting so much in their
strength and prowess, that if the Emperor (for proof of the cause) should
commit it is the Combat, they easily thought to compass their intent. So
were the two Pilgryms committed to the Dukes Nephew, with an hundred Knights of
Greece for their guard, and four hundred Hungarians, who would needs follow
for the love they bare the Queen: she being maruellous^^^ favored in her
country, for her many virtues, and chiefly charity.

The Queen her self, with the young Princess Armida her Daughter, and all her
Ladies and Gentlewomen, were committed to the Duke of Pera his charge, and the
rest of the train that came with him in the Ambassade. When the Queen
understood she should be carried to the Emperor, she (...) further out of
patience then she was before, rather desiring a thousand deaths, then is come
with this reproach before her Father: yet notwithstanding all her entreaties,
she was conveyed into a Litter, and not so much as a pin left about her, for
fear of inconvenience.

To comfort her, her Daughter Armida was placed in the Litter, without whose
company, such was her greets to come before her Parents, as she was diverse
times in danger of death by the way. But the young Princess being twelve or
thirteen years of age, could so well comfort her sorrowful mother, as her
talk expelled many bitter imaginations. If the Queen was in heaviness, we
must think Florendos griefs nothing inferior, seeing his Lady led in such
sort, and accused of a crime wherein none but himself was culpable: yet made
he no account, being revenged of his ancient enemy, so the Queen were
delivered, though himself endured the death. But now are they come to
Constantinople, yet not so soon, but the Nephews of the deceassed King were
before them, where they had blazed a false and most shameful report. And but
for the advice of certain noble Princess, that favored Florendos and the
Queen Griana, upon the trothlesse speeches of these twain: the Emperor had
concluded to burn his Daughter and the Prince so soon as they came, such
horrible slanders had these traitors spread of them. Namely, that the King
was murdered, finding Griana committing adulteris with Florendos, At which
words the Emperor was so enraged, that like a man deprived of reason, he
violently pulled himself by the heard, saying.

Ah wre^ched and unfortunate old man, have the heavens suffered (...) thus
long life, that after the death of thy sons Caniano and young Cariteos, thou
must see thy daughter convicted of treason, adultery, and murder? If I have
had some comfort by my Sons, lying now in the Hearse of honor, for
maintenance of the Christian faith: doubtless this injury is so great and
enorme, as no joy or comfort can now abide in me. Ah my lovely Daughter
Griana, whom I had good hope would be the only support of mine age, and for
that cause sent to have thy company: come thou now with such shame and
monstrous report? Florendos, if heretofore against the Turk Gamezio thou
did me service, with great wrong have thou now revenged thy self, taking
from me that good which thou can never restore again. But let it suffice,
that knowing the truth of thy disordered dealing, such shall be thy
punishment, as shall remain for perpetual memory. The Empress likewise
forsaking her Chamber, came and kneeled before the Emperor, desiring him to
put Florendos to the first council, and be to be dispatched with diligence.
At which words the choler of old Remicius augmented, he answering.

Madame, for Gods sake get^e you gone, for you are the only cause of my
dishonor: and then you began it, when you would not suffer the Prince
Florendos of Macedon to match with our daughter, but gave her to your Nephew
perforce, and contrary to her own liking. The Prince seeing him so offended,
entreated her to depart, persuading her that the accusers of Griana were her
cheifest enemies, and that might easily be gathered by their proud and
maleuolent detractions, which happily would prove false rather then truth. For
if they might herein speed of their purpose, and their accusation pass for
current, the princess Armida should be disinherited, and themselves be the
only heirs of the Kingdom. This was their principal drift, not any devotion
to revenge their Uncles death, as they in outward show declared: and hereupon
all opinions were set aside until the next day, when the prisoners arrived.

Chap. XXVII.
How Florendos and Griana were brought to Constantinople, and there were
appointed by the Emperors Council, to purge themselves of their accusation,
by the combat of two knights, against their accusers Promptaleon and Oudin.

THe Duke being arrived at Constantiople, immediately caused the Queen Griana
and Armida her daughter, to be conducted to the Palace, by many noble Lords
and Gentleman. When Griana saw she must needs go before her father, she began
again her wonted pitiful complaints, notwithstanding she was so comforted by
the Lords of Greece, by their solemn promise to defend her right, as she
encouraged her self, and coming before her Father, fell on her knees, and
thus began. My gracious Lord and father, inconstant fortune evermore has
been, and still will continue, a most cruel enemy of them of highest
calling: and no further need I speak for proof of my words, then the History
of your last wars against the Turks, and the present slander of mine enemies
against me. I cannot likewise forget that twenty years and more are now
expired, since (to my great grief) I was separated from you: but with much
more exceeding heaviness am I now returned, if by my misaduenture you receive
any impeach, or I deserve to loose the name of your Daughter. Therefore my
Lord, forgetting the name and office of a Father, let natural regard be
exempted from me, and exercise on me tyrannous ^orments, with the greatest
rigor that may be de^ised. Yet all too little in respect of my deserts, not
for any offense in this matter, as God is my witness, but for the suspicion of
the common and vulgar people, more credulous of the faults of Princes and
noble Ladies, then of their discreet and sober virtues. Nevertheless,
receiving death for a matter never committed, and with patience, despite of
mine enemies, it will redound to my immortal honor.

Upon these speeches, the Princess Armida making great reverence to the
Emperor, and with the tears trickling down her cheeks, said. Dread Lord, my
cheifest desires evermore have been to see your majesty, but so it falls
out now, that in steed of joy and pleasure, it is with grief, tears, and
tribulation. Yet gracious Lord, for the first request that ever I made to your
highness, I beseech you to credit me, that my mother has committed no
treason, or any dishonor to the deceased King my Father, neither ever
permitted any man entrance into her Chamber, but he whom now the question
cencerneth, and at that time, I with these other Ladies were present, and are
credible witnesses of the whole action. Such efficacy wrought her words in the
Emperors mind, as he began to defy the accusation, persuading himself
that it was nothing but falsehood: and lovingly taking the young Princess up by
the hand, addressed his speeches in this manner to the Queen.

Well have thou said, that Fortune has been too contrary toward thee, for
when my whole hope remained in thee, and that the Crown of mine Empire should
have been placed on thy head, thou have fallen into such wounding reproach, as
both thou and I shall be for ever dishonored. My Lord, quoth Griana, under
correction, and saving the reverence of your imperial Majesty, never imagine
the case any thing to your defame: if you credit not mine enemies or common
report, from whence is engendered all untruth. This speak I not to exc^se my
death, which I know to be the refuge for the desolate, and end of al
afflictions, but to declare mine own innocence, and that mine honor shall at
length be found unspotted. But now consider good Father, with what violence
you enforce me to match with the King Tarisius, my heart being still against
it, and the neerenesse of lineage between us forbidding it. Nor were you
ignorant of my love to the Prince Florendos, the most gentle Knight of Greece,
and whose only travail hither was to make me his Wife: all this will I not
deny, nor can my heart permit to pass in silence. Notwithstanding, by your
commandment I was constrained to forsake my best beloved, and take the man I
was not borne to fancy. After I saw it must needs be so, acknowledging him
my Lord and Husband, and my self his Wife and Subject, neither in word or
deed, nor so much as very thought, did I dispose my self to any disobedience,
but lived in most loyal and h^nourable duty. Uerie truest is, that he found
Florendos talking with me, but I protest before Heaven, that it was with such
chaste and modest regard, as the Sister might confer with her Brother. And
so little time our talk endured, as I had not the mean to answer the Prince,
for the King coming in, and pr^uoked with frenzy or wicked iealous^ie, would
have slain him, whereby such fortune fell out, as the King received what he
would have given. Nor can Florendos he worthily blamed for coming to see me,
in respect of the long time since our last company: beside, having not
forsaken his Pylgrims weed, wherein he travailed to the holy Land, he came
to acquaint me with the maruailes in his journey.

See here in bree^^ the whole truth of his History, and if the Kings Nephews
avouch otherwise, I say (my Lord) they lie falsely. In this respect, as well to
prote^t mine own honor as the Princes, I humbly desire your Majesty, that
our innocence may be discided by Combat: for such is my hope in a rightful
cause, as I shall find some Knight to fight for me. The Lords of the Empire
were altogether of the same opinion, and instantly desired the Emperor, to
grant his Daughter her lawful request: whereto he answered that he would
take counsel thereon, and justice should be done her as it ought. Hereupon
the Emperor went into his Chamber, and the Queen was brought to the Empress
her Mother, where the poor Lady was assaulted afresh, for she was no sooner
entered the Chamber, but her Mother thus began. I know not Daughter how badly
thou have been counseled, that since the day of thine espousall to the Prince
Tarisius, who loved thee so dearly, thou have continued such hatred against
him, that at length thou art become the only cause of his death.

Madame, quoth the Queen, you speak your pleasure, but (in regard of my
reverence to you) I answer, that I never though it. Wherefore I entreat you
to forbear such speeches, and if you consider all things well, your self will
be found in greater fault then I. For con^rarie to my solemn promise which I
had made to the Prince of Macedon, you compelled me to marry with him: and if
Florendos had the opportunity, and in defense of his own person has slain
him, ought you then to impute the crime to me? With these words the Empress
held her peace, and sat conferring with the young Princess Armida: in mean
while came the Duke of Pera, who had the Queen in charge, and conducted her to
her Chamber, and afterward (by the Emperors commandment) he shut Florendos
into a strong prison.

The next day, Promptaleon and Oudin came to the Palace, where with great and
audacious impudency they came before the Emperor, saying. Why have you not my
Lord, provided the fire to burn your Daughter, and her adulterer Florendos?
Soft and fair, answered the good Remicius, be not so hasty, I find them
not so faulty as your accusation delivers: for no other harm was committed
then talking together, and because Florendos was disguised, is that a
consequence my daughter must die? Nor will I encurre with infamous report, in
putting such a Prince to death, without hearing how he can answer for
himself: you therefore my Lord of Pera, go fetch Florendos, that he may
answer to their propositions. The Duke obeyed his commandment, and brought
the Prince so spent with extreme grief, because he had caused the Queen
into such danger, as hardly he could sustain himself, but after he had with
great humility, prostrated himself before the Emperor, he began in this
manner. Most mighty Loed and Emperor of Greece, marvel, not that with such
heaviness I come before your majesty, when in steed of doing you service
according as my duty commands me, I bring you cause of offense and
displeasure. Nevertheless, I repose my self on your benignity and princely
justice, wherein I must entreat you, to have regard on the Queen your
Daughters innocence, for the fault that is committed, if it deserve to be
called a fault, was done without the Queens knowledge, or so much as a
thought of the matter on her part, before it happened. Moreover, there is none
of so harsh judgment or reason, but will consider what familiarity and
friendship, both pass between Princes and Ladies in occasions of honor.
Which may serve to answer the cause of my coming to see the Queen, being
thereto bound by duty and honest love, wherewith in my younger years I
faithfully served her. And this I did without any injury to her honor, much
less occasion of offense to the King, which he would needs interpret in
that sort, when with so good indiscretion he came and assailed me.

These are fables, quoth Promptaleon, for the conspiracy and treason between
thee and the Queen is so manifest, as every one knows it. And if the
Emperor do not this day consumate your lives both together in one fire: he
offers the greatest injury that ever Prince did, and before the whole world
we will hereafter accuse him. Dare thou maintain by Combat in field,
said Florendos, what thou with such bravery affirmest in this Hall? that will
I by mine honor, quoth Promptaleon, and let the Knight come that dares
adventure, on this condition, that if I be the conqueror, the Queen and thou
may be^ burned as ye have deserved, and the Princess Armida declared not
legitimate, and so disinherited of the Kingdom. Now have thou revealed thy
villainy, said Florendos, and for the last condition do thou follow the
cause so earnestly, rather then by any matter of truth and equity: but thou
art deceived in thine intent, and thy death (villain) shall deliver assurance
of her succession. So please my Lord the Emperor of his grace, to prolong the
day of Combat till I have recovered some health: my self alone, against thee
and thy Brother, will prove ye false Traitors, and that maliciously ye have
accused the Queen. The Emperor seeing the Prince so weak and sickly, and yet
with so good courage willing so defense his Daughters wrong, resolved himself
that she was innocent. Remembering then his noble services in defend of his
Empire, and hows injuriously he denied him his Daughter: he was moved in such
sort as he could not refrain from tears, thinking for vengeance of that
offense, that heaven had justly permitted the death of Tarisius, wherefore
beholding Flo^e^dos with pitiful looks, pronounced the sentence in this
manner. You Promptaleon and Oudin, Nephews to our deceased, dear, and beloved
son, the King of Hungaria, shall maintain your words in open Field, against
two such Knights, as my Daughter and the Prince Florendos can deliver on their
behalf, and that within twelve days after this instant, one of which the
Prince himself shall be, if he be not furnished with another to his liking:
always provided, that the vanquished shall be declared Traitors, and attainted
of the crime of Lose Maiestatis, and so punished according to the exigence of
the case. The two Brothren accepted these conditions, being so far overcome
with their own pride, as they reputed themselves the most valiant Knights of
the world. Florendos feeling himself so weak of body, would gladly have
demanded a longer day, but the sentence being given, the Emperor likewise
promising to appoint another knight in his steed, he was contented, and
committing all to the Emperors pleasure, was carried back again to prison in
such pensiveness, as he was judged not able to live til the combat day. The
Queen likewise was kept in sure guarde, despayring how she should find a
Knight, that would adventure on her behalf in fight, because the strength and
prowess of the Challenger was so renowned. Leaving thus these two lovers in
doubts and fears, let us return where we left before, to noble Palmerin, that
he may bring them some better comfort.

Chap. XXVIII.
How Palmerin having staid with his Lady five days, in so great pleasure as
his heart could desire, fearing to be discovered to the Emperor, took his
leave of her, promising to begin the search of Trineus and Ptolome.

POlynarda having her Friend in her custody, would not presume so far upon
her self, or the faithfulness of her Ladies, as she would suffer him to stay
there in the day time: and doubting likewise least his coming in the night
should be espied, committed the whole matter in such trust to Bryonella, as
they performed their joys without any impeachment. During these delights and
amourous contentments, which these timorous Lovers passed together, the
Princess among other talk rehearsed to her Friend, how the King of France
sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor, to treat on the marriage between her
and his eldest Son, as also her Brother Trineus with his Daughter Lucemania.
And how importunate the Empress had been with her, discovering what honor
and felicity it should be to her, to be Queen of so great a Kingdom as
France is. And trust me my Lord, quoth she, I know my Parents are so
affected to this alliance, as if my Brother Trineus were come, I know no mean
whereby to excuse my self. Alas Madame, quoth Palmerin, herein you may
consider, if the Emperor by violent force constrain you heereto, what
continual grief it will be to your Servant Palmerin? What torment? What
tyrannous pains of strange conceit, may equal themselves with the very least
of my passions? nor can I any way be able to endure them. The doubtful fears
of this misfortune struck to his heart, with such an impression, as he fell
in a swoune between his Ladies arms, she embracing him with such ardent
affection, as the soul of the poor tormented Lover, seeling with what equal
desire his Lady requited him, received fresh strength into his languishing
body, and being come to his former estate, the Princess said. Alas my Lord,
at the time I supposed to be in assurance with you, and to think on no
imaginations, but new pleasures and delights, forgetting the regard you have
long continued, in expectation of the wished fortunate hour, will ye be now
the cause of my death? Think you, that if love be so violent on your behalf,
it exceeds not a thousand times more in me? Believe me, you men make your
vaunts of the great passions, fears and doubts you have to offend your
Ladies, whom to serve loyally you have especially chosen: but in no wise may
these oppressions be compared to ours. Where is he among ye, who has
experimented, how great the pain of dishonor is, and can cover his extreme
love with dissimulation? What a death is it to constrain violence against it
self? to contain the piercing eye, and subdue an heart so affectionate, as
brings death to the rest of the body: if she show not some part of her
desire, by looks (the faithful and secret messengers) to him she has
chosen, loves, and wishes? The torment of the will like wise, when one dare
not come in presence, nor behold her favored, to languish, and yet may seek
no mean of help: all these insupportable miscries we poor Ladies must
endure, being given by nature, or forced for a custom. Wherefore my Lord,
present not me with your passions, considering each thing as it ought, they may
not be compared to the least of mine: for love who has ouermaistred me,
reigueth with such resolute authority, as I must sooner die, then offer you
any wrong, seeing that as my Lord and Husband I have elected you, and bestowed
those favors on you which are most desired, to wit, willing obedience, and
that (then which) nothing is more precious. Having then made you sovereign of
my self, the Prince of France cannot enjoy an other man's right. And if my
Father using his authority, shall enforce me, although it be grievous to me,
I will tell him what has happened, and no menaces whatsoever shall alter mine
opinion.

Palmerin seeing his Lady so firm and loyal, was not a little joyful, thus
answering. Doubtless my dear and most gracious Mistress, hitherto I durst
presume on my self, that by my manifold loyal services, I should one day
deliver recompense, for some part of the honors you have done me: but now I
perceive, that abounding in your graces, you deprive me of all means to
acknowledge your bounty, which commonly men desire to show by their obedience,
nor shall I be able to deserve the inestimable value, contained in the simplest
word of your last most honorable promise.

Now the Princess discerning by the Window, that Aurora Phoebus his fair
Porter, began to let forth the morning light, and provide way for his Masters
journey, withdrew her self to her Chamber, and quickly laid her down by
Brionella, who the better to hide her Ladies affairs, dissembled that she had
a fever Quotidian, by which meaue she compassed to keep her Chamber, and
entertained Palmerin as her self desired. All this while Vrbanillo brought
news from the Prince Olorico, who was so desirous to see the Princess again:
as he vowed not to depart the City, before he accomplished what he
intended. Palmerin who loved him as his Brother, was in great doubt how he
should safelye bring it to pass: till Bryonella, whose devises were ever
readyest, said. My Lord, the man being no way able to hurt you, of the less
importance need you make the matter: will ye see how we will a little iuggle
with the Emperor? Let it be said, that the Prince is Cousin to Vrbanillo, and
the cause of his coming into his Country, was to seek you: then because he
understands how my Lady loves the Dwarffe, (...) Majesty (without any
doubt) will suffer the two Cozins to take their leave of her: will not this
devise then shadow his seeing the Princess? Without question, quoth Palmerin,
I should never have invented such a subtlety, be it then as you have
determined, but with great polity, that the Emperor misdoubt nothing, for if
he discover us, we are shamed for ever. Refer it to me, said Brionella, if I
discribe not their kindred cunningly, never believe that a Woman can invent a
lie without study. Brinella conferring with the Dwarffe, laid down the
platform in such order, as the next day the Prince came before the Emperor:
when Vrbanillo on his knee desired leave, that he might depart with his Cousin
there present, to seek his Master, in whose search he would travail, till
he heard certainly of his life or death.

Ah, Vrbanillo, quoth the Emperor, in such a luckie hour may thou go, as
to find both him and my Son Trineus, good leave have thou to go when thou will. But when I behold you both advisedly, very hardly do you seem to be
Cozins: for if there be any alliance between you, it never came by the
Fathers side: and if it be by the Mother, the one was then married in Barbary,
and the other in Scotland. Why my Lord (quoth the Dwarffe) rather had I die,
then tell an untruth before your highness: and with such protestations did the
Dwarffe sooth his tale, as they of greatest doubt gave credit to him. Hereupon
the Emperor commanded them to go take their leave of his Daughter, willing
her to write to her Brother. Having obtained what they desired, they stayed not
long in returning thanks: but went presently to the Princess Chamber, where
she (aduertized of their coming) staid for them. Honorable salutations on
each side delivered, a Chair was brought for the Prince, and he sitting down
by Polynarda, she thus began. Albeit my Lord I am very loath to forgo my
Servant: yet having found him so honest, and for the good will I wish to all
his kindred, especially you, who have enterprised to seek his Master and my
Brother, I am the better contented to part with him. If the Prince commended
her beauty, when being ambushed he saw her pass by: what may we imagine of
his opinion now? For beholding her, the comfort of her long absent Freende,
had called all her beauties together, enriched with so many sweet and ami^ble
graces, as he could not repute her of human lineage, but rather some Angel
descended from heaven, to make the glory of Palmerin more ample: whereupon, to
deceive the Ladies being present, he returned this answer. Undoubtedly
Madame, if I and all mine had spent our souls in your service, we should hold
our selves sufficiently recompensed, with the princely favor you afford our
Cousin, which he is no way able to deserve. And persuade your self fair,
Princess, that if he be your obedient Servant, my self am no less, in all
things that your excellency shall please to command me: so that if there
were not urgent occasions to excuse my departure, it would be my only content
to remain at your disposition. Yet such is my hope, that this grief shall be
changed into joy by a speedy return, when we shall bring the Prince Trineus
and our noble Master Palmerin. The sooner, the better welcome will they be,
quoth the Princess, for therein consists my cheifest comfort. And after many
other speeches between them, she gave him many rich gifts, wherewith he held
himself so honored, as if he had gained the Monarchy of Asia: so kissing her
hand, the Prince with his new Cousin, returned to his lodging. Now was it
concluded between Palmerin and the Princess, because the Empress on the
morrow would come to see her daughter, that he should depart the same way he
came, wherefore the hour being come that he should pass the Wall,
Polinarda thus spoke. Now is the time (my Lord) that you must leave me, and I
be forced to consent, because there is no remedy: but persuade your self,
that with this parting begins my sorrows. Yet if I know where you travailed,
my grief would be the (...), and my life prolonged with better hope: but
being uncertain of your way, and knowing what misfortunes and dangerous
perilles, may encounter you in unknown Countries, I know not how I shall
dissemble my torments. Notwithstanding, sweet Freende, if your stay be long,
send Vrbanillo again, to comfort poor Bryonella, and myself: for loosing the
only maintenance of our languishing lives, impossible is it but our spirits
will soon forsake their miserable habitations. For Gods sake Ma^ame quoth
Palmerin, never talk of such a separation, for the remembrance thereof, is
death to me: and it so offends me to see you in this perturbation, as I
loose both courage and hope of well doing. Continue then the humor you have
done since my coming, that I beholding you pleasant, may be comforted thereby
during the search of your Brother, which I hope will be both short and sudden.
Otherwise, before the earth be ready for me, I shall be forced to take up
my endless Hostage. So after many sweet kisses, and gracious courtesies
passed between them, they took their leave each of other, with such effusion
of tears, as the very inward soul bemoned their departing. So with his
Ladder of Cords he got over the wall again, and came to the lodging where
he left Olorico: then arming themselves, they rode away in great haste, because
they feared to be known by any.

Chap. XXIX.
How after Palmerin was departed from his Lady, there appeared to him one of
the Fayries of the Mountain Artefaeria, who declared to him part of his
fortunes following. And of a Combat which he and Olorico had against ten
Knights.

GReat haste in their journey made these two knights, so that in short time
they came into the Kingdom of Hungaria, where passing through a great forest,
they ascended a high Mountain, at what time the air being calm and clear,
was suddenly obscured by many dark Clouds, and such outrageous winds and
rain began, as they were glad to shrowde themselves under certain Pine
Trees near at hand. Having there rested themselves a while, they beheld a
very thick mis^e about a Fyrre Tree, and heard withal a very terrible
thunder: and the fogge somewhat clearing, they beheld a comely Lady under the
Tree, whereat they were struck into no little admiration, yet Palmerin
desirous to understand the effect of this adventure, made toward the Tree,
when the Lady began in this manner to him.

Palmerin d'Oliua, marvel not at this accident, which has happened only for
thy sake and profit. Heretofore I came to thee on another Mountain, where I
and my Sisters healed the wounds thou did receive by the Serpent. At this
time I am come to thee, so wish thee follow thy journey begun: assuring thee
that they whom thou seek, are yet living, and in the custody of Turks and
Infidels: but before thou can find them, thou shall be delivered from death
by him thou hate most. And after thou have found this favor by him, he
shall aid thee in restoring from prison and death, thy best and dearest
Friends: and so I leave thee to thy happy success. Then suddenly vanished
the Woman away, and could not afterward be seen again, leaving Palmerin
very pensive for what he had heard, which he esteemed to be true, because
hitherto he had found no less, all that the Sisters said to him on the
Mountain Artifaeria.

Returning to his company, Olorico demanded what Goddess had talked with
him, and what made him on a sudden so cheerful? Trust me my noble Friend,
quoth be, the matter is such, as for all the Gold in the world, I would not
but have known, which Vrbanillo can better declare unto you, then I am able:
but because we would meet no more strange adventures in this Mountain, let
us speedily set forward on our journey. All that day they rode without any
occasion to stay them, and the next day likewise till toward the Evening, when
they espied ten Knights coming before them, the foremost of them leading a
Lady, who made very grievous and pitiful lamentations: whereupon Palmerin
clasped his Helmette, desiring Olorico to do the like, because (quoth he) for
any thing I see, we shall have pastime with some danger. The Prince did as
his Freende requested him, and when the Lady was come somewhat nearer them,
she framed her speeches to them in this manner. Gentle Knights, for Gods sake
help me, for these Traitors have ^orcibly brought me hither: and to compass
their villainous intent, they have murdered my Husband and two of my brethren.
Palmerin without answering one word, approached to him that led her, and gave
him such a rap on the pate, with a Mace that he carried at his Saddle ^owe, as
with the stroke he fell dead to the earth, making him sure not to escape,
during the time that he dealt with the other. Olorico had taken his carryre
against another of them, whom he encountered so puissantly, as the Knight
breaking his Lance, Olorico thrust his quite through his body, whereof
Palmerin being glad, said.

To the rest noble Prince, for we are sure two of them can do us no harm.
With such courage did these Gallants bestirre themselves, as in less space
then half an hour, six more of them were slain: for Palmerin never gave
stroke, but either he brake an arm, head, or neck. The two which were left,
seeing the hard fortune of their fellows, would bide no further danger, but
took themselves to flight with all the speed they could. When the Lady saw
her self delivered of her enemies, she came and humbled her self at Palmerins
feet, earnestly desiring him not to leave her, but that it would please him to
convey her to her Castle near at hand: whereupon Vrbanillo alighting, help
her to mount on one of the vanquished Knights Horses.

By the way she rehearsed how he that led her, had of long time loved her,
but because he was proud and of evil conditions, her Father could not like of
the match, but gave her to a young Gentleman his neighbor, who was a very
virtuous and worthy minded Knight. This seemed displeasing to him that was
refused, so that he brought nine of his kindred and Friends with him, and hid
themselves in ambush near my fathers Castle, whereto I have entreated you to
conduct me. They staying there thus unknown to any all the night, and the most
part of the day, till (...) husband, two of my brethren, and my self, took
Horse, intending to go hunt at the Rivers side, they seeing us far enough from
any reskew, (...) set on us, killed my Husband and Brethren, and brought me
away with them, the Traitor himself saying, that after he had (...) me of
mine honor, he would commit me to the like usage by the Grooms of the Stable,
who when they had satisfied their vallainous wills, should put me to cruel
and shameful death.

Believe me Madame, quoth Olorico, you are happily delivered from such
violence, and I think if all such like Russians were so served as they are,
Ladies might pass through the Country safely and without danger. By this time
they were come to the Castle, where (because it was night) the Bridge was
drawn, but when the guard heard that the Lady was come, it was presently let
down, and one of them ran to the Ladies mother, who fearing she had lost
her Daughter, was now greatly comforted, especially when she understood, that
they which had slain her Sons, were likewise killed themselves: and
certainly both the Mother and the Daughter reputed themselves so beholding to
these Knights, as they knew not in what sort to entertain them, whereby they
might express their comfort.

Being very honorably used by these Ladies, after supper they were conducted
to their Chamber, where they reposed themselves that night, and the next
morning came to take their leave of the Ladies, to the no little grief both of
the one and the other. All this day they travailed without any adventure, till
at length they came to a goodly fountain, where they alighted to let their
Horses pasture a while: and having refreshed themselves with certain
victualles that Vrbanillo had provided for them, Palmerin laid him down and
slept, and Vrbanillo by him, finding themselves somewhat weary with riding all
the day. Olorico being a young Prince, and desirous to see any strange occasion,
walked about into diverse places, regarding here and there the s^ituation of
the Country, the Mountains and goodly Castles builded upon them. He was no
sooner departed, but there arrived five armed knights, two of them being they
that escaped, when Palmerin so nobly delivered the Lady, they having that
night past lodged at his Fathers house who led the Lady, and which Palmerin
first killed with his Mace. And thinking now to reueng^ themselves, had
brought three of his Couzins in their company, and watched at the Ladies Castle
the coming forth of the Princes, but their stomachs would not serve them to
meddle with them there, wherefore they followed them all that day, till they
beheld them separated as you ^aue heard.

When they saw that Palmerin slept, one of them (fearing least the noise of
the Horses should awake him) alighted, and drawing his Sword, came there with
to have slain him: but by good fortune there arrived a Knight, who had been
hunting there about all that day, and he cried to him with his Sword drawn.
Ah villain, kill not the man that sleeps. The Traitor seeing this new come
Knight so brave a person, began to be afraid, and therefore slept back
again a little, at what time Palmerin, by the knights cry, awaked, and seeing
him so near that thought to give the mortal stroke, was greatly amazed,
suddenly drawing his sword to defend himself, not having the leisure to put
on his Helmet, by which occasion he received a small wound upon his head. The
Knight seeing the cowardly villainie of them that assailed Palmerin altogether,
bestirred himself so worthily among them, as he that gave the wound died
soon after under his sword. Whereupon the four Knights divided themselves,
two against Palmerin, and two against him, who defended themselves so worthily,
and had brought their enemies into such danger, as they two that before
escaped, seeing to what danger the fight would tend, gave the spurs to their
Horses, and galloped away so fast as the horse could pace. By this time the
prince Olorico heard the Dwarfes clamours, being greatly afraid of his
masters death, came running thither with all speed, when the Knight that had
sauled Palmerins life, said.

Noble Knight, well may you give thanks to Heaven, in that your enemies, who
thought to kill you sleeping, are foiled: for if God had not permitted my
course this way, without all doubt you had lost your life. But since it has
been my good hap to prevent your ominous fortune, I must advise ye
hereafter to beware of like hazard: and may it please you to accompany me to
a Castle within two miles distance, your entertainment shall be good, and your
wounds cured by a Lady very expert in Ch^^urg^rie. I accept your offer gentle
Sir, quoth Palmerin, with right good will, as well to have your friendly
company, as to sheelde you from any other such like villainies, who happily may
seek your harm for this noble favor. So they rode on altogether, Palmerin
remembering the words of the Fairie Lady, and could not imagine who the knight
should be that had so honorably preserved his life: this made him more to
marvel, that he should be his enemy, whom (to his remembrance) he had
never seen in any place before.

To put him from these cogitations, Olorico ashamed of his absence in such a
needful time, came to Palmerin with these words. Certes my noble Friend, I am
henceforth unworthy to bear arms, seeing that in such danger I left your
company: unhappy that I am, might not former experience teach me what sudden
adventures do often happen to Knights errant? what punishment may be
sufficient for my heinous offense? Leave such speeches to Women, quoth
Palmerin, for if we kn^we before what would happen afterward, never should we
fall into any inconveniences, but it is sufficient that we have so well
escaped, and let God have the glory for so happy deliverance. By this time
they were come to the Castle, and entering the base Court, the Servants came to
take their Horses to the stable: mean while the Knight himself went to
advertise the lady of the other knights arriual, saying. Fair Leonarda, I pray
you vouchsafe the best honor and entertainment you can devise, to two
Gentlemen I have here brought with me, for I imagine by their rich arms and
courtly behavior, that either they are Princes, or descended of very honorable
parentage. Trust me my Lord, quoth she, for your sake I will endeavor my self
to welcome them as they ought.

And coming into the hall to salute them, after many courtesies delivered on
either side, the Lady seeing Palmerins armor besmeared with blood, by reason
of the wound he received on his hea^, said. I fear my Lord you are very sore
hurt, therefore the sooner it be seen to, the better ease you shall find.
Hereupon her self help to unarm him, and afterward brought him into a
goodly Chamber, where when she had staunched his bleeding, and bound up the
wound, he was laid in a maruailous rich bed provided for him, she promising
within ten days and less to restore him so well, as he would at pleasure
travail without any danger.

For this kindness Palmerin returned her many thanks, and because he might
the better rest without disturbance, she caused every one to depart the
Chamber, her self likewise courteously bidding him good night. Palmerin being
alone, looked round about the Chamer, to see if by any arms of devise, he
might know the Knight that so happily delivered him: at length, hard by his
bed side he espied the Sheeld of Frysol, with the Sun painted therein, which
he well remembered to be his devise, whom for Polynardaes love he hated,
according as you have heard in the former part of this History, which when he
beheld, the tears trickling down his cheeks, he thus began to himself. I
perceive that the lady which saluted me on the mountain is of excellent
knowledge, for though the Knight be my cheifest enemy, yet for the honorable
kindness he has this day showed me, I will forget all former injuries, and
love him henceforth as he were my brother, and what I could never compass by
rigor and force of Arms, I will now seek to conquer by love and courtesy.
While he continued these private speeches, Frysoll opened the Chamber door, and
entered to bid Sir Palmerin good night, who not a little glad of his coming,
said.

I pray you Sir knight, by the honorable love you bear to Chivalry, to tell
me your name, and if heretofore you were never in the Realm of England? My
name, quoth the Knight, which hitherto I never hid from any man, is Frysoll,
and two years I remained in the Realm you speak of, with the Duke of Gaul
in his Court. You rememb^^ then a Knight, said Palmerin, with whom in less
space then twelve days together, you had two several Combats? Uery true,
quoth Frysoll, and some good reason I have to remember it, for the fight on my
behalf was so dangerous, as but by the favor of a Lady and a Squire, I never
had escaped with life. Now have thou in thy custody, said Palmerin, the man
that did thee such wrong, no more an enemy, but for ever thy vowed, true, and
trusty Friend: and by the order I have received, there is no man this day
living, that shall withdraw me from thy friendship, because thou better
deseruest it then any Knight in the world.

And has by my means, quoth Frysoll, the only flower of Chivalry been
delivered from death, and the resolute hatred between us, united now with
love more then brotherlike? in happy hour went I on hunting this day, and
fortune could never honor me with more desired success. For confirmation of
this new alliance, he ran and called Leonarda, Olorico, and the rest, and
before them all kissed Palmerin in the Bed, to seal the perpetual league of
amity between them. Then was recounted their adventures and hatred past,
whereat every one greatly maruailed, seeing this sudden change to such
surpassing love.

Frysoll also rehearsed, how after the rape of Agriola, the Duke Crenus his
Lord, went to the Court, where he advised the King to pursue his Daughter, or
to send him in search of her, whereto he could not any way persuade the King.
Moreover, how his Majesty would have kept him still in his service, whereto
he might not grant, for the promise he made the Lady that came thither, whom
after he had brought to her Castle, he travailed by the Emperor of
Allemaignes Court, where he certainly understood that Trineus and Agriola
were not as yet there arrived, nor could any news be heard what became of
them.

Yet during all these speeches, he concealed all his own noble deeds of
chivalry in England, Allemaigne, and other places: so virtuous and vebonarie
was this gentle knight, coveting in nothing to extol himself. He forgot not
likewise to report how that Lady cured him of a long and grievous disease, for
which he had so given himself to her service, as for ever he vowed himself
her knight. Palmerin not a little contented with this discourse, said. I think
the King of England would not sennde his Ships after his daughter, remembering
her happiness to come, being now the espoused wife to Lord Trineus, and the
honor thereof ha^ been already seen, but that the tempest of the Sea was
too much their enemy. Then declared he their troublesom^ time on the Sea, in
what manner he lost them, and how he now travailed to find them again. Since
fortune has so appointed (quoth Frysoll) that this love and friendship should
be begun between us, to continue the same I will bear you company, and
will not forsake you till ye have found them, may it like you to accept me for
your companion.

If it like me? quoth Palmerin, you need not doubt thereof, and rather you
then any man that I know, for which noble kindness I think my self most
fortunate. In this manner began the concord between Palmerin and Frysoll,
which continued with virtuous and perfect constancy, as in the Chapters
following you shall perceive. Thus soiourned these Knights, there lovingly
together, till Palmerin being recovered and able to bear arms, they departed
thence, leaving the poor Lady Leonarda in great heaviness, because her friend
Frysol left her so soon.

Chap. XXX.
How Palmerin, the prince Olorico, and Frysoll, went to Buda, thinking to find
the Court there, where being arrived, they heard news how the prince
Florendos was taken, whom they went to succor with all diligence at
Constantinople.

FFysol, because he would not have his Lady Leonarda too much discontented,
made promise of speedy return to her: which words somewhat pleasing her, he
departed with his two friends, and such quick have they made in their
journey, and within six days after they arrived at Buda. There were they
advertised of the Kings death, whereof the Prince of Macedon was accused, and
the Queen likewise: for which cause they were as prisoners conuaied to the
City of Constantinople.

At these tidings Palmerin was very displeasant, wherefore he said to his
companions, Believe me good Friends, my heart will never be in quiet, till I
have been before the Emperor, who ought to be an indifferent Judge to
Florendos, and he is the only man of the world, to whom most gladly I would
do any service: therefore let us make have to Constantinople, to the end we may
succor him, if he stand in any need of our aid. I am ready, quoth Frysoll,
and let us set forward when you please. Heerewith he remembered his father,
to whom the Crown by right appertayned, if Tarisius deceased without any
heir: where to (by this mean) he might attain right soon. Persuading
himself with assurance hereof, he was now more ^arnest to be gone, and
hastened his companions in such sort, as they came to Constantinople, two days
before the appointed time for the Combat. As they entered the City, they met a
Knight riding on hunting, whom after they had saluted, Palmerin questioned
with all: if he knew any thing of the Prince Florendos his misfortune, and
what the Emperor intended to do with him. Sir, quoth the knight, the Emperor
has resolutely set down, that the Prince and his daughter shall receive their
trial by Combat, against the two Nephews to the deceased King: and furnished
they must be of their Champions, before the limited time of ten days be
expired, and nothing else as yet is done, to my knowledge. I thank you good
Sir, quoth Palmerin, it is happy the matter is no further forward. So leaving
the ^^ight, they praunc^d merrily into the City, and because it was (...)
soon to take up their lodging, they rode to the Palace, to know^ at full the
certainetye of the matter: thus being all Armed, except their Helmets, which
their Squir^s carr^^d after them, they made a seemly show as they rode, in
that they were all three of one stature, and very beautiful young Princes,
they were especially noted, and followed by many Knights and Gentlemen, who
imagined such persons went to the Palace, for other matters then Co^^tlie
dancing.

These three companions being entered the great Hall, which was hang^d round
about with black velvet, in sign of mourning, ^^ey meruailed what might be
the occasion thereof: wherefore Palmerin falling on his knee before the
Emperor, and having humblye kissed his hand, thus spoke, Most renowmes
Monarch of the world, my Friends here and my self, within these f^we days,
as we travailed through the Realm of Hungaria, were advertised that you keep
in prison the Prince of Macedon, whom so please your Majesty to vouchsafe) I
would gladly see, in respect that he is my Lord, as for the desire I have to
deal in the Combat appointed, if it like him to make choice of me.

The Emperor perceiving Palmerin so fair, modest, and courageous, began with
himself to conceive well of him: and imagined that his Son Caniano was
again^ received, so near did he resemble him in countenance, stature, and all
proportions of the body, wherefore he returned him this answer. It shall not
in ought displease me, my Freende, to let you see him, to the end you may
conceive no suspicion of injustice. So calling a Gentleman Usher, commanded
him to conduct the Knight to the Tower where the Prince Florendos was:
afterward enquiring of the Prince Olorico and Frysoll, what the Knight was
that so hardily did enterprise the Combat. Dread Lord, quoth Frysoll, he is
called Palmerin d'Oliua, a Knight (in my judgment) of the very highest
quality in the world. Then he and the Prince Olorico, rehearsed the prowess
and deeds of Chivalry by him accomplished, in France, England, Allemaigne,
Bohemia and Turkey: which being heard by a Bohemian Knight then present, he
came to Frysoll, saying.

I pray you Sir, is this that Palmerin who killed the Serpent on the Mountain
Artifaeria, and brought the water from the Fountain, which healed the good
King Prymaleon Father to Florendos? It is he Sir quoth Frysoll, and no other.
Then dare I say, gracious Lord, quoth the Knight, that you have seen the most
valiant and virtuous Gentleman, that ever came in Thrace. Heereuppon he
discovered the noble victory he obtained in Bohemia, against the two Giants
Da^^aco and Mordano, whom he slew before his worthy Combat on the behalf of
Dyardo, Co^i^ (...) to the King and fair Cardonya: against the Count of
Ormeque and his Cozins, in the Company of Prince Adrian, and Ptolome. Heereat
were all the Princes and Knights present amazed, so that the Emperor himself
said.

Well may Florendos now adventure the trial of his rause, having the only
Champion of the woilde on his side: and in this manner they devised of him,
till his return from the prison again. Palmerin entering the Tower, Florendos
was astonished, because no person was wont to come see him: but chiefly when he
saw him on his knees to him, using these speeches. Alas my Lord Florendos, how
grievous to me is your imprisonment? in unhappy time did you know him, that
has caused you to be so ill entreated. I pray you my Lord comfort your self
and take courage, for here may you behold your Servant Palmerin: who will be
hewed in a thousand pieces, but he will deliver you from this misery.
Florendos, whole eyes and fac^ were greatly swollen with incessant weeping,
only with the sorrow he conceived for his Lady, knowing him to be the same
man indeed: was so exceeding joyful, as infinite embracings and kissings,
would not serve to bewraye his comfort, for such gracious welcomes, reverence
and courtesy he used, as Palmerin (bashful to be used with such honor) said.

Unseemelie is it my Lord, that you should thus much abase your self to me:
for (under correction) it ill agrees that the Master should honor the
Servant. The poor Prince could not but still hold him in his arms, and with
tears and marvelous affection, thus answered. Ah Palmerin, mine only hope
and comfort in trouble, where have thou been? what fortune has kept thee so
long from me? My dear Freende, how many yrkesome thoughts have I endured,
expecting thy coming? so that when I saw thou did not return, and I could
no way hear what was become of thee: the very conceit of thy absence had
neer^ ^laine me. Then careless what became of my self, being deprived of my
love and honor of my life, I am fallen into these miseries far exceeding
death: which Fortune I see has permitted, because I am persuaded that thou
must deliver me from all mishappes, and by thee shall I attain my cheifest
desires. Ah happy and fortunate hour, well worthy for ever to be celebrated
with tryumph^s, finding thee the only cause of my good, whom long since I
feared was consorted with the dead: but seeing thou art now so happily come,
acquaint me with the fortunes that ^raied thee thus long, for very desirous am
I to know them. Palmerin was so grieved to see him in such weak and sickly
estate, as he could hardly make any answer, yet striving with himself,
said.

My noble Lord, the time requires now other occasions, hereafter shall I tell
you the whole discourse. Grant me I beseech you, without further entreating,
that I may enter the Combat in your name, against one of those Traitors who
have accused you: for such is my hope in God, that I shall speed luckily, and
bring him to the end such a villain deserves. With all my heart, quoth the
Prince I am contented, assuring my success so well in your virtues, as if five
hundred of my Knights did enter the field for me. And to the end that
without fear or doubt you may take my cause in hand, I swear to you by the
living God, that since Tarsius espoused Griana, I never saw her, till when the
King came and found me with her: which was so short a time, as she had not the
leisure to make me any answer. True it is that I killed the King: but how? I
did it in respect he was mine enemy, and abused my Lady and lawful wife. What
though they were espoused together? the marriage was not to be allowed, in that
it was done against her will: she being (as I have said) my Wife, by solemn
speeches before God married to me. It suffiseth, said Palmerin, I have enough.
You shall likewise understand my Lord, that I have brought with me another
Knight, who will gladly adventure the Combat on the Queens behalf, and such
a one he is, as the other accuser will scant dare to stand against him:
wherefore let me entreat you to comfort your self, expecting our happy and
fortunate success.

Florendos falling on his knee, gave thanks to Heaven for this luckie event,
and having an indifferent while conferred together: after Palmerin had
advertised Frenato, of his Son Ptolomes health, and that in short time he
had good hope to find him, he returned to the Emperor, to whom making great
reverence, he said. Now my gracious Lord, I come to understand your answer. I
pray you sir Knight quoth the Emperor, hold me excused, if I have not
welcomed you, as your nobility, bounty and high Chivalry deserves: but
after the Combat is ended, which for my part I grant ye, what has wanted now
shall be supplied, so that your self shall rest contented. I thank your
Majesty for this extraordinary favor, said Palmerin, and seeing the Prince
has committed his cause to my fortune, I beseech you send for the Kings
Nephews, that the appointed day may not be prevented by any further delays.
And if the Queen your Daughter be not provided of a Champion, this Knight
(poynting to Frysoll, my vowed Freende and companion, shall undertake her
cause, in that he came hither for no other business: and such good experience
have I made of his valor and hardiness, as if by knightly Chivalry her
right may be defended, assure your self my Lord, this is the man. I think,
said the Emperor, she is not as yet determined of any one, albeit full many
have made offer of themselves: and for we will expect no further, this Knight
shall be preferred before all that come. I humbly thank your Majesty for this
favor, answered Frysoll: yet would I be loath to presume too far, before I
understand the Queens pleasure. The Emperor caused him to be conducted to the
Queens Chamber, and his two companions with him, who desired to see the
Ladies: where being entered, Frysoll humbly upon his knee, began in this
manner. Right noble and excellent Queen, so far through Christendom, is
spread the report of your rare virtuous and integrity of life, especially your
innocence in the crime wherewith you are accused: as from far Countries I
am come to be your Knight, if you will vouchsafe me such honor as to accept
me. Assuring you, that under your commandment, and in the company of my
noble Friend, who undertakes the Combat for my Lord Florendos, right willing am
I to adventure life and credit. Alas Gentle Knight, quoth the Queen, this
offer proceeds from your courtesy and bounty, not by any virtue on my part
deserving: for too contrary has Fortune evermore set her self against me.
But very ungrateful might I be accounted, and never be reckoned among Ladies
of regard, if having taken such pains for me, I should not accept you for my
Knight, especially in so urgent occasion. Therefore I entertain you into this
service, and I desire of God, that you may be as easily delivered from the
charge you take in hand for me, as my conscience is clear from the fault
wherewith I am accused.

I hope Madame quoth Frysoll, that my Lord your Father shall ere long perceive,
your loyal, perfect, and pure nobilite, which never can keep company with
servile an^ detestable treason. All this while Palmerin beholding the Queen,
seeing her sweet face so stained and blubbered with tears: moved with
natural remorse, was constrained to turn his head aside, to hide the tears
that trickled down his cheeks.

The Queen likewise regarded him so earnestlye, as when ^he beheld him weep,
she imagined that one gave a violent pull at her heart: which she dissembled
so well as she could, determining not to demand the cause thereof, until such
time as the Combatte were finished. So taking their leave of the Queen and the
Princess Armida, they returned to their lodging till the next morning, when
the Emperor sending for them to the Palace, where Promptaleon and Oudin
stayed their coming, the Emperor himself thus began. Now Promptaleon, here
may thou behold two young Knights, who speak the contrary of that thou have
reported: will thou yet maintain that my daughter has committed treason, and
has been disloyal to her Husband, thy deceased Uncle? I will my Lord,
quoth he, and swear by my Baptism, for that cause she shall die the death: and
if any dare undertake the contrary, I am ready to prove it by force of
Arms. I think it convenient, said Palmerin, my Good Lord, that no Combat
should be granted, without the presence of the accused. Immediately Florendos
and Griana were sent for, and being come before the Emperor, Palmerin said to
the Prince? How say you, my Lord, do you permit in maintenance of your
right, that I give these false accusers such discipline, as their wicked and
treacherous dealings deserve? I do, (quoth the Prince) and Heaven prosper thee
in thine enterprise. What say you Madame, quoth Frysoll to the Queen, do you
affoorde the like to me? She answered as Florendos before had done,
whereupon Palmerin thus spoke to the accusers.

We two Knights will maintain, that you both are Traitors, and that by
covetous and greedy desire of rule, and to enjoy the Kingdom, you would
(against all right) disinherit the young Princess Armida: for which cause you
have shamefullie accused the Queen her Mother, to have committed murder, and
more then that, charge her with disloyal lubricitie. For if the Prince
Florendos talked with her, when the King found him in her Chamber: it was in
no other sort then honor allowed, and according to ^he duty of honest love,
wherein all Princes are bound to their Ladies. Beside, if your King was slain
by the Prince, if was in defense of his own life, and in repelling the
injurious speeches he gave him: to approve what I say, we present our gadges
to the Emperor, so please him to receive them. The like did the too Brethren,
desiring his highness to appoint the Combat presently, in the wide and
necessary place before the Palace. For (quoth they) we will teach these
vainglorious Strangers, the price of such injurious speeches, spoken to those
that know how to correct them.

I think (quoth Palmerin) thou shall need to teach thy self: but if thou
have learned any new dexterity, practice it well thou art best, for I can
tell thee the time will require it. The good Emperor Remicius commanded
silence, and taking the gadges of these four Knights, bad them go arm
themselves, saying he would see the end thereof before he took any
sustenaunce. The Duke of Mensa, and the Count of Redona, ancient Princes of
Greece, were appointed to be Judges of the Field: who commanded two hundred
knights to Arm themselves, for assurance of their own persons.

Chap. XXXI.
Of the noble Combat in the City of Constantinople, by Palmerin and Frysoll,
against the two Nephews of the deceased King of Hungaria, whom they
vanquished, by which mean the Prince Florendos and Queen Griana were
delivered.

PRomptaleon, and Oudin being departed the Hall, Palmerin and Frisoll taking
their leave of Florendos and the Queen, whom the Emperor caused to be shut
up in their prisons again: went to their lodgings to Arm themselves. The
Duke of Mecaena, an honorable prince, descended of y^ most ancient race in all
Greece, with many other great Lords went after them: and when they were Armed,
the Duke would needs bear Palmerins Lance, and the graund Squire attending
on the Emperor, carried Frysols. In this manner came they to the place appointed
for the Combat, where the two Brethren were already staying for them, the
eldest thus beginning in mockage. Believe me Knights, for men that showed
themselves so hardy in a Hall, me thinks you have been very long Arming your
selves.

I think you came on your footcloth Mules to the Fields entrance, for fear
of felling to hurt your selves: but soon shall ye be taught better
horsemanshippe I warrant ye. If there were in thee so much wisdom and exercise
of Arms, answered Frysoll, as are high words and brauing behavior, it would
be a little better discerned then it is: notwithstanding ere we have done, I
think they that came first into the Field will tarry last here, unless
some body for pity carry them out before. Heerewith the Trompets sounded,
and the Heraldes commanded the Champions to do their deuoire, which was the
cause, that these hot words were changed into deeds: and running fiercely
against each other, they encountered with such puissaunce, as Palmerin cast
Oudin forth of his saddle, with a very great wound on his left side, and
Promptaleon was received by Frysoll so roughly, as he fell backwarde on the
crupper of his Horse, because he was loathe his Brother should fall without
company. The two Brethren, enraged to be thus foiled at the first, came with
their swords drawn to kill their adversaries Horses: so that they were
constrained quickly to alight, when they assailed each other with marvelous
fury, for either side expected victory, the one in hope of a kingdom, the
other to save their Friends lives.

Strange was it so behold this violent fight, yet the two Brethren seemed
unable long to hold out, for their Armor was so cut and mangled, and
themselves so driven forth of breath, as hardly they could sustain
themselves: so that Promptaleon desired Frysoll to rest a while, who moved
with anger, thus answered. Nay Traitor, now shall I teach thee how to defend
thy self, and not one minute will I grant thee to trauerse with me: but will
send thy soul to the Father of thy villain, unless with speed thou deny
thy slander. With these words he laid so many sound strokes on him, as at
length he fell down dead at his feet, which when Oudin perceived: he
threw his Sword at Palmerin, and caught him fast about the middle, thinking
that way to get him down, but Palmerin striking away his feet, caused him fall
on his back, and without attending for his revolt, noblye stroke his head from
his shoulders.

So coming to Frysol, he asked if he were wounded. No my Lord (quoth he) I
thank God, the greatest wound I have cannot with-holde me to do you further
service, if so be you have any need. Then putting up their Swords, they
demanded of the Judges, if any thing else remained to be done, for
deliverance of the prisoners. Nothing worthy Lords, answered the Judges, and
them will the Emperor now deliver, with all possible speed. The good
Remicius heartily thanking God for his victory, sent a Knight to the
Champions, with request to come and lodge in his Palace, as also that they
should presently come speak with his Majesty: yet could not the Messenger
make such haste, but they were come forth of the Field, the Duke of Mecaena
and the Prince Olorico bearing them company.

When the Knight had overtaken them, he said. Return worthy Knights to my
Lord the Emperor, for he would confer with you, and have your wounds
attended by his own Chirurgions. So turning again to the Palace, they entered
the Hall, where the Emperor meeting them, said. Right welcome are ye my noble
Friends, who hau^ so happily defended my Daughters honor: for whose sake I
shall make ye such recompense, as shall be henceforth an encouragement to all
Knights, to adventure the Combat on the behalf of any distressed Lady
Imediatlye in their presence, by sound of Trompet he caused to be declared,
that the Prince Florendos and the Queen Griana, were innocent of the
traiterous accusation, and therefore in open Field bad they should be
delivered: commanding likewise his most expert Chirurgions to give diligent
attendaunce on the wounded Knights, causing them to be lodged in the most
stately Chambers of his Palace. Afterward, he suffered the bodies of the
vanquished to be buried, giving express charge on pain of death, that none
of the knights of Hungaria should depart from Constantinople, without his
leave: because he would while they stayed there, provide for the government
of the kingdom, as appertaining to his young Daughter the Princess Armida. The
Empress was so joyful for the deliverance of Griana, as she had soon
forgotte her Nephews misfortune: the Queens Ladies likewise were not a little
glad, but above all, the young Princess Armida, her comfort could not be
expressed, that her Mother was so graciously defended: and now the Duke of
Pera, who had the Prince Florendos in custody, fetching him forth of
prison, said. My Lord thank God and the Knights that fought the Combat for
you: for by their means the Emperor declares you absolved and set at
liberty.

The Prince lifting his eyes to Heaven, thus began. Ah my God, how happy is
the man that trusts in thy mercy? doubtless, he that believes in thy
promises, shall never perish. Noble Duke, in all mine afflictions I have
evermore found your special favor: but if God prolong my life, I will not be
unmindful of your gentleness. In sooth my Lord, quoth the Duke, for so good a
Prince, any honest mind would gladly endeavor himself: and if I have
pleasured you in any thing, I did no more then my duty, which christian
amity requires of each other. So taking him by the hand, he brought him
before the Emperor, when falling on his knees, the Prince thus spoke. If
heretofore dread Lord, both I and my people gave our selves to ^rauaile, and
adventured desperate hazard in your defense: at this time I count my self
sufficiently recompensed, seeing your displeasure qualified, and the hard
opinion you conceived against me, changed into princely and honorable justice.

Sir Florendos, answered the Emperor, when I remember the wrong you did my
Daughter, leaving such a scandalous report of her, at the first time you came
to this City, I think you worthy of the sharpest death. But placing mercy
before rigorous justice, I am desirous to let you know, that it likes me
better to be loved then feared: forgetting quite the offense against our
person, the murder of our Son, without any regard to the murmur of the
people, whose ignorance cannot consider of Princes mercy. Nor will I stayne
mine aged years with mine own proper blood, or the death of a Prince so
noble, whereby I should leave to my following posterity, as a Trophe of my
life, an endless memory of tirannous cruelty: but rather shall my cheifest
adversaries stop their mouths, with remembrance of my clemency and princely
bounty, as your own conscience shall well witness with me. You therefore my
Lord, the Duke of Pera, see that the Prince Florendos be lodged in the best
place in our City, and keep him company until his train shall come from
Macedon. With great humility the Prince kissed the Emperors hand,
acknowledging his manifold and princely courtesies: desiring the Duke
likewise before his departure, that he might speak with the two Knights,
Frysoll and Palmerin.

Being brought to their Chambers, the embracings and gracious courtesies he
used to them, I am not able to utter, and very loath was he to part from
them, but that he would no way preiudise their health: wherefore giving them
the good night, he was conducted to his lodging, leaving Palmerin very sad
and pensive, remembering what the Queen of Tharsus had said to him, how he
should deliver his Father from death, before he could know him, which was
likewise confirmed by the apparition of the Lady to him, under the name of his
best and dearest Friends.

O that the Heavens did so favor me, quoth he, that I were the Son of the
Prince Florendos and Queen Griana, then would I imagine my self the happiest
man in the world. Yet can I not forget, that the Fayries told me on the
Mountain Artifaeria, that one day I should be Lord of all Greece: but God
is my witness, that I covet not such honor and preferment, were it not for the
love of my Lady, to the end her Father might not dislike of our contract. And
hence will I not depart before I understand the truth hereof, and to what end
this adventure will happen. Frysoll on the other side, he devised how to make
himself known to the Emperor and Empress: because he had good hope when
himself might be known, that his Father Netrides should enjoy the Kingdom
of Hungaria. The Prince Florendos likewise could take no rest, for his great
desire to recover the Queen Griana. Such were the passions of these three
Princes, each one living in hope of good success, which happens according to
their expectations, as you shall read hereafter.

Chap. XXXII.
How the Queen Griana with the young Princess Armida, went to visit Palmerin
and Frysoll, and how the Queen knew Palmerin to be her son, to the no little
joy of the Emperor and the Prince Florendos.

TWo days after the deliverance of the Prince Florendos, the young Princess
Armida devising with the Queen her Mother, said. Me thinks gracious Madame, we
are to be reproved of ingratitude, in that we have not as yet visited the
poor wounded knights, considering how greatly we are beholding to them I
beseech you let us this morning go see how they fare.

Alas Daughter, answered the Queen, have thou the heart to bring me among
such persons, when I am said to be the cause of thy fathers death? Then the
Princess breaking forth in tears, replied. Believe me Madame, if you
remember your self well, you are in as little fault as Iam, and so has an
honorable victory declared: but had you been any way culpable therein, yet
now you ought to comfort your self, having had such a famous proof of
innocence. In sign whereof, and to declare your thankfulness to those gentle
Knights: it will be counted a special point of courtesy, to visit them that
ventured for you. Go we then, said the Queen, seeing you think it so
necessary, and are so desirous. So accompanied with many Ladies, clothed all
in mourning black, they went first to Frysoll, greatly thanking him for the
pains he had taken, putting his life in danger, for the conservation of
their honors. Not to me Lady answered Frysol, ought you give these thanks,
but to him that only gives strength to man: and if from my birth I had
continually travailed in your service, yet your graces are such as I should
never deserve to be reckoned among your meanest favorites. The young Princess
thinking her self greatly bound to him, would not give him good morrow
with so little talk: but sitting down on the bed by him, taking him by the
hand, began again thus.

I know not Sir Knight, how the Queen my Mother will proceed in requita^^ of
your noble service, for mine own part, not forgetting how the Traitors
threatened me, whom (to their endless shame) you have vanquished and slain: I
find my self so indebted to you, as it far exceeds my power, to guerdon you
with answerable recompense. Frysol perceiving the young princess affection,
whom Love had caught somewhat within his reach, knew immediately by her sober
bashful looks, the cause why so many sighs were coupled with her words,
himself likewise suddenly sick of the same disease, returned this answer.
Madame, if Fortune the Friend to your happiness, would favor me so much, as
the enterprise done by your commanding, might sort to an end fitting my
desire: I should then accounte my self more then sufficiently gratefied in
this, that the act is agreeable to your liking, and the fau^urable countenance
of such a Lady, is more then so mean a Knight as my self can merit. Beside,
from the day that the high renown of your prudence and gracious beauty,
assured me of those exquisite gifts, wherewith nature has plentifully
enriched you: I took such a religious vow of b^ndage on me, as (considering
your high calling, and my self so far inferior) I shall never obtain the
favor of liberty, if your ^enignitie, exceeding all things else, grant me
not that special grace. The Queen loath to trouble this form of confession,
withdrewe her self into Palmerins Chamber, where (as it fell out) she found
no body but himself: by which occasion, remembering the love she bare to
Florendos, after she had humbly saluted him, she thus began.

Believe me gentle Sir, your knightly Chiu^lrie has showed it self of such
desert, as the Prince Florendos, for defense of whose honor, you have not
feared to adventure your life, your dangerous wounds well witnessing the
same, shall never devise sufficient satisfaction. For in my judgment it may
well be said, that goods, honor and life, has been restored him by your
noble magnanimity. Madam, quoth Palmerin, these wounds that for th^se two
days have made me keep my Chamber, thank^s b^ to God are not so dangerous,
as if occasion were offered, either for you or my Lord Florendos: but full well
could I be seen therein, to purchase entertainment into your gracious
conceit. The Queen then sitting down in a Chair by him, and viewing him
very earnestly, his locks of hair kept down by a gorgious wrought Cap,
embroidered with Saphires and small Emeralds, she beheld the mole on his face
like a Cross, which made her remember that her Son had the like, and in the
self same place, when Cardyna took him from her and carried him to the
Mountain. Hereupon she took greater occasion to regard his countenance, and
imagining him very much to resemble the Prince Florendos, immediately she
persuaded her self that he was her Son. Which conceit moved her to such
alterations, as of long ^he continued silent, though Palmerin (in mean^ while)
demanded many questions of her. These changes ouer-ruled by reason and
discretion, she commanded her Ladies to depart the Chamber, and to go
accompany the young Princess Armida: they being no sooner gone, but she
began in this manner.

Let me request Sir Palmerin, to know your Parents and the name of the Country
where you were borne. Palmerin somewhat amazed at this demand, was now in the
midst of his only desire, verily persuading himself that the Queen was his
mother, wherefore he thus answered.

Madame, I swear to you by my faith, that I know no Lady this day living, to
whom I would willingly reveal more then to your self: but so contrary was
Fortune to me in mine infancy, that as yet I could not get any knowledge
either of my Father or Mother, nor of the Country where I was borne. Yet thus
I have been certified, that I was nourished on a Mountain not far from this
City, which is called the Mount of Olives, where (as I have been many times
told) my Foster-father found me in rich swaddling clothes: and more then
this, so please you to credit me, cannot I bewray of whence or what I am.

O heavens (quoth the Queen) how greatly am I bound to praise your infinite
bounty and pity, for so safe protecting mine infant, whom I forsook so
cruelly? Ah gentle Knight, see here thy Mother, even she that commanded thou
should be carried to the Mountain: and the Prince Florendos, whom so lately
thou did deliver from death, he (noble Palmerin) is thy Father.
Norwithstanding my Son, I desire thee by the reverent love thou bear me,
to conceal secretly what I have said, until I gain the mean to discover
my shame to the Emperor: yet such a shame, as never came greater good to thy
Mother: nor can I now account the deed sinful, in that my fortune has
brought me such an honorable Son. So ravished with joy was both the Mother
and the Son, as neither could express their inward contentation, for such
was their alteration as they reputed for an illusion or dream, what was most
certain indeed: such wonderful comfort brought this unexpected chance,
wherewith the greatest indowments of honor or riches may not be compared.
Being in this ecstasy, the Mother for her Son, and the Son for his Mother:
Palmerin having now again recovered his forces, said.

My God I render thy name immortal thanks, in that I drew my breath from so
noble and virtuous persons, as also for granting me knowledge of them in a
time so fortunate: forbear then (good Mother) to mis^eeme of any thing, for I
will discourse the matter in such sort to the Emperor, as forgetting all
things past, he shall receive both the mother and son with greater joy then
you can imagine. But to the end (Madame) you may be more certain of your
son, see here a Crucifixe of Gold, which was tied about my neck when I was
found, and has of long time been kept by the most perfect Lady in the world.
The Queen knowing it right well, after she had kissed it many times,
answered. Assuredly my son, it is the veri^ same that my self tied about thy
neck, when I was in the greatest grief that ever distressed mother might be:
to see her infant violatelie rapt from her, so soon as Nature had brought him
into the world. But if my mishap as then surpassed all other women's: yet now is
it recompensed with such a fortunate hour, as no Lady may compar^ her
felicity with mine. Ah, my son, by thee are my sorrows changed into joy,
my despair into content, and from death it self am I brought again to life:
for if my husbands hard hap made me d^spise life, now may you be assured how
much I desire it.

Then declared she, how to save the Prince Florendos life, whose faithful
love brought him to such extremity by sickness, she adventured her honor for
his safety, and entering the paradise of love, bestowed that jewel on him,
which she most of all esteemed. And so may thou (quoth she) report to the
Emperor, yet in this manner, that not by car^all impudicitie I so consented:
for God is my witness, that notwithstanding the peril wherein I saw him, no
persuasion could cause me yield him that especial remedy, before he had first
solemnly vowed marriage to me, which against all right was broken by the
Emperors commandment.

Madame, quoth Palmerin, Florendos is of such valor, and his honorable actions
so well received among men, that albeit he had made you no such promise, yet
reason may excuse you in this matter. But if by promised faith, and to save the
life of so gentle a Knight (who happily by your refusal might have miscarried)
you honored the Temple of Love with so sweet an offering: among people of
good mind, it ought rather to be termed a virtue, then any bad affection or
unlawful lust. And therefore, Madame, comfort your self, for shortly I hope to
assure your peace with the Emperor: and seeing I have you for my mother, and
the Prince Florendos for my Father, I feel my self free from any grief or
vexation, assuring you, that I will drive it to no further delay, but this
morning will I confer with his Majesty.

The Queen being fearful, that her long stay should cause any bad opinion,
having kissed her son, gave him the good morrow, and so went to her Chamber,
where she found Cardyna her Gentlewoman, to w^om she showed the Crucifixe her
son had given her, saying. Tell me, I pray thee Cardina, do thou remember
that heretofore thou have seen this Crucifixe, and in what place? Believe me,
Madame, quoth she, I think I have seen it before now, but in what place I
am not certain? Why? forgetful creature, know thou not that this is the
Crucifixe which was tied about my sons neck, when thy self did carry him
to the mountain? In goo^ faith, the Knight is he, who fought the Combat for
my Lord Florendos. Now see the great mercy and bounty of our God, who
preserved his life then, and from infinite dangers has defended him hitherto.
Notwithstanding, be thou secret, and on peril of thy life reveal it to none,
until the Emperor my Father be acquainted therewith. Cardyna was so joyful
hereof, as she must needs go presently to see Palmerin, and finding the
Chirugions with him visiting his wounds, she fetched a gorgious Mantle of
purple Ueluet broydered round about with Pearls, Diamonds and Rubies, as well
might beseem the greatest Monarch to wear. As Cardina help him to put on
this Mantle, she noted the mark on his face, which she remembered since the
time of his birth: and in this manner goes Palmerin cheerfully to the Emperor,
whom he found conferring with his Lords and Barons, but his presence caused
them break off talk, imagining him the comeliest person that ever they saw.
The good old Emperor Remicius, rejoicing to see him in so good and able
plight, demanded of him how he fared* Right well, quoth he, I thank God and
your highness, ready to adventure on any occasion shall like you to command
me: and now am I come to advertise your Majesty of such matters as will not a
little glad ye in the hearing, so please your grace to vouchsafe me private
audience. Hereupon the Emperor commanded every one to depart the Hall, and
they being now alone, Palmerin thus began. Drea^ Lord and mighty Emperor,
till this time have I frequented the Courts of many Kings and Potentates,
without desire of requesting any thing, until this present: when feign would
I request one boon of your Majesty, the grant whereof shall return you both
profit and honor. My noble Friend Palmerin, answered the Emperor, what ever
thou please, demand, and on my word it shall be granted.

Palmerin with humble obeysaunce kissing the Emperors hand, said. In sooth, my
Lord, all that I have to request, is only to desire your highness, that all
offenses committed by the Prince Florendos, and Madame Griana your Daughter,
may not only be forgotten, but also forgiven. For thy sake Palmerin, quoth the
Emperor, I forgive all their offenses whatsoever. May it then please your
Majesty, quoth he, to remember, how when Florendos came to do you service
during your wars against Gamezio, because you denied to giu^ him your
Daughter, he was so sick, as every hour his death was expected? It then so
fortuned my Lord, the Princess your Daughter, acquainted with the cause of his
sickness, to give him some comfort, as also to defend so good a Prince from
death: by gracious speeches she gave him such hope of her love, and such (for
truth) as before they parted, a solemn promise of marriage was concluded
between them. I know not the conditions of their agreements, but it seemed the
Articles consisted on no difficult accord, for each received of other the
sweet desires of love, in so much as that night was I begotten. And for a
truth, my Lord, I am the Son to the Prince Florendos, and Madame Griana your
Daughter, who (as I understand) by the Empress persuasion, against all right
you compelled to marry with the Prince Tarisius. Florendos, notwithstanding my
Mothers wrong was very great, has continued so loyal, as he would never
accept any other for his Wife, nor as yet will, but only her. Now my Lord,
that this matter may not seem a fantastical invention, I can resolve you of
the place of my by^^h, which was in the Tower, where my Mother remained
prisoner by your commandment, under the charge of a Lady named Tolomestra:
who to defend your daughters honor, caused me to be carried to a place not far
hence, which is called the M^unt of Olives, from whence my surname is likewise
derived, and in that place was I ^ound by a Country pesant under a Palm Tree,
who in sign thereof named me Palmerin d'Oliua. My sorrowful Mother, hoping
one day to see me again, diligently noted diverse marke^ I have, and hung
about my neck a golden Crucifixe* which this day I gave her again: and by
this mark (...) like a Cross, she well remembers me to be her Son. In this
respect my Lord, that your Daughters offense, was occasioned by true and
faithful love, and having likewise promised to forgive all causes of
displeasure: grant my father now at length to enjoy his lawful Wife, that I
being their Son, may not be esteemed as illegitimate, the d^^ing whereof
will renown your name for ever, and love tried in so many affli^tions, shall
be crowned with his long and desired reward.

The Emperor amazed at this strange discourse, could not imagine what answer
to make: wherefore having ^itten a pretty while silent, lifting his eyes to
heaven, he thus began. O mighty King of Kings, only good and full of mercy,
I render thy name everlasting thanks, for thy gracious regard to the
distressed Empire of Greece: for though in our last wars thou tookest away my
Son Caniano, thou have at this instant sent me another, who well has learned
to defend this state, from the proud inuading Governor of Turkey. Ah my Son
Palmerin, right well do I believe what thou have said. And albeit thou had
not shown such probable arguments, yet do thou so perfectly resemble my
Son Caniano, as easily may be coniectured whence thou art descended.
Whatsouer thou demaundest my Son, is already granted. And with these word^
the tears trickled down his milke-white Bearde, such was his inward earnest
conceyt of joy: and embracing Palmerin in his arms, he called his Lords, who
marvelled not a little at this event, and thus spoke the Emperor. See here my
Friends your liege Lord and Soueraign^, the Son of my Daughter Griana, and
the Prince Florendos, how may you applaud the bounty of Heaven, providing for
you such a noble Prince? The Lords all wondering at these speeches, came and
entertained him with many sign^^ of honor: so that it is not registered in any
ancient mem^rie, that ever King or prince had such sudden and gracious (...).

By this time these news were spredde through the whole Palace, and the
Empress ^earing thereof, sent one of her Squires for Palmerin: when the
Emperor taking him by the hand, brought him to her Chamber, saying. See here
Madame your Son, who by your means has long time been banished our Court:
hereafter look he be better used.

The Empress surprised with incredible joy, lovingly embracing him, said.
Welcome my Son, forget my heinous o^^ence, when I would not suffer thy Mother
to enjoy the Prince Florendos, which fault Heaven has revenged with the death
of my three Nephews, whereof I now make no reckoning, seeing God has sent us
such a gracious comfort. The Emperor on the other side welcomed the Queen his
Daughter, which as yet he had not done since her coming from Hungaria. Lay
by (quoth he) fair Daughter, these black garments, the witness of your inward
mourning, and deck your self presently in rejoicing habits: for now before
all my Lords of Greece, will I have you espoused to the Prince Florendos. So
departed the Emperor and the Princes, leaving the Queen ^it^ her Ladies, who
disrobed her of her mourning garments* his Majesty commanding Palmerin to go
seek the Prince of Macedon his Father, accompanied with all the noble men of
the Court.

In the mean while, he caused all the ornaments of black to be taken down,
and the Palace to be hanged with sumptuous cloth of Gold: and gave in charge
to the Empress, that the Queen, the Princess Armida, and all the Ladies,
should adorn themselves, as to receive the very greatest Prince in the
world. Likewise he said to all his Knights. Rejoice my good Friends with me:
for God took away my Children, and has double restored them: for those that
be dead, he has raised us more. Palmerin having with him all the Emperors
Knights, went to the lodging of the Prince Florendos, and by the way the
Citizens of Constantinople, Nobles, Merchants, and Artezans, welcomed him
very honorably, making bonfires and Garlandes of triumph, in every street,
crying. Welcome to this noble City our new Lord and Master: and such
cheerful delights did they solemnize the time withal, as though it had been
the feast of Christmasse. Palmerin and his train being come to the Princes
lodging, found two squires at the Gate* sent thither by the Emperor, the one
holding (...) Horse very richly c^parassoned, and the other costly garments of
cloth of Gold, which h^ caused t^ (...) brought up after him into the
Chamber, where falling on his knee before the Prince, he said.

Now come I my Lord to kiss your hand, not as I have done heretofore, but
as becomes a Son to his Father: for I am your Son, begotten on the Queen^
Griana, whom the Emperor will n^we bestow on you in marriage. Florendos was so
ravished with these speeches, as he was ready to swoune between Palmerins
arms: but at length ^^tching a great sigh, said. O celestial Sovereign,
what am I, whom thou should so respect, and lif^ to such surpassing
happiness? Ah poor Florendos, not long since the m^st wretched among men:
what man may now^ compare with thy fortune, having such a knight to thy Son,
and fair Queen Griana to thy Wife? Go we my son, quoth he, embracing
Palmerin, for it is no reason to stay, when such happy new a has sent for
us. And credit me, the very first time I did behold thee, my heart was
solicited with greater joy then I am able now to express, which ever since
made me conjecture, that there was more between us then freendly alliance.
Then was he clothed in the rich garments sent by the Emperor, and his Cousin
Frenato in like manner: so coming on horseback, the Duke of Pera rode on his
right hand, and his Sonn^ Palmerin on the left, with many Princes, Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, ryding both before and behind them. In this manner came
they to the Palace, where the Emperor himself stayed their coming at the
Gate: and after they were alighted, the Prince making humble reverence to his
Majesty, thus spoke. Mighty and redoubted Lord, I know not how to render
sufficient thanks, in that your highness is pleased to honor me with your
daughter, which is the thing I always desired. Notwithstanding, I hope to ^^ew
such deserts hereafter, as neither she shall be miscontented, nor your
majesty repent your gentle gift. No^le Lord, quoth the Emperor, well have you
deserved her, and mine Empire with her, in respect of your worthy sonn^
Palmerin, whom all Europe, Asia, and Africa honors. Wherefore in the
presence of all my Lords I will give her (...) you, deferring the day of
solemnity, until the states of Macedon come, therefore Son Palmerin go for
your Mother.

Presently he departed, the Dukes of Pera and Mecaena with him, and soon they
returned, bringing with (...) the Empress, the Queen, and his Sister the young
Princess Armida, whom he had schooled with such gra^^^s speeches, as she had
now forgotten her displeasure toward the Prince Florendos, for the death of
the King (...) Father. There openly in the Hall, by the Archbishop of
Constantinople, the Prince Florendos and Griana were ^^^i^nced together, to
their no little contentment, as also to the good lyking of all the Princes and
Lords of Greece, who spent the rest of the day in joyful disports and try^^ph^.

Chap. XXXIII.
How Frysoll declared to the Empress, that he was son to her Nephew Netrides.

ALl this pleasure of the Princes and lords of Greece, for so many joyful and
unexpected accidents, might not be compared with the pleasures of the Prince
Olorico and Frysoll, who would now no longer keep his bed, in respect of his
joy for the good fortune of his friend, wherefore putting on his garments, and
accompanied with Olorico, he came down into the great Hall, as the Prince of
Macedon was betrothed to his Lady, when Palmerin stepping from all the rest,
welcomed them with very gracious courtesy. After they had been generally
saluted, Frysoll came before the Empress, and on his knee began in this manner.

Most excellent and gracious Madame, may it please you pardon mine offense in
shedding the blood of your kinsman. Notwithstanding, as the Law of judgment
and reason exhorts me, of two euilles I choose to take the least: so did I
rather think it good to bathe my hands in the blood of mine own Couzin, then
permit him (by the Prince Florendos offense) to suffer open violence. This
speak I Madame, as being the Son to your Nephew Netrides, whom long since
his eldest Brother disinherited, and banished him his Country to a little
Castle, where at this time he remains in good disposition. Now judge which of
these events is most admirable, that of your noble son Palmerin, or this
which I have now rehearsed. But may it be (quoth the Empress) that my Nephew
Netrides is yet living? and can it be possible that thou art his Son? Trust
me Madame, said Frysoll, I have told you truth, and by Gods leave you shall
have more ample proof thereof within these few days.

Heereuppon the Emperor, the Empress, Florendos, and Palmerin, with
inexplicable rejoicing, embraced Frysoll, not a little extolling their fortune,
that such hardy knights were descended of their lineage. Then Frisol rehearsed
before them all the three Combats he had with Palmerin, and what great honor
he woonne at the Tourney in France, which report greatly contented the Prince
Florendos, hearing the honorable Chivalry of his son, nor would he forget
to join therewith, his conquest on the Mountain Artifaeria, with his Combats
both in Bohemia and Durace.

At these reports the Emperor somewhat amazed, said before all his Lords. I
believe my Friends, that the maruailous rare fortunes of these two Cozins
Palmerin and Frysoll, with the strange adventures they have finished in their
youth, promise greater matters in their following years. Then an ancient
Knight of Hungaria, who was named Apolonio, said to the Emperor, how in time
past he had been Page to the Father of Tarisius, by which mean he knew
Netrides right well if he might see him. And if he be yet living, quoth he,
in regard of his manifold princely virtues, the Realm of Hungaria need no
better Governor, nor will the people themselves mislike of so good a change.
Wherefore, may it so stand with your highness pleasure, to grant me company
beseeming the cause: I will do my duty in the search of him, and bring him
hither with me to the Court. Willingly the Emperor consented thereto, and like
order took the Prince Florendos, that Cardyna with her Brethren and other
Gentlemen, should go to the Mountain of Olives, and enquir^ for Gerrard
Palmerins foster-father, Marcella his Wife, and Dyo^ena their Daughter.
Palmerin seeing all things sort to so good end, falling on his knee before the
Emperor and his Father, said. Seeing it has pleased God to make me known
for your Son, I will not conceal a matter from you, which concerns me
very nearly, and although it be of great importance, yet will I not further
proceed without your advise. So discoursed he all his several apparitions,
while he continued with his supposed Father, whereby he was provoked to go
seek the lady, who by fatal destenie was promised him: nor did he hide his
troubles in her search, but therewith bewrayed that her name was Polynarda,
daughter to the Emperor of Allemaigne, and his Wife by solemn vows passed
between them. He declared moreover, how he travailed to find the Prince
Trineus, whom he lost on the Sea with the Princess of England, and them he
would recover again, in respect of his faithful promise to his Lady.
Notwithstanding, quoth he, if you think it convenient, I would gladly send to
advertise the Emperor and my Lady his Daughter of my present good fortune,
that his Majesty may confirm our private agreement, because I doubt the
Prince of France, whose Ambassadors have been there to confer on the
matter, may otherwise present me of mine only choice. In like manner, if
Netrides shall be found to be made King of Hungaria, and the Princess Armida
to be bestowed in marriage on Sir Frysoll, who is such a Knight in my
judgment, as well deserves one of the cheifest Ladies in the world.

So God help me my Son, quoth the Emperor, no reason were it to disappoint
what thou have so well contrived: for seeing things have been fore-pointed by
fortune, mere folly it is for men to contrary them. And because I have
heretofore heard, that the Emperors Daughter is the flower and choice Lady
among all other, whose virtues challenge the man beyond compare in Chiualri^:
I will send mine Ambassadors to the Emperor, as well for the perfection of
the marriage, as to comfort her in her despayres, with certain assurance of
our health and welfare, and so shall your intended travail not be hindered.
Notwithstanding, before you begin your journey, you shall receive the homage of
all the Princes and Lords of Greece, as their liege Lord and supreme Governor,
which being done, I will likewise take order for my Nephew Frysoll, so soon
as his Father shall come to the Court. Then calling for the Master of his
Horse, commandment was given for speedy dispatch of messengers to all parts.
So leaving the Emperor busied in these affairs, Florendos and Palmerin went
to the Queen, who causing them to sit down by her, after she had very
graciously welcomed them, said.

I pray you tell me, which of us three is most beholding to Fortune, the
Father, the Mother, or the Son? Doubtless, who so considers the condition
of our adventure, will ^^^nde it such, as seldom has the like been seen
heretofore. And in sooth my Lord Florendos, the gree^ous torments I have
endured since the loss of my Son, and my great disloyalty toward you by
breach of my promise, I judge may be equalled with the burden of mine
offense. Nevertheless, if you esteem not your self satisfied, let your noble
regard excuse what nature has perfected, which is, to endure much more then
as yet we have done. Madame, answered Florendos, in time of joy remember not
our passed misfortunes, but think what now is done, our gracious stars have
graciously furthered and limited to this end, that my loyalty, with the
bounty and prowess of our son, should be laid open to every judgment.
Here had the Prince occasion to rehearse his afflictions in love, endured
twenty years space and more for her sake, which Palmerin hearing, either
fearing to offend them, or induced by modest bashfulnes, he went to his Sister
the Princess Armida, whose thoughts he sounded by such subtilties and
dissimulations, as he found the effect of her desires, which was to enjoy Sir
Frysoll to her Husband. He not a little contented heerewith, confirmed her
choice to be commendable, sealing the assurance thereof with an honorable
report of his knightly deeds of Arms. Then the Emperor called for the Duke
of Mecaena and the Count of Re^fo^t, as also his principal Secretary, whom
he commanded to write to the Emperor of Allemaigne, touching the marriage of
the Princess Polinarda and his son Pa^merin, shadowing the secret agreement
betw^ene themselves, and committed the rest to the discre^ion of the
Ambassadors.

The Letters sealed with his great Signet, was delivered to them that had the
charge of this message, who could not so speedily depart from Constantinople,
because the wind and weather was not nauigable. Now had Palmerin promised
Frysoll that he would speak to the Princess his sister, and solemnly resolve
upon their marriage: wherefore (meeting with this earnest L^uer) he thus
labored to please him. Trust me Cousin, I have so surely imprinted your
especial generositie in my Sisters mind, as the carracters can never be
defaced, but remain more perfect by your speedy marriage. Frysoll revived
with these news, as all pretenders of love may well imagine, offered to kiss
his hand, which Palmerin would not suffer, whereupon he thus proceeded. Ah my
Lord, how am I more and more indebted to you? right wise was he which said,
that affability and liberality are continual companions with nobleness and
magnanimity. And though by all my services I cannot deserve the honor you do
me in accepting me for your Brother, yet am I so faithfully vowed yours, as
the honors of my Father nor love of the Princess your Sister, can separate
me from your company, until you have found your long desired Friend
Trineus. And for this cause my Lord, I earnestly entreat you to hasten
Apolonio toward my Father, for I will send him to (...) place, where he shall
be assured to find him. Palmerin accorded thereto immediately, and so labored
with the Emperor, that the Letters were delivered, and the oaths taken of all
the Hungarians, they were sent home into their Country, with a Lieutenant
appointed to govern them until the coming of Netrides, to whom Frysoll wrote
the truth of all his fortunes, with earnest request of his speedy presence.

And to enduce him to the greater haste, he feigned that many Princes labored
for the Crown of Hungaria, and were in likelihood to obtain it: all which was
but to enjoy the fair princess Armida. The same day Florendos sent to the
King his Father at Macedon, that he should send the cheifest states of his
Realm, against the day that Palmerin should be sworn the Prince of Greece.

Chap. XXXIIII.
How C^tdyna the Gentlewoman attending on the Queen, accompanied with her
Brother and diverse other Squires, brought Gerrard, his wi^e and daughter to the
Court, and what entertainment Palmerin made them.

CArdyna, with those that were commanded to keep her company, in short time
came to Gerrards house, whom she found sitting at dinner with his family. The
good man was at first amazed, seeing such courtly personages enter his house, a
matter esteemed rare among y^ persons dwelling on the mountain: but seeing
they came in decent and modest sort, not proffering any discourtesie, he
entertained them very friendly, when Cardyna taking him by the hand, said.
Good Father, are you the man that is called Gerrard? I am the same quoth he,
gentle mistress. You are then the man, answered Cardyna, that I seek, and
therefore I pray thee tell me what thou did with a Child, that twenty
years and more since, thou foundest in swaddling clothes under a Palm Tree on
this Mountain: for certain I am that thou did take him home with thee to
thy house? Ah mistress, quoth the good old man, you have killed my heart in
remembering me of him, whom I loved deerer then any of mine own. The infant of
whom you speak, I found not far hence under a Palm Tree, for which cause
at his Baptism I named him Palmerin. From that time forward, I nourished him
as he had been mine own Son, till he rame to tall stature, and as he grew
in years, so did he in virtuous and noble qualities, which made him not a
little beloved in these parts, for when he attended my Cattle, he took
pleasure to course the Wolf, Heart, Bear, Bore, and Lion, and oftentimes would
kill them when him listed, which none of mine own Children durst at any time
adventure.

Ah sweet Mistress, when I remember his many services, the dutiful reverence
and love he bare me, I am ready to die with conceit of grief, that it was
my ill hap so soon to loose him. Yet came not this misfortune alone, for mine
eldest Son, who loved him as he had been his own Brother, immediately went
after him, and yet could I never hear any tidings of them. Notwithstanding
Mistress, if you know of whence he was, I can show you all the clothes
wherein I found him. I shall be contented to see them, quoth Cardyna, but what
will ye give the party that can tell ye whee he is? Cerrard at these words
fell on his knee before her, and with the tears trickling down his graie
beard, said. By my troth mistress, if it shall like you to do me so great
pleasure, of all my substance I will give ye the one half: or all my heard of
Beasts, which ye saw feeding on the Mountain as ye came, beside my continual
service while I live. Gramercies Father, said Cardyna, but call for your Wife
and Daughter, and then shall I tell ye news that well content you. As for him,
whose friendly Parents you were so long time, he is now at Constantinople,
and is the Son of Madam Griana, daughter to the Emperor: who commands you
three to come to the Court, that she may content ye for nourishing so well the
noble young Prince. The old man exceeding joyful, without ordering his
affairs, or appointing his Servant their course of labor, said to his Wife
and Dyofena his Daughter.

Make ye ready presently in your best garments, and let us go see that noble
Gentleman: for all the Gold in the world cannot make me stay, now I have
heard so happy tidings. The good woman and her daughter, trickt up themselves
in their country fines, and taking the rich swaddling clothes, set forward to
Constantinople so merely, as sometime did the foster Father of Paris,
Alexander, his Wife, and their Daughter Pegasis, when they brought the Cradle
and acoustrements of the infant royal, to the City of Troy, after he was
known by his Father King Priam, and Queen Hecuba his Mother.

Palmerin being advertised by one of the Ladies of Honor attending on the
Empress, that Cardyna had brought Gerrard, to provoke greater contentation, he
would needs go meet him, and so went down into the Court, accompanied with
many young knights lately come to the Emperors service. Gerrard seeing this
goodly troop, among them all knew Palmerin perfectly, wherefore alighting
from his Horse, and without giving him in charge to any Page or Lacki^, ^an
and fell down at his feet* but Palmerin staying him in his (...), said. Father
Gerrard and (...) dear friends, the G^d of Heaven (...), praised, in that by
bringing me to the knowledge of my Parents, I have the mean to satisfy your
pain and travail for me, saving my life in my youngest years, and nourishing
me to the state of discretion.

Ah my Lord, quoth Gerrard, I think in all the world is no man so happy as my
self, having defended from peril so noble a person, therefore needelesse is
it to make offer of money for your nurriture: in that I prize your gold and
silver less then dross, such is my content to see you so well. Palmerin
likewise, whose match might not be found in courtesy and nobility of heart,
lovingly welcomed Marcella, and her daughter Dyofena, walking along with them
up into the Palace, where in this sort he presented them to the Emperor. See
here my good Lord, they that from mine infancy, with exceeding kindness and
love nourished me: let me therefore entreat your Majesty so to conceive of
them, as their pains and charges may be sufficiently requited. The Emperor
taking great pleasure to behold them, said they should continue in the Court
with him, commanding them to be brought to his daughters Chamber, who
entertained them very graciously: but when they came to unfold Palmerins
little pack of clothes, hardly can you imagine the inward joys of the
Mother. For Tolomestra well knew the Scarlet mantle, which her self had all
embroydered with curious knots of Gold, and all the other pretty trinkets,
saying. Doubtless Madame, it cannot be but that Palmerin is your Son: for
well I know he was wrapped in these clothes, when Cardyna carried him hence
to the Mountain. Then did Gerrard discourse before all the Ladies, in what
manner he found young Palmerin among the Trees: not forgetting to report every
thing, from that day till his departure without his knowledge.

Many sweet smiles did the Queen intermedle with her forced tears, hearing
the (...) dangers her Son had endured: and for the great love she bare to
Marcella, she made her one of the Ladies of her Chamber, and gave Dyofena a
worthy dowry to her marriage. As for Gerrad himself, the Emperor made him
one of his cheifest Barons, and dubbed his Sons Knights, who proved afterward
of hardy courage, as hereafter in the History you may perceive. This done,
the Emperor brought Florendos and Palmerin into his Treasury, saying. My
friends, take, bear away, all is yours, dispose thereof as you please: furnish
your selves with all needful things, against the day of my Daughters
marriage. Give bountifully to the poor Knights, that they may likewise prepare
themselves in readiness, all which will redound to your perpetual honor.

In sooth my Lord, answered Florendos, it is against all equity and reason,
that during your life I should presume so far: well worthy were I of the
sharpest reprehension, to usurp that, which by right appertains to him who
gave me life and honor. When the Emperor saw he could not persuade them,
he sent a sumpter Horse laden with Gold, to the Prince Olorico and Erysoll:
beside diverse other Jewels of inestimable value, that they might the better
furnish their estate, against the solemnity of the Macedonian Prince. On which
day, these two Knights determined a Tryumyhe at Arms, for the love of their
friend and companion Palmerin: who the same day should be sworn Prince, and
sole heir to the Empire. Upon this occasion, and by his highness
commandment, the Heraldes were sent abroad to publish the Tourney, which
should endure ten days together: with the excellency of the prize to them,
that should bear the honor of the Ioust each day. These disports so provoked
the Lords of Greece, as neither King, Duke, County, Barron, or Knight, that
was able to manage Horse and Arms, but repaired to Constantinople, in such
troops, as though a new world had been to be conquered.

Chap. XXXV.
How the Knight that Florendos sent to Macedon, rehearsed to the King
Primaleon the effect of his charge: and how Palmerin entertained his fathers,
Princes and Knights.

FLore^dos having sent one of his knights to Macedon, in very short time y^
Messenger arrived at a Castle of pleasure, where as then the King remained for
his delight, with the Princess Arismena his Daughter, to expel such
contagious thoughts as daily troubled them, for the absence of the Prince, of
whom they could understand no tidings. The knight being come into the
Kings Chamber, where his Majesty satt^ devising with his Daughter: and
setting his knee to the ground, in this manner began his message. Right high
and mighty King, I bring you the very straungest tidings, yet repleate with
joy and special comfort, whereof your Majesty never heard the like. My Lord
the Prince Florendos your Son, with humble duty saluteth your excellency,
and the fair Princess Arismena his Sister, certefying you, that the
aduenturous knight Sir Palmerin, even he by whose means your health was
recovered, is his own Son, begotten on the princess Griana, Daughter to my
Lord the Emperor, to whom he is now betr^thed, by the consent of all the
Princes of the Empire, and Sir Palmerin your Son shall be Emperor, after the
decease of his noble Grandfather. The good king Primaleon old and decrepite,
was so surprised with these news, as he imagined he heard some fantastical
illuding voice, rather then matter of truth and certainty: with which inward
oppressing conceit, his weak estate not able to support it self, being
overcome with joy, doubt and suspicion, as hardly could Arismena his Daughter
keep life in him, so often he swouned with hearing this report, yet at
length taking the Knight by the hand, he said. My good Friend, God I trust
will bless thee with honor and prosperity, for bringing me the tidings I
have long desired. Now may I well say, that never any Princes age was more
beautified with happiness, then mine is, having my Son allied in such an
house, and another Son excelling all the Knights in the world. But if the
Heavens vouchsafe me so much grace and favor, that I may once see him before I
end this life, it will be such sufficient content to me, as then I force not
though I live no longer. Then calling for one of his Secretaries, to read the
Letters his son had sent him, and having heard the contents there of*
commanded present dispatch of Messengers, to advertise the Lords and nobility
of his Realm, who likewise were so glad of these news, as each one prepared
himself against the day appointed. The King having written Letters to his
Son, as also to Palmerin, whom he entreated to come and see him, gave them
to the Messenger, and withal such an honorable gift for his pains, as well
might content a greater personage. He returning to Constantinople, effectually
discharged his answer: and Palmerin reading his Grandfathers Letters, vowed
to fulfill his request, and afterward to follow the search of Try^eus.

Now the day being come, when the Lords of Macedon should set forward to
Constantinople, they came to take their leave of the King, who began to them in
this manner. Ah, my good Friends, God is my witness, with what good will I
would bear you company, if my aged years did not forbid me: nevertheless,
let me desire ye to behave your selves in such sort, as if I were in person
with ye, and honor Prince Palmerin no less then my self. So creating the
Duke of Pontus his Lieutenant in this Ambassade, because he was a brave and
comely young Prince: bequeathed them to happy Fortune in their journey,
commanding a Knight to post before them, that Palmerin might be first
advertised of their coming. On the same day as they should arrive at the
City, Palmerin accompanied, with the young King of Sparta, the most subtle
and ingenious Prince of his time, (as well instructed in the manners and
conditions of the ancient Kings his predecessors, especially imitating
cautelous V^isses) and diverse other young Princes and Knights, rode to meet
the Lords of Macedon, at the Gates of the City. There alighted all the Lords
to kiss his hand, which he would not permit them to do: but casting
himself likewise from his Horse, embraced them all one after another. And
mounting on horseback again, entered the City, which was so plentifully
stored with Knights and gentlemen against the triumph: as the Prince Olorico
and Frysoll were appointed by the Emperor, to see the Lords lodged according
to their estate, and to erect Tents and Pauillions without the City, where
the rest of their train might be decently entertained.

This choice made the Emperor of these twain in this matter, because in all
his Court were not two more courteous Princes: beside, they were the only men
in the world, for affable and gracious entertaining strangers. All this
business ended, and Palmerin devising with the Queen his Mother, Frysoll
being in his company, saw her enter the Chamber, to whom he had vowed his
serviceable devotions: wherefore feigning some occasion at the window where the
Princess stood, he went and stood by her a pretty while, and at length entered
into these speeches. Madame, as yet in all my life I never requested any thing
of a Lady, and now would I gladly move one suit to you, (as to her that is the
only Mistress of my heart) if I should not seem ouer-bold in this petition:
assuring you, that having obtained this favor of you, you shall not command
any thing, how difficult so ever it be, but I will gladly enterprise it for
your sake. Believe me, Sir Frysoll, answered the Princess, you speak but
reason, demand then what you please, and you shall obtain it: because I
hold this opinion of you, that you will not request any thing, that shall in
ought be prejudicial to mine honor. A thousand thanks good Madame, said
Frysoll, this hour I hope has boaded me good fortune, and this is my
request, that you would so much honor me, as to permit me enter the Tourney
under the name of your Knight, because I would enterprise nothing but by your
commandment. And this (in my judgment) is such an especial ^auour, as I
durst not presume to solicit you withal, without the grant my Lord your
Brother Palmerin made me: with this addition, that according to my deserts in
the Tourney (if you can so fancy) to accept me as your Lord and husband. With
these words the Princess was touched to the quick, in that her desires were
that way addicted: and her color changing with her private conce^te, she
shadowed so artificially as she could, and with words fearful and
trembling, thus answered.

In sooth my Lord, never was I moved with any such suit heretofore: but my
Brother may so far command me, as what likes him I would be loath to
gainsay. As for your demand, to enter the field under the name of my Knight,
with right good will I grant it: assuring you thereof with this Jewel, which
henceforth so please you to wear, shall remain as a token of my love to you.
So taking a goodly Emeralde from her finger, kissing it, with great courtesy
gave it him. Now am I sure Madame, quoth Frysoll, to have part of the prize,
seeing I shall adventure in your service: nor is this ring of so little value,
but when in the Combat I shall behold it, my forces will be redoubled, and new
life enter my fainting spirit. Moreover I dare say, that never did the Ring of
Giges bring him more honor, then this will to me: for his could not profit
or advantage him, but only by being invisible. On the contrary, I have no
pleasure but in your presence, nor shall I think my self at better ease, then
when among Lances and Swords I may labor for your love. Then entered the
Empress, with other Ladies newly come to the Court to see the Iousts: which
brake of their talk, wherefore taking leave of each other, they departed the
Chamber.

Chap. XXXVI.
How the Duke of Mecaena, and the Count of Reifort, arrived at Allemaigne, at
the Emperors Court, and after their Embassage dispatched, the Emperor sent
back with them to Constantinople, the Duke of Lorraine, and the Marquess of
Licena, as his Ambassadors.

Now is the day come, when the Fleet appointed for the Ambassade to
Allemaigne, should depart, wherefore being furnished with all things
necessari^ for their voyage, the wind and Sea likewise very serviceable: came
to advertise Palmerin thereof, to know if he would command them any further
service.

Palmerin walked with them to the Haven, and by the way gave a Letter to the
Duke of Mecaena, saying. Worthy Duke, present my humble duty to my Lady
Polynarda, and give her this Letter, whereof I pray you bring me an answer.
And pleased God that I might go with you, never could any voyage better please
me: therefore let me entreat you return so soon as possible may be. The
Duke promised to accomplish his desire, and taking leave of each other, they
went abroad, where hoysing their sails, with a merry wind a way they went,
and arrived in Allemaigne sooner then expected. When they were come on shore,
they sent a Knight before to the Emperor, that he might be acquainted with
their coming, yet could not his Majesty but marvel at this Embassage,
because in all his time he never had the like, and therefore thought this
strange occasion would sort to as strange an end. At length, to do them the
greater honor, he sent all his Knights and Gentlemen to receive them, who
conducted the Duke of Mecaena and the Count of Reifort to the Palace, and
afterward to the presence of the Emperor. When the Duke entered the Chamber,
^hee saluted his Majesty with great reverence, yet not kissing his hand,
because he came from as great a state as he was: afterwrd he began in this
manner.

Mighty and redoubted Monarch of Allemaigne, the most high and excellent
Emperor of Constantinople my Master, understanding the loss of your Son
Trineus, greeteth you with health and continual happiness. Giving you to
understand, that within these few days such good fortune has befallen him,
as in all his life time he never had the like. And albeit in his last war
with the Turks and Moors, he lost both Sons, Nephews, and many great Lords
of his kindred, and since that time has been troubled with the hard ^ap of
his daughter Griana, Queen of Hungaria, and the sudden death of her Husband
the King: yet has his Majesty changed all these greefes into joy, by
knowledge of the good Knight Sir Palmerin, whose renown lives as well in
Heathenesse as in Christendom, being now found Son to my Lord the Emperor,
and therefore created sole heir to the Empire. And the noble Prince Palmerin
on his behalf, humbly saluteth your imperial majesty, being the Lord to
whom he is most affected in service, so that to find out your Son Trineus
and the fair Agriola Daughter of England, whom two years since and more he
lost in the East Seas: he abandoneth all honorable preferments, until his
travail shall be finished: and he has brought him hither before your
highness. And having already searched in many Kingdoms, at length he
understood that they were living and in health, also that himself should in
the end recover them, he thought it necessary to acquaint you herewith,
because he doubted of your extreme sorrow and heaviness. The Emperor astonished
to hear the good fortune of Palmerin, as also the loss of his Son Trineus,
could not subdue his passions, which moved the tears to trickle down his
cheeks, with conceit of joy and grief together: yet shadowing his alteration
so well as he could, thus replied. In truth my Lord Ambassador, I always
imagined by Palmerins worthy actions, that he was descended of noble or
royal lineage, and greatly it contenteth me, that he so happily has found the
house of his descent, expelling altogether (considering his promise and
prowess) what has been long imprinted in my heart, considering the loss of
my Son Trineus. For so favorable are the heavens to Palmerin, in all his
enterprises and admirable adventures, as one may imagine, that deeds of honor
and account are reserved only for him, cheefely the recovery of my Son,
which I hope he will effectually bring to pass. And trust me, not without
great and sufficient reason, does the Emperor your Master repute himself
happy: this only good fortune being of force enough to discharge his mind of
all sorrows and cares, that former occasions moved him with all. Now know I
how to recompense his princely kindness, honoring me with so good and happy
tidings, but that it may please him to accept of me hereafter, as his loving
Brother and faithful Friend. No other thing my Lord (quoth the Duke) does his
Majesty desire, and to begin this amity and alliance between you, he
requesteth that if his Son Palmerin has heretofore found such favor in
your eyes, you would now confirm it, by giving him to wife the Princess
Polynarda your Daughter, whom he will not marry until he have brought home
your Son Trineus. As for the other conuentions of the marriage, this Letters
shall certify you: so kissing them, he delivered them with very great
reverence.

And her shall he have with right good will, said the Emperor, for a fitter
husband can she not have: I think likewise her self will consent thereto,
for the good opinion she had of him while he remained in our Court. But because
I will not displease the King of France, who in like manner requesteth her for
his Son and heir, I will confer with the estates of the Empire, and then
deliver you certain answer. So the Ambassadors withdrew themselves to their
lodgings, and the Emperor caused the Letters to be read before all his Princes
and Lords, who could no way mislike of this marriage, and therefore great joy
was made through the Empire, in hope the Prince Trineus should soon be
recovered. These joyful news soon spreading through the Court, at length
were brought to the Princess Polinarda in her Chamber, who not able to
conceal her sudden joy, ran to Bryonella, saying. Sweet friend, now
may thou rejoice with me, in that our loves are now assured us, whereof
before we utterly despayred. Ah my Brionella, Heaven has now confirmed our
fortunate success, in that my Palmerin is found to be the Emperors Son of
Constantinople, whereof he has certified my Lord and Father by his Embassage,
and how Palmerin has heard tidings of my Brother Trineus, whom shortly he
will bring home again, yet not without thy Ptolome I hope. Therefore (my only
copartner in love and fear) let us abandon all grief and sorrow, which
greatly may prejudice our health and welfare: and now dispose our selves to a
contented resolution of life, attending our long desired fortune. God grant it
may be so, quoth Bryonella, yet my mind persuades me that we shall not see
them so soon as you ween. The Emperor having conferred with the Lord of
Allemaigne, who very well allowed the marriage of his daughter with Palmerin:
determined to send to the Emperor of Constantinople ambassadors, for perfect
confirmation of the marriage. And by general consent, the Duke of Lorrayne and
the Marquess of Licena, were chosen for this present Embassage. Which being
done, the Emperor went to the Empress Chamber, and sent for his Daughter
Polynarda, who was so joyful of these happy news, as she could scant imagine
how to dissemble her content, when she should come in her Fathers presence,
yet shadowing it from any open suspect, after she had saluted her Father with
great reverence, the Emperor, thus spoke.

Daughter, you have hitherto refused so many noble offers, as hardly can I
permit to move you with any other: yet once more will I try you again, in
hope you will stand upon no more refusals, but join with me in opinion, as
beyond all other best beseemes you. The man of whom I speak, is noble
Palmerin, of whose honorable behavior you have some knowledge, and for no
other cause has the Emperor sent his Ambassadors, advise your self then
what you answer, for all our nobility allow the match, and thereto have
generally subscribed their consent. The Princess covering her inward joy with
modest bashfulnesse, thus answered.

If heretofore my good Lord, I excused my obeisance to your commandment,
especially for taking a husband, it was only for the promise I made to my
Brother Trineus: but now seeing it is your pleasure, and the good lyking of all the estates, as also that the marriage shall not be solemnized till my Brothers
presence: I will not disobey your command, assuring your Majesty, that more
content am I to match with him, then any other you named heretofore. And this
one special cause, that he labors to bring home my noble Brother, which
Heaven grant he may: otherwise can I not marry, without very great impeach
to mine honor.

The Emperor well perceived by the grace of her answer, and her countenance
now nothing sadoe or melancholy, that she was nothing offended with this
motion, wherefore he said. Happy may I count my self fair daughter, that
among all the Christian Princes you have chosen such a Husband: therefore
apparel your self to morrow in the best sort you may, for then shall my
Lords the Ambassadors see you. So departed the Princess to her Chamber, and
no more speeches were used till the next day, when the Emperor sent for the
Ambassadors of Constantinople, and in the presence of the principal estate of
the Empire, ratefied the marriage between Palmerin and his daughter. And for
further confirmation thereof, promised to send his own Ambassadors with them,
to satisfy (on his behalf) the Emperor, Florendos and Palmerin. For which
exceeding gentleness, the Duke of Mec^ena (in the Emperors name) thanked his
Majesty, earnestly entreating him to dispatch them thence so soon as might
be, because their charge was to return with all possible speed. This
resolution absolutely set down, the Emperor (for the greater honor) caused
them to dine with him at his own Table, and grace being said by the Lord
Almoner, the Duke of Mecana desired his Majesty, that he might see the
Princess Polynarda: whereof he made promise so soon as Dinner was done, when
taking the Duke of Mecaena by the one hand, and the County of Reifort by the
other, brought them to the Empress Chamber, where they found the Princess in
such sumptuous ornaments, and accompanied with such rare grace and exquisite
beauty, as they judged her rather an Angel then any earthly creature. And
greatly was the Duke abashed at such a singular spectacle, not knowing how to
frame his opinions: but having humbly saluted the Empress, came to the
Princess, and on his knee reverently kissed her hand, with these speeches. Let
it not displease ye fair Madame, that I use this honorable duty to you: for
I do it in this respect, as to the gracious Lady and Empress (hereafter) of
Constantinople.

By this mean he secretly conveyed Palmerins Letter into her hand, for which
the Princess gave him many devout thanks, which were coupled with such
magesticall gestures, as neither to Nero or Galba were done the like, no not by
Constantine himself to the Pope. And though the Dukes words had raised a sweet
blush in her cheeks, yet could she with such choice answers excuse the same,
as gave greater countenance to all her behavior. Then turned the Duke to the
Emperor, and smiling, said. Trust me my Lord, now do I verily believe what
has heretofore been told me of the Prince Palmerin, that he is an especial
Judge of the beauty of Ladies, for in mine opinion, he has chosen one
without a second: and of her may truly be affirmed, what the Poets described of
Helena, tearming her the Goddess of beauty. With this rare Princess to be
matched an Husband so famous, well may be said, the couple to be without
compare: for the fair formed Paris may not be equalled with Palmerin. So the
Ambassadors departing, the Princess withdrewe her self to her Chamber, where
reading her friends Letter, her joys and pleasures redoubled, because she
might now boldly credit her fortune.

And before she would forget the invention her spirit offered, ^hee presently
wrote an answer: earnestly entreating him to hasten his return, to abreuiate
her languishing desires, which now made her life but a shadow of death. Having
close sealed her Letter, she sent it to the Duke by one of her most trusty
Ladies, with diverse other rich gifts and presents. The Duke of Lorraine and
his company ready, departed thence with the Ambassadors, and wind and
weather serving so well, they arrived at Constantinople the day before
Florendo's his nuptials. News being brought hereof to the Court, Palmerin
accompanied with many Princes and Knights, went to the Haven, and at the
landing of the Ambassadors, Palmerin embraced the Duke of Lorr^ine, and the
Marquess of Cicena: and so ryding to the Palace, beguiled the time with
diverse discourses, where among, the Duke of Lorraine thus spoke. Sir Palmerin,
I always did imagine, that those strange adventures a^chiued by you, during
the obscurity of your younger years, would in the end reveal your honorable
parentage, and make your name for ever immortal: and were the Prince Tryneus
with you now, for the very best condition in the world would I not leave your
company. Gentle Duke, answered Palmerin, if I did not persuade my self, how
greatly I should comfort your mind, by recovering your Prince Tryneus: I
should account my life so unhappy, as presently I would ^^sire my death. God
grant quoth the Duke, that you may find him again, for that will be the
greatest good that ever came to our Empire: considering the virtues,
magnanimity and special chivalry, which is as current in our young Prince as
in any other. And thus they spent the time till they came to the Palace, where
the Duke of Lorraine after he had saluted the Emperor and the Princes,
delivered the message committed to his charge. Wherewith Palmerin was not a
little pleased, considering what he had read in his Ladies Letter, which
discovered the sorrows she endured for his absence: but being assured of her
firm loyalty, as also that she was now promised him in marriage, his cares
were the less, commanding the Duke to be lodged near his own Chamber, that
he might the better confer with him of his Mistress, whom he loved as dear
as his own life.

Chap. XXXVII.
How after the Prince Florendos and Queen Griana, were espoused together,
Palmerin was sworn Prince and heir of Greece and Macedon, by the consent of
the Lords of the Empire and the Realm.

THe Ambassadors of Allemaigne being now come, the Emperor was advertised
thereof, and considering that the Princes of Thrace and Macedon, had expected
their presence for the space of six days, it was appointed, that on the
morrow the Prince Florendos and Griana should be married. And the day being
come of this long desired wedding, she was clothed in such rich and costly
garments, as though she had been still a virgin. But here to set down the
sumptuous vestures of her, her husband, the Emperor, the Empress, with diverse
other Lords, Ladies and Gentlewomen, also the solemnity and ceremonies, both
at the Church and at the Palace, would waste a great deal of time in vain,
and without any pleasure or profit to the Readers, and therefore I will let it
pass under your conceit, and speak of such things as are most needful.

After that the Prince Florendos and Griana were espoused by the Patriache of
Constantinople, the whole train returned to the Palace, where before the Gate
was erected a goodly Theater, hanged round about with cloth of Gold, and
therein were set many Chaires and Canapies of estate. There was the Prince
Palmerin placed in the cheifest seat, the Emperor and Florendos on the one
side, and the Empress and Griana on the other: then was Palmerin sworn Prince
of Greece, with all the observations in such causes accustomed, by all the
Lords of the Empire, from the Emperor himself to the very meanest Gentleman.
In like sorts did the states of Macedon, his Father Florendos first beginning,
the Duke of Pontus next, and in the self same order as the Imperialistes had
done. This done, the Tables were covered, and all the Princes placed
according to their dignities: the Emperor and Empress at the cheifest, the
new married couple at the second, and the Prince Palmerin at the third: so
consequently the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marqusses, Counties, and all the rest
in order. As for the magnificence of the service, the royal order observed, the
Tryumphes, Momeries, Masks, and dancing: would but fill paper with needless
reports, in that your judgments can conceive thereof sufficiently. But the
Tabels being withdrawn, the noble Gallants went and Armed themselves, and
entered the field which was appointed without the City, and furnished with
Scaffoldes and standings for the Lords and Ladies, where the afternoon was
spent bravely at Tylt and Tourney, with dainty chivalry performed by
Frysoll, Olorico, the King of Sparta, the duke of Pontus and many other
knights. When night was come, and Supper ended, the Bride and Bridegroom were
honorablye brought to their Chamber, and Florendos being alone with his Lady,
thus began. Ah sweet Madame, how many sorrow^s have I endured, in
expectation of this long desired h^ur^? but (...) at length compassed my wish,
I hold my self sufficiently satisfied: giving credit to the ancient
proverb, That true love never wants his reward, and that which I thought
would have been my death, has now returned me greatest honor and profit. In
sooth my Lord, answered the Queen, I was evermore persuaded of your loyalty:
but where necessity rules, reason has no place. And if by the exterior
action I have been disloyal to you: yet my heart, which first of all I gave
to you, never diminished in will to love you firmly. For which Tarisius very
often reproved me, notwithstanding in the end, and by the sufferaunce of God
I think, he received the reward, that the usurper of another man's right
deserves. But why should we (my Lord) call now to memory things past, or
remember matters which breed nothing but heaviness? it is for you to excuse
me, and for my self to love and honor you. All the points of their former
divorce debated between them, to such effect their pleasures sorted in the
end, as that night she conceived with a Daughter, which proved to be beyond
all other in beauty. On the morrow the Prince Palmerin entered the Lists
royal, because this day he desired to Ioust: before him went the cheifest
Princes of Greece on foot, and six Trompets to make him way: he managing his
Horse with such lofty voltages, as every one delighted to behold him. After
he had done his reverence to the Emperor, he gave the spurs to his horse
to encounter Frysoll: but when they came to meet, Frysoll threw by his Lance
and would not touch him. The like did the Prince Olorico and diverse other
Knights, whereat Palmerin somewhat angry, s^rooke his Lance into the ground
and brake it: and causing himself to be unarmed, went up to the Emperor in
his standing, to see the pastime of the other Knights, and he was no sooner
come, but the Emperor thus spoke to him. Be not offended my Son, because
you have unarmed your self without trial of the Ioust: for the Knights have
done as best beseemed them, not to adventure on their Lord and Master. But if
you would so feign have some sport^ with them, you must hereafter disguise
your self from ^^ing known: otherwise I see you shall but (...) your labor.
When Palmerin heard these words, to the end he might somewhat delight the
Emperor and the Ladies, especi^^lie such as never saw his behavior in
chiu^lrie: he was determined the last day of the Tryumphe to come suddenly
among them, and Armed in such sort as none should know him. In bree^e, now
is the last day come, and the Emperor understanding that Palmerin would
enter the Listes disguised, went to his standing, and Palmerin secretly
entering his Chamber, found there a white Armor, such as the young Knights was
accustomed to wear, which his Dwarf had there provided for him: Armed
himself presently therewith, and mounted on a Horse of the same color,
entered the Field on the assailants side, because he had heard, that this day
the King of Sparta would encounter the Duke of Pontus, Frysoll, Olorico, and
other of the most gentle Knights in the company. The Emperor knew Palmerin,
among all the rest, and said to Florendos: what think you (Son) of the white
Knight? Do you know him? No my Lord, quoth the Prince, I know not what he is
but me thought he entered with a iollie countenance, it now remains to see
what he can do. At the encounter, Palmerin vnhorssed the Prince Olorico,
afterward the Duke of Pontus, and five other Knights in his company: then
having broken his Lance, the Emperor sent him another by a Squire, willing him
(for his sake) to employ it as he had done the other, but he would make no
answer because he feared to be known. Now was Frysoll much offended at the
Prince Oloricos misfortune, wherefore he would revenge his Friends cause: but
the king of Sparta, esteemed a hardy and approved knight, stepped between
them, and being cast from his horse, was so hurt with the fall, as he was
carried forth of the Field to his Chamber. Then Frysoll gave spurs to his
Horse, and encountered Palmerin with such puis^aunce, as he made him loose his
styrrops, and had he not caught hold about his horse neck, he had fallen to
the ground: but Frysoll, his fortune was so bad, as his Horse stumbling fell
down, and his Master under him, whereupon the Emperor said to Florendos,
that the Knight in white Armor was his son Palmerin. In sooth my Lord, quoth
the Prince, his fortune is good if it be he, and well may he be esteemed the
worthiest in the company. The duke of Lorrayne hearing their talk, said.

Marvel not my Lord that Prince Palmerin has so good success, for in
Allemaigne have I seen him do much more then this, and so much, as my Lord
the Emperor has been constrained to command them give over. Palmerin seeing
himself Master of the Field, departed as secretly as he came thither, and
so did the Emperor, Florendos, Griana, and all other Ladies* among whom the
young Princess Armida was most pensive for her Friends misfortune, so that by
her countenance her inward affections might easily be discerned. But on the
morrow, when Palmerin sent for all the Knights of name with whom he had
Iousted, and every one knew that he woonne the prize of the last days
Tryumphe: the sorrow of the Princess Armida was converted into pleasure,
reputing it an honor to her Knight to be vnhorssed by her Brother.

When the Emperor understood that Palmerin was jesting with the Knights, he
came into the Hall, and taking him by the hand, merrily said. See here my
Friends the white Knight, whom you all were so desirous to know, but if you
find your selves agreeued with him, you must lay the blame on me: for I was
the only cause of this enterprise, to the end that having made open proof of
himself, you all might witness his valor and bounty, who after me decease
must be your Lord and Governor.

Now were all the Knights well contented again, especially the Prince
Olorico and Frysol: who though he was somewhat bruised with his Horse falling
on him, came and embraced Palmerin, saying. In sooth my Lord, the strength of
your arm and Lance yesterdaye, has given us good experience of your virtue:
yet our desire to revenge our companions foil was such, as had you been our
Father we should not have known ye. It may be (said Palmerin) that ye made
no reckoning of the Knight, who handled ye in this rough manner: or that you
thought him not worthy to bear a Lance, because you refused to Ioust with
him the other day. A kind ^loute (quoth Frysoll, perceiving how Palmerin
iested) and queintlie delivered, is this your recompense to the Knights that
Freendly spared you? If I had known so much before, I should have cried
quittance with you before we parted. These words Frisoll spoke in such sort,
as Palmerin imagined he was in choler: wherefore he thus answered. Good
brother I pray you excuse me, if in doing my deuoire I have offended ye:
when you please I will do penance for it, if it be but to please her, who
cannot hide her good will toward you.

Heereuppon all the three Friends embraced together, taking leave of each
other till the next morning, when a new Tourney was begun again, and
continued for five days together: the honor whereof (to make short) happened
to Frysoll, until the last day, when a strange Knight came into the Field,
and brought one with him resembling a Giant in stat^re, who with a Turkish Bow
and enuenomed arrows, ^lewe and wounded very (...). So that Palmerin seeing
the spoil of his Friends, was constrained to go Arm himself, and defying
the Giant, overcame both him and the Knight that brought him.

Some have reported this Giant to be a Mon^ter, inform of the Centaures that
encountered Hercules at the nuptials of Hippodamia: but such rediculous follies
are not here to be inserted, and though the Spaniard in his History affirm
it, yet carries it no likelihoode, wherefore leaving such impertinent
discourses, let us proceed as occasion does lead (...).

Chap. XXXVIII.
How the aged Knight Apolonio, found Netrydes, father to Frysol, and brought
him to Constantinople, where he was made Governor general of Hungaria: and
how Frysol espoused the Princess Armida.

APolonio having received Frysols Letters, and a brief direction for his
journey, to the place where he should find his father Net^ydes: followed his
intent with such ^iligence* as he came to the Castle where he remained, and
found him sitting at the Gate, being newly returned from hunting in y^
Forest. No sooner (...) Apolonio beheld him, but he presently knew him, (...)
^eigning that he and his company were Knights errant, saluted him, and
dem^unded if he would give them entertainment for that night, because they
knew no place of lodging near at hand. Netrydes, who was ever of a most noble
mind, (...) them very courteously, commanding their Horses to the stable,
and themselves to be honorably feasted at Supper. All supper time, Netrydes
very earnestly eyed Apolonio, persuading himself that he had seen (...)
before: and Apolonio likewise well regarded Netrydes, neither daring to
question with other for ^^are of misconcei^.

In the end, Apolonio thoroughly resolved that this was the man he ^^ught, and
seeing two young Gentlemen sitting at the Table by him, he thus began. I pray
you Sir tell me, are these two Gentlemen your Sons? They are Sir, answered
Netrydes. Have you not one more (quoth Apolonio) elder then these? Then
Netrydes remembered his son Frysol, whom he judged to be dead because of his
long absence: wherefore breathing forth a very great sighe, said. In truth
Sir, I know not whether I have (...), for it is long since I lost (...) eldest
Son by great misfortune, and hitherto heard no tidings of him, nor know I
whether he is living or dead. By what mishappe* I pray you Sir, quoth
Apolonio, did you loose him? Whereupon Netrydes discoursed the whole
circumstaunce, in self same manner as Frysol had reported: whereby he was now
assured that Frysol was his son, and so without dissembling any longer, said.
I can resolve ye my Lord, that he is yet living, and in very good disposition.
O my God (answered Netrydes) if* these news may be true, then am I the most
happy Knight in the world. And so are you, said Apolonio, for he is living,
recovered of the disease he had when he departed from you, and is now one of
the most esteemed Knights in all Greece: so that having delivered the Queen
Griana from prison, which victory he obtained in the company of noble
Palmerin, against the two Nephews of King Ta^isius, he is found to be near
kinsman to the E^presse. For which cause he has sent, and I am expreslie
hither come, to bring you with me to Constantinople, to the end you may
receive your own by right, I mean the principal regiment in the Realm of
Hungari. Ah Heavens, answered Netrydes, for over be your praises, in revealing
the wrong my Brother did, when causeless he banished me my native Country:
but that I may be resolved in one doubt, I pray ye tell me, were ye not
sometime of my Brothers Court? Yes truel^e answered Apolonia, and to your
Father I served as a Page in his Chamber, now in respect of the manifold
courtesies* I received at your hands, for ever I vowed my self to do you any
service, desiring you with all possible speed to hasten your departure: for I
greatly doubt we shall not else find your Son at the Court, because he
determines to journey with Palmerin, in the search of Trineus the Emperors
Son of Allemaigne.

Hereupon Netrides leaving the charge of his house to one of his Cozins,
departed with his Wife and his two Sons: making such speedy dispatch in
their journey, as not many days after the Triumph, they arrived at
Constantinople. Which when Frysoll understood, he went to meet them: being
accompanied (for the greater honor to his Parents) with Palmerin, the King of
Sparta, and many other young Princes. There were many salutations and
welcomes, given with great joy by the Son to his Father, Mother, and
Brethren, and by the Parents likewise to their Son, with such exceeding
^ignes of love, as you can better conceive, then I express. After all these
courteous gr^etings, they went to the Court, where began a fresh occasion of
joy, between the Empress and her Nephewe Netrydes: she then embracing him in
her Arms, thus spoke.

Ah my noble Nephew, how have the Heavens blessed me with special favor, in
suffering me before my death to see my cheifest Friends, whom I was out of all
hope to behold again: especially you, whose long absence from your Country,
has rather delivered imagination of your death then life. Nevertheless, it is
the providence of the highest, that after all the troubles you suffered in your
youth, you might receive the recompense in your age, by the knightly honor
and bounty of your lineage. In sooth Madame said Netrydes, not so pleasant to
me is high preferment, as that I live to see my son again, for having
contented my self in my little Castle, with a life free from offense and
sollitarie, I did account it to exceed all other: but now seeing in my
declining years, the God of Heaven has thought good that I might profit his
people, the thought were base and abject in me to make refusal. So long were
they devising on these and other matters, as the good night being given on all
sides, the Emperor caused these new come Friends to be conducted to their
lodgings.

But on the morrow when Palmerin came to bid the Emperor good morrow, he thus
began. You know my Lord, that a Common wealth without a head and Governor,
(as for example) is the Realm of Hungaria, cannot long endure without
sedicious tumults or rebellion: wherefore, under your Majesty's reverend
regard, I think it expedient that my Sister Armida should be given in
marriage to Sir Frysoll, because in nobility of mind and perfection of
judgment, hardly may so good a Knight be found, nor she enjoy a fitter
Husband, and so may the Realm lineallie discende, from Netrides now aged, to
his noble son.

The Emperor liked well of this advise, wherefore the same day were Frysoll
and the Princess Armida espoused together: to the good lyking of all, but
especially of the lovers themselves, whose secret desires were now
effectually requited. After the feast was ended, Netrides instituted Governor
of Hungaria, departed with his wife and Sons to his Kingdom: where he was
received very honorably by his subjects, who had not forgot their former love
to him: and the unnatural dealing of their king his deceased brother.

Chap. XXXIX.
How Palmerin took his leave of the Emperor, his father and mother, to follow
the search of the Prince Trineus.

Certain days after the solemnity of this honorable marriage was ended,
between Frysoll and the young Princess of Hungaria, Netrides likewise gone to
his seat of government: all the Lords and Princes of the Empire, except such
as continually abode in the Emperors Court, returned to their own homes, y^
like did all the strange knights that came to the tryumphs, except the king of
Spar^a and the Lords of Macedon. Wherefore Palmerin now remembering his promise
to his Lady, and how long he had stayed slothful at Constantinople,
determined to depart, and understanding that his Father was with the Emperor,
came to them with these speeches.

My gracious Lords, it is now three months and more, that I have remained
here by your commandment, contrary to the promise that I made my Lady:
wherefore (^y your leave) I am now determined to depart hence, before the Duke
of Lorrayne return back again, that he may assure my Lord the Emperor that
I am gone to seek my Friends. My Son quoth the Emperor, unwilling am I
thou should leave us so soon, but if the matter may not be contraryed, in
respect you are bound to her by faithful promise, who above all other
deserves loyal service: I neither may or will gaine-saye you, but entreat
your return so soon as may be. You shall therefore take with you a good
company of Knights, who may prevent any s^nister occasions, which your
travail in strange Countries happily may offer: that my heart enjoying life
by your presence, may once more see you before my date be expired.

I beseech you my Lord answered Palmerin, grieve not your self by my absence
which shall not be long I hope, neither will the multitude of Knights avail in
my enterprise, for more by fortune then by force of Arms must the adventure
be finished. Do then as you think good answered the Emperor, in mean time
I will cause provision for your train. Palmerin having now license to depart,
persuaded Frysoll so earnestly as he could, to abide a^ Constantinople, as
well for the love he bare his Sister Armida, as because he was loath to depart
the new married couple: but all the circumstances he could use, might not
persuade him, for his religious vow to his Friend, exceeded, his affection to
the Princess: so that for a flat resolution, he answered, that nothing but
death should seperat their company. Palmerin seeing Frysoll continue in his
former amity, and that the desire which conquers all men, could not prevail
in his noble mind: reioysed greatly thereat, determining to recompense his
princely kindness, if Fortune did not contrary him in this enterprised
journey. And fearing least any new occasion should arise to delay this
intent, dispatched presently his Letters to the Emperor of Allemaigne and his
Lady Polynarda, honoring his highness* Ambassadors with many sumptuous
gifts. Having now ordered all his affairs, and every one being ready to
mount on horseback, he came to bid the Queen his Mother farewell, for well
he knew, that if she could any way hinder his departure, his journey should
be soon prevented. The Queen with motherlie love embracing her Son, said.
Ah my Son, (...) thou been so short a time with me, and will thou now leave
me? trust me it is a point of great ungentleness, to deal so hardly with thy
mother: but seeing the Emperor and my Lord have given their consent, my
gain-saye will be to little purpose. And nothing would it avail me to set
before thine eyes, the inconstancy of Fortune, her sleights and treachery,
commonly against great persons: when they are in the way to prosperity, honor
and renown. Therefore my son, I commit she to the protection of Heaven,
desiring thee to regard mine honor, which by thee ought to be defended, and now
may run in danger of common reproach, in that the vulgar sort judge after
their own humors, not according to the quallitie and estimation of virtue.
For this cause let thine return be the sooner, as thou tenderest my life and
thine own good.

All which Palmerin promised to do, and so coming down into the Court,
found there the Emperor and his Father mounted on horseback, who bare him
company two miles from the City: where after many courtesies between them,
the Emperor and Florendos returned to the Court again, where the Duke of
Lorrayne stayed their coming, when taking his leave likewise, went aboorde,
and sailed with so good a wind, as in short time he arrived in Allemaigne,
where he was graciously welcomed by the Emperor, and especially by the
Princess his Daughter, to whom he reported the honorable behavior of
Palmerin, and how he was sworn Prince of Greece and Macedon. Hereof was she
so joyful, as never could she be satisfied, with the discourse, making many
demands to the Duke, as well of the Tryumphes, Tourney and disports, as also
of the marriage celebrated at Constantinople: whereto the Duke returned such
fit aunswers, as nothing wanted to extol her Friends honor, yet without
any occasion of iealouzie to the Princess, whereto amorous Ladies are
commonly subject.

But now returning where we left before, you must note, that Palmerin being
departed the confines of ye Empire, entered his Fathers Realm, where in every
City he was entertained with great tryumphing: especially in the City of
Hermida, where the Merchaunt dwelt that was Palmerins Master, for whom he
sent, but he was advertised by his Wife, that her Husband was gone to the Sea,
and his two Sons with him, wherefore he gave her many rich gifts, and
Letters for his Masters free enfranchise and liberty. At his departure from
thence, he came to the place where Vrbanillo his Dwarf was borne, whose father
was there living a poor ancient Knight, and his Sister of as tall stature as
Vrbanillo, whom Palmerin (at her Brothers request) sent to Constantinople to
his Mother. And for the honor of the order his Dwarfes Father had received, he
gave him the Uillage wherein he dwelt, and in the presence of the Macedonians
put him in possession thereof, who not a little commended the discreet and
liberal mind of the Prince.

From thence he iourneyed to the chief City of Macedon, where remained the
aged King his Grandfather: but how the Citizens entertained him, and what
honorable Tryumphes were made at the Court, I list not here set down,
because it would be more tedious then benificiall. As for his Aunt the
Princess Arismenia, she at his coming met him in the base Court with all
her Ladies: and as Palmerin fell on his knee before her to kiss her hand, she
stayed him in her arms, saying. God forbid Sir Palmerin, that the Knight of
the greatest fame in the world, should reverence so simple a Damsel as my
self: but rather am I bound by duty to honor you, as the man by whose
especial virtues, our lineage is this day crowned with perpetual memory.

Fair Aunt, answered Palmerin, if before I knew you to be my Fathers Sister,
I devoted my self to your service, with much more affection shall I desire to
follow it now: wherefore suffer me (sweet Madame) to kiss your hand, as
being the Lady to whom I rest continually bounden. I beseech you my Lord,
quoth the Princess, to pardon me, for never shall Macedonian Maiden be so
rep^^^ued, but that she well knows her duty to her betters. At these speeches
came the King of Sparta, the Dukes of Pontus and Mecaena, and the Prince
Eustace, whom the Princess welcomed with exceeding honor. After all
courtesies ended, Palmerin said.

I understand Madame, that the king your Father is crazed and sickly: if it be
so I am very sorry, I pray you therefore let us go see how his Majesty
fares. When you please my Lord, quoth the Princess, for I think if
heretofore he received health by you, Fortune may at this time afford the
like: and yet (as I have read) there is no remedy for troublesome age, but
only death it self, which is the Gate to immortality, and ends all
diseases whatsoever. So entered they the Kings Chamber, and the Princess going
to the bed side to her Father, said. My Lord, see here the good Knight
Palmerin your Nephew, may it please you to speak to him, and bid him welcome?
Well know I that he is right welcome to your Majesty, were there no other
cause then the happy recovery of your former health, which his aduenturous
travail heretofore brought ye.

The good old King, whom the palsy caused to shake and tremble: raised
himself up a little, and beholding Palmerin, with weak and feeble voice,
thus spoke. Come near my noble Son, that these arms half dead may embrace
thee, and my lips now dry and withered, may once kiss thee before I die. So
holding him between his arms, and lifting his eyes to Heaven, said. O my God,
for ever be thy name honored and praised, in vouchsafing me to see my Son
before my death. Ah sweet death, the end of all miseries, and beginning of
felicity, now art thou welcome, forbear not thy stroke, in that I have now
seen the honorable defense of my Subiests hereafter, yea such a worthy
Freende for them, as never had they the like. Ah my Son, how dearly ought I
to love thee? how gracious has thy remembrance been of me? yet feel I my
self so weak and feeble, as nature cannot prolong my life three days. Alas,
I know not which of us twain has greatest cause to rejoice: either the
Father seeing his Son, even when he is ready to leave him, or the Son
finding his Father attending his coming before he give up the ghost. I hope my
good Lord, said Palmerin, that you shall not leave us so soon, therefore take
a good heart, and that no doubt will prolong your life. Alas my Son, quoth
the King, unwieldy age has so weakened my body, and even dried up my vital
blood, as longer I may not live: and had not hope to see thee lengthened my
languishing days, thou had found my body breathless, which yet sustaineth
feeble life, only by thy presence.

Now that I may leave this world with content, and travail with better quiet
to mine end: tell me (good Son) the whole matter concerning thy Father
Florendos, with the perfect discourse of thine own fortunes. Then Palmerin
rehearsed every circumstaunce, both of his Fathers delivery, how he had
married the Queen Griana, and in what estate he left them both at his departure.

Chap. XL.
How the aged King Primaleon of Macedon, graundfather to Palmerin, dyed, and
how the King of Spa^ta espoused the fair P^incesse Arismen, Sister to the
prince Florendos,

NOt two days had Palmerin stayed in the Court of his Graundfather, but the
aged king resined his life to the celistiall powers: for which cause all ye
triumphs ceased, and general sorrow entertained for the loss of their good
king. Arismena who so reverently loved her father, as in his life time she
would not match in marriage with any one, because it was his will it should be
so: never showed her self disconted therewith, but her Father being now dead,
she committed the whole affairs of the Realm to the Count Roldin, one
appointed for that office by general good liking. With such honorable pomp
was the funeral obsequies executed, and the Princess gracious behavior
therein so especially commended: as the young King of Sparta became amorous of
her, and discovered his mind to Palmerin, entreating him so to favor the
cause, as he might make Arismena his Queen.

Palmerin very joyful of the Kings motion, in that he was one of the cheifest
estates of Greece, acquainted his Aunt with the Kings request, and what an
honor it was to her to be so matched. Nor was the Princess heart so cold by
her Fathers death, but seeing the young beautiful King loved her so well, it
began to warm again: so that considering her own estate, being now in
years past four and twenty, she made some excuses by her Fathers late
^ecea^e, But Palmerin perceived by her modest ye^lding looks, that the heart
consented, although the mouth was loath to utter it. Wherefore the next day
they were espoused together, by which mean the King was more affected to
follow Palmerin, as he determined before he came from Constantinople, as well
for the great kindness he found in him, as for his favor in furthering him
with the end of his desires.

Now was the King more importunate on Palmerin, to accept him for his companion
in his travail, who at length condiscended, although he imagined that his
Aunte had rather have her new Husband ^arrie with her. The day being
appointed for their departure, Palmerin concluded with the King of Sparta, that
he should send Arismena to Constant^nople, there to stay his return wish her
Brother Florendos. For her safe conduct thither, all the cheifest Knights that
came thence with him where chosen, except the Prince Eust^ce Son to the duke of
Mecaena. And Palmerin fearing his voyage would be longer then he expected,
commanded Vrbanillo his Dwarffe to return to the Queen Arismena: and if I
^^ay (quoth he) longer then a year from Constantinople, go then to Allemaigne
with this Letter to comfort my Lady, and take with thee thy Sister, whom I
sent to the Queen my Mother.

The Dwarffe (although he had rather have gone with his Master, then attend on
Ladies) not daring to gainsay him, returned with Arismena, who in short time
after arrived at Constantinople, where the Prince Florendos very joyfully
received her, being not a little contented that she was joined in marriage
with the King of Sparta, yet his Fathers death he took very heavily. How
welcome she was to the Emperor, the Empress, and Qu^^ne Griana, I doubt not
but you can sufficiently imagine, who cont^^^allie comforted her till her
Husbands return. Before Palmerin departed from Macedon, he established all
things in due and decent order, creating the Count Roldin Lieutenaunt general
for the Realm, commanding as dutiful obeysaunce to him, as to their
sovereign Lord the King his Father. Afterward he took order that his
shipping might be ready, because he would delay no longer the search of Trineus.

Chap. XLI.
How Palmerin and his companions sailing on the Mediterranean Sea, were taken
by, Olimaell Admiral to the great Turk: and their fortunes in Greece, where
Palmerin saved Laurana the princess of Durace.

ROldin established in the government of Macedon, and the Ship ready which
Palmerin had appointed, he went aboard with his vowed Friends that would not
leave him, vz. Frysoll, the Prince Olorico, the Duke of Pontus, the King of
Sparta, and Eustace son to the Duke of Mecaena. These six having sworn the
search of Trineus, committed themselves to the mercy* of the winds and Seas,
not knowing where they should first take landing. Having thus sailed six or
seven days together, and the Seas nothing rough or tempestio^s: they went up
on the deck to see if they could descry any shore. And as they were devising
merrily together, they suddenly espied a great Fleet of Ships, which with
wind at will made apace toward them: but because you shall understand of
whence and what they were, attend the sequel and you shall be resolved. The
Moore Olimaell, as ye have read in the former part of this History, after he
had given the Princess Agriola to the great Turk, entered into so great
credit, as in recompense of his gift, (...) was made high Admiral of Turkey,
so that being renowned for a Knight of Peerless desert, the Turk gave him
the charge of his great Army, where with he should continually disturb the
Christians. This Olimaell was General of this huge Fleet descried by
Palmerin, whereat somewhat amazed, he called one of the Pilots, demanding if
he knew the ensign of whence they were. The Pilot had no sooner beheld them,
but he presently said they were Turks, and no way there was for themselves
to escape, because he saw six light Galleys were made out to hem them in, and
the rest came mainly upon them. But Palmerin as a Prince experimented in
dangers, thus spoke to his companions.

Noble Friends, where Knightly force or be^^tie cannot avail, it were mere
folly to use it, we are but six and all in one vessel, and far we cannot
^lie before we shall be taken: I think it best therefore that w^e use ^ound
dissimulation, and so expect when Fortune will better teach us the way to
recover our loss, and revenge us on our enemies to their confusion. Withdraw
your selves, and leave me alone to talk with them, because I can well speak
the Arabian language. Yet think not that ^owardise or fear of death makes me
use these speeches: for in an action invincible, hardiness and knightly
prowess will be esteemed as folly and indiscretion. Have then patience my
good Friends, I hope that all shall turn to our good. No sooner had he ended
his speeches, but he heard the Captain command them to yield, or else they
should die^ Die? quoth Palmerin, that goes very hard: assure us our lives and
we yield, otherwise not. I promise thee, said the Captain, neither thou nor
thy company shall have any harm. So seazing upon the ship, they brought it to
the Admiral Olimaell, presenting to him all the Knights they took therein: for
which he heartily thanked them, saying.

Tell me Gentlemen and dissemble not, are ye Turks, or Christians* Sir, quoth
Palmerin, seeing Fortune has been so contrary to us, you shall understand
truly what we are. We are Christians and poor Knights, searching adventures to
gain honor and profit, in some Princes service be he Heathen or Christian.
And because we can not now show you what we are able to do, so please you to
suffer us enjoy our liberty, and grant us the benefit of our Armor, we will
promise you loyal and faithful service. Olimaell, who was by nature stern
and austere, seeing these six Knights so young and brave accomplished persons,
imagined their assistaunce would greatly avail him: wherefore he thus
answered. Gentlemen, if you will swear to me by your faith, that you will not
depart from me without my license, but will loyally employ your selves in what
I shall command, you shall have your Armor again, and I will not use you as
my slaves and prisoners, but as my honest companions and Friends. Which oath
they all took to him, wherefore they were immediately armed again and
remained in the Galley with Olimaell, who seeing their armor so rich and
costly, esteemed them to be of noble blood, and therefore caused them to be
very honorably entreated.

So s^yling on, at length they came near the great City of Albania, when
O^imaell commanded two or three Foystes, to go understand in what estate the
City was, who were advertised by certain Frenchmen, that the people were
unprovided of any fortifications, so that winning the Port, the whole City
might easily be conquered. These tidings caused them forciblie to enter* the
Haven, where setting all the Ships on fire, they went on shore, and
murdering the Warders of the Gates, ^ooke the City at the first assault,
when Palmerin and his noble Friends (to their great sorrow) declared how well
they could skill of such affairs. The City was overcome, and the chiefest
Citizens therein taken prisoners, the Turks following their fortune, marched
further, and came to the City of Durace, where the fair Princess Laurana
abode, of whom Palmerin sometime was amorous: when he imagined by her excellent
beauty, that it was she who so often solicited him in his dreams. Palmerin
being there come on land, presently knew the Country, wherefore he said to
his companions.

I now perceive dear Friends, that fortune forces us from ill to worse, this
speak I in respect of this City, against which we must be compelled to
fight: and not many years since, with the price of my blood I labored to
defend it. But because the Dukes Daughter is so good a Lady, as in my heart I
reverence and honor, I beseech you every one employ your self, to preserve her
and her Ladies, and demand them of the Admiral for our part of the spoil.

While Palmerin thus conferred with his Friends, Olimaell understood by
certain prisoners, that the City was very slenderly defended, therefore no
great maistrie to win it quickly. Yet at their first assault they were so
valiantly repulsed, as Olimaell and his men began to despair of victory:
wherefore he made open protestation, that he who first could enter the
City, should have any boon of him he would request. Palmerin joyful of
this promise, caused six scaling Ladders to be set against the wall, whereon
he and his Friends ascended, and on the wall cried, the City is ours:
wherewith the people within were so dismayed, having endured a long and furious
skirmish, as they all fled out at the further Gate. The Turks then burned
the Gates on the Sea side, and entering the City, put old and young to the
Sword. But Palmerin and his companions feigning to pursue them that fled,
ran strait to the Palace, at the entrance whereof they found many Moors,
who had taken the Duke, wherefore they went to find the Princess Laurana, who
sat in her Chamber, well near dead for grief, because sh^e heard that her
Father was slain. Her he committed to the custody of the King of Sparta,
Frysoll, Olorico, and Eustace, desiring them to comfort the Princess, in that
neither she or her Ladies should fall into the Tyrants power, and so coming
to Olimaell, on his knee he began in this manner. You know my Lord the promise
you made to day, by virtue whereof beca^se I first got over the wall into the
City, for my share I request the Dukes Daughter, and for my Friends that
followed me, her Ladies and Gentlewomen: for other spoil of the riches and
treasure we desire not.

Olimaell granted his demand, charging his people on pain of their lives,
not any way to offend the Ladies. In this manner was the Princess saved,
whereupon the Duke of Pontus presently went to her, and taking her by the hand,
acquainted her with this joyful news, whereto she thus replied. Can it be
possible that Palmerin, who heretofore ventured his life in my fathers
defense, against the Count Passaco of Mecaena, should now become so familiar
among Turks and Moors? Has he so forgot his honor to God, that himself is
not only a vassaile to the enemies of his faith, but does likewise seek
their destruction that serve Christ Jesus? Be silent good Madame, answered the
Duke, for if his name be known, we all perish: what has been done, is for
the safety of your life, and our own likewise, which he has obtained of the
General of the Army.

With these words she was somewhat pacified, and the old cinders of love, which
now began to spread abroad, caused her to return this answer. In sooth, my
Lord, seeing I am become Palmerins prisoner, I think my honor in better
assurance, and my Fathers death is the less gree^ous to me, in that this
matter may sort to better effect then I can conceive. By this time was
Palmerin come to her, who entreated her to keep all things secretly, for he
would endure a thousand deaths, before she should be any way dishonored. In
time (quoth he) we may be delivered from these Hell-houndes: as for you and
your Ladies, the Admiral has openly commanded, that you be reverently used.

A thousand thanks my Lord, quoth the Princess, and seeing matters are so come
to pass, yet do I rejoice that I fell into your power. The City of Durace
left in the same state as Albania was, the Turks went all aboorde, taking no
prisoners thence, but Laurana and her Ladies, whom Olimaell intended to give
to the great Turk. So passing along the Coast of Thessalie, they spoiled many
Cities on the Sea side, took the King and many noble men: so that now they
were stored with a number of Christian prisoners. Now O^imaell feared, that the
Christian Princes hearing what spoil he made in their Dominions, would r^yse
a mighty power against him, wherefore he gave charge to his Pilots, to order
their course toward the City of Tubant, where as then the great Turk kept
his Court.

The King of Thessalie, three days before his taking, sent his Queen (who was
great with Child) to one of his Castel^, a good day journey from the Sea: but
when she heard her Husbands misfortune, the grief she conceived caused her
presently to fall in travel, when she was delivered of a goodly Daughter,
named Francelina. At this time the three Magical Sisters, who appeared to
Palmerin on the Mountain Artifaeria, and one of them afterward in his going
to Buda, made their aboode in an Isle thereby named Carderia. When they (by
their hidden Philosophy) heard how the King was taken, and should be kept in
perpetual prison, without the help of his Daughter which was newly borne:
they concluded to frame such an enchauntment, as ma^ger the Turk and his
power, as he that would not deigne to kiss his shoe, should be delivered
from imprisonment. Hereupon the youngest of these three Sisters, went to the
Castle where the woeful Queen remained, where she was very honorably
entertained, because the Queen desired to know, if the King her Husband was
dead or alive, and if any hope might be expected of his deliverance.

The Damsel Enchauntresse advertised the Queen, that in departing with her
Daughter Francelina, the King her Husband should enjoy his liberty, and in
time to come, she should be married to one of the best Knights of the world. We
need not doubt that the Queen was heereat amazed, yet the love of the Mother
to her infant, cannot conquer the love of the Wife to her Husband, which among
all loves is the most honest and loyal: so that in hope to free him again, on
whom depended her health and welfare, she gave her Child to the Damsel,
entreating that she might be used as beseemed the Daughter of a King, and as
the sweet beauty of the infant deserved. She returning to Carderia with the
Child, made her Sisters very joyful by her coming, who there nourished the
infant till she was three years old, when the beauty of the young Princess
began to show it self, as fair Cynthia does among the Stars.

Now did the Sisters enclose her in a strong Tower, made of purpose for young
Francelina, wherein was the most goodly Garden in the world, there was she
attended by her Nursses, and six waiting Gentlewomen: and such enchauntments
were imposed on the Tower, as no man should ever see her, unless he were the
best Knight of his time. The entrance into the Tower was very strayte and
narrow, barred up with a great Gate of iron, and guarded with two furious
Lions. Over the gate stood a huge Image of Copper, holding a mighty Mace of
Steel, wrought by such cunning, as if any Knight but he that was destenied to
end the adventure, should assay to enter, hardly might he escape to return
again. Moreover, the conqueror should not demand the first demand of the
princess, which was the deliverance of her Father, and for this cause the
Sisters enchaunted the fair Francelina, whose History we must yet forbear,
proceeding where we le^t before.

Olimaell being thus on the Sea, laden with Christian spoils and prisoners,
at length entered the port of the great City of Tubant, where he made such a
cheerful noise of Droms, Trumpets, Clarions, and Cornets, as though the
greatest Monarch in the world had come to take landing. The great Turk
maruailing at this sudden melody, sent one of his Knights to understand the
cause, who being certified by Olimaell, what great victories he had obtained
against the Christians, and the number of prisoners he brought with him,
returned to the Palace, where he told his Lord that the Admiral Olimaell was
come, and had brought with him great spoils from the Christians: where among
(quoth he) is a Christian King in person, many worthy Knights and Gentlemen,
and a young Princess of incomparable beauty. Not a little joyful was the
Turk at these news, wherefore coming into his great Hall, where the
imperial seats of majesty were erected, himself fate down in the ^one, and
fair Agriola of England in the other, expecting the coming of Olimaell, who
in tryumphant manner set forward with his prize, bravely mounted on a lusty
Co^rser sumptuously caparasoned, and aduauncing his sword drawn in sign of
victory. Being come to the Palace, Olimaell saluted his Lord with great
reverence, standing by him to make report of his conquest, and make present of
his prisoners after their estate and calling.

First he caused all the riches to be brought, and all the meanest captives one
after another to kiss the great Turks foot, then commanding them to be
carried thence, he began in this manner. It is not to be doubted, most high and
mighty Monarch, that this victory gotten on the Christians, enemies to our
Gods, has been obtained only by your favor, therefore it is good reason
that the principal head of this enterprise, the great and cheifest honor
should be done. The witness hereof are the treasures present, and these
prisoners abiding your mercy, who from the very meanest to the highest, shall
humble themselves at your majesty's f^^te. When very many had done their
reverence, and the King of Thessaly should next follow, who though his hands
were pinniond behind him, yet had a Crown of Gold on his head to show what
he was: although he saw himself in the Traitors power, and Olimaell had
commanded him to kiss his Masters foot, boldly made this answer. Nor will
I so much displease my God, uncircumcised Tirant as thou art, in such sort to
abase my self, being a king, and administratour of justice to faithful
Christians, to kiss the foot of the most^nastie and unclean creature in the
world, profaning the worship which I only owe to my maker. It is in thy power
to take my life from me, but not to constrain me do the thing wherein
consists my damnation, and a thousand deaths I will endure, before I yield so
much as in thought to thee. Uillaine (quoth the Admiral) dare thou speak so
irreverently in the presence of my Lord? did not my regard of him withholde
me, soon should I separate thy cursed he^d from thy shoulders. With these
words he gave the King such a blow on the face, as made him fall on his knees
to the ground.

Ah Traitor, quoth the King, well have thou shown the nature of a villain,
that without command strykest a King captive, and unprovided of Arms: but
might it so please thy Lord, in open Field will I prove thee a disloyal and
unchristened Curre, that thus abusest the blood royal. The great Turk seeing
the King so moved and angry, the blood likewise trickling from his nose and
mouth: commanded him to be carried thence, to one of the strongest Castles in
Nacolia, where he should be enclosed without any company, that his captivity
might be the more greenous to him.

When the King of Thessaly was departed, Palmerin approached, leading the
Princess Laurana by the hand, he and his five companions being Armed,
except their Helmets, Gantlets, and swords, whereat the great Turk maruailing,
demanded of Olimaell why he suffered them to be armed? My Lord, quoth he,
these six Knights were the first prize I took, who (after they had given me
their oaths) have done such service to your Majesty, especially this,
poynting to Palm^rin, one of the best knights that ever I saw: as full well do
they deserve liberty, which in recompense of aduenturing their lives in your
service, under your highness correction, I promised them. By Mahomet, answered
the great Turk, for thy sake I likewise confirm^ it, and if hereafter they
will abide with me, I will make them greater then ever they were. While the
Turk was making these promises, Agriola having well noted Palmerin, knew him,
and with the sudden conceit thereof was ready to swoune: but staying her
self on her Chair, said. O sole bounty, who is this? are not mine eyes
deluded and my thoughts be guiled? At these words Palmerin knew her, which
before he did not, by reason of her strange disguysed apparel: yet thought
he best to conceal his inward joy, least crooked fortune should now again
prevent him.

The great Turk seeing Agriola look so pale and wan, started from his Chair,
and taking her in his Arms, said. Alas Madame, has any sudden ill befallen
ye? has any one in this company offended ye? By our Gods, if I knew him,
presently should he die the death. The Princess trembling with fear, seeing
Hippolyta was not present, spoke thus in English. What will my Lord and
Husband Trineus say, if he be in this company, seeing I have so dissloyally
forsaken him, and thus (though God knows perforce) in steed of him, have taken
the enemy to him and our faith? Yet one comfort have I, that this Infidel
has not carnally known me, for which perfection I thank the heavenly
majesty. At these speeches Palmerin was so glad, as the fear of death could
not withholde him, but in the same language he thus answered.

Fear not good Madame, Trineus is not in our company, but so please you to
say I am your Brother, you may happily save my life and practice your
deliverance. The Turk misdoubting by Palmerins persuading, that he had caused
this sudden alteration, imagining him to be her husband of whom he had heard
her talk so often, in a great rage said: Knight, how durst thou presume my
Ladies presence, knowing the sight of thee would any way displease her? By the
Prophet Mahomet thou shall immediately die, that all such audacious villains
may take an example by thee.

Agriola knowing the Turks censures were very peremptory, and commonly no
sooner said then excuted, embracing him, thus replied. Ah my Lord, do not the
thing in haste, for which afterward you will be sorry, for I assure you on my
honor, the Knight that spoke to me is my Brother, and has left his Country
only to find me, and him I do love so effectually, as if you put him to
death, impossible is it for me to live afterward. When the Turk heard her
speak with such affection, qualifying his anger, said. I promise ye Madame,
for your sake he shall have no harm, but be entertained with love and
honor, conditionally that you forgette this melancholy, and henceforth show
your self more pleasant: for in seeing you sad, I am more grieved, then if I
had lost the moitie of dominions. In sooth my Lord, answered Agriola, now
shall I be merry, seeing you intend to love my Brother, for greater good
cannot happen to me then this gentle entertainment, and henceforth shall I
tread under foot, the sad remembrance of my Country and Parents, having him
with me, by whom I hope to gain my greatest comfort. So the Turk arising from
his Chair, caused Palmerin and Laurana to accompany Agriola, and the other
five Knights having kissed his hand, he went to his Chamber, commanding
Olimaell (for his greater honor) to usher Agrola, who as she went, thus spoke.

Believe me Admiral, if I was offended when thou broughtest me prisoners
hither, thou have now made me sufficient amends, in that by thee I enjoy my
Brother, whom I was out of all hope to see again. Alas Madame, quoth he,
little did I think him to be such a one, for had I: his usage should have
been much better, which fault I hope hereafter to recompense. I commend him
to thy countesie, said Agriola, let him and his friends have all things they
want, according as my Lord has appointed. So taking her leave of them, she
entered her chamber, where she and Hyppolita conferred with Laurana, of all her
fortunes passed, and the adventures of her Brother. Now was Palmerin and his
companions by the Turks commandment, lodged near the Palace, and to each of
them he sent a goodly Horse with costly furniture, thinking by these means to
conquer Agriola, and purchase that of her which he long had desired, and
talking with Palmerin, said. Right well may you be Brother to my Lady Agriola*
in that your beauty and complexion delivers great likelihood, seeing then our
Gods have permitted that for her comfort you should be brought hither persuade
her I pray ye, that she be no longer repugnant to my will, for could I have a
Child by her, I would think my self the happiest Lord on the earth. Beside, I
would have you forsake the folly of your Christianotie, and yeel^ your self
to our Law, which is much better then yours, and you shall see how our Gods
will favor you, likewise what great good you shall receive thereby. My Lord,
quoth Palmerin, I will labor with my Sister so much as lies in me to do^ as
for your Law, as yet I am unacquainted therewith, but when I shall find it to be
such as you assure me, easily may I be drawn thereto, and to serve you with
such loyalty, as so great an estate does worthily deserve. I confess my self
likewise greatly b^unden to your majesty, in that you have accepted my Sister
as your Wife, and to me a poor slave given life and liberty, which I beseech
you also grant to the Mariners, in whose Uessell it was my chance to be
taken, in so doing she may be greatly moved by your magnificent liberty and
mercy.

The great Turk presently gave his consent, causing their safe conduct to be
openly proclaimed, so Palmerin and his Friends humbly departing to their
l^dging, the Turk went to Agriolaes Chamber, where sitting down by her, he
thus began. Now shall I perceive Madame, how much your Brother may prevail
with you: for he has promised me so to order the matter, as you shall grant
my long desired suit. My Lord, quoth she, my Brother shall command me nothing,
but I will do it with all my heart: as for your request, it is not in my
power, but in the hand of God, who defends me as best him pleases. Nor can
I change the opinion I have held so long, though by having my Brother with me,
I enjoy far greater content then I did before.

It suffices me, said the Turk, to see you so well pleased, and as for your
Brother, that you may perceive how well I love him, before one month be
expired, I will make him the cheifest Lord in my Court, next mine own person:
so kissing the Princess, he departed to his Chamber. The day following
Palmerin said to his companions. You see my friends, how friendly Fortune
smileth on us, but least she change, as evermore she is wont, we must
practice some means to escape from these Turkish infidels. Beside, seeing we
have found the Princess Agriola, I hope Trineus is not so secretly hidden,
but we shall hear some tyding^ of him. Of her will I therefore enquire, if she
know what became of him and Ptolome when we left them: in mean while you may
closely conclude with our Mariners, that they be ever ready at an hours
warning, for I hope we shall set hence before eight days be past. Palmerin
went to Agriolaes Chamber, and there by good hap he ^ound her alone, whom
after he had humbly saluted, the Princess thus spoke to him. My noble friend,
you must be careful how you speak to me, especially before the aged Lady you
saw here yesterday, for she understands all languages, and if we be
discovered, there is no way but death, therefore when you see her with me,
confer rather with Laurana, and say to her what you would have me know,
because she is a Lady both virtuous and faithful. No less (Madame) have I
always found her, quoth Palmerin: therefore I beseech you make account of her,
and acquaint her with your greatest affairs, for she is daughter to one of
the most gentle Princes in the world. But Madame, I would gladly know what
became of Trineus, after that so unhappily I departed from you. The Admiral
Olimaell, quoth she, came with his Galleys so soon as you were departed, who
took us, and then separated us in sunder, scant permitting me to speak to him
or Ptolome, nor know I what is become of them. It suffices then Madame
answered Palmerin, that I have found you, for on you depends the life of
Trineus, who shall not long (I hope) be concealed from us, therefore advise
your self on the day when you will depart, for I have a ship ready to
carry you from this servitude. Thanks be to heaven quoth she, for so good
fortune, I will be so ready as you shall not stay for me. Now entered
Hippolyta, who brake off, their talk to other occasions, where we will leave,
and return^ to the Prince Trineus.

Chap. XLII.
How Trineus being enchaunted into the shape of a Dog in the Isle of
Malfada, there came a Princess of the Moors, who requested him of the aged
Enchauntresse, to whom he was given, and what happened to him afterward.

I Think as yet you remember, without repetition of the former discourse, in
what manner the Knight, Cousin to the Admiral Olimaell, to whom the Prince
Trineus was given, arrived by tempest in the Is^le of Malfada, and how he with
his people were transformed into diuors shapes of Beasts, among whom Trineus
bare the likeness of a goodly Dog. Being thus disguised, a young Princess
named Zephira, Daughter to the King of the same Country, came to demand
counsel of the aged Enchauntresse Malfada, for the cure of a certain disease,
which by strange adventure happened to her in this manner.

This young Princess one day being pleasant in her Fathers Court, among many
of her waiting Ladies, entered a goodly Garden, which abounded with great
diversity of sweet flowers, and after she had walked a pretty while in an
Arbor of Muske-roses, she espied a Gille-flower, which seemed so fair and
beautiful in her eye, as she was provoked to go crop it from the stalk.
Having this dellicate flower in her hand, wherein (by misfortune) a venomous
worm was crept, she took such delight in smelling it: as her breath drew up
the worm into one of her nose? thrilles, not being able to get it out again.
So the venom and poysome of this little worm, engendered a putrefaction and
other like worms, which gave a smell so filthy and loathsome, as hardly could
any abide to stand by her. Her Father not a little agreeued at this mischaunce,
sent for the most skillful Physicians, to see what remedy might bedeuised: but
all their pain and travail was in vain, for the disease continued still
without any amendment. In the end, the King fearing it would change to a Canker
incurable, and having heard what strange actions the Enchauntresse Malfada
performed, sent the Princess Zephira to her, where she being arrived without
any danger, because she would not hurt any inhabiting in the Isle, declared
to the Sorceresse the whole manner of her misfortune.

The Enchauntresse answered, that she could give her no remedy, and hardly
should she find any at all: except it were by an ancient Knight, who remained
in the Court of the King of Romata and Grisca, Realms subject to the Soldane
of Persia, and the knight was named Muzabelino. The Princess was so displeased
at this answer, seeing her intent frustrated, as she would receive no
sustenaunce: wherefore walking in the Feeldes to repress her anger, and so to
the Seaside, where the Ships lay confused, she beheld the Dog which was
the Prince Trineus, and so far in liking was she with him, as she des^red
the Enchauntresse to give him her, and having obtained her request, returned to
her Father, who lay sick in one of his Cities called Nabor, whereof the whole
Realm bare the name.

When the King saw his Daughter returned without cure, his Mela^cholie conceit
so struck to his heart, as with in three days after he died. Having made his
Testament before his deceasse, he gave his Daughter as her portion a City
called Elain, one of the greatest and surest strength in the Realm, with all
the signories belonging thereto. To Maulerino his youngest Son, he gave an
other like portion, which was a days journey distaunt from Elain. After the
Kings funeral rytes were solemnized, the Princess with her brother Mulerino,
went to their own possessions, doubting the fury of the Prince Tyreno, their
eldest Brother, who always had showen himself proud and contentious.

She being thus in quiet by her self, took no other pleasure then in
playing with her Dog, because he seemed very subtle and politic: so that
she prepared a Couch for him at her beds feet. Tyreno being crowned King
after his Fathers deceasse, began greatly to despise that his Sister should
enjoy the fairest City in the Realm: for which cause he practiced all the
means he could to put her to death. And that he might the better compass his
purpose, he secretly sent a Messenger to the master of the Princess horses,
that if he would kill or poison his Brother and Sister, he would give him
thirty thousand Seraphes, and make him governor of Elain. The wicked noble
man, greedy and covetous, seeing the large promise of the Tyrant, consented
thereto: so that one night the Princess being asleep, he entered her Chamber
with his Sword drawn, there to have murdered her, and afterward the Prince
her Brother. Trineus, who had lost nothing belonging to a man but bodily shape
and voice, seeing the Traitor enter his Ladies Chamber with his weapon drawn,
started up presently, and setting his two forefeete on the villains breast,
bit him so cruelly by the face and thraote, as he being unable to help
himself, was constrained to cry out aloude. With this noise the Princess
awaked, and her Brother likewise, who lay in the next Chamber, coming in haste
to see the cause of this outcrie, and knowing the Traitor, beat him so fore
with the Pommell of his Sword about the stomach, as in the end enforced him to
confess his treason. Whereat Maulerino not a little maruailing, and wrathful
at his villainous intent, smote his head from his shoulders. In the morning he
appointed such guarde in the City, as no stranger might enter without great
examination. The Princess knowing how her Dog had saved her life, loved him
afterward so tenderly, as she would feed him at her own Table, and none but
her self might give him any food. Here will we likewise pause a while, and
declare the deliverance of the Princess Agriola.

Chap. XLIII.
How the great Turk became enamoured with the Princess Laurana, by means
whereof he was slain, and Agriola delivered.

PAlmerin being upon a day in his Chamber with his Companions, practicing some
mean for the deliverance of Agriola: the Princess Laurana of Durace, came to
them, framing her speeches in this manner. Gentlemen if any of you be desirous
to deliver us from this cruel enemy, who holds us in this thrall and
bondage, I have devised the best means that may be, and thus it is. The Turk
the most luxurious and unchaste man in the world, not contented with infinite
number of Concubines, has many times made love to me, so that to compass mine
intent, I have made him promise within three days to grant his request. In
this time I have entreated the Princess Agriola to show him the most
disdamefull countenance that may be, which she has faithfully promised, and
for this cause has sent me to you, to convey hence all the riches he has
given ye, and which she herself will likewise send ye: so that when the
hour is come for me to fulfill his pleasure, one of you being privily armed,
shall in my place murder him, in revenge of the ill Christendom has
sustained, by the last unhappy voyage of Olimaell, who determines very
shortly, as I understand, to go spoil to Isle of Rhodes. Palmerin very glad
of the Princess notable invention, thus answered. Because (Madame) I lately
promised the Turk, not to depart his Court, but to keep him company, when he
denied his Admiral, that I and my companions should go with him to the
Rhodes: I cannot be the man to end this worthy revenge, therefore one of you
(my Friends) must resolve to perform it. In mean while, you Madame Laurana
may return to the Turk, pleasing him with fair and freendly speeches: for if
neeuer so little suspicion be gathered, not one of us can escape with life.
Fear not, said the Princess, I will use the matter so carefully as you can
desire, right well know how to inflame his heart with ^ueint looks, coy
disdaines, faint dealings, and other such like ceremonies used in love, as
fear not you to prosecute the stratageme, in that a beginning so good, must
needs sort to a successiue end. The young Duke of Pontus, who began to grow
affectionate toward the Princess Laurana, said.

In sooth my Lord, so please you to commit the charge hereof to me: so well
hope I to execute the same, for her sake that did so woorthily invent it, as I
dare warrant to deserve no reproach thereby. For my first earnest to gentle
Love, shall be so gracious, as in qualifying the unlawful heat of our enemy,
I will bind my self never to love any other: and her faith received, if I
bring not his head to Madame Laurana, let me be accounted as one of the most
slothful Knights that ever bare Arms. Advertise me therefore of the place
and hour, and doubt not of my faithful performance. At this pleasant answer
they all be ganne to smile, whereupon Palmerin thus spoke. Believe me noble
Duke, considering your youth and brave disposition, I know no one in this
^^mpanie more meet for the Princess Laurana, then you are: but I think when
the appointed hour shall come, you will be a little more angry with the
Turk then her, if she have you in that subi^ction as it seems she has. Yet
let us not now trifle the time in vain, when such weighty occasions
commands our diligence.

So returned Laurana to the Princess Agriola, acquainting her with the Knights
determination, when not long after, the great Turk entered the Chamber,
accompanied with Palmerin and the King of Sparta, and that he might the better
speak to her he so earnestly desired, he caused Palmorin to sit between him
and Agriola, then turning to Laurana, he began to devise familiarlie with her.
Which when Palmerin and Agriola perceived, the better to beguile him, he made
a sign to the King of Sparta, that he should enter into some talk of
hunting: whereat the Turk presently arose, and taking Laurana by the hand, led
her to the window, with these speeches. Mistress of my heart, and the very
fairest creature that ever mine eyes beheld, will ye grant the request I made
to you yesterday? See you not what great honor I have done to Madame Agriola?
Notwithstanding, if you will love me, I will make you my Wife, that I may have
issue by you to succeed in my kingdom, and your honors shall be nothing
inferior to hers. And though she still deny me the favor, which with long
and continual pursuit I have desired: yet do you consider my grief, and if
in short time you vouchsafe me no pitti, the extreme afflictions I endure for
your love, are rated at the price of my life. God forbid, quoth Laurana, that
so great a loss should come to the Oriental Empire by me, rather will I
forget the accustomed regard of mine honor, to be accepted in your grace and
favor. And the cause that made me defer so long from this answer, was the
fear I have of Madame Agriola, and her Brother, to whom I was given by your
Admiral after my Fathers decease.

But to the end, my Lord, that none of them may suspect our love, I think it
convenient that Hyppolita, who always lies in your Chamber, remove her self to
the Ladies attending on Agriola, and her shall you command to give me the Key
of my Ladies Chamber, which hitherto she has used to carry. By this mean
may I the more safely, and without suspicion of any one, come in the night to
fulfill your desire. The Turk imagining he had gained the Princess love
indeed, was not a little joyful, wherefore he said.

Sweet Lady, you shall have the Key as you request, nor shall she longer
lodge in my Chamber, whom you fear so much. Moreover, this night will I
persuade Agriola, that I feel my self not half current: and therefore to
keep her self in her own Chamber, and so may you come boldly to me this
night. If any man chance to meet ye, say that I sent for you: and if they
dare be so bold as to hinder your coming, in the morning shall my Ianizaries
put them to death, whatsoever they be. So taking a King from his finger,
wherein was a stone of inestimable value, he gave it to the Princess, saying.
Hold Madame, take this as a pledge of my promise: for which Laurana humbly
thanking him, thus replied. My Lord, I see Agriola, has four or five times
earnestly noted you, I think it good therefore that we break off talk,
assuring you, that I will not fail at midnight, when every one is fast a
sleep, to keep my word, and in the Mantle which you sent me yesterday, I
will covertly enter your Chamber, conditionally that you keep your promise to
me afterward.

Doubt not thereof, said the Turk, and so taking his leave of he^, went
presently to his Chamber, where finding Hyppol^ta, he commanded her to take
thence her bed, and ^arrie it to the Ladies Chamber, likewise taking the Key
from her, he sent it by one of his Pages to Laurana, who having it in her
hand, came laughing therewith to Palmerin, saying.

How say you my Lord, have I not handled the matter (...) it should be? the
Turk moved with pity of our strait imprisonment, has given me the charge
of Madame Agri^la: for by his Page has he sent me the Key of her Chamber, and
Hyppolita shall lodge now among other Ladies. And because this night the
action must be fulfilled, do you advertise the Duke of Pontus, that at
midnight he fail not to come, to use drunken Holofernes as he has deserved.
Palmerin and the King of Sparta, praising God, that their affairs went
forward so luckily, returned to their lodging, entreating Agriola to be ready
at the hour, that their intent might not be hindered by her. Afterward they
rehearsed to their companions, what was concluded by the Princess Laurana:
wherefore, quoth he to the Duke, prepare to bring your Armor secretlye to
Agriolaes Chamber, where you shall find the King of Sparta, and my self.
Mean while, Frysoll, Olorico, and Eustace, see that all out baggage be
conveyed into our shi^pe, which may safely be done without suspect, considering
what great multitude of Soldiers are embarquing, and therefore provide all
things ready against our coming. The hour being at hand, Palmerin, the King
of Sparta, and the Duke of Pontus, went to the Princess Chamber, where the
Duke was immediately Armed, except his Helmet, which he left on the Table,
covered with the Mantle whereof Laurana spoke, putting on the attire the
Princes wore upon her head, and so finely was he disguised in those habits,
as in the dark he might be reputed rather a woman then a man, and being ready
to depart about the practice, he said to Palmerin. I think it best my Lord,
that you and the King of Sparta, con^uct the Ladies before to the Port: for if
in mine attempt I should happen to ^aile, yet should you loose but the worst in
your company. So importunate was he with them to follow his advise, as he
caused them to depart presently to the Haven, where they were joyfully
welcomed by Frysoll, and the rest, without meeting any by the way to hinder
them. When the Duke saw himself left alone, and now he was to dispose himself
to his intent, falling on his knee, he thus spoke.

O my God, that suffered the mighty Holofernes to be be headed by thy
Servant Judith: affoorde me at this time the like grace, and give me strength
to work his death, who is the greatest living enemy to Christians. This said,
he went to the Turks Chamber, where he found the door ready open, and
approaching the bed, the Turk (who verily thought it was Laurana) raised up
himself, and taking him by the arm, said. Welcome, sweet Lady, for very
long have I expected thy coming. Ah Traitor, quoth the Duke, I am not she
thou look for^ regard of honor will not suffer her to sin in such sort.
With which words he stabbed him to the heart, and smiting off his head,
wrapped it in the Mantle that Laurana gave him: so going to Agriolaes Chamber,
and clasping on his Helmet, went presently to his Friends, whom he found in
prayer for his good success, and throwing the head into Lauranaes lap, said.

Madame, he that was so importunate for your dishonor, as a witness of his
love to you, has sent you his head here by me: wherewith I present you so
devoutly, as henceforth I dedicate my life and service to your disposing. A
thousand thanks my Lord, quoth the Princess, this virtuous act has made me
so constanlie to be yours: as in any thing that touches not the impeach of
mine honor, I remain with my uttermost endeavors to pleasure you. As the Duke
would have replied, the other Knights came to look on the head, which when
they ha^ cast into the Sea, they presently hoysed ^aile, and before day had
gotten far enough from thence.

In the morning, as the mariners came from their Galleys toward the City,
they espied the head floting on the water, and taking it up, showed it to their
companions, to know if they could tell whose it was. When they be held it so
dreadful, the mu^^achoes ^^routing out like (...) bristles, and the locks of
hair hang shagging down, they knew not what to think, and one of them having
well marked it, said.

By all our Gods, if I be not deceived, this is the head of my Lord the great
Turk, at which words all the other began to scorn and ^ocke. Hyppolita seeing
fair Phoebus let forth the morning light, came to the Princess Agriolaes
chamber, where not finding her nor Laurana, the chamber likewise dispoyled of
many things, she doubted immediately that they were fled, whereof to be
resolved, she went to the great Turks Chamber, and seeing the Pages standing at
the door, said. Why enter ye not? the hour is past, and my Lord is not yet
risen. Lady, quoth they, as yet he has not called us, and you know as
yesternight be forb^d our entrance till we were called: it may be he (...)
but badly this night, and therefore now is contented to take his rest. I fear,
quoth she, some other matter then sleep does hinder his calling you, so
thrusting open the door, and entering the Chamber, saw the blood dispersed on
the ground, and the headless truncke hanging beside the bed, with which sight
they made a very pitiful outcrie, whereat many noble men and Gentlemen came,
who likewise beholding what had happened, joined with them in sorrowful
complaints. Soon was the report of this murder blazed through the City, so
that Olimaell bearing thereof, ran thither with all haste, where he was no
sooner present, but Hyppolita thus began. Ah Olimaell thou broughtest the
Traitors hither that have slain my Lord, and by thy means has this treason
been committed. By all our Gods, said one of the Turks Nephews present, it
is true, but because thou have suffered Agriola, her Brother, and the other
Knights to escape, thou villain shall abide it dearly. So drawing forth his
Semitarie, killed Olimaell therewith, saying. Such be their reward that
traitorously betray their Sovereign: mine Uncle of a poor Ianizarie made
thee his chief Admiral, and thou for his kindness have requited him with
death, but now thy villainy is worthily recompensed.

Olimaell thus slain, his men ran furiously on the Turks Nephew, and ^^ew
him, with fifty Knights beside that defended his quarrel, and had it not
been for an ancient Basso, who with an hundred Soldiers came to part them,
they were in danger of a greater sedition, because they saw none pursue
Palmerin and his companions.

The Basso that had thus pacified this tumult, by promises persuaded the
Ianizaries, and prevailed so well with them, as the same day he was proclaimed
younger Brother to the Soldane deceased, and great Emperor of Turkey. Many
injuries did he to Christendom afterward, in revenge of his Brothers death,
which yet we will forbear, to rehearse what happened to Palmerin and his
companions being on the sea.

Chap. XLIIII.
How Palmerin and his companions meter two Turkish Ships, from whom they
delivered Estebon the Merchant and his Sons: and came to the Isle of Malfada,
where Palmerin lost them all, and of the sorrow he made for his mishap.

LAurana was so joyful, that she had so fortunately escaped the Turks hands,
and beside was so revenged of her cheifest enemy, as nothing could yield her
greater contentation: but how much more would she have rejoiced, if she had
known the slaughter at the Palace? As she sat discoursing heereon with
Palmerin and the Duke of Pontus, Frysoll being aloft on the de^ke, espied
four ships coming toward them with full sail, whereupon he called to his
companions, that they should presently arm themselves. For (quoth he) I see
two (...) Ships, and they have taken two other, or else my judgment fails:
let us therefore labor to withstand them, least we (...) a further danger.

No sooner had he spoken these words, but they all pu^ themselves in
readiness, so that when the enemy close^ with them, and many entered the
ship, thinking it was yielded, they had a sharper entertainment then they
expected, for not one escaped alive that came aboard, but either were slain or
thrown into the Sea. In brief, they overcame both the Pirates; and left not
one alive to carry tidings hereof into Turkey. Afterward, as Palmerin searched
the Cabins, to see what prisoners the Moors had taken: he espied his master
Estebon the Merchant of Hermida, and his two sons by him, with two other
Merchants, chained by the hands and necks, in like sort as the poor slaves
are in the Galleys, whereupon he said. Trust me Master, he that put this
collar about your neck, was little acquainted with your honest humanity. So
looking up and down for the (...) that opened the locks of the chains, he
^spied a Turkish mariner, who fearful of his life had hid himself, to whom
he said. By God villain, it thou she west me not quickly where the Keys are,
I will send thy soul after thy fellows. Spare my life most noble Knight,
cried the Turk, and I will give ye not only the Keys, but also show you such
secrets here within, as no other now but my self can show ye, wherein is
infinite wealth and riches.

Dispatch then, said Palmerin. The Moore fetching, the Keys, opened the
locks, took off their chains, and brake the manacles bound about their
hands, when Palmerin lifting up his eyes to Heaven, said. Thanks to my God,
that so happily sent me ^o succor Estebon, by whose means I came to the
knowledge of my Friends and Parents, and who first gave me horse and armor
for knightly service. Estebon hearing Palmerins words, maruailing not a little,
fell on his (...), saying. I beseech you my Lord to tell me your name, to the
end I may be thankful to him, by whom I have escaped the cruel Infidels, and
received such an unspeakable benefit. Why master, quoth Palmerin, know ye not
me* I am your servant Palmerin, who you first provoked to follow arms by your
liberality, and ever since have I followed that profession, and now have
requited some part of your kindness. Ah my noble Friend Palmerin, said old
Estebon, suffer me to kiss thy hand, for if heretofore thou did deliver me
from the Lions throat: what may I say of the danger from which I am now
defended? In happy hour was that knightly furniture given, and with
successful fortune have you employed them, but may it please ye to go with
me, I will provide you of all things necessary, and give you my Sons here
to be your Servant.

The King of Sparta seeing Estebon use such zealous speeches, said to him.
Father, you are very much deceived imagine you the son to the Emperor of
Constantinople, a simble Soldier? your age (Father) makes you forgette your
self. At these words the good old man somewhat astonished, excused himself to
the King, and turning to Palmerin, said. Alas my Lord, in not knowing you
otherwise then one of my servants, I have offered your excellency very great
wrong, and great has been my desert of punishment, using the great Lord of
Greece so irreverently. But pardon my boldness, noble Lord, and let mine
ignorance excuse the offense committed: for unwittingly did I fall into this
error. Content thy self good master, quoth Palmerin, in nothing have thou
offended me, but it thou will return to thy Country, these vessels
belonging to the Moors, and all the treasure in them, will I frankely bestow
on thee. Ah my Lord, answered Estebon, since Fortune has so happily brought
me into your company, so please you to lisence me, loath am I to depart from
y^u, for such store of Thieves and Robbers are on the Seas, as hardly can I
escape their hands alive. And sorry would I be, said Palmerin, that you or
these merchaunts should any way miscarrie, though perhaps your Wives would
gladly have ye at home: but this I must tell ye, that I cannot retu^ne to
Constantinople. I shall be contented, said Estebon, to stay your good leisure,
for a poor life is better to me in this company, then welthie possessions
among mine enemies.

Heereuppon, Palmerin commanding all the riches in the Moors Ships to be
conuayed into the other, set are on the vessels, and hoising sail, rode on
merrily. Within three days after arose a mighty wind at Northeast, which
carried them with such violence, as the Pilots ^old Palmerin they were now
come on the borders of Persia, and very near the Isle of Malfada, where they
arrived before the Sun setting. They seeing the Country so fair and
delectable, would needs go on shore to refresh themselves, for the Ladies
were so distempered with the rough storm, as they were very desirous to
recreate themselves a little.

Palmerin not able to shun this fatal chance, went on shore with his friends
and the two Princesses, all the other likewise speedily followed them, where
they had not long stayde, but they were all diversely enchaunted. The two Ladies
were transformed into the shape of Hindes, the other to Dogs, Wolves, and
Leopards, all of them running with such swiftness, as though the furies had
stood to chase them: but Palmerin could not be enchaunted, by reason of the
gift he received of the three wise Sisters on the Mountain Artifaeria,
whereat he greatly grieved, for such was his impatience thus to loose his
friends, as he entered into these lamentations.

Ah perverse and unconstant fortune, how diverse and dangerous are thy
trecheries? Ah stepmother too cruel, why do thou not exercise thy rage on
simple and forsaken souls, but on such as exceed in honor and virtue?
Doubtless my sin has caused this mishap, when I persuaded my Friends to
go against their Christian Brethren, only by fear of my wretched life. As he
stood thus complaining, he beheld the Lady of the Isle with her Servants,
coming to take the spoil of their booty, whereof being joyful, and
thinking by her mea^es to find some succor, be ran apace toward her, and
falling on his knee, thus spoke. Alas noble Lady, if ever power had pity to
(...) ye, instruct me how to recover my companions, and two worthy Ladies
transformed into brute Beasts. Malfada swelling with anger, to see that he was
not likewise enchaunted* answered. Wretched knight, accursed be their power
that defended thee from my incontations, live not thou in hope to find any
remedy here: for these enchauntments are of such strength, as they may not be
vndane, but by the most skillful magitian in the world, which thou art not I am
well assured, and therefore do thou but loose thy labor. But because by mine
art I cannot be revenged on thee, some other means will I seek for thy
destruction. You therefore my Servants, lay hands on him, and carry him to
the darkest of my prysons, that his following days may be spent in greater
misery. Uncourteous and despightfull, quoth Palmerin, are these speeches,
especially coming from one that vaunteth of her knowledge, nor can they be
measured by love or charity, and therefore shall I chastise such bad
creatures, as refuse a matter no way hurtful to themselves, but wherein their
own honor might be discerned. With which words he smote her head from her
shoulders, and valiantly buckling with the other, in the end left not one to
carry report of this massacre: afterward he fell into this lamentation
again in this manner.

Unfortunate Palmerin, see thou not how mishap will never leave thee? for
where thou thoughtest with comfort to find thy Brother Tryneus, now has
Fortune overwhelmed thee with a whole world of mischaunces. Ah noble Agriola
and gentle Laurana, two of the most modest Princesses that ever the earth bare,
how may you justly blame me? bringing you from where you lived in honor, in
this accursed place to be transformed to brute Beasts. Never did Circes deal
so cruelly with Grillus, and other Soldiers to the wise Ulysses, as this
villainous old bag has done with me. Had you yet been altered to Lions and
Tigers, you might have defended your selves from the cruel^ie of other Beasts:
but this damned Sorceress^ has transformed you, to the most fearful and
timorous among all other creatures, and therefore subject to every
inconvenience.

Ah loyal companions, who loved me deerer then your Father or Brother: from
the Turks which cherished you with such kindness and love, have I brought you to
the cruel and merciless Malfada. My noble Friend and Brother Frysoll, what
now will avail thy haughty Chivalry? And gentle Prince Olorico, who for my
sake forsook country, Parents, Friends and all: how may thou justly
condemn me of infamous reproach? What answer shall I make to mine Aunt
Arismena, for her noble husband the King of Sparta? And virtuous Duke of
Pontus, a Knight of high and especial quality: greatly may thou blame thy
fortune to be acquainted with me. Not forgetting the magnanimious Prince
Eustace, how can I excuse thy hard (...), to the good old Duke of Mecaena thy
Father? Had it pleased the sovereign Creator of all things, that among you my
self had taken the strange shape, my quiet would have been the better, to
accompany you with mishappe, as I have done in good fortune. Ah sweet Sister
Armyda, little think thou what offense thy Brother Palmerin has committed:
and gracious Mistress Polynarda, what torment will this be to your heavenly
thoughts, when you shall understand the sum of my ill success? Wandering
along in these mones, he came to the Enchauntresse Castale, where at the gate
he saw two Damoselles, who humbly saluting him, said. Welcome Sir Knight,
here may you repose your self if you please. Alas Ladys, quoth be, it is now
no time for me to rest, because the Lady of this place I think, being the
most ingrate and despightfull woman that ever I saw, has deprived me of all
my joy and comfort: but I hope I have so well paid her for her pains, as
hereafter she shall do no further harm. Yet if any of you have been so well
instructed by her, as to finish the deuellish coniurations, and will accomplish
it, or tell me, if by force they may be reduced to their former shapes, who
remain enchaunted here in this Islande, for ever will I be her Knight, and
will prefer her in honor beyond all other of her race. The Damsels (who
thought their Ladies cunning had brought them thither, that she might abuse
him, and afterward transform him as was her custom) being amazed at this
answer, thus spoke. Accursed villain, of an evil death may thou die, whom
our Mistress by her knowledge cannot transform, now know we that thou have
murdered her: but assure thy self to find us thy two most mortal enemies,
and though we can change thy Friends to their former shapes, yet in despite
of thy villainie, we will not, nor shall thou know how it may be done.

Away strumpets, quoth he, get ye going, or I will send your souls after
your Mistress: and were it not a disgrace to mine honor, to defile my hands
with the blood of such wicked creatures, by heaven I would cut ye as small
as flesh to the pot. Then came a knight forth of the Castle, who embracing
Palmerin, said. My Lord Palmerin, what fortune has brought you into this
accursed Island? Palmerin seeing such strange events succeed one an other,
knew not what to imagine: but at length returned this answer. You must hold me
excused Sir, for in truth I know ye not. Why my Lord, quoth the knight, have
you forgotten D^ardo, whose life you defended in the king of Bohemiaes Court?
By heaven, said Palmerin, I could not call you to remembrance, but tell me
good Knight, what adventure brought you hither? for my chance has been so
unfortunate, as the rehearsal would be most dolorous. Then Dyardo declared,
how the King had sent him with some small assistaunce, to pursue five Foystes
of Moorish Pirates, who had done many injuries to his subjects. And, quothe
he, after I had long time chased them, five other Galleyes came, and joining
with them, took me, and ^^ue all my men.

At length, by tempesteous wether we were cast on this Isle, where we landing
to seek fresh water, all the Moors were changed into Hearts, Dogs and Bores:
but the Lady sparing me in regard of amorous desire, has kept me in this
Castle a year and more, abusing me at her own pleasure, and never could I
compass any mean to escape hence again, for if I had but made offer near
the Gate, by forcible strokes have I been beaten back, yet not able to
discern who smote me.

Your hap, quoth Palmerin, has been very hard, but her cursed head lying on
the shore side, persuades me hereafter she shall do no more harm. But tell
me good Dyardo, is there no one within so skillful in her Science, as we may
win to do us some good? Not one, answered Dyardo, therefore am I loathe you
should stay long here, in doubt of further danger. I will then, said
Palmerin, go seek such a one as shall end these enchauntments: and because
you shall not be iniuried by any in the Castle, we will make them fast in
prisons till my return. After they had so done, they went to the stable,
where Dyardo gave Palmerin a lusty Courser, and taking leave of him, set
forward on his journey.

Chap. XLV.
How Palmerin departing from the Isle of Mal^ada, came to the Court of the
Princess Zephira, she that kept Tryneus transformed: where he was
entertained, to aid her against her eldest brother, who vexed her with daily
troubles.

SO soon as Palmerin had thus left the Isle of Malfada, and had y^ day
likewise passed a very dangerous river, at night he came to a little village,
where taking up his lodging, he fell in talk with his host in y^ Arabian tongue,
if he knew any one that was expert in Nigromancie. I know none, quoth the
Host, but an old Lady in an Islande hard by, to whom our Princess not
long since went, for remedy of a strange disease wherewith she is tormented.
Where abides your Princess? said Palmerin. Not past thirty miles thence,
(quoth the Host) in a City called Elain. Perhaps, quoth Palmerin, by her I
may be better resolved. So bidding his Host good night, withdrewe himself
into his Chamber, where many imaginations passed him concerning the Princess
Zephira.

It may be, (quoth he within himself) that the Enchauntresse unable to help
her, has yet assigned her to some man more expert in that devilish Science:
who compassing her health, happily may give me some counsel to amend my
misfortune. In this opinion the next morning he rode to the City of Elain,
heavy and sad, yet in hope of comfort: and as he came near the City, he
was enclosed with two or three hundredth light Horse men, whom the Prince
Maulerino Brother to Zephira had there ambushed, to taste all auaunt, currers
and Knights passing by them. Yet observed they these conditions, that who so
would take the Princes pay, and swear faithful service, should sustain no
harm: but such as refused so to do, were carried into the City, their
Horse and Armor taken from them, and they enclosed in strong prison. These
Moors were amazed to see Palmerin so richly armed, and much more beholding him
so bravely mounted, wherefore they said to him.

Yield your self Sir knight, and swear to maintain our Princess quarrel: or
else be assured thy death is present. The condition is very hard, said
Palmerin, but for I have heard the wrong offered by the king to your Princess,
I will sustain her cause, not as a prisonrr enforced heereto, but of mine own
good will, as all knights errant are bound by duty, to definde the just
quarrel of distressed Ladies. Presently was Pa^merin brought to the Princess
and her Brother, who were conferring together about these earnest affairs:
when the Knight that conducteth Palmerin, stepped to the Prince Maulerino, and
thus spoke. See here my Lord, a Knight lately taken, whom we have found
honest and courteous, we have suffered him to remain Armed, and commit him to
your opinion. While the knight continued these speeches, transformed Trineus,
who lay^ at the Princess foot, seeing Palmerin with his beuer open, ran and
leaped on him, whining and fawning on him so lovingly, as every one greatly
meruailed thereat. In brief, they might discern by cries, colling about his
legs, and pitiful mourning, that feign he would have spoken, and showed his
loyal Freende his inward complainings. The Princess meruailing at this
strange occasion, said. I think (Sir Knight) my dog knows you, for since
Malfada gave him me, I never could see him so faune on any body. In sooth
Madame, answered Palmerin, to my remembrance, I never saw your dog before
this present. Hereupon she called him to her, and made many means that he
should come to her, yet would he not leave Palmerin, but shaking his head,
still whined to his Freende, as craving aid and succor at his hand, wherewith
the Princess moved, thus spoke.

I pray thee Knight conceal not any thing from me, for I persuade my self,
that thou have been heretofore some Freende to the Enchauntresse Malfada,
seeing my dog is so loath to come from thee. Let me understand the truth I
pray thee, and if thou likewise wilt assist me against my cruel Brother,
thou shall be honorably used, and thy ordinary pay redoubled. Madame,
answered Palmerin, here may you behold the most distressed Knight living, and
a Christian, whose hard fortune has been such, as arriving in the
Enchauntresse Isle whereof you spoke, I have lost five Friends, my true and
honorable companions, and with them two Ladies, who in all virtues may not be
equalled. Yet have I revenged their loss on the old hagge and her servant,
whose breathless bodies remain for food to the fowls of the air. And
because I heard (fair Princess) your self was not long since with her, for
council in some unhappy fortune befallen you, feign would I know, may it
please you to grant me so much favor, if she assigned you to any other
more skillful then her self, by whom you not alone shall find remedy, but my
tormenting greefes may likewise be comforted. Good Knight, answered the
Princess, the Gods themselves will travail to help thee, and it may be I
have learned of her, by whose death thou have revenged the wrong of many noble
persons: some hope of further good, to ease those passions which thy speeches
bewray. True it is, that I stayed with Malfada the space of eight days, yet
not learning any thing of her worthy the rehearsal, this only excepted:
she told me that in the kings Court of Grisca and Romata, remained an ancient
Knight named Muzabelino, by whom (if my malady were curable) I should find
help, and by no other man whatsoever, so did she extol him beyond all other.
And had not the king my Father died soon after my return, and my injurious
brother ever since molested me, long ere this had I gone to that skillful man,
whom I mean to find, so soon as I can bring my troubles to any good end.
By all our Gods, quoth the Prince Maulerino, seeing Malfada is dead,
Muzabelino may finish all the enchauntments: but during her life, neither he
nor all the Magitians in the world were able to compass it.

As for the kingdom of Romata, it is very far from this Couutrey, the
greater will your pain and danger be in travailing thither. Right pleasant
will the pain be to me, said Palmerin, so may I recover my dearest Friends
again: and for you sweet Madame will I adventure my life, either to win you
peace with your Brother, or a happy victory by his death, that we may the
sooner set forward to Romata.

A thousand thanks good Knight, quoth the Princess, and this day shall we
know what our Brother intends: if peace, it is welcome, if war, we must
defend our selves so well as we may. Still did the dog cling about Palmerins
feet, so that he demanded of the Princess, if she brought him from the
Isle of Malfada, for doubtless, quoth he, I think it is some Knight
transformed by that cruel woman, who heretofore belike has known me. At
which words the dog howled exceedingly, when Pa^merin took an oath that he
would search all the world over, to find some mean to bring him to his
former sh^pe, that he might know from whence this love proceededed. The next
day the king Tyreno assaulted the City, who was slain in the battle by
Palmerin, so afterward was Maulerino crowned king of Nabor, and all the
Country enjoyed their former quiet: whereupon the Princess Zephira gave
Palmerin her dog, who requited her with many gracious thanks, because he
greatly suspected, that it was his friend Trineus transformed into that shape:
but now let us return to the soldane of Babylon, understanding how his Army
was discomfited at Constantinople.

Chap. XLVI.
How one of the Nephews to the King of Balisarca, brought news to the
Soldane of his uncles death, the foil of his Army, the loss of Palmerin and
Olorico. And how the Princess Alchidiana bought Ptolome, whom she greatly
honored for Palmerins sake*

THe King of Balisarca* (as you have heard before) being slain, his Army
discomfited and al his Galleys burnt before Constantinople, one of his Nephews
that kept the straight of y^ Bosphor, with two foysts, least any succor should
come that way to the Christians, by one Galley that escaped, heard all this
misfortune: wherefore making haste back again fearing to be taken, at length
arrived in the Soldans Kingdom, where not staying long, he posted to the
Court, and to the Soldane revealed all that had happened. When the Soldane
heard how his Army was thus overthrown, Palmerin whom he loved so well, and
the Prince Olorico lost in the storm on the sea: vexed with grief and rage,
he called his Lord Ambassador Mauce to to him, saying.

Haste thee good Mauc^^to to my Brother the Soldane of Persia, and desire him
to leu^y me a strong Army against the Month of March next ensuing, to
encounter with the Emperor of Greece: promising him the spoil whatsoever it
be, reserving for my self nothing but the ^^me of revenge.

Maucetto departed presently on his journey, and by the way met six Moors,
leading two Christians to the Soldans Court to sell, which were Ptolome and
Colmelio, of whom he demanded why they were so bound in chains?

My Lord, quoth one of the Moors, they be Christian slaves, who not long since
were taken at the Sea by Olimaell Admiral to the great Turk. And how came you
by them? said Maucetto. The Admiral, quoth the Moore, gave them to one of his
Cozins, who now is dead, and his wife being loath to keep them any longer,
sendes them to the Court to be sold for money. Maucetto bought Colmelio of
them, refusing Ptolome because he was somewhat s^cklie, and so passed on his
Embassade. The Moors coming to the Court with poor Ptolome, and placing him
among other slaves that stood to be sold, there came a deformed Moore, far
worsse misshapen then was Thersites y^ Greek, and he would needs buy Ptolome of
the Merchaunt: but Ptolome disdaining to be subject to so vile a creature, gave
him such a stroke on the stomach with his fiste, as made him tumble over
backward, saying. Thou monstrous Uillaine, let me rather die, then come into
thy subjection. At this instant passed by the Princess Alchidiana, smiling is
see the Moore lie along: but when she beheld the good personage of Ptolome,
she remembered her lover Palmerin, and was therewith moved thus to speak.
Now durst thou take such hardiness upon thee, being a bondslaue and a
captive, thus to strike a Moore, free of this Country? Ptolome perceiving by
the Ladies attending on her, that she was the Soldanes Daughter, falling on
his knee, thus answered.

Assuredly Madame, rather desire I death, then to li^^ at such an ill favored
villains control, my self being a Knight at Arms. Are you then a knight?
said the Princess? I am good Madaine, quoth he, although my servitude has
very much altered me. Alchidiana without any further questions, delivered the
Merchant two hundred Seraphes, and by two of her Squires caused him to be
conducted to her Chamber, where he was presently disroabed of his unseemly
garments, and clothed in such as well became a knight to wear: afterward,
she commanded her attendants to depart the chamber, and coming to Ptolome,
she thus began.

Now Sir Knight, I entreat you by the holy faith you owe to your best
beloved, that you will truly tell me, by what misfortune you happened first
into thraldom. Madame, quoth he, seeing of your own grace and bounty, you
have delivered me from these villains that made sale of my life, I will not
fable with you in any one point, but tell you a History repleat with
wonderful sorrow. Having revealed the manner of his taking, and all the
mishaps he endured ever since, the tears trickling down his cheeks, he
said. And yet sweet Lady, all these passed miseries, and still abiding your
slave, greeues me not so much, as the loss of my dearest Freende, the best
knight in the world, who went to see his Falcon fly, when the Pirates came
and unhappily took us. Tell me good freende, quoth the Princess, what may
the knight be called, of whom you make such estimation? Quoth Ptolome, he
names himself Palmerin d'Oliua.

O sovereign Gods, said Alchidiana, have you been^ companion to the noble
Palmerin? That have I in truth Madame, quoth he, and know more of his affairs
then any other man does. Unhappie that I am, said the Princess, now see I
well that I am deceived in all my hope. Say good knight, naie more, I conjure
thee by thy faith to the sovereign Creator of all things, to tell me, if he
be of our Law, and has been dumb of long, or no? By God Madame, answered
Ptolome, your adiuration is such, as rather will I make a sacrifice of my
self, then be found untrue to you in any thing. He is a Christian, borne in
Greece, and never had defect in his speech: if discreet consideration of
following events, either to escape captivity or death, did not enforce him to
feign such a deceit, for he is most expert among all other, in dissembling
any matter may turn him advantage. Then such has been my fortune quoth
Alchidiana, as his virtue, bounty and wise foresight, used for the space of a
year and more in my Fathers Court, made me so religiously vowed to him in
love, as never intend I to make other choice: and I swear by all our Gods,
that if I hear not the better tidings of him by thee, my spirit will forsake
this wretched body, and except better fortune among the souls in Elisium. Ah
imperious love, how wonderful is thy struck? My freende is contrary to me in
law and profession, a Knight errant, unknown, absent from me, and loves me
not: for these occasions, were I the only Daughter to the great Emperor of
Turkey, I neither can or will change my former opinion.

Hap then what shall, and let my Father make an oblation of my blood to his
secret Idol, I will not desist from loving him. And thou my Friend (quoth she)
to Ptolome, because thou have not hid the truth from me, be thou at this
instant free, and use thy liberty as thou please: for rather let me abide
the death, then the companion to my noble Lord suffer shame by me. Ptolome
falling on his knee, humbly kissed her hand, and began to reveal the
knightly chivalry, that Palmerin and Treneus sometime did in England: likewise
how they brought the Kings Daughter from thence, who remained captive among
the Turks, and her Husband given as slave to the Admiralles Cousin. It is enough
said the Princess, talk to me no more hereof, for by the great God, the
very remembrance of him is greater grief to me, then the merciless
servitude a poor slave endures. The love he bare to you, to the other knight,
and the young English Princess, whose misfortune I cannot sufficiently bewail:
calls me hence to travail in search of him, and may I find him with them,
right gladsome will the journey be to me, because he is the only darling
and favorite of Fortune. And now shall I tell you how I mean to couller mine
intent. My Father not knowing your captivity, to him shall I say how you are
the only companion to Palmerin, and hither are you come to seek him, as
having heard before that he remained in your service: of this I dare assure
you, his Majesty so dearly loves Palmerin, that he will deliver you all
things necessary for his search, be it by land or sea. And if your God shall
favor you so much, as in your travail you happen to find him, or else to
send me certain tidings of him, you shall do me the greatest honor, that
ever Knight did to distressed Lady. So forward was the Princess in her
amorous desire, and loath to waste time with tedious delay: as that day she
acquainted her Father therewith, and so cunningly she played the Dratrix, as
the soldane gave Ptolome Armor, Horses, Servants, and forty Knights to
attend on him. Beside, he furnished him with two great Ships, that he might
enquire at all the Ports on the Sea for Palmerin.

The day being come of his departure, he took his leave of the Soldane, the
Princess Alchidiana accompanying him to the Port, where for her adieu she
gave him a sweet kiss, saying. Sir Knight, if your fortune be such as to
bring me the man, who only has power to mittigate my torments: beside the
continual favors of a Princess, I will make you one of the greatest Lords
in the Orient. Madame (quoth he) I will do my diligence, and till I return
let good hope persuade ye. So ho^sing sail they set to Sea, where we will
leave him till he meets with Palmerin.

Chap. XLVII.
How Palmerin and the princess Zephira, departed from Elain toward Romata, to
seek Muzabelino, and what happened by the way in their journey.

AFter that Maulerino was crowned King of Nabor, the rebellious Subjects
brought to obedience, and the body of (...) ^laine king Tireno enterred, y^
young Princess Zephira and Palmerin thought long to set forward on their
journey, wherefore the king allowing them a very honorable train, bequeathing
them to their desired fortune, Having passed many regions, and sundry dangers
incident in travail, chiefly of a Basilisque, whom Palmerin with the help
of the dog Tryneus valiantly overcame. At length they entered y^ realm of
Romata, where by commandment of the king Abimar, their entertainment was
according to their estates, the occasion thereof being thus. This king Abimar
holding the greatest possessions in that region, would never yield himself as
subject to the signorie of Persia: whereat the sultan now growing offended, sent
an Ambassador to command him, presently to determine on his obedience, or
else he would ouer-run his Country with a mighty Army, and put both old and
young to the Sword. Abimar ^bashed at this threatening Embassade, demanded
counsel of the wise Muzabelino, what answer he should make the Ambassador,
whereto the Magitian thus anuswered. Fear not my Lord the threatening menaces
of the Soldane, for in that you have two noble Sons, so wit the Princes
Tomano and Drumino knights of high and special account: yet come there two
others, (one whereof may not be known) with the Princess Zephira, Daughter
to the King of Nabor, who shall deliver you from his tirannie, and make him
your Freende, therefore dismaie not to send him a hardy answer, as well
beseems a Prince free, and not to be commanded. And though one of his
knights that comes with the Princess shall a while be unknown to you, by
the bounty of his companion, with whom no other may well compare: yet ere long
you shall know him, to your no little joy and contentation. Abimar giving
credit to Muzabelinos speeches, gave charge in all the Cities where through
the Princess should pass, that she should be entertained with honorable
tryumphes, as if himself had been in company. And though the Prince T^mano
grieved heereat, who loved the youngest Daughter to the Soldane of Persia, yet
the King answered the Ambassado^ that he would maintain his right by the
Sword, and if the Soldane came to assail him, he would defend his Co^ntrey so
well as he could.

The Ambassador dispatched with this answer, Tomano came to Muzabelino,
saying. Ah my dear Freende Muz^belino, what wrong have you done me, in
persuading my Father to hold war with the Soldane? whose Daughter you know I
love in such sort, as if I obtain her not in marriage, hardly can my life long
endure. Content your slefe my Lord, answered Muzabelino: for if the two knights
that come, bring ^ortune for your father, you must expect the like for your
self. But, said the Prince, may I not know their names? Let it suffice
(quoth Muzabelino) what I have said, yet hereof I daer as^ure you, that they
are Christians, and extract of the greatest lineage on the earth, in bounty and
valor incomparable: whereof if you list to make experience, and thereby to
credit what I have said beside, I shall show you a mean auaylable for the
purpose. You shall cause two Tents to be erected by the C^dar Fountain, which
is half a mile distant from this City, in the one of them let be your
Brother Drumino, and your self, with ten of the best Knights in your
Fathers Court, and in the other let be your Sister: accompanied with ten of
her cheifest Ladies, and about a bow shot from thence toward the high way
side, you shall set up a Marble Pillar, where^pon let these lines be engraven.

Sir Knight, in these pauillions does remain,
A Lady fair, kept by a Princes son:
Foil him by Ioust, and win her hence again,
Thou may not pass before the deed be done.
If it happen that they pass by and see not the Pillar, send one of the Ladies
to them, to let them understand that they may not pass, before one of them
have (...) with the Prince and his Knights. If they be vnhorssed by him, the
Lady must be delivered to him: yet with this condition, that he refuse not to
grant her one demand. By Mahomet, s^yd Drumino husband to the Lady, I will
not meddle in this matter, he may be such a one, as if he hap to win my Wife,
he will be loath to restore her back again. Fear not that (quoth the
Magitian) he is so courteous, and has so fair a Friend himself, as he
neither may or will with-holde her. By heaven said Tomano, I will cope with
him, and to morrow let the Pill^r and Pauillions be erected, there will I
with my companions stay his coming. See here the cause why the King A^imar,
commanded the Princess Zephira and her Knights to be so honorably
entertained. By this time is the Princess come within a days journey of
Romata and Tomano with his Brother, Sister, Ladies and knights, betake
themselves to ^he pauillions, hearing that Zephira was come so near: and being
themselves Armed, their sister decked likewise in most sumptuous ornaments,
they vowed to break many lances for her sake.

Chap. XLVIII.
How Palmerin Ious^ed against Tomano, Drumino and their knights, whom he all
dismounted, and what entertainment the king Abimar, and the wise Nigromancer
Muzabelino made them.

BY this time is the princess with Palmerin, and her company, come to the
place where the pauillions were erected, and not seeing the Pillar, they passed
on: wherefore Tomano sent a Damsel to declare the conditions of the passage.
Palmerin feigning himself somewhat weary, made this answer. Damsel, you may
say to the Prince and his knights, that the Princess Zephira is not in our
guarde, as the Lady he fights for abides with him. Nor comes she hither to he
fought for, rather does she entreat him to spare us the Ioust, in that it will
be small honor to him to conquer knights ouerlaboured in travail, and whose
horses are not able for that exercise.

The Damsel certifying the Prince of this answer, he grew into anger,
swearing they should not pass before they tried their fortune: wherefore he
sent the Damsel again, who thus spoke to Palmerin. Sir knight, your excuses
may not serve you, you must either Ioust or leave the Princess behind you.
Trust me Damsel, answered Palmerin, sorry would I be to accompany her so
far, and leave her in the custody of one I know not, did your Prince show more
courtesy, if would agree much better with his order: but because he shall not
think, that we refuse the Iouste through fear or cowardice, say he shall have
his desire, both he and all his shall try their fortune ere we pass further.

This answer returned to the Prince, Drumino first showed himself in the
Field, and by importunate entreaty, certain of the Princesses Knights would
first try their valor: but such was their ill fortune, as Drumino unhorsed
them one after another. Zephira somewhat offended heereat, entreated Palmerin
either to win them passage, or else with his success she was content to stay
Prisoner. I go Madame (quoth Palmerin) and Fortune speed me, as I regard the
safety of your honor. Muzabelino, having acquainted the King with this
pastime, they came in habits disguised to behold it, at what time the Prince
Drumino encountered Palmerin. But not to hold you with tedious discourse
considering which way the victory is intended, the twe Princes and all their
knights were manfullye foiled by Palmerin.

The Ioust being ended, and the king returned again to the City, Muzabelino
came to Palmerin, and having saluted him with great reverence, thus spoke.
Worthy Lord, who only deseruest the name of chivalry, let me entreat you
to excuse the kings Son, who to make proof of your valor, by my means
attempted this noble adventure, from which you have escaped with great honor,
and to their shame that made the challenge. What are you Sir, said Palmeiin,
that know me so well, and the cause why I came into this Country? Your Friend
Muzabelino, (quoth he) whom you have taken such pains to find, and who
knowing you to be a Christian, will keep you from all dangers among these
Mahumetistes. Palmerin suddenly allighting from his Horse, came and embraced
him, saying Noble Friend, suffer me to kiss your hand, as a witness of my
reverence to your honorable age. Not so my Lord, answered Muzabelino, rather
suffer me to do my duty, to that incomparable person, by whose means ere
six Months be past, the greatest nobility in the world shall receive
incredible honor.

While these courteous ceremonies endured, the conquered Princess with her
Ladies came from the Pauillion, and saluting Palmerin with great courtesy,
said. See here, Sir Knight, the Lady, who trusting in your honorable
benignity, comes to submit her self at your disposition, being woonne with
more choice chivalry, then ever any other Lady was. Notwithstanding, I hope
that you will not refuse to grant me one demand, according to the conditions
agreed in the Ioust. Palmerin seeing her so discreet and modest, so sumptuous
in apparel, and accompanied with so many Ladies, judged that she was the
Kings Daughter, and Wife to the Prince Drumino, wherefore entertaining her
very graciously, he thus replied. Unfitting it is, fair Lady, that a
Princess of so high and special quality, should be subject to a poor and
unknown Knight: and though the agreement of the Ioust be such, yet do I
humbly thank you for this honor, bequeathing you to your former liberty,
and restoring you to him that has best right to you.

A thousand thanks worthy Lord, said the Princess, now I se'e the words of
Muzabelino to my father are true, that the Knight who conducted Madame Zephira,
as in chi^alrie he surpasses all other: so in sranke ininde and ltberalitic,
he has not his second, which was the cheifest cause why I adventured my
self in this hazard of Fortune. Madame, quoth Palmerin, if the wise
Muzabelino has used any speech of me in mine absence, and to my honor, it
proceeded not by my virtue, but his good will in so ^^^ing, which if I live, I
will one day acknowledge. Right welcome are you, said the Princess, and fair
Zephira, the rather for your sake: and such be the hour of your arrival
here, as you may obtain the end of your desires. Zephira humbly thanked the
Princess, Tomano, Drumino, and all the rest embracing Palmerin, thinking it no
dishonor to b^ conquered by him: they mounted all on horseback, and coming
to the City, found the King there, ready with an honorable train to
receive them, who saluting the princess Zephira, very kindly, said. No
marvel Madame, if you durst undertake so long a journey, having y^ only knight
of Fortune in your company, as my Sons have good occasion to witness: and
she that ommits her self to his charge, may be well assured of (...)
defense. Zephira with humble thanks requiting the K^^g, Palmerin and all the
rest graciously welcomed, they rode all to the Palace, where being
entertained in choysest sor^, Muzabelino still accompanied Palmerin, who forgot
not his woonted kindness to his loving Dog.

Chap. XLIX.
The talk that the princess Zephira and Palmerin had with the wise
Muzabelino: and how Palmerin departed from Romato to the Castle of the ten
Rocks.

THe Princess Zephira, who had not yet talked with Muzabelino, in the morning
sent for him and Palmerin, she causing them to sit down by her, began in this
manner. My Lord, if your great judgment have acquainted you with the cause of
my coming, and that you will do any thing for the love of Sir Palmerin, let
pity persuade you, for in you only consists my remedy. Madame, quoth
Muzabelino, use not such speeches, for what my study and practice has taught
me, you must make no account of, but refer your self to the supreme
Creator, who by the means of noble Palmerin, will restore your health, and him
will I acquaint with the manner how it must be compassed.

Your disease happened by smelling to a flower, and by the smell of another it
must be recovered. The flower appointed to give you health, grows in an
Arbor in the Castle of the ten Rocks, and kept by the enchauntment of a
Lady, more skillful in all arts, then ever was the skillful Medea. This Lady
deceasing an hundred years since, and more. She seeing before her death the
virtue of this flower, and of a Bird which is kept there by the self same
means, having inchaunted them in a Garden, the must sumptuous in the world,
raised ten Rocks of Marble without the Castle, each one ascending higher then
an other, and by these Rocks was the Castle named. Such enchauntment did the
Lady exorcise on them, as when any one thinks to pass them, presently
starteth out of each Rock an armed Knight, who returns the aduenturer so
forciblie, as to to this day they have not been passed by any. Courageous
therefore must he be that passes these Rocks, which if Palmerin by his bounty
and prowess do not accomplish, no man living can end the adventure: for by
force, not cunning must the enchauntment be ended. When the Princess heard,
that by the dangerous travail of noble Palmerin her health must be restored,
she thus sor^owfully complained.

Ah Gods, suffiseth it not that heretofore this good Knight adventured his
life, in the dangerous battle when my Brother was slain: but now he must
abide the devilish coniurations, where death is daily and hourelie expe^^^ed?
shall I consent to offer him such wrong, and be guilty of his blood, who
surpasses all other in chivalry? rather let my death be a warrant for his
safety, then noble Palmerin should endure such perrill for me. Lament not
Madame, quoth Muzabelino, before you have cause, he that slew Malfada, and
her Servant, is so specially favored of the heavenly powers, as no
enchauntment whatsoever has power to hurt him. Why Madame, said Palmerin,
think you my good will is less to do you service, then when I was first
brought to your Court? Forbear these tears, I pray you, and offend not your
self: for such is my hope in God, that what is done by man, shall be
destroyed by man: besides, it will be great reproach to me, if coming into
strange Countries to seek adventures, I shall depart without trial of my
fortune. Muzabelino hearing him speak so courageously, took him aside,
saying. Noble and hardy Knight, whom fear of death cannot dismay, happy
shall I account my self to do thee any service.

And to the end thou may with better affection follow this enterprise,
assure thyselfe to pass the Rocks, and enter the Castle with happy
victory, where ending all the adventures therein contained, thou shall find a
part of remedy for recovering thy companions, but not all, for the rest is in
the Tower of Malfada, where as yet thou can not enter, but at thy return
shall easily open, and in the end joyfully find all thy Companions and
Friends. For the rest, fear not my discovery of thy secret love and
parentage, which is the most noble in all Christendom, for rather will I be
torn in a thousand pieces, then so good a Knight shall be iniuried by me.
Seeing you know so much quoth Palmerin, I commit all to God and you, let me
therefore right soon crave leave of the King for my departure, because I long
that the Princess were eased. Right sorry was the King to part with him so
soon, yet the hope of his short return somewhat pacified him. And when the
news were spread abroad that Palmerin should travail to the Castle of the
ten Rocks: Tomano Drumino, and the Princess Zephira would needs bear him
company, which he being not able to gainsay, because they were importunate
on him, gave his consent. So departing from Romata, they made such haste in
their journey, as within few days after they arrived at the Castle: and
coming to the first Rock, they beheld a goodly Sword, enclose^ therein hp
to the cross. The two young Psinces maruailing thereat, allighted from their
Horses, and assailed by strength to pull it out. Which they were not able to
do: wherefore Tomano entreated Palmerin to try his fortune, who after many
courteous refusals offered to pull it forth, but a fearef^ll flame of fire
suddenly issued forth of the Rock, which compelled them to retire back,
wherefore Palmerin said to the Princes: This Sword I see must be none of ours,
therefore it is in vain to strive any further.

Chap. L.
How Palmerin passed the ten Rocks, vanquished the ten enchaunted
Knights, and entered the Castle, where he finished all the enchauntments:
Tri^eus returning to his former shape, and what happened to them afterward.

PAlmerin when he had failed in drawing the Sword out of the Rock, he
prepared himself to the Combat with the enchaunted Knights, whom as yet he
could not any way discern: but first he began his orisons in this manner. O
sovereign Creator, who evermore has succ^ure^ (...) adversities and fortunes,
this day give me strength to confound these diuelries and enchauntments, and
let thy name have the honor of a glorious victory.

Then giving his horse the spurs, gallopped onward, saying. Sweet Mistress
Polynarda, if ever your remembrance gave me aid and favor, now let your
divine regard comfort your servant. Being then between the two foremost
Rocks, a mighty Knight mounted on a lusty Courser, with a huge Lance in his
hand, called to him, saying.

Turn Sir Knight, you may pass no further, then furiously enco^ntering one
another, they met so roughly together with their bodies, as they were both
cast forth of their saddles. The Dog that still followed Palmerin, seeing his
Freend^ horse offered to stray, caught the bridle by the reigns with his
teeth, and would not let him pass any further. In the mean while, Palmerin
having fought with the Knight, and after a long and cruel combat, smote his
head from his shoulders. In brief, he was so favored of Fortune, as having
vanquished all the ten Knights, he passed the ten Rocks: and no sooner was
he mounted on the foremost, but a dark Cloud compassed him about, so that the
two Princes, Zephira and their Knights, to their great amazement lost the sight
of him, yet his former victory, exempted all fear from them of bad success.
There (...) Palmerins return till Sun setting; when the two Princes
demanded of Zephira, if she would depart thence, or stay there all night?
Depart? quoth she, no by my life, here will I abide the good knights return
from the Castle: whereupon her servants having erected their pauillions, they
there took up their lodging for that night. By this time Palmerin was come to
the Castle Gate, where looking on his Armor which was ^acked in pieces, his
flesh cut and mangled in many places, breathing forth a bitter sigh, said. If
yet this travail may avail the Prin^esse, and my noble companions that are
enchau^ted, let hap to me what please the Heavens, for their liberty is
more dear to me then life. Then looking on his Dog, who all his while held
the Horses bridle in his mouth, he remembered, that he had not demanded of
Muzabelino any thing concerning him, wherefore he said. Ah gentle dog, yet no
Dog (I think) but rather some Knight thus transformed, how forgetful have I
been of thy service in my necessity? why did I not demand the truth of
Muzabelino, what thou art? But may thou prove to be my good Friend Trineus,
when all the enchauntments of this Castle shall be ended, thy former shape (I
hope) shall be restored.

So striking at the Castle Gate, to see if any way he could get it open, at
length he looked up to the battlements, and beheld an ancient Knight, with
a long beard so white as snow, who furiously thus spoke to him. Proud Knight,
who made thee so bold thus to beat on the Gate? enter, unto thy further ill I
hope: with these words the Gates opened of themselves, when presently Palmerin
with his Dog entered, and the old man, who seemed ouerspent with years and
weakness, meeting him in the Gate, taking him by the arm, threw him violently
against the ground, saying. Thou that have overcome the ten Knights, young and
armed, what can thou do to an old man without defense? Wretched villain,
answered Palmerin, wherefore have thou strooken me? by the living God, did not
thine age excuse thee, soon should I lay the breathless at my foot.

Soft and fair, said the old man, thou shall have work enough to defend thy
self. So catching Palmerin about the middle, he wroong him so cruelly, as one
might hear his bones crack. O my God cried Palmerin, defend me against this
cursed devil. At length he forced the old man to let go his hold: when
began such a furious fight between them, as never was Palmerin in such
danger, in that eueri^ blow was given him, he thought did break all his
bones in pieces. The ^og seeing his Master in such extremity, caught the old
man by the throat, and never left tugging till he got him down, when suddenly
he vanished away, and was no more seen afterward. For this victory Palmerin
thanked God, and having cherished his Dog, entered further into the Castle.
Where he beheld most stately Galleries, erected on great colombes of Porpherie
and Alabaster, as never did he behold a more sumptuous spectacle.

In the midst of the Court was a goodly Tomb, enclosed with barr^s of beaten
Gold, and over it stood a goodly Table of Crystal, vphelde by four Satyrs
of Agatha: and on the Table was pictured the personages of a Lady, drawn by
such curious art and woorkmanship, as hardly could it be equalled through the
world. Palmerin approached to behold the counterfeit, which held in the one
hand a Book fast shut, and in the other a Key of Gold, poynting with the
Key toward the Gate of the Palace: whereupon he imagined, that this was the
Tomb of the Lady Enchauntresse, whereof Muzabelino had told him before, and
putting his hand between the golden Bars, the Image presently offered him
the Key. Heereat being some what abashed, he judged that this happened not
without great cause, wherefore taking the Key, he went and opened the Palace
Gate, and entering the great Hall, he found it so richly paued, and
garnished round about with such costly Tapistrie, as the greatest Monarch in
the world had not the like.

Looking behind him for his Dog, he beheld him suddenly changed to his
former shape, and running to embrace Palmerin, said. Happy be the hour of thy
coming dear Friend, to whom I remain for ever bound, in acknowledging the
special graces and favors received. But Palmerin deceived with so many
illusions before, would hardly give credit to what he now beheld, reputing
him rather some he (...) fury so disguised, only to entrap him with further
danger, which Trineus perceiving, spoke again. Ah my noble Friend Palmerin,
for Gods sake doubt no more, I am thy Brother Tryneus, who since thy coming
from Elain, followed thee in the enchaunted form of a Dog: rejoice then with
me, for since thy long desired hope has now so good an end, doubt not but the
residue of thine affairs will prove as fortunate. Palmerin being now
thoroughly resolved, I leave to your judgments the kind gratulations between
them, who well can conceive the wonderful joy of longabsent Friends,
especally of such as live and die for each other. Ah my Lord quoth Palmerin,
why did I not sooner acknowledge thee? the great succor thou gave me by
the^way, might well have persuaded me, yet though I still imagined thee my
friend transformed, hardly could I resolve thereon till further experience.

A^ fortune, if heretofore thou have been envious toward me, yet now have
thou recompensed me in such sort, as now I have no cause to exclaim on thee.
So sitting down together, Trineus revealed the manner of his taking, and all
that befell him till his transformation. Which Palmerin to requite, discoursed
the knowledge of his Parents, how he was betrothed to his Lady Polynarda, and
how he recovered the Princess Agriola, who afterward^ was likewise enchaunted
in the Isle of Malfada. (...) at these news, was ready to die with grief,
but Palmerin persuaded him of the wise Muzabelinos promise, that shortly he
should return again to the Isle, and there finish all the enchauntments
whatsoever. While they thus conferred together, they saw suddenly, set
before them a Table furnished with all kind of meats, and a hand holding two
great Golden Candlesticks, wherein burned two fair wax Tapers, beside, they
heard a trambling of their feet that brought the meat to the Table, but they
could not discern any living creature. Trust me, quoth Palmerin, I think
some body knows I have an hungry appetite, ^itte down with me good friend,
for these two months had I not a better stomach. After they had well
refreshed themselves, the table was presently taken away again, and they
entering a goodly, wardrobe, were under a Canapie of cloth of Gold, they found
two maruailous costly green Armours, so beset with fair Emeraldes and great
Oriental Pearls, as never proud Pagon wore the like in heathenesse. By them
stood two goodly Sheeldes of proof, in the one being figured the Arms of
Constantinople, and in the other the Creast of Allemaigne, whereat Palmerin not
a little maruailing, said to Trineus. I think my Lord, that these Armours were
provided for us, let us try if they do fit for our bodies, so helping to
arm each other, they found them so fit as they had been purposely made for
them. There found they likewise a Silver Casket, wherein were two sumptuous
Kingly Crowns of Gold, and between them stood a rich Golden Cup, having in
it a King, with the most beautiful stone in it that ever was seen.

Wondering at these events, and doubtful to take thence those rare presents,
immediately a Damsel came before them, and humbly on her knee thus spoke.
Most mighty and magnanimious Princes, the Jewels you have found in the Casket
are yours, and them must you carry to the Ladies of your affections, because
they were purposely made for them, as these worthy Armours were for you. As
for her that devised them, in this she accounts her self right happy, that
this day they are fallen into your power, and by you shall all the adventures
here be finished.

You my Lord, quoth she to Trineus, must take the King that is in the Cup, and
leave it not wheresoever you come, least you be changed into the shape of a
dog again. And you my Lord Palmerin must take the Cup, to put the flowers
therein, which you must bear^ to the Princess Zephira, assuring you that no
one must drink therein, but she to whom you must carry it. Fair Damsel,
said Palmerin, ^ell me how I shall find the Garden, where those flowers grow
of such sovereign virtue, and how I may come to the Arbor where the strange
Bird remains pearched: likewise if any other then your self is in this
Castle?

My Lord, quoth she, the Lady of this Castle at her ^ecease, left all the
persons in this Castle a sleep by enchauntment, except my self that am her
Niece, and such coniurations has she charmed them withal, as they shall not
stir till you have taken the Bird you ask for: at whose fearful cry they
shall all awake, in all this long time no whit consumed. And here have I ever
since remained forepointed by her to do you service, in showing you the manner
how to gather the flowers, and to tak^ the fatal Bird pearched in the
Arbor, whether I will bring you at an appointed ^oure. In mean while rest
your selves on this rich bed, which has been (...) only for you, and here
repose your selves till my return. By my sword Damsel, quoth Palmerin, you
tell us matters full of wonder, notwithstanding, seeing (...) find some part
of them true, we give credit to the rest. ^o bidding her good night, there
slept they till the next morning, when the Damsel came to call them,
conducting them into the Garden, the most brave and stately that ever they
beheld, and after she had showed them the Arbor, departed. Palmerin looking
round about him, maruailed at the ingenious foundation of the Castle, the
surpassing fair Galleries, and the beautiful Fountains in the Garden, where
he heard an exceeding pleasant harmony of Birds. Then calling Tryneus to him,
entered the Arbor, where taking the fatal Bird by the wings, she gave three
great cries so loud and fearful, as made both the Princes greatly amazed.

At this instant were all the enchauntments there ended, and the Servants*
restored to their former liberty, when Palmerin having tied the Bird to his
fist with a thread the damsel gave him, and filling his Cup with the
sovereign flowers, they came forth of the Garden, and in the great Hall met
them the Lord and Lady of the Castle, so old withered, and decrepite, as it
s^emed hardly they could sustain themselves, casting themselves at Palmerins
feet, they said.

Ah noble Prince, flower of all chivalry, the highest God has blessed thee
from thy Cradle, and in the end shall make thee the happiest in the world, for
the especial good thou have this day done, restoring all them to life that
here slumbred, except the aged Lady my wives Sister, who for these hundred
years past has slept in her Tomb. After many courteous speeches passed
between them, Palmerin and Trineus departed the Castle, and as they went down
the Rocks, Tomano and the Princess Zephira came to meet them, she courteously
embracing him, said. How fares my noble Lord? greatly did I despair of your
health, for this morning I heard such a fearful cry from the Castle, as we
were out of all hope to see you again. By the aid of God, Madame, answered
Palmerin, and this Knight ^y dear Friend, whom in the shape of a Dog you
brought from Malfada, I find my self in perfect content, and here have I
brought you the sovereign remedy for your so long and unfortunate disease.
But may it be, quoth the Princess, that so fair a knight should be so
transformed? No less do I rejoice for his good fortune then mine own. So
entered they the Princess pauillion, discoursing all the maruailes they had
seen.

Chap. LI.
How the Princess Zephira was cured of her disease, and Trineus ended the
adventure of the enchaunted sword in the Rock.

AFter that the Princess Zephira had felt the sweet odours of the flowers
Palmerin brought her, the enuenomed worms which so long time had tormented
her, fell from her head dead to the ground, and the loathsome smell of her
Canker began to ceas^. Yet all the ^^ars on her face were not thoroughly
healed: but the sedaine ease that she found by the flowers, gave her hope that
in time they would wear away. Mean while the two Princes of Romata, conferred
with Palmerin about the strange Bird, and also of the costly Armours they
brought with them from the Castle, which being past over with no little
admiration, they remembered the Sword enchaunted in the Rock, whereupon the
Prince Tomano entreated Trineus, to try if that adventure were reserved for
him.

Nay quoth Trineus, if you have already failed, hardly may I hope of better
fortune, yet can I but loose my labor as you have done, and shame were it for
me to pass hence without trial. So taking the Sword by the handle, with very
great ^ase he pulled it out of the Rock, being the goodliest Sword in
workmanshippe that ever was devised. Trust me, quoth Trineus, he that made this
weapon doubtless has tried the virtue thereof. That may be, answered
Palmerin, but had he likewise known the valor of the Knight, who now is
worthily become master thereof, of greater ^ount would he have esteemed his
lab^ur, and to thy perpetual honor dear friend may thou employ it. But
now worthy Lords? seeing the Princess Zephira has found so good ^ase, and my
loving Brother Trineus has won this Sword, I think it best that we set
forwards to Romata, which (after they had seen the sumptuous buildings in the
Castle, the rich Tomb, the beautiful Garden, and all other mounments worthy
view) they did.

Being come to Romata, and there received with special signs of honor, the
wise Muzabelino caused the fatal Bird to feed of the flowers, which Palmerin
had brought from the Castle of the ten Rocks. No sooner had the Bird tasted
the flowers, but presently she delivered such melodious notes, as sweeter
harmony was never heard before, and during the time of her singing, fell so
many drops of precious water from her beak, as before Dinner time the Cup
was well near filled. Which when the wise Nigromancer perceived, he brought a
very fair Lute to Palmerin, saying. I beseech you my Lord play some
exquisite piece of Music, that the Bird listening to your melody, may cease
her own records, else shall we loose the sovereign virtue contained in the
Water. Palme^in taking the Lute, plaide thereon so artificially, that the
Princess of Romata whom he woonne in the Io^st, was enforced to use these
speeches. How can we sufficiently marvel at the perfections of Palmerin? for
if in prowess he surpass Hercules of Libia, who overcame Tyrants and Monsters
at his pleasure: well may we name him another Amphion or Orpheus of Thrace,
who with their melody ^amed the Fishes, Beasts, and Bir^s, Trineus taking the
Cup, brought it to the Princess Zephira, who dipping her handkercher therein,
bathed her face therewith: the precious virtue whereof was such, as all the
enuenomed scarres the worms had made, were presently washed away, and her face
so delicate as ever it was before: whereupon the Princess falling at Palmerins
feet, joyfully thus spoke. Doubtless my Lord, I am greatly beholding to the
Prince Trineus, who saved my life when the Traitor would have slain me in my
bed: but I must confess my self much more indebted to your worthiness, by
whose pains the venomous putrefaction is extinguished, whereby I endured
torments far exceeding death.

Madame, answered Palmerin, your happy recovery must not be imputed to me,
but to the sovereign Lord that so provided for you, and seeing your health is
so worthily restored, I think best that we set forward to morrow on our
journey, that we may finish the Magical coniurations of Malfada, as we have
already done those at the ten Rocks. The Princess of Romata hearing these
words, prevented the answer of Zephira, and coming to Palmerin, said. I
beseech you Sir Knight, in honor of that God which you reverence, that you
will not refuse me one demand, according to your promise made me, when you
overcame my Brother and his Knights in the Io^st. Ask Lady (said Palmerin)
what you will, and you shall not be denied, so that the matter consist in my
power to perform. Well may you perform it (quoth she) and to your endless
honor I hope. The sum of my request is, that you will not forsake the King my
Father, till his war against the Soldane of Persia be finished. And that you
would entreat your Friend to accompany you therein. Deny me not good Sir,
for no greater shame is to a Knight then breach of promise: nor will I stir
from your foot, until you have granted what I request. In sooth Madame,
answered Palmerin, although my Friends and I have great affairs in our
Country, yet (in respect of my promise) we will assist your Father, let us in
mean while entreat you, to pardon our return with the Princess Zephira, who
thinks the time long before she come to Nabor. Doubtless my Lord, quoth
Zephira, rather then you and my Lord Trineus shall break your promise to the
Princess, in giving succor to the King Arbimar her Father: I can content my
self to stay here more willingly then to return to the King my Brother.
Madame, said Muzabelino, assure your self that Palmerin is the only mean
whereby you have attained your present felicity, and by him shall you with
honor see your Country again. In sooth my Lord, said the Princess, full
well I know his own gracious nature induced him, first to adventure his life
for the safety of my Country: then to pass strange Countries with danger,
only to find you, and lastly his rare fortune at the Castle of the ten
Rocks, from whence he brought those precious flowers, and the fatal Byrd,
whereby my long infirmity has been cured. To off^r him favor or all my
possessions in way of recompense of so great pains, they are not comparable:
for though I made him Lord of my self, and all those territories my father
left me, yet does my conscience tell me they are too base. In bree^e, I know
his deserts so exceeding my reach, as well may I sit down to imagine, but
never be able to contriue a sufficient reward. Believe me Madame, answered
Muzabelino, you have spoken truth, and his noble magnanimity must only help
my Lord, and this I assure you, that were it not the danger of his kingly
honor, and hazard of the whole Monarchy of Asia, hard^y might the knight be
stayed here, of such weight and importance are his other affairs. Then
calling Palmerin to him, whose inward thoughts were busied with the remembrance
of his Lady, he said.

Let not your stay here my Lord offend you, though well I know the weight
of your grief, for that God who has called you to this present estate, has
forepoynted things that you cannot shun, in recompense whereof, before your
departure from this country, great and victorious honors are appointed you.
Beside, for a perfect resolution in your further doubts, take you no care for
nourishing your Bird: for when your Music made her cease singing, at that
instant I threw such a charm on her, as henceforth she shall live without
taking any food. And when you return to your City of Constantinople, let her
be pearched in some convenient place, in the great hall of your Palace, and
there shall she remain as a certain Oracle until the day of your death, to
deliver tidings of good or bad. If an^e Knight or Lady shall enter your Court,
either with intent of treason, or bringing ill news, the Bird shall give such
fearful shrikes, as she did at the time when you took her in the Arbor: but
if the news be of joy, and for your good, then shall she sing more sweetly,
then when the sovereign water fell from her beak, wherewith the Princess
Zephira was cured.

In brief my Lord, at the time when you must leave this life, for the
glorious habitation among the blessed, she shall foretell such strange
occasions, as shall dismay the most resolute courage. By this mean shall you
be guarded from all inconveniences, and your good fortune continued in such
sort, as you shall be the most peaceable Emperor that ever lived in Greece.
Certes my Lord, answered Palmerin, not by any desert in me, am I thus honored
with so high a present, which I will keep so charie as mine own person: but
that the name of Muzabelino may for ever be imprinted in my heart* give me
some one of your name or kindred, who ^uermore may be nearest to my person. My
Lord quoth Muzabelino, to you will I give one of my Sons, begotten by me on a
Christian Lady, agreeing with you in faith, and o^inion: whereof I am not
sorry, yet fear I that the King should know so much, least his religion might
cause his death.

Dear friend, said Palmerin, for Gods sake give him me presently, and him will
I love as he were my brother. Your request (quoth he) can I not yet satisfy,
till we go to my Castle where he is kept, which because I will no longer
defer, to morrow will I perswa^e the King to journey to his great City of
Grisca, there to take view of his Army, when I shall compass the mean to give
him you, upon this conclusion they departed to their cambe^s.

Chap. LII.
How Muzabelino gave Palmerin his Son Bellechino, entertaining the King and
all his company royally at his Castle, and how the two Armies of the King
Abimar and the Soldane of Persia encountered, with the success thereof.

MVzabelino perceiving by his art, that the Soldane of Persia with his power
was near at hand, thinking to ruinate the great City of Grisca, advertised
the King thereof, willing him with all speed to muster his Army, and prevent
the soldanes determination. The King not misliking his advise, set forward
presently to Grisca, and by the way, at the earnest entreaty of Muzabelino,
the King with all his courtly company lay at his Castle, where many rare
devises were showen them by enchauntment, which I pass over as matter
altogether impertinent. There did the Magitian give Palmerin his Son
Bellechino, one of his Daughters likewise to the Queen, and another to the
Princess Zephira.

Afterward they iourneyed to the City of Grisca, where all his army was
ranged in readiness, being numbered an hundred thousand fighting men: the
auantguarde he committed to the two Princes, Palmerin and Trineus, consisting
of twenty thousand horsemen, his two battles of 30000. Archers on
horseback, the two Princes Tomano and Drumino had in charge, and the rereward
was governed by the two Kings of Seuata and Garara. The Soldanes power being
ordained in battailewise, within few days after the fight began, which
continued with such danger on either side, as the victory hung very long in
suspense. In the end, after a mighty massacre made of the Persians, among
whom was Donadel Prince of Siconia slain, with many other great Califes and
Lords, the Soldane himself was taken prisoner by Palmerin, and sent bound with
^etters of Gold to the Princess Zephira. The Messenger coming to the
Princess Chamber, declared how Palmerin had sent her that prisoner, to
entreat him as her self liked best. In sooth my Lord quoth the Princess to
the Soldane, you are right welcome for his sake that sent you: here shall your
entertainment be as fittes your calling, and mi^like not your mishap, in that
the knight who sent you, is wont to conquer where himself pleases. The
Soldane angry at his hard fortune, yet seeing he was prisoner to a Lady so
beautiful, was immediately so surprised with love, as he was not able to
answer the Princess one word. But she perceiving he was very sore wounded,
caused him to be conducted to a goodly Chamber, commanding her Chirurgions to
attend him dilligently.

On the morrow she came to see how he ^ared, when Loueouer mastering all his
senses, made him forgette his hatred to the King Abimar, resolving to become
his friend by marriage of the Princess, and unable longer to suppress his
waighting passions. which more troubled him then his dangerous wounds, he thus
began. Fairest among the daughters of men, tell me I desire you, if you be
the Child of the King Abimar, or else of whence you are, to the end I may one
day acknowledge this favor, which your mild nature affoordes your prisoner.
Heereunto the Princess answered, how she was Daughter to the King Onodius of
Nabor, coupling therewith all her passed fortunes: concluding in the end, that
in all actions agreeing with honor, she remained his humble Servant. Fortune,
quoth he, never constant but in inconstancy, once yesterday was I the greatest
Prince in the world, and now none in my Kingdom so miserable as my self,
being brought in subjection to my inferior, and snared in love with my
vassailes Daughter. Wisely said the Poet, That badlie do love and Majesty
agree together: for though the height of mine estate forbids my desire, yet
love and mine own lyking are two such severe enemies, as I must not now stand
to dispute the cause. Happy is the Knight in whose power remains a Lady so
excellent: but much more happy is the Lady that can command so great a
person, by whom such honors are this day affoorded you fair Princess, as well
may you vaunt to be the greatest in Persia.

If by a Knight surpassing in prowess I was conquered in battle, by one in
beauty and courtesy incomparable am I again ouermaistred: so that I am
enforced to present you my heart, and all the signories I possess, to use at
your pleasure, vowing (for your sake) perpetual peace with Abimar mine enemy.
The Princess abashed at this unexpected offer, a sw^ete blush colourer her
dainty cheeks, and fearing to be imputed too indiscreete, shaped her answer
to the last point of the Soldanes speeches, as thus. In sooth my Lord, well
could I like, that peace were concluded between the King and you, though not
by any mean in me, but by the omnipotent power of the Gods: who letting you
know the weakness of your own strength, would not have any war between you
and the King Abimar. And if it like you so much to abase your self, as to like
the simple Daughter of a King, who while he lived, was your highness Subject:
well may I with modesty give consent^ for if my Father all his life time
obeyed you as his Lord, unseemly were disobedience in his Daughter. By the
hol^e Alcaron of Mahomet, answered the Soldane, your benign humility has
more conquered me, then the proudest enemy in the worl^e could do: do you
therefore appoint the Articles of our peace, and I as impartial will agree
thereto.

Thus began the peace and the promise of marriage between the Soldane and the
Princes Zephira, which being thorowlie agreed upon, the King Abimar,
Palmerin, Tryneus, and all the states subscribing thereto, the Camps on either
side were discharged, and the Soldane with his great Seneshall openly in the
City of Grisca, protested peace in this manner. That the Soldane should
espouse Zephira, and Tomano the Princess Bel^ina the Soldanes Daughter.
Beside, he renounced all pretended rights to the Realms of Grisca and Romata,
nor would he demand any tribute of them afterward, or enter his confines with
any violence, but assist the King continually against all his enemies.

Moreover, within two Months, he would deliver ten thousand talents of
Gold, and two millions of Seraphes, in recompense of his wrong done to the
King Abimar. All this my Lord, quoth the Soldane, will I faythfullie perform,
and all the Kings my Subjects shall subscribe thereto: on this condition, that
you accompany the Princess to the City of Harano, there to honor with your
presence our espousall, where your son Tomano shall likewise match with our
Daughter. To this the King willingly consented, whereupon the Soldane sent his
Seneshall, to cause his Army march homewardes into Persia, except six
thousand men at Arms, to guard to Soldanes person: then openly in the field
was the peace proclaimed, and the Captains on either side freendly embracing
each other. Afterward the soldane coming to the king Abimar and in the
presence of Palmerin and Trineus, thus spoke. Needless were it now (my Lord)
to remember our passed displeasures, but generally to confer of war and
peace: yet hereof I can assure you, that the Princess Zephira, and these two
strange Knights, prevailed more against me then all the rest of your Army. But
least your people should think, that our concluded peace is not thorowlie
grounded, to morrow will I be openly affian^ed to the Princess Zephira, and
afterward set forward to Harano, that my Sisters may be present at our
nuptials, in the mean while, our Seneshall and six other noble Lords, shall
remain with you as our hostages. These determinations fulfilled, the Soldane
passed to Harano, where he heard of the death of the Prince Donadel, and the
Kings son of Rosillia, with diverse other Princes of his kindred ^^aine in
the battle: but the heat of his new love caused him to make small account
thereof, preparing all things ready for the solemnity of his marriage.

Chap. LIII.
The conference that the Soldane of Persia had with his Sisters, thinking by
their means to stay Palmerin, and Tryneus in his Court, and the honorable
entertainment he made them at the arrival of the Princess Zephira. And how
by good fortune Palmerin recovered his Squire Colmelio, from the Ambassador
Maucetto.

NO sooner was the soldane come to Harano, but he presently dispatched
Messengers to his sisters, that they might be present at his honorable
marriage: and calling for his Daughter the young Princess Belsina, he thus
began. Fair Daughter, I think you are not ignorant, for report f^^eth
quickly f^r, that I have promised you in marriage to the Prince Tomano:
therefore I account it very requisitie, that your solemnity be done on the
same day, when I shall espouse the Princess Zephira.

My gracious Lord and Father, quoth she, I remain altogether at your
highness direction: and if for conclusion of peace you match with so fair a
Princess as is Zephira, it were against reason I should refuse the worthy
Prince Tomano of Romata. When he perceived the ready good will of his
Daughter, and his two sisters by this time were come to the Court. After he
had welcomed them in most gracious manner, he entered into these speeches. I
thought it very expedient (fair sisters) since you understand the peace
concluded between the King of Grisca and my self, to acquaint you with other
matters greatly concerning you.

There comes hither in the company of the Princess Zephira, two strange
knights of very rare perfections, to whom I would willingly have you use such
especial behavior, as we might purchase the means to enjoy them continually
in our Court, for no other intent I promise you, but only that they may match
with you in marriage. You sister Lyzanda, (quoth he to the eldest) I commit to
the cheifest Knight, the very same man that most valiantly took me prisoner
in the battle: and you Arecinda, (for so was the youngest named) I bequeath to
the other, who is one of the goodliest personages that ever Nature framed.

Heereunto they were right soon entreated, especially Aurecinda, who though
her elder sister were grave and well advised, yet was she pleasant, quaint and
so subtle, as easily could she practice the mean to deceive the wisest man,
whereof she made some experience, as you shall hereafter perceive in the
Chapters following. The Soldane having sent for all the Kings, Princes and
Lords his subjects, to be present on the day of this great solemnity: the
Prince Tomano, earnestly des^ring to see his best beloved, desired Palmerin,
Trineus, and the Princess Zephira, that they might set forwards to Harano.
But Muzabelino, who knew what troubles would succeed the marriage, advised the
King Abimar not to go, and counseled the two Princes, Trineus and Palmerin,
to keep themselves continually Armed, because the Soldane was a man
continually subject to incertaine chances. So giving of each of them a Cote of
Arms of Crimson Ueluet, most curious^ie embroidered with Pearls, he departed
from them, returning back again to the City of Grisca. Now ride these
Princes joyfully to Harano, where they were received by the soldane with
wonderful pomp and honor, each one admiring the rare bea^tie of the Princess
Zephira, who was conducted with such a royal train, as never was the like
seen before in Harano. At the City Gate the Soldane met them, and in a
sumptuous C^^che accompanied them to the Palace, where after many solemn
courtesies on each side delivered, and such magnifical royalty beseeming the
time and place, the Soldane came to his Sisters, who had not yet talked with
the two strange Knights, and thus spoke.

Sisters, to the e^de that hereafter you shall not be beguiled, the Knights
that accompany my Lady the Princess, and whom I have so much commended to
you, are Christians, notwithstanding they be such, as they twain deserve
greater honor then I am any way able to express. As for their comely stature,
after that your ^ye has conferred with your heart, I refer my opinion to
your judgment, regard then that they be loved and esteemed as their
perfections do worthily deserve. Aurecinda the youngest and most voluntary
Sister, having her eye continually fixed on the Prince Trineus, thus conferred
with herself.

My Brother very lightly commands us to love these strange Knights, I know
not what my Sisters opinion is, as for mine own, the beginning already of my
love is such, that if I do not quickly obtain my desire, I fear that my
affection is rated at the price of my life. The time is passed over with many
delights, and daily pastimes after the Persian manner, but all this while
Lizanda and Aurecinda are tormented with love, so that all patience was utterly
denied them, yet bearing this weighty burden so well as they could, at length
the two Sisters came to the Princess Zephira^s Chamber, where they found
Palmerin and Trineus conferring together, feigning the cause of their coming
to bid the Princess good morrow. Palmerin perceiving that Lizanda suddenly
changed her color, imagined the cause of her secret disease, and being loath
to be tempted with any such occasion, dissembling that he saw her not, took
Zephira by the hand, and leading her to the window, ^ounde some cause of
conference, which Lizanda perceiving, in anger she ^long forth of the Chamber,
yet Aurecinda would not follow her, for she being thoroughly conquered with love,
neither regarding fear, shame, or other such like behavior seemly in
Maidens, took Trineus by the hand, and causing him to sit down by her, thus
began. I do not a little marvel Sir knight, that when Ladies come to see
you, their entertainment is no better. It is not the manner of Gentlemen to be
so sollitarie, without having some friend or beloue^, which you shall soon
find in this Court, of higher calling then you imagine, if Ladies may discern
some sign of your favorable liking. In good ^aith Madame, answered Trineus,
if to you and your sister I have not done such ^uety as beseemed me, it
proceeded by forgetfulness, or my mind carried away with other occasions, for
nature made me obedient to Ladies. If these words Sir knight (quoth she)
proceed from your heart* I can assure you to be loved of such a one, who is
not unworthy the like good will, and of such account is she with the
Solda^^e, as he shall create you one of the greatest Lords in Persia, so please
you to stay in his highness Court. That may not be (quoth Trineus) for so
soon as the Soldane and the prince Tomano shall be espoused, I must needs
depart with my companion, about affairs of very great importance. Palmerin who
with one ear listened to the Princess Zephi^a, and with the other to the
words of Aurecinda, after she was departed to her Chamber, thus spoke to
Trineus.

Good Friend, beware of this Lady, that she cause you not to offend God,
and violate the loyalty you owe to Madame Agriola. Such experience have I had
in these actions, as when Ladies have enterprised their amarous furies, if they
cannot compass it by the means of men, they will adventure it with hellish
familiars, that can deceive the very wisest, especially in this wicked
Country, where is no knowledge of God or his Laws. Beside you know, that such
impudent love cannot be carried about without such apt m^^engers, and from
whence proceeds many inconveniences. Brother, answered Trineus, fear not
my constancy, for my Ladies love has taken such sure foundation* as death
cannot make me false to her, yet proved his words contrary in the end, and
for which he repented afterward.

While these delights continued, (...) Ambassador to the soldane of Babylon,
arrived at the Court, where the Monarch of Persia received him very
honorably, willing him to conceal the news till the marriages were past,
which on the morrow was performed with maruailous royalty. As the Princes and
Lords accompanied the soldane to the Temple, it happened that Aurecinda was
conducted by the Prince Trineus, whereof she being not a little glad, by the
way entered into these speeches. Ah my true Friend and Lord Trineus, when will
the day come that I may be thus led, to espouse the man whom I love more dear
then my life? Madame, quoth Trineus, I cannot marvel sufficiently to see you
thus changed, considering the greatest Lord in the Orient may be thought too
simple for such a Wife: yet did you choose one that perhaps would not espouse
you, my Lord the soldane being your Brother, may constrain him thereto.
Heere-hence (quoth she) proceeds my sorrow, for he whom I love is not the
soldanes subject, nor does agree with me in faith and opinion, he will gi^e
no ear to mine entreaties, much less to such a one, as can make him one of
the greatest Lords in Persia.

But think you my Lord that I can conceal what you may plainly discern in
mine eyes? You are the only man my heart (...) chosen, and whom the soldane
loves more then his Brother. Alas Madame, quoth the Prince, unfitting is it
that a Knight errant, should espouse the Sisters of so great a Lord as is the
Soldane of Persia. And would his Majesty so much honor me, yet the
contraritie of our faith is such an impeach, as flatly it may not be, for
rather will I be torn in pieces then match with a Pagan, or renounce my faith
for her love. No, no, my Lord, said the Princess, I will r^nounce mine for
your love, and worship Jesus Christ the son of the blessed Uirgin. Well
worthy then were I of reproach, quoth Trineus, if I should not requite you with
love again, considering what you adventure for my sake.

As they would have proceeded further in talk, Colmelio Palmerins. Squire
whom Maucetto had bought, standing to see the t^aine of Persian Lords and
Ladies pass by, espied his master and the Prince Trineus, wherefore preasing
through the guarde of Archers, he came to the Prince, and taking him by the
Mantle, said. Most happy be this hour my noble Lord, to find you and my
Master Palmerin, What fortune has brought thee hither Colmelio, said
Trineus, have thou yet spoken to thy Master? No my Lord, answered Colmelio,
he conducteth the Princess with the Calife of Siconia, wherefore I durst not
presume to trouble him.

Believe me, said the Prince, but thou shall speak with him, and while the
Arch Flamin was performing the ceremonies in the Temple, Trineus presented him
to his Master Palmerin, who was thereof so joyful, as if he had gotten the
best City in Persia. He demanded by what means he escaped the Pirates
hands, the true discourse whereof Colmelio rehearsed, and how Maucetto the
Ambassador bought him, as Ptolome and he were brought to the Soldane of
Babylon his Court to be sold, and there does Ptolome find great favor as I
have heard, of the fair Princess Alchidiana the Soldanes Daughter, only for
your sake. Thou tellest me wonders, said Palmerin, depart not from me till
after Dinner, when I will go to thy Master Maucetto to demand ^hee, which I
hope he will not deny, because when I was Knight to Alchidiana, he was one
of my most specially good Friends. After the solemnity of the marriage was
ended, and Dinner ended at the Palace for preparation of pastime: Palmerin
calling Colmelio, went with him to the Ambassador Maucetto, who not a little
abashed to see him, that was generally reputed dead in the soldanes Court, came
and embraced him with these speeches. My Lord Palmerin, what great God has
raised you again? The soldane was credible informed, that you and Olorico were
drowned in the sea: for which both he and Madame Alchidiana more lamented,
then for the loss of his whole Army before the City of Constantinople.

Palmerin dissembling as though he knew not thereof, seemed to marvel thereat
very much, and the better to shadow his conceit, said, that after the tempest
was ceased, which cast him very far from the Soldanes Army, thinking to
return to Constantinople, he was by violent winds brought to the Isle of
Malfada, where the Prince Olorico, quoth he, and all the rest of my companions
remain enchaunted, whom I hope to recover again after I can get hence. Little
thought I my Lord, a^nswered Maucetto, to find you in this Country, but did
Madame Alchidiana know so much, her sorrow would soon be converted into joy.

But what news with you my Lord? said Palmerin. What may be the cause of your
Embassage? I will not conceal the truth thereof from you, quoth Maucetto, I
come to demand aid of the Soldane of Persia, for a fresh invasion against
Constantinople. I marvel quoth Palmerin, that he will enterprise the voyage
again, which has cost him so much, and returned so little profit: rather
would I counsel him to forbear, and so will I write to his majesty before
your departure, as also to Madame Alchidiana his Daughter. But I would request
one courtesy of you Sir Maucetto, that you would give me your slave Colmelio,
who in time past has been my Squire. Him shall you hau^ with all my heart,
quoth Maucetto, and not only him but whatsoever else is mine beside, so please
you to accept thereof.

I thank you good Sir, answered Palmerin, and I doubt not in time to requite
your gentleness. While they thus talked together, the Soldane came to
Palmerin, saying. Will not you make one my Lord in this dance? the Ladies say
they cannot have your company. In sooth my gracious Lord, answered Palmerin,
little do I delight in any such exercises, very earnest affairs have I with
the Ambassador Maucetto, which crave sudden and speedy dispatch. Beside,
feign would I know some tidings of him from my Lady Alchidiana, from whose
service I have now discontinued a year and more. The Soldane abashed at these
words, said. I pray you tell me the truth, are not you he that slew the
Prince Amarano of Nigrea in Combat, and afterward two other of his Brethren,
of which exploits remain such fame through all Turkey? In sooth my Lord
answered Palmerin, being vowed to my Ladies service, I never could suffer her
honor to be any way distained, and in that duty I will continue, for the
manifold courtesies I have received by her. By the living God, said the
Soldane, now think I my self the happiest prince in the world, having the man
in my Court, whose very name makes the stoutest to tremble. But seeing we
are thus far entered, tell me, is the Princess Alchidiana so beatifull as
Fame reports her, That is she my Lord, quoth she, and much more then fame is
able to utter, beside, she is one of the most gracious and affable Princesses
that ever I beheld in any Kings Court.

Now is night come, and after the Courtly pastimes were ended, the Bridegroom
went to receive the honur of his Bride, commanding Palmerin to be entreated
as his own person, which not a little contented the Princess Lyzanda,
thinking hereby (alas too lauishly) to obtain him for her husband, but
herein she was deceived, so that her rash love procured her miserable death.
Aerecinda likewise continually courted Trineus, as though she had always
been trained up in his company, wherefore one day, after he had been warned
four or five times by Palmerin, he thus spoke to her. Madame, if your honestly
and virtue has imprinted in noble minds, an especial conceit of your
continency and chastity, I marvel now what many will think, in that you
should not show any such signs of love to me, for it seems ye yield the
City before any assault be given. Al these speeches could not qualify her
humor, for love had so emboldened her with such unshamefastness, as she made
no conscience of following the cause, giving credit to one of her Ladies
persuasions, that by good pursuit all things enjoy a happy end.

Chap. LIIII.
How Maucetto the Ambassador to the Monarch Misos of Balylon, declared his
message before the Soldane and all the princes of Persia. And of the Combat
between Trineus, and the King Orzadine of Galappa.

AFter the marriage feast was fully ended, the Soldane sent for the Ambassador
Maucetto, who in the presenc^ of all the Persian Lords, thus began to deliver
his embssage. Mighty and illuous Monarch of Persia the soldane of Babylon my
lord and master, having evermore continued in faithful alliance to your
majesty, lets you know by me his great and damageable loss, which he
sustained before the City of Constantinople. For recovery whereof, he humbly
entreats your highness most favorable assistaunce, which well you cannot
deny him, in respect of the great sway you hold in Turkey, as also for the
establishment of our faith and general destruction of the G^ecian Empire.
Ambassdor, quoth the Soldane, I will better consider heereon, and answer you
accordingly. So calling all the Princes presently to counsel, diverse confused
judgments were amongst them: whereupon he sent for Palm^rin, and before them
all demanded his opinion, whereto he shaped this answer. Might it stand
with your highness liking, and the good conceit of all th^se noble Princes,
gladly would I be excused in this matter, wherein I may not speak without
suspicion, because the intent is against mine own native country, and those
whom I agree withal in faith and opinion.

But seeing your Majesty will needs know my judgment, pardon in speaking
boldly what I would be loath to dissemble. I think no one of you my gracious
Lords, but well remembers the late wars against the King of Grisca, si^ce
which time the soldiers are hardly recovered, and extreamitie were it to
endanger the lives of wounded men. Moreover, the Soldane of Babylon who now
demands succor, sending his Army into Greece, where reigns a Prince so
mighty and puissant, as well could repulse them with shameful confusion.
Persuade your selves as yet there is no other, but he that tryumpht in conquest
before, I fear can do the like again, and thus my Lords is mine opinion.

Well have you answered, quoth the Soldane, and this peaceable conclusion
likes me best, so arysing from counsel, they went into the great Hall, where
before their coming, as the Princess Zephira was devising with many Lords and
Ladies, entered an armed knight, accompanied with six other in Armor, and
twelve Squires, who seeing the Soldane not in his chair of estate, demanded
of the Queen where he was. Knight, quoth she, he is in counsel with the
Princes and Lords of his Realm, and long it will not be before he come: in
mean while you may pass the time in conference with the Ladies. By God, said
Trineus to the Queen, I think he scant knows how to confer with Ladies,
for his indiscr^ete behavior shows him to be the woorst nurtured Knight y^
ever I saw: saw you not (quoth he to the Princess Zephira) how unmannerly
he sot down without using any reverence to your Majesty?

The Knight sitting strouting in a Chair, and having unclasped his Helmet,
said to the Queen. I pray you tell me Madame, are those two strange Knights in
this Court, that were against your Husband in the battle and took him? They
be Sir Knight, quoth she, well and in good disposition thanks to the sovereign
Creator. I ask not of their health, quoth he, how are they called? The one
said the Queen, is named Palmerin, the other Trineus. And I quoth he, am
Orzadine King of Galappa, to whom fortune has been more favorable in love,
then in riches: making me Freende to the fair Oronia, Daughter to the Calife
of Siconia, and Sister to the Prince Donadell, who was slain in the battle
against the King Abimar: she in my judgment, not having her second in
beauty, at whose request I have travailed the greatest part of Asia, to spread
her name and honorable reputation, which I have done ^o her perpetual fame:
and returning to her when my labors were finished, in sted of joy and
pleasure, I found her sad and pensive for the death of her Brother. These news
were worse to me then death, and to comfort her, I promised to revenge her
Brothers misfortune: and this is the only cause of my coming, for having
Combatted with him that sl^w the Prince, her love to me will be the greater,
and mine honor shall be spread with more advantage. I bel^eue well, quoth the
Queen, if you escape with life from the Combat: but tell me Sir Knight, why
bear you such ill will to him that sl^w the Prince? considering that it was
done in plain battle, and he his enemy who would have done as much to him
if he could. Not for this cause alon^ will I enter the Combat, said Orzodine,
but for I am desirous to let him know that I am more favored in love then
he: and as I am one of the most happy Lovers, so am I the best Knight in the
world, which I will maintain against any that dare gainsay it. Happy lover,
Dieu Vous guard, said Trineus. If the Poets had hitherto spared the description
of Cupid, Son to the Goddess of love, now might they justly have set him
down for blind: yet is he worthily to be condemned, that he would vouchsafe
any favor to the most foolish among men, he having dedicated me to the
service of a Lady, to whom your gentle Ironia, Oronia, I should say, does
not deserve the name of her servant.

For the rest, where you vaunt your self to be the best Knight in the world,
your folly is too apparaunt, for there are many Knights errant in the
world, who can give you a brave ca^uazado at the Lance: and after they have
foiled you in the Ioust, bestow a little pains to take your green head from
your gross shoulders. My self that flew the Brother to your Goddess of
beauty, will do you so much pleasure, as to heal the incurable disease
wherewith you are day and night tormented. O divine spirits cried the Pagan,
favor me so much, that this Knight may but dare to enter the Field with me.
Yes I dare, said Tryneus, and before we part, I doubt not but to make thee
quiet enough.

Ozodine presently threw his Gauntlet as his gage, and Tryneus a Golden
bracelet, which Aurecinda had given him, entreating Zephi^a to keep them,
which she refused to do, fearing the danger of the Prince Tryneus. Hereupon
the Soldane entered the Hall, leading Palmerin by the hand, but when they saw
the Armed Knight thus contend with Trineus, they meruailed greatly what might
be the occasion thereof. When Orzadine saw the Soldane was set, he entered
into these speeches. Soldane, I am hither come to accuse thee, of a villainous
act which thou have committed, harboring in thy Court, the man that ^lewe the
the valiant Donadell: whose murder thou can not so cunningly cover, but thy
treachery shall be openly discovered.

What art thou, said the Soldane, that dare speak thus presumptuously in our
presence? Orzodine King of Galappa* quoth he, of whom thou have heard
heretofore, and now have I presented my gage against this Knight, which I will
maintain in despite of the proudest. The Soldane abashed at this event,
sought to dissuade them from the Combatte, because he had heard great speeches
of the Kings prowess, but all was in vain, for Orzodine was so obstinate, and
Tryneus so earnest to revenge the Turks proud blasphemy against his Lady, as
they would not be pacified till the Field was granted them. Let us have
Judges presently, quoth Orzodine, and the Field assured for our Combat, that I
may discipline this glorious stranger.

Make not such haste, said Tryneus, for I fear thou will think thy coming
too soon. Immediately were the the two Combattants Armed, the Judges placed in
their Tent, when the Soldane and Palmerin with many Princes, went to behold
this exployt. But such a mighty man was the King of Galappa, as Palmerin
feared his friends success. The Tr^mpets sou^^ding, the Knights brake their
Lances bravely, and met together so furiouslye with their bodies, as they
were both thrown out of their Saddles: but they quickly recovering themselves,
dr^we their swords, and marched against each other with like courage, as did
Achilles against noble Hector. Long continued the fight with danger on either
side, but the king of Galappa struck such peasant strokes, being a man of
equal stature with a Giant, as he wounded Trineus in many places: and such
was his ill fortune, after long traversing about, he set his foot vnwarilye
on the Trunchion of a Lance, whereby he fell down backward to the ground.
Orzodine taking advantage of this fall, set his foot on the Princes breast,
striving to pull his Helmet from his head: but God knows in what agony
Palmerin was new, when he breathed forth these speeches to himself. Ah
Heavens quoth he, have I taken such pain and travail to find my Friend, and
must he now die among his enemies, Aureeinda likewise ready to yield up her
ghost with grief, seeing Palmerin ready to swo^ne as he stood. Alas, quoth
she, is it not enough that my Friend must die, but his noble c^mpanion will
bear him company? While this doubtful fear was among the Courtiers, Tryneus
had so well scufled with Orzodine, as he lay along by him likewise, when
drawing a pocket dagger, he stabbed it through his Helmet, into one of his
eyes, so that he nailed his head to the ground. Orzodine feeling himself
wounded to the death, gave a very loud cry: when Tryneus having gotten his
Helmet off, presently smote his head from his shoulders. If the Knights of
Galappa were now dismaide, and the soldane, Palmerin, Zephira, Tomano, and all
the rest joyful, I leave to your judgments: especially Palmerin, who
rejoicing that Trineus had thus conquered his enemy, entered the Lystes and
embraced him, and bringing him forth of the Field, ^he was welcomed to the
Palace with wonderful honor.

The body of the dead King was given to them that came with him, with
marvelous reprehension of their Masters audacious challenge, and so with
great heaviness they returned home again. Nor would the Soldane longer stay
in his Court the Assirian Ambassador. But excused himself to the Babylonian
Mysos, that he could not give him any assistaunce, covering this answer under
his unfortunate battle against the King Abimar. Maucetto seeing that to stay
longer would not avail him, took his leave of the Soldane, saying. Albeit my
Lord, you cannot give my Master any assistance, yet let Palmerin return to
him at his departure from your Court. What I can do herein, answered the
Soldane, your Lord shall be assured to find, although I think his mind be
otherwise adicted: but you were best to know his mind your self, because I
heard him say he would write to Madame Alchidiana.

Maucetto departing to Palmerins lodging, the Soldane went to see his Sisters,
of whom he demanded, if they had as yet practiced any thing with the
Knights. My Lord, answered Aurecinda, who in all things was more prompt then
her eldest Sister, I have fixed my love on the knight Trineus, with full
resolution never to love any other: yet does not he intend to stay here in
your Court, much less (I fear) to make me his wife. As for my Sister, she
cannot compass the mean, how to impart her love to Sir Palmerin. Right
strange is it, quoth the Soldanen, that the promises you have made them, and so
apparent signs of ardent affection, cannot dissuade them to make choice of
you: Doubtless they be some great Princes, who to see the fashions of the
world have thus disguised themselves. Continue your love as you have begun,
and if by other means you cannot stay them, adventure your honors as a mean
to entrappe them. And now does occasion well serve you Sister Aurecinda, for
by courteous entreating Tryneus now he is wounded, you may more profit in one
hour, then you have done during this tedious pursuit.

Needless was it for the Soldane thus to persuade her, in that she labored
for no other matter, keeping Trineus company both day and night: but Palmerin
offended thereat, secretlye thus rebuked the Prince. What mean you my Lord? If
you mend not this order I must be angry with you. You see this Princess
exceedes in her desire, and you give her occasion to continue it: I know not
what will happen heereon, but my mind persuades me that you will hardly
depart hence with honor. Be advised I desire you and take this of me: that if
the wisest man will lend his ears to loose persons, and follow their
affections: he shall become more unreasonable then a brute Beast, regarding
nothing but what is object to his eyes, and what the flesh, (the only mortal
enemy to the spirit) shall soonest persuade him.

Chap. LV.
How Aur^cinda Sister to the Soldane of Persia, pursued the Prince Tryneus so
near, as in the end, she had her desire, and what followed thereon.

PAlmerin having thus schooled y^ prince Trineus, that he should give no ear
to the enticements of Aurecinda: Lyzanda came to his chamber, and feigning
urgent business with him, took him aside, delivering her affections in this
manner. Right happy would I think my self Sir Palmerin, so you would deigne to
continue in the Soldans Court, who doubtless would advance you to the highest
step of honor, and give me to you in marriage that am his Sister, and a Lady
worthy some reckoning.

Palmerin offered to depart the Chamber, but Lyzanda stayed him, proceeding
thus. Alas my Lord will you never vouchsafe to speak to me? now see I well
that you are the most dis^oyall Knight in the world. Madame answered
Palmerin, rather will I die then one jot of di^^oyaltie shall be found in me:
nor can I grant your importunate requests, without committing notorious
treason to my Lady, and offending my God, whom foolish love shall never make
me to displease. So without any further speeches he went to the Prince Tomano,
leaving the poor Lady well-neere dead with this unkind refusal, who going
to her own cabbanet, thus began to breath forth her sorrows.

Ah Love, the most cruel passion that ever entered the heart of any Lady, how
great and marvelous is thy power? Some thou enforcest to desire and entreat,
without being heard or regarded: others thou causest to be happily favored,
esteemed of their Friends, Servant and lovers. Unhappie that I am, but much
more unhappy Brother, accursed be the hour when thou did command me, to
love the most cruel and unkind among men. Can there be any Lady in the
world more disgraced then I am? had I not revealed my love to him, some
comfort I might thereby enjoy among my sorrows: but the frozen mind knowing
my love, does hold me in the greater contempt. My Sister told me, that by
too long concealment of love, many have lost them they most esteemed: but I
(alas) do find it clean contrary. Now was Aurecinda (by chance) in the
Chamber next her Sisters Cabinette) and hearing her thus sorrowfully complain,
she came to her, and thus spoke.

Good Sister discomfort not your self by your friends refusal: I would not
think my self worthy the name of a woman, if I could not win you the man
that thus torments you. As for me, I have found the mean to compass mine
own desire. Yet could not all these speeches appease her, wherefore she left
her, and understanding by one of her Ladies, that Tryneus should this night
suppe in the Soldans Chamber, whereupon she went to the Ladies hot house,
amd there prepared his bed, and such sweet delicate bathes, as might move the
spirits of a very stayed Gentleman. This done, she came to one of the Pages
of honor, Brother to the Lady whom she most of all trusted, saying.

I pray thee good Page, go to the Prince Trineus his Chamber, and there
attend till he come forth: then feigning that some one has done thee
injury, thou shall entreat him to help thee against him that abused thee. If
he condiscende, as doubtless he will, bring him to the bathe, where I will
stay his coming with thy Sister, and so soon as he is entered, make fast the
door on him, and get thee gone, but in any case be secret herein, and I
will recompense thee to thine own content. The wagge was so well instructed in
his art, as he failed not in any one point o^ his charge. But as the Prince
Tryneus came alone from his Chamber, he fell on his knees before him saying. My
Lord, if ever you pity a Gentleman abused, let me entreat you to revenge my
cause, on a villain that has too much wronged me.

Tryneus, who had often seen the Page in his Chamber with Aurecinda, answered.
Believe me Page, it were pity to deny thy request, considering thou do
demand it so courteously: shall I need to be better provided then I am? No
my Lord, quoth he, your sword is sufficient. So was he conducted by the Page
along the Gallery, and being come to the appointed place, he opened the door,
thus speaking to the Prince. My Lord, the party you must deal withal is in
this Chamber, accompanied but with one Lady, wherefore you may enter secure
from danger. He was no sooner in, but the Page clapped to the door and
departed. Now was Tryneus not a little amazed, when he saw no body but the
Princess with her Lady, she being come thither to bathe her self, and laid
in her bed: but in such surpassing brauerye, as Jupiter with his lightning,
Neptune with his three forked Mace, and Pluto with his Cerberus, would stand
and wonder thereat. So ^in^lie had she tressed the golden wyres of her hair,
and her head attire embellished with such goodly Oriental Pearls, as made
her seem a beautiful Angel, being covered with a gorgious Canapie,
resemblingng the Sun under a fair cloud. Between her dainty Breasts hung
a precious Carbunckle which supplied the office of Venus her firebrand: when
she saw Tryneus stand so aghast, she said. Why? my Lord, are you more afraid
of a naked Lady, then of the most puissaunt Knight in Persia, armed cap ape? I
can judge no less, seeing you dare approach no nearer. In sooth my Lord, quoth
the Pages Sister, you may think your self happy to be desired of such a
lady, whom mighty kings and princes have earnestly sought, and would gladly
have had the least favor she bestows on you. So taking him by the hand, she
caused him to sit down in a Chair by the beds side, and giving her Mistress
her Harp, she departed, leauig them together. Ah page, quoth Trinens, how
have thou deceived me? What? said the princess, you forgette where you are,
you must at this time somewhat pity my sorrows, and hear a dittie which I
have made for your sake. Then taking her Harp, she thus began to sing as
follows.

The Dittie sung by Aurecinda to the Prince Trineus.
THe God of war, fierce, stearne, and rigorous,
when he beheld fair Venus heavenly beauty:
Made small account of her disloyalay,
But suddenly became full amorous.
Beauty had th^n her power vigorous,
Changing rough looks to sweetest secrecy.
But he I love, incenst with cruelty,
Does not regard my torments langourous.
Why should I then pursue that stubborn mind,
That with excuses kills my hope outright?
Yet if he help not, death must me acquit
Ah mighty love in nature most unkind
Thou do constrain me to affect the man:
That neither favor, love nor kindness can.
What have I said? the Knight of my desire,
Is mere divine, and furthest from compare:
Whose Eagles eyes can well discern my care,
Vnd with sweet pitties drops ^lay this fire,
The little Cod has made him gracious,
His Mother, mild, to rue the Ladies smart:
That shrines his lively Image in her heart,
Then to despair beseemes no virtuous.
Regard sweet friend the passions of thy Friend,
Whom God and nature has appointed thine:
Give love his due, and then thou must be mine,
So shall long sorrow have a happy end.
The Persian maid, say boldly thou have won:
That Monarchs, Kings and Princes near could done.
With excellent cunning did she handle her instrument, but with far better
grace and affection delivered her dittie, gracing it with such sad
countenance, mournful looks, and renting sighs, as forced the Prince
Tryneus to become exceeding amorous. And burning in this new fiery
impression, beheld the singular beauty of Auredinda, which ravished his senses
in such sort, as (trembling like the Aspen leaf) he satte down by her on the
beds side. The Princess laying her Harp from her, embraced him very
lovingly with these speeches. Alas my Lord, will you still continue in this
rigor and cruel inhumanitie? your heart is more hard then Adamant, that will
not be mollified with so many entreaties: I swear to you by the Sun that
lightneth the world, unless you grant me one request, before your face will
I presentlye s^eye my self. Full well do I perceive, quoth Tryneus, that
hardly can I escape misfortune: the Servant has deceived me, and now the
Mistress seeks my death. Ah Madam, quoth he, how can I grant your request,
considering mine offense to God, and he that loves me loyally? Either be as
good as thy word, quoth she, else stand to the danger that may befall thee.

Why? Sir Knight, is my beauty of so slender account, as I am not worthy to
be held between thine arms? will thou (...) me to consume in this violent
flame, which thou may with such ease and honor extinguish? had thou rather
see a Lady split her heart before thee, then thou will vouchsafe to preserve
her life? Come, come sweet Freende, see how love and his Mother has made way
for thee, refuse not opportunity so favorably offered. What blemish is on
this body, that should deserve disdain? If the King of Gods would think
himself honored with this conquest: much more estimation should thou make
hereof. In brief, she was so perfect in her subtlety, and kn^we so well how
to inueigle the Prince with queint speeches and sweet embracings: that she
made him forget God, his Lady, loyalty, and himself, so that of a Maiden, he
made her the fairest woman in Persia. When the time came that he should
depart, the Princess said to him. Yet have I a further request, my Lord, you
must promise to m^ete me in this place at times^ convenient, and endeavor with
your companion that he may likewise love my Sister. Trineus made promise he
would, but rather he desired to stab himself with his weapon: then that
Palmerin should know this great abuse, so heinous did his offense seem to
himself.

Aurecinda persuaded her Sister, still to pursue Palmerin with her love, and
what had passed between her and the Prince Trineus, she declared: whereupon
her desire grew the greater, yet all was in vain, for Palmerin would give no
ear to her complaints, which was the cause of this mishap following. Lyzanda
advertised by her Sister, that Tryneus still thus used her company in the
Bath: euious of her Sisters benefit, and despightfull at Palmerins obstinate
refusal, she went to the Soldane, and with many tears thus delivered her
grief. Ah my Lord, how much better had it been, that we had never known
these cruel Christian Knights? whose ingratitude will be the cause of my
death: for the younger of them is meruailouslie beloved of my Sister, who
forgetting her faith, honor, and her obedience to your Majesty, has
dishonored both her self and you, only to make proof of the other knights
Cruelty to me. The Soldane admiring his Sisters report, answered.

I did not will my Sister to abuse her self, without promise of marriage: but
seeing it has so fallen out, by my Fathers soul they shall both repent it.
Durst the Traitor abuse me so much in mine own Court? Why? my Lord, quoth
Lyzanda, you are the only cause thereof, and therefore you must be angry
with no body but your self. Let me not live an hour said the Soldane, if I
be not sufficiently revenged on him: Sister, be you but secret, and refer
the rest to my direction. Then calling for the Captain of his Guard, willing
him to take fifty Knights, and when his Majesty was at Supper, they should
go take his Sister and the Knight with her in the Bathe, and afterward carry
them to strong prison. But see it done secretlye, quoth he, for if his
companion know thereof, it may arise to further inconvenience. And because
Palmerin should not misdoubt this treason, all Supper-time the Soldane held him
in familiar talk: he hoping by this fetch, to stay them still in his Court,
but it fell out afterward to b^e the cause, that many of his best and chee^est
Knights were slain.

Not long had the ambushed Knights waited where they were appointed, but the
Princess Aurecinda opened the door, and came forth with her Friends as she
was accustomed: where they were suddenly taken, Tryneus not having the
leisure to draw his sword, so was he carried prisoner to one of the strongest
Towers in the Palace, and Aurecinda at the same time to another. Tryneus
s^eing himself thus betraide, fell into these lamentable discourses.
Unfortunate wretch that I am, have I so lately escaped by my freende, the
cruel enchauntments of the hellish Malfada, wherein I endured so many pains
and torments, and am now come to the place where they shall be redoubled?

Ah Palmerin my good Brother and companion, what will thou say when thou
hear of my taking, but most of all when thou understand the cause
thereof? Miserable wretch, how often did my Friend warn me of this
inconvenience, yet had not I the grace to credit his Cousaile: doubtless, my
very conceit of shame, when thou shall be acquainted with my soul offense,
will be more grievous to me then death. What dishonor, pain, torment and
punishment, shall be sufficient for my misdeede? Forlorn and despised Catife,
could not the fear of God, which has hitherto so graciously protected thee,
nor the loyalty of Agriola, who forsook Parents, Friends, and all for thee,
have kept thee from this monstrous act? O eternal God, the man that forsakes
thee is vile and abh^minable. When I had thy fear before mine eyes, I was at
rest and quiet in conscience, esteemed and beloved of all men: but when thou
gave me raynes of liberty, I became dissolute and forgetful of thee, as
also of them that honored me so much. Ah miserable occasion, and those
deceits, entisements, and subtle persuasions, how mighty are they in
operation? neither men nor diue^^ could bring me into such danger, as you
have plunged me in up to the ears. Ah villainous Page that first brought me
thither, and thou the falsest Lady in the world art cause of my evil. Nor are
they to be accused but my wretched self, who seeking mine own hur^, ^ound it,
and having found it, continued in it. Thus sorrowfully wayled Tryneus, where on
the contrary side Aurecinda rejoiced: for when she considered the estate of
her Freende, she persuaded her self by this mean, that the Soldane her
Brother would enforce him to marry her, which hope made her as joyful,
Tryneus was sad and pensive.

When the Captain had imprisoned Tryneus and Aurecinda he came to the Sultan
sitting at the Table, saying. Will your Majesty command me any further
service? I have enclosed the knight Tryneus in one Tower, and your sister
Aurecinda in another. Why? quoth the Soldane, did you find them together? I did
my Lord, quoth the Captain, your sister leading him by the hand out of the
Ladies hote-house. By Mah^met, quoth the Soldane, but that you speak it,
hardly could I believe it, what shameful villainie is this committed in our
Palace? by the greatest God, the fact shall be so worthi^y punished, as it
shall remain for a perpetual memory. At these speeches Palmerin was not a
little amazed, and dissembling his anger so well as he could, said to the
Soldane. I cannot be persuaded my Lord, that Tryneus would commit so vile an
act, without entisement thereto by your sisters treason: she being (under
your Majesty's correction) the most shameless Girl that ever I saw, for
twenty and twenty times have I seen her follow him, with gestures far
unfitting one of her calling. Then starting from the Table, quoth he* Consider
what he is, and what thou intendest against him, for never was imprisonment so
dearly bought as this will be, and before thou put him to death, it shall
cost me my life, and the lives of an hundredth thousand Knights beside, in
revenge of his wrong. Being thus enflamed with ire, he could not so give
over, but thus began again. By God Soldane, thy treason is so manifest as
thou can not hide it, full well do I understand thy flatteries, whereby thou
hopest to keep us in thy service, but far art thou from thy reckoning, for
rather will I be torn in a thousand pieces, then endure the reproach of such
a man's service, who under color of friendship imprisoneth his Knights, and
afterward threatens them with death. Tomano, Drumino, Corax, and many other
knights belonging to the King Abimar, seeing Palmerin in such a rage, as it
seemed the fire did sparkle from his eyes, endeavored to persuade him, and
Tomano thus spoke to the Soldane. My Lord, under my safe conduct and your
faith promised, are these two Knights come with us to your Court, and yo^ have
now imprisoned one of them, advise your self of speedy justice: for this
shame done him is against all right, and forever shall you be noted with
breach of faith: beside, I repute his injury as done to my self. The Soldane
seeing the Princes thus moved, although himself procured those fif^^e Armed
knights to take Tryneus, yet with smooth countenance he thus answered. Content
your setues my friends, Tryneus in right shall be defended: and if I find my
Sister culpable, she shall be punished as she were a stranger. More I demand
not, said Palmerin, for I am assured that by her flatteries Tryneus has been
seduced. So departing to his Chamber, he met his two Squires, Bellechino, and
Colmelio, of whom he demanded, if they at any time perceived the love between
Tryneus and the Princess Aurecinda.

They answered that they did perceive it, and diverse nights they saw him go
to the Princess Chamber. And why did you not reveal it to me? quoth he,
worthilye have you deserved death, in concealing the shame of your Masters
Freende, wherein my self cannot escape untouched. Hereupon he Armed himself,
and sending for the Prince Tomano, said to him.

I think it best my Lord, that you keep your ordinary guarde about your
person, till we know how the soldane will deal with Trineus. As for my self,
I intend (if your Brother Drumino and the Prince Corax will join with me) to
keep the Field with the thousand Knights that came hither with us, that none
may enter into the City without our license. In mean while, you may send a
Courtier to the King your Father, that he presentlye send us what help he
may. Sir Palmerin answered Tomano, not only my Knights shall enter the
Field for you, but my self likewise, so please you to command me, and what
you think best for the deliverance of your Freende Tryneus, I will be
willing to accomplish to my uttermost. Presentlye will I send a Horseman to
Grisca, and confer with my Brother Drumino, that his Knights and Gentlemen
may be Armed that came from Sauata, as also they that came with my Nephewe
Corax from Garara, which will be in number a thousand more: your self in mean
time may get forth your necessaries.

Who then had seen the Knights Arming, the horses providing, the bag and
baggage carrying, would have said that Palmerin was as much feared and beloved
in a strange Country, as in his own. Such was the diligence of the Nobles
and Soldiers of Grisca, Sauata and Garara, as they were right soon before
the Palace attending for Palmerin: who commanded Tryneus his Horse and rich
Armor should be brought forth by his Squires, leaving in his Chamber all the
riches and treasure, that the soldane and the Princess Zephira had given him:
and mounting on his own Courser, he came and embraced the prince Corax,
saying. Let us depart (my Lord) from these ungrateful (...)

^

Chap. LVI.
How the Sultan seeing he could not persuade Trineus to marry his sister,
condemned him to death* and what followed afterward.

TOmano, who by the advice of Palmerin (...) for the deliverance of the Prince
Trineus, and coming to the Queen Zephira, thus spoke. Madame, seeing (...)

(...) him, that so willingly adventured his life for you. Ah my Lord, said
Zephir^, I fear the Soldane will hardly hear ^ee: for when su^^ mighty
persons are in anger, little account make they of love or virtue, yet will I
willingly too what lies in me.

So bidding the Prince good night, she went weeping to the Soldanes Chamber:
which his Majesty perceiving, came and embraced her, demanding who had any
way offended her. Even you my Lord, quoth she, and in such sort, (...) (...)
(...) and there before all his Knights, said. You have heard my Lords, the
confession of them both, and withal have seen their great obstinacy:
therefore by sentence irreuocable I condemn them to death, and this day shall
they be burned in the place accustomed, none of you all move me to the
contrary, for I will not be otherwise persuaded. By heaven, say the Prince
Tomano, unhappy should I be to stay with you any longer, wherefore at this
instant I forsake your alliance, and henceforth will show my self your
mortal enemy. Alas my Lord, quoth the young Princess Bel-sina, will ye so
soon abandon my company? Follow me then answered Tomano, where I go, for no
more will I be seen in this tyrannous Court, where nothing but dishonor and
cruelty is used.

Presently the Princess and he mounted on Horseback, and with their train
came to Palmerins Camp: who having heard the Soldanes sentence, was ready to
have slain himself, but that he hoped to save the life of Trineus at the
fatal hour. Alas my Friends, quoth he, to his company, this day must you
assist me, to deliver the most gentle Knight that ever bare Arms. Set
forward courageously against the Tyrant, whom with the aid of my God, we
shall easily vanquish. Zephira hearing that Tomano and Belsina were gone, and
how the Soldane had judged Tryneus and Aurecinda to death, entered into
maruailous regrets and acclamations, whereat the Soldane was so enraged, as he
commanded that Tryneus and his Sister, should presently be led to the place
of execution, and under the charge of five thousand soldiers, they were
brought on horseback forth of the City: but when Aurecinda saw herself so
hardly used, wringing her hands, and renting her comely locks of hair, she
brake forth into these pitiful speeches.

Alas Gentlemen, why are you the instruments to execute a Tyrants will? what
recompense can you expect at his hands, that for greedy desire of my
patrimony, sends me to death? So piercing were these words in the ears of
the Soldiers, as they very much lamented her case: but Tryneus never
changed color, ryding on with resolute constancy, not once listening to the
mones of the Princess.

When they were come within sight of Palmerins power, they raunged themselves
in battle array, committing Tryneus and Aurecinda to fifty Knights, who
should convey them to the Furnace where their death was appointed, which was a
good quarter of a league from the City. Trineus now seeing death before his
eyes, and no succor near to reskewe him, prepared himself to the latest
extremity, and with many sorrowful farewels to Agriola and Palmerin, was
fully persuaded to endure the torment. Palmerin knowing which way his Friend
should be led to death, with a sufficient train lay secretly ambushed, and
espying opportunity, gave summons to his men, whereupon they all issued forth
very courageously. But as they rushed out from their secret ambushment, the
air was suddenly obscured, and such thunder, hail and rain fell, as never
was the like heard or seen before, the Soldanes squadron seemed to be all in
a flaming fire. The poor Persians thinking the end of the world was come upon
them, fled toward the City: but notwithstanding all their haste, the
greatest part of them remained dead in the field. If the natural fire (prepared
for Tryneus) made him fearful, doubtless this fire raised by coniuration made
him much more a^righted, but suddenly came to him an Armed Knight with his
Sword drawn, and mounted on a horse of mighty bigness, who took the Horse
of Tryneus by the bridle, saying.

Come Sir Tryneus, in despite of the Tyrant thou shall not die. At these
words arrived Palmerin, who embracing Tryneus, said. Ah my dear Friend and
Brother, what villainous minds bear they that would do you this outrage? (...)
my Squire has brought hither, that we may with honor revenge this shame. As
they thought to go set on the enemy, the Armed Knight, who was Muzabelino,
thus spoke. My Lord, let us not tarry tryfling time here, but summon^ your
people together, and set forward to Grisca, where you shall (...). The
disolate Tryneus, what with his former fear; and present joy to behold his
Freende, was not able to speak one word, but Palmerin having well noted the
Armed Knight, at length knew him to be Muzabelino, wherefore embracing him,
said.

Ah my Lord, for ever be the King of Kings praised, in granting me to have
knowledge of you, let me be worthily condemned of ingratitude, if I do not
acknowledge this great favor to my Friend, which I account as dear as done
to my self. After many courteous salutation^ passed on all sides, they set
forward to Grisca with their men and provision: where we will leave them, to
show what afterward befell to the Soldane and his people. After a long and
very dangerous tempest, with whirle-windes, lightnings, and strange
apparitions, to the great discomfort of all the Persians: one of the Princes,
came to the Soldane, saying.

My Lord, the lightning has fallen so terriblie in the Court, as all the
Ladies of honor are ^laine therewith. An other brought news, that three
parts of the soldiers, which conducted Tryneus and Aurecinda forth of the
City, lay all slain in the rough tempest. While these strange mishappes were
discoursing, Aurecinda entered the Chamber, saying. Now soldane may thou
behold thy sin* See thou not that the celestial spirits, have revenged our
wrong with the death of thy people? and for my escape I r^nder thanks to the
highest, not to thee that gave my life to the fire, yet much better would my
death have contente^ me, then to live without him whose absence is my torment:
and did not the hope of his life give me some comfort, thou should perceive
how little I esteem of my life. Then entered the Queen Zephira, and she
falling at the Soldanes feet, thus began. Ah my Lord, the dishonor you have
this day done me is unspeakable. Have my deserts been so simple in your
eyes, that I might not entreat the liberty of one Knight, who this day (I
fear) has perished by your ingratitude? Never shall I see those noble Knights
again, whose lives have been endaungered for my welfare. Ah my Lord, if you
look into the weight of your offense, you shall perceive my tears are not
shed without great reason.

Madame, quoth the Soldane, and you fair Sister, at this time excuse my fault
committed, and patiently bear what has happened: for I vow to you by the
faith of a Prince, that I will make sufficient amends for my trespass. When
he now thought to be no further troubled, his Sister Lyzanda entered mad and
raging, and snatching his Fauchion from his side, said. See villain, see what
happens by thy commandment, one of thy Sisters is for ever defamed, and the
other will presently and her life before thee. Heerewith she st^^d the weapon
to her heart, and felt down dead at the Soldans feets, to the no little sorrow
of his Majesty, and all that were present: but Zephira, causing the body to
be taken away, the Soldane commanded she should be honorably buried, and
erecting a goodly Tomb of Marble over her grave, caused the manner of her
death to be thereon described. Afterward, by the counsel of the Lords of
Persia, he sent the Prince Tomano, and the strange Knights, all the riches
and treasure they had left behind them: the Princess Aurecinda remaining in
continual heaviness, and within short time she felt her self to be
conceived with (...). Here in she somewhat comforted her self, though
Fortune would not suffer her to enjoy the company of her Friend, yet one day
she hoped to see his lively image: which at the time appointed by Nature she
did, being delivered of the goodlyest male Child that ever was seen in
Persia, naming him Ryfarano, wh^ carried the beautiful complexion of his
Mother, as he did the hardiness and magnanimity of his Father.

Chap. LVII.
How Palmerin and Trineus having soiourned a while at Grisca with the king
Abimar, departed to the Isle of Malfada, where by the means of Dulacco and
Palmerin, all the enchauntments were finished.

BY the way as the Princes rode toward Grisca, Palmerin used these speeches to
Trineus. How happy is the Prince that gives credit to good counsel, and will
not be led by flatteries, or subject himself to his own passions? and how
unfortunate are they that fall into the the contrary? Can ye have a better
example here of then the traiterous Soldane? who first (causeless) disquieted
the good King Ab^mar, and afterward at his sisters motion, I imprisoned his
Friend: for your good success herein my Lord, you must thank Muzabelino, and
the Prince Tomano, whose power was so ready to defend you. Tryneus remembering
his follies past, was still so ashamed thereof, as he could make no answer,
wherefore Palmerin thus spoke again.

Why? my Lord, has the imprisonment for fair Aurecinda struck you dumb?
leave this bashfulnesse to Women, and remember your former courage. Stout
Hercules, whose honors are yet so rise in memory, did not he for the love of
Iole, wear feminine garments, and spin among women? Did not Achilles the like,
when he was with his fair friend in the Court of King Lycomedes, Mark
Anthony the Roman Emperor, did not he follow Cleopatra before Octauius,
although his army on the Sea was two fold the number of his enemies? And you,
for a little familiar love to a young Princess, who conquered you only by
(...) suit, remain thus confounded. Do you imagine your self to excel in
strength, prowess, and knowledge, Hercules, Achilles, and the Emperor
Anthony?

Alas dear Brother, answered Tryneus, well may you (...) of your especial
graces, being able to triumph over co^cupis^ence, but so yrkesome is my
offense in mine own conceit, as I think myself unworthy to be seen among
men of virtue. What shall I say to my Agriola, when she shall understand my
heinous offense? how shall I dare to present my self before her? For that,
said Palmerin, we shall do well enough, but I would it were so welcome to
pass, that we were with her to abide her censure. Continuing these speeches,
they arrived at Grisca, where the king being advertised of their coming, came
to meet them using these words at their gracious enter^^^^ment. Righ^ welcome
are ye my noble Friends, no marvel though the Soldane sought to wrong you,
remembering how for my sake you used him in the battle. In sooth my Lord,
answered Palmerin, well does your nobility deserve our service, and his
injurious dealing sharp revenge, which happily hereafter he may feel to his
cost, using strangers so vnhonorably: but here we present your Daughter
Belsina to your Majesty, after whose marriage al these troubles began.

Welcome fair Daughter, said the King, much better then my son has been
to your Fathers Court. When my Father, quoth the Princess, has considered his
fury, doubtless he will be heartly sorry therefore, and make satisfaction
for any thing mis^oone, till then I beseech your highness to conceive the
best. And according as the Princess had spoken it came to pass, for within
three days after, the Soldane sent Ambassadors to the King Abimar, to excuse
the imprisonment of Trineus, and the sentence of death he gave against him,
sending to him and Palmerin all their treasure and sumptuous presents, in sign
of satisfaction, and to his Daughter Belsina and the Prince Tomano, he sent
six Camelles laden with gold, as the dowry of their marriage.

Now are Palmerin and Trineus weary of their so long stay from their
friends, wherefore they desired leave of the king to depart, who seeing he
could not well entreat their longer aboade, right thankfully yeelted to their
request, giving them all things needful for their journey, as Horses, Armor,
men, money, and diverse other gifts of inestimable value. For which kindness
they humbly thanked his majesty, refusing to trouble themselves with such
riches in their travail, nor would they take that the Soldane sent them, or
what they brought from the ten Ro^ks, except the Bird and the two Crowns,
giving all the rest to Muzabelino, desiring him to continue them in
remembrance. My Lords, quoth he, no service can be lost that is done to such
liberal Princes, as now you give me good occasion to confess, and though
both I and mine should spend all our following days in your service, yet can
we not recompense the very least of your courte^^es, recommending my son
Bellechino once more to you my Lord in hope he will prove a loyal and
faithful Servant, otherwise I could part his head from his shoulders in your
presence.

And because the way you brought Madame zephira, is very long, trouble some,
and dangerous: I (...) Ship for you, which without any perrill shall speedily
carry you to Malfada, and a young Knight my brother have I appointed Pilot
therein, who (...) you how to finish all the enchauntments in the Isle, (...)
I desire you to order the matter with the King Maulerino, that my Brother may
have the government thereof after your departure. Be^eeue me noble Friend,
answered Palmerin, your Son will I entreat as well be^eemes him, and your
Brother shall not only have the charge of the Isle, which I will freely give
him, but I will so work with the Brother to Zephira, that he shall endow him
with greater possessions. So taking their leave of all the Courtiers,
M^zabelino brought him to the Ship, wherein they were no sonner entered, but
it presently cut through the waters with such violence, as they were very
quickly come to Malfada. They going on shore, Dulacco Brother to Muzabelino,
demanded of the Prince Trineus, if he had the Ring he found in the Cup at
the Castle of the ten Rocks. I have it on my finger sir, answered Tryneus.
Let us three enter the Isle, said Dulacco, as for you Bellechino and Colmelio,
stay you in the ship till you hear the sound of a Cornet, and then may you
safely venture on the land.

Dyardo standing in one of the Turrets in the Castle, saw when the ship came
and cast Anchor, wherefore he expected if any durst come forth thereof on the
shore, and so amazed he was that the three knights were not transformed, as
till Palmerin spoke to him, he knew not what to imagine, but afterward he
made have down, and letting down the Bridge, came and embraced him, saying.
Welcome is my noble Lord to Malfada, have you learned or brought any remedy
with you, whereby to recover your Friends here enchaunted? in happy hour
did you bestow your labor, if so it came to pass, but what may these two
knights ^ee that come in your company? The one is the Prince Trineus, quoth
Palmerin, whom I so long time sought for, and the other is the man that must
give us assistance.

After many friendly embracings, Palmerin demanded what was become of the two
(...) he left there. My Lord said Dyardo, they remain prisoners (...) for the
hard speeches they gave you. So went they all to the prison, where Palmerin
demanded which of them had the Key of the enchaunted Tower: but they continuing
in their former obstinacy and malice, would not answer one word. False
harlots, quoth Palmerin, why speak^ ye not? if you give me not the Key quickly,
all your forcerie shall not save your lives. Then being fearful of death,
presently fell on their knees, and one of them taking the ^ey forth of her
pocket, opened the (...) of the Tower, (...).

Enter Knight, I hope thou will repent the hastine^^e* Palmerin and his three
companions went in, where they beheld a huge I doll of (...), holding a Bow
with an arrow ready (...) to shoot: by him hung a (...), and on the other
side a fair Book. My Lord, said Dulaceo, we must have both the Cornet and the
booke^ and if you (...) in getting them, no one alive can end the
enchauntments, my God will strengthen me, said Palmerin, so (...) his Sword,
and covering himself with his (...) (...) (...)

Afterward he went to bid Agriola and Laurana good morrow, and then coming to
Frysoll, the king of Sparta, and Olorico, who were all pleasantly disc^ursing
together in their Chamber, he said to them. Assure^ly my good friends, if
fortune had been so adverse to me, that I could not have found Tryneus, or the
mean to deliver you from the enchauntment, I had given my farewell to Arms,
riches, and honor, and would have haunted those paths where never (...). For
with what face could I approach the presence of my sister and Aunt, having lost
them whom they live only to love. And you noble Prince Olorico, have just
occasion to complain on me, that have caused you to endure such pain and
travail: but in recompense of this over great wrong, I will cause you to enjoy
her whom you have so long faithfully lou^d, and so soon as I am arrived at
Constantinople, I will send Ambassadors to my Lord the Soldane, that he may
accept you as his son in my steed.

My Lord, answered Olorico, the honor you have done me in accepting my
company, I account to exceed al other courtesies, and though for a time I have
been unfortunate, I take it patiently, assuring you by the word of a Prince,
that I imagine the man not worthy to taste the sweet, that cannot abide to
feel the sower. By this time are Palmerins Letters come to the King Maulerino,
who having understood their contents, joyful of Palmerins return, and of his
good fortune in finishing the enchauntments, he came presently with his train
to Malfada, where to discourse the pleasure on each side conceived, the
honorable and gracious courtesies bestowed, with all the especial favors
besee^ing a king and so worthy personages, is far beyond my capacity, and
therefore I refer it to your gentle consideration. But at Palmerins
entreaty, Dulacco was made Lord and chief Gouerno^r of Malfada, and diverse
other territories near adjoining, which moved Palmerin thus to thank the
King. Seeing your majesty for thy sake, has bestowed this Istance on my
worthy good friend, to the end that the name of the wicked Malfada may be
utterly raced forth, let me entreat that it may (...) in the end to their n^
little comfort.

Let it be, quoth the King, as you have appointed, and whosoever henceforth
(...). After ward the King accompanied Palmerin and his friends to their
Ships, and there committed them to their prosperous voyage: so Palmerin, his
seven (...), the two Princesses, with his Squires Bellech (...) and Col^^elio,
(...) other ship well appointed, so hoysing sail, with a merry ^ale of
wind they (...).

Chap. LVIII.
How Palmerin and his companions sailing on the Sea, met with Ptolome: and of
the honorable entertainment the Emperor Florendos, and the Ladies made them,
when they arrived at Constantinople.

THree days sailed our Knights without any adventure, and on the fourth, as
Phoebus began enter his Chariot, to display his golden beams on his Uncle
Neptunes regions, Palmerin standing alo^ton the deck, espied a great Carricke,
which with full sail made haste toward them, and by the Banners he discerned
that it was of Turkey, wherefore he cried to his companions to arm themselves.
Suddenly were they all come alo^t armed, and the hundred knights in the other
ship were likewise in rea^inesse, when the Carricke being come near them, they
might behold the Turks strongly provided, and Ptolome their Captain bravely
encouraging them. At length they bu^keled together, and a dangerous fight
began between them, so that seven of the King Maulerinos Knights were slain,
the King of Sparta sore wounded by Ptolome, and Dyardo in great peril of his
life. When Palmerin saw the King of Sparta fall, and that the Moors had
dangerously hurt diverse of his Friends, fearing the King was slain, he
came to Ptolome, and after many sharp strokes on either side, at last got him
down, when pulling his Helmet furiously from him, thinking to have smitten
off his head, Ptolome cried: Kill me not sir Knight, for I yield my self to
thee, Palmerin knowing his friend, said to his companions and the rest. Give
over my friends and fight no longer, for false fortune has too much deluded us.

Ah, worthi^ Ptolome, why have I dealt so hardly with thee? is it possible that
any man may be likened to me in mishap? no sooner am I out of one, but
presently I fall into another: by heaven (dear Freende) if I had slame thee,
right soon would I have been revenged on my self. See then, sweet Ptolome,
how Palmerin greeues for his offense, more then if he had lost the best limme
on his body. When Ptolome beheld his Friend Palmerin, and by him the noble
Prince Tryneus, embracing them, he said. O Savior of the world, how highly
have thou this day favored me, permitting me to find my dearest Friends:
then they brought him to the Princess Agriola, in her Cabin, who was not a
little glad to behold the man, that endured with her some part of misery, and
Colmelio was joyful to behold Sir Ptolome, in that their hap was to be parted
when they were led to be sold as ^laues: but Agriola would needs hear all
his fortunes, since the first time of their separation, which he and Colmelio
truly recounted. Believe me Ptolome, said Palmerin, I see we all have had our
shares in adversity, and hardly can we judge whose wrong has been greatest:
but how came you thus to be Captain among the Turks? My Lord, quoth he, the
Princess Alchidiana bought me, and charged me to seek you, both by Sea and
Land: and for my defense gave me forty Knights, of whom there now remains
but ten alive. That Lady am I highly behol^ing to, said Palmerin, and for
the wrong I have done her by the death of her Knights, I will excuse my self
by an honorable Ambassade, when I shall send the Prince Olorico to her again.
And that thou Ptolome may know some of my good hap, understand that I
have found my Father and Mother, who are Florendos, the King of Macedon, and
Gr^ana the Daughter and ^eyre to the Emperor of Greece. I did ever persuade my
self, quoth Polome, that your descent was of royal lineage: but I entreat you
for my sake, that these Knights which your men have taken, may be gently used,
and enjoy their liberty. Palmerin calling them to him, said. For Ptolome his
sake that was your Captain, and her love that commanded you to travail with
him, I wish to you as to my self: yet shall you all go with me to
Constantinople, that you may help to conduct the Prince Olorico back again,
whom I mean to send with you to your Mistress.

We abide my Lord (quoth they) at your direction, and willingly obey your will,
in that we have known how dearly the Soldane loved you, and better fortune
could not befall us, then so luckily to meet with you, and the Prince
Olorico: as for our Companions that are s^aine, there is no remedy, for such
mishaps are common where Fortune ^rowneth. So sailed they on friendly
together, and on the Sea we will leave them, to tell you of the return of the
Ambassador Maucetto to the Soldane of Babylon, who hearing that the Persian
had refused to assist him, was somewhat offended thereat, but when he saw that
Palmerin had written, he pacified himself, saying. Ah gentle Palmerin, had
thou been in the battle at Constantinople, I had not needed to demand help
of him whom I judged my Friend: but seeing Fortune has shown her self so
contrary, I will not attempt any thing from which thou disswadest me.

Maucetto declared, that Palmerin had likewise sent a Letter to the Princess
Alchidiana, which he commaun^^^ him presently to carry her: no sooner had
she read the Letter, and thereby understood his knightly deeds of (...), but
embracing the Ambassador, thus spoke. Maucetto, never could thou have
brought me better news, thou of the man whose name flourishes in all (...)
Letter, written by the hand of the most perfect Knight living, full char^e and
choisly will I keep thee. Ah Ptolome, whom my noble Friend loves so dearly,
thee have I sent in dangerous hazard of thy life: but may I once see thee
again, thou shall perceive my love for Palmerins sake.

Happy art thou Princess Zephira, having with thee the myrror of mankind. My
Lord, quoth she, (as though Palmerin had been present) willt thou wrong thy
self so much as to tarry with her? Dare the Soldans Sisters vaunt that they
love thee? They be fair, as I understand, but not so fair that thou should
refuse me for the^. What have I said? doubtless matter to mine own reproach,
for if thou would, the kingly offers of my Father, and my importunate
intreattes could no way move thee: hardly may the Persians prevail with
thee, especially in such a weighty cause as love is. Maucetto, what say
thou? is Lord Palmerin like to stay long in Persia with the Soldans Sisters? No
Madame, quoth he. I heard him (...) very often that he would depart thence
before a Month was expired.

In these and such like speeches they continued, wherein we purpose to leave
them, for by this time is Palmerin and his Friends arrived in the Haven of
Constantinople, and Colmelio is sent before to the Palace, to advertise the
Emperor of these joyful tidings. As Colmelio entered the great Hall, the
(...) man he met was his Father Gerrard, who was newly made Lord Chamberlain
to the King Florendos: wherefore falling on his knee before him, he said.
Father, ^ittle did I think to find you exalted to such honor, happy was the
day when you (...) Prince Palmerin, and much more (...) you shall hear matter
of marvel. (...) the Emperor with the King Florendos (...) Hall, an^ all the
Ladies going to hear (...) Gerrard thus spoke to his highness. My Lord, see
here my Son Colmelio, who long time has travailed in sear of Prince
Palmerin, he has some (...) to deliver to your Majesty. Right welcome is
(...) the Emperor, say what thou (...), my friend, (...) liberty.

Mighty Emperor, said Colmelio, your Son Prince Palmerin (...) arrived in the
Haven, and with (...) Prince Tryneus, Son to the Emperor of (...), the good
Knight Sir Ptolome, the five Princes which went with him from Macedon, the two
Princesses of England and Durace, with diverse other unknown to me: and
saluting your Majesty with his humble duty, entreats that (...) and they
may come to kiss your (...) Florendos and the Ladies, were (...)

Long live your Majesty in health and happiness, here may you behold the
man, for whom my Lord Palmerin your Son, has endured such pain and
travail. The (...) perceiving by his speeches that he was Trineus the Prince
of Allemaigne, thus answered. I hope my Lord, that you will bear with mine
age and weakness, which hinders me from entertaining you as fain I would, but
I beseech you to arise, for it ill beseemes so great a Prince, to humble
himself in such sort. Florendos and Griana (in this time) welcomed their
Son, Arismena the King of Sparta, Armida her Frysoll, and the old Emperor
and Empress graciously entertained Agriola and Laurana, each absent Friend so
embraced and welcomed, as all the day was spent only in those ceremonies.
The next morning Palmerin dispatched his Dwarffe Vrbanillo to the Emperor of
Allemaigne, that he and Polynarda might understand these long expected news:
and afterward coming to Sir Frysoll, he said to him. Brother, our Mother has
e^riched us with a Sister since our departure, and my Sister Armida me with two
Nephews, I pray you let us go see them.

Hereupon the Nurses brought the young Princes, the ^ldest of them being named
Dytrius, and the youngest Belear, the young Princess, Daughter to Florendos and
Griana, was called Denisa, so fair and comely were the infants, as if Nature
had studied to make them most exquisite. Believe me Sir Frysoll, quoth
Palmerin, if my sister continu^ (...) she begins, the Realm of Hungaria shall
hardly want (...): what? two at a blow, her Lady it is a ^^gne of good (...).
And when you are entered the estate of wedlock, answered Frysoll, if your
lineage increase according to the greatness of desire, Madam Polynarda shall be
as well sped (...) her neighbors. Thus iested the Princes together, attending
^ewes of (...) courrier, that went with Vrbanillo to the Emperor of Allemaigne,
(...) at that time was at Vienna.

Chap. LIX.
How the Duke of Mensa, and the County of Redona, conducted the prince Olorico
into Assiria, where he was espoused to the princess Alchidiana.

FOr the space of a Month and more, Palmerin, Trineus and Agriola, soiourned
at Constantinople, till all things were prepared for them to (...) toward
Allemaigne: during which time, Palmerin showed such signs of love to the
Prince Olorico as he would seldom be (...) that more and more his amourous
passions increased, he said. Dear (...)

Nor do I this (sweet Prince) as envious of your company, or that I stand in
fear of the Soldane, but only to keep my promise, which was, that I would
aid you to my ^ttermost, to accomplish the marriage (...), for whom I see your
(...) troubled. My Lord, answered Olorico, if ever perfect love might be
discerned in a Princes heart, doubtless it is most amply (...) in yours.
Where you can find in any History, se^blable affection? or that a Christian
would so favor his enemy, that is contrary to him in law and (...) that so
great ^ Prince would (...) to accept as his companion in Arms, the poor Son
of the King of Arabia, practicing for his good, not the surety alone of the
Christians, but the alliance of the greatest Lord in Asia. (...) Lord, since
of your accustomed good (...) this offer, of simple judgment should I show my
self to refuse it. I accept your gracious kindness, and assure your self of
his ready service, whom (...) to the Prince of Greece. (...) the Soldane of
Babylon in (...).

The Letter of Prince Palmerin, to the great Soldane of Babylon.
(...) (...) against all your enemies. Contrariwise, if you will follow your
former opinion, we must defend our selves so well as we may. And for I can no
more (with (...)) forsake my Country* Parents and friends, to return again
to your service: I send you the Prince Olorico, a Knight both valiant and
hardy as any in all Turkey, without exception of your Court, the great Turks,
or the Soldane of Persia, and he to serve you in my (...). Desiring your
highness by that affection which you did bear me wh^^ the Prince (...), that
you accept him as your Son, and give him in marriage your Daughter
Alchidiana, as the man that has best deserved her, if ever Prince might merit
^ Ladies love by bounty and choice chivalry. So shall you perform an action
of (...) honor, and (...) me continually to acknowledge this kindness.

Your Palmerin d'Oliua.

Another Letter he wrote to the Princess Alchidiana, the tenure whereof was
thus.

The Letter of Prince Palmerin, to the Princess of Assiria.
TO you Madam Alchidiana, daughter to the great Soldane of Babylon, Palmerin
d'Oliua your knight, sends health condign to your magnificence. Madame,
sending to your Father the Duke of Mensa, and the Count (...) to the Crown of
Arabia. You know fair Madame, that never had he come to your Fathers Court,
had not the perilous battle against the proud Brother of Amarano provoked
him, nor would be have adventured the dangers of the Sea, but in hope (at
length) to purchase your gracious love. For these considerations, good Madame,
entertain him into your sober thoughts, who has no more feared to spend his
blood for your sake, and thrust his life into infinite dangers, then I have
done to set my hand and pen to this paper. I know that your grace,
beauty, and great (...), commands the cheifest Prince on the earth for your
Husband, and (to sheelde my self from blame) I know that I promised you my
service. When I should return from Constantinople: but how has it fallen out?
your Palmerin is known by them that have like authority over him, as your
love has of the Prince Olorico. I am a Christian, a stranger, Son to the
simple king of Macedon, and the Daughter to the Emperor of Greece, beside, of
very little or no desert at all. He is of your Law, your Neighbor, son to
the rich king of Arabia, and a Prince of as high virtue as ever was in my
company: witness whereof he made on the Phrigians, and in an hundred places
since in my presence. Wherefore Madame, if nobleness of heart, and loyal love
deserve so great an alliance. I know no Prince this day living more worthy
then he. Assuring you withal, that more gladly would I die the death, then
solicit the cause of him, whom I would not imagine unworthy my person.

Your Knight, Palmerin d'Oliua.

When he had sealed these Letters, he gene them to to the (...) who
accompanied with fifty Grecian (...) where their ships was (...), after them
followed the King Maulerinos hundred Knights* the number being supplied with
other, instead of them that were slain, and after them went the Knights that
came with Ptolome, then came the Prince Olorico and Palmerin, devising by the
way on many matters.

My Lord, quoth Palmerin, I imagine you now remember our taking by the
Admiral Olimaell, and fear that the like mishappe may again befall you: I
therefore (as your guarde) give you the hundred Knights I had of the King
Maulerino, and fifty Knights naturally borne in Greece, as able in Arms as
any other whatsoever, entreating you to hold me excused, if I give you not
such estate as (...) your nobility. Worthy Palmerin, answered the Prince,
the greatest Lord that is, might well content himself with the honorable
company you have given me. And did not extreme passions overrule me, and
call me hence to her service whom I have only chosen, I would renounce
Arabia and the Law of Mahomet, only to live in your company. But in what
place my fortune guides me hereafter, neither Parents or Friends shall hinder
me to say that I am your vowed and affectionate servant. The like do you
conceive of me, said Palmerin. So with tears they left each other, Olorico
and all his compani^ being aboard, such favorable wind and weather they had,
as without any danger they safely arrived where the Soldane lay: and first the
ten knights went ^n shore, they that were left of the company which the
Princess Alchidiana gave to Ptolome, and coming before the Princess, said.

Madame, your Knight sir Ptolome humbly saluteth you by us, sending your
excellency this Letter. Beside, there is now arrived at the port, the Prince
O^orico, and certain Ambassadors from the valiant Palmerin, Prince of Greece
and Macedon, who come on his behalf to kiss^ your hand. The Princess having
heard these news, and read the Letter which Ptolome sent, containing the great
(...) fortunes of Palmerin, was inwardly so ravished with delight, as a long
space she remained silent, but at (...) brake forth into these speeches. Ah
Fortune, how well thou know to change matters which way thou plea^est, not
according to the will and desire of passionate minds, but on the behalf of the
highest in perfections. Ah Palmerin, the man whom my heart shall ever love,
how may fair Polinarda justly term her self happy, having thee for her
Lord and love, considering that the beauty and graces of so many Ladies
conquered with thy deserts nor the sumptuous riches continually offered thee,
could once diuer^ thee from thy first affection. Ah Alchidiana, that which has
made so many Ladies and knights fortunate, in compassing the only issue of
their desires, does now remain for ^hy torment alone, making thee the most
unhappy creature under the Sun. Agriola, Griana, Arismena, Armida, and
Zeplura, are they (sweet Knight) by thy means in assurance of their loves.
Trineus, Frysoll, the King of Sparta, Maulerino, Abimar, Tomano, and ^iuers
other, are their Realms quieted, and their Ladies triumphing in their joys,
only by the price of thy blood and danger (...) thy life? And must I alone
remain disgraced, for ever (...), having lost the knight I loved a^ my soul?
While the princess continued these complaints, the prince Olorico and the
Ambassadoures were come before the soldane, and being entertained by him with
very gracious (...), they presented the Letters from Palmerin, which being
read in presence of all his Lords, the Soladne thus answered.

My Friends, I will impart these (...) to my Counsel and my Daughter, and
afterward make you answer as I may. Heereuppon the Duke of Mensa, the Counte^
of Redona, and the Prince Olorico (...) and soon after the Soldane sent for
his daughter, thus speaking to her. Daughter, our Princes think good, and have
counseled me to make peace with Palmerin, who at (...) of Greece, and
requires in (...) of our truce, that I should give you in marriage to the
renowned Prince Olorico. Advise your self hereon, for Palmerin has earnestly
entreated it by writing, and here I have a letter for you, I think to the same
effect. The Princess having read the Letter, returned this answer. It is
very true my Lord, his request to me is for the self same cause: seeing
therefore it likes you, and the Princes of our Realm think it convenient, in
respect of the common profit and good may ensue thereby, it is not for me to
make denial.

Right glad was the Soldane of this answer, wherefore he said, go then fair
Daughter and (...) your self accordingly, for after Di^ner in the presence of
the Ambassadors, you shall be affiaunced to the Prince. Olorico since his
arrival had talked but little with his Lady, wherefore he now determined to
go see her, and meeting her as she returned from the Soldane, he saluted her
with great reverence, but the Princess ^eig^ing that she knew nothing yet of
their marriage, thus spoke to him. I understand my Lord, that your companion
Palmerin has altogether forsaken us. Madame, quoth the Prince, if he have
abandoned your company, it is only by the favor of Fortune, who has been a
greater Friend to him then any man beside: yet cannot the great honors and
possessions he now enjoys, make him forgette you, in that at my departure he
said, for ever he would live and die your knight. God keep him, said the
Princess, where ever he is, for still is my heart vowed to his remembrance,
and gladly can I do as (...) for him as for my Brother, though his present
(...) from my service. Such is his trust (...) present you my heart, that never
since the day of our departure from Constantinople, has enjoyed any rest,
being absent from the only mean of my comfort. If then I have lived all this
while in some hope, by remembrance of your exceeding graces and courtesies,
beyond all other should I account my self in happiness, if now at length you
receive me as your Servant. I receive you, said the Princess, for Palmerins
sake, and for your own deserts which have been so worthy, requiting you with
equal affection, so that you deny me not one request. Nothing shall you be
denied (sweet Princess) quoth he, if by my life it may be compassed.

Nor will I demand any thing of so great value, said she, this is the favor
you shall grant me, hereafter when time shall serve, that you will conduct me
to Constantinople, there to behold the fair princess Polynarda, and the
magnificent Court of noble Palmerin, in recompense whereof, I give my self to
be your wife, and accept you as my Lord and Husband. If Olorico was now well
pleased, I refer to your judgments, wherefore confirming their promises, by
kisses and embracings, with solemn protestations and irreuocable vows, they
departed thence to their Chambers.

After Dinner, the Princess attired in most sumptuous garments, came into the
Hall with her waiting Ladies, when the Soldane sent for the Ambassadors, and
thus spoke to them. My Friends, I now perceive the man to be over foolish
that trusts in himself. I thought by my power to destroy Greece, where on
the contrary my people are destroyed. I thought to continue vnquenchabl^
hatred toward your Master, and now I am constrained to grant him peace, yet
not constrained, but by the work of the greatest God I am moved so to do,
which in the presence of all my Lords I protest, and with as good will as he
^ooth d^maunde it. See then the power of that Majesty, which can (...) and
conquer^ where he lift, and I swear^ to you by my Crown, that the good fortune
of Palmeri^ contenteth me as well, as if he were mine own son. Mighty
Soldane, answered the Duke of Mensa, if you resolve to love the worthy Prince
Palmerin, both he and his will perform the like to you, and on his behalf we
promise faithfully, that against all your enemies (Christendom excepted) you
shall be assured of his succor and assistance.

I request no better assurance, quoth the Soldane, then this that he has sent,
and that you may witness I am his faithful Friends: at this instant shall
the peace be ratified by all the Lords and Princes here present, and to seal
the same, as he requested, I give my daughter to the Prince Olorico. Great joy
was generally made for this good agreement, and the two lovers were espoused
together within few days after: and the time being come for the Ambassadors
return to Constantinople, Alchidiana sent diuer^ rich gifts to Palmerin and
Polinarda, the like did the Soldane and the Prince Olorico.

Chap. LX.
How Palmerin, Trineus, and Agriola, accompanied with many great Lords and
princes, went to the Emperor of Allemaigne at Vienna, where great triumphs were
made at the celebrating of the marriage between Trineus and the princess
Agriola.

Soon after the Prince Olorico, and the Ambassadors of Greece were gone
toward Assiria, Palmerin (although the aged Emperor very much dissuaded him)
made provision for his speedy voyage to Allemaigne, and having conducted the
King of Sparta and his Aunt Arismena some part of their way homeward, at their
return to the City of Constantinople, he came to the Duke of Pontus,
saying. I remember the time when you did cut off the great Turks head, an
act deserving good and especial recompense, and that you thereby delivered
us, and performed it at the motion of the Princess Laurana, her have you loved
ever since both on land and Sea, and her Country is not far hence: will ye
now make her your Lady and Wife? I promise ye my assistance so far as I can.

My Lord, answered the Duke, fearing to offend you, I still deferred to move
you in this cause, but seeing we are now so happily fallen into these
terms, I will not conceal the truth from you. In sooth my Lord, when first
I saw her, I loved her, and have ever since continued in this hope, that time
at length would favor my intent. It suffices, said Palmerin, and presently
he acquainted the Emperor therewith, who thinking the match very meet and
convenient, they were the next day married by the Achbishop of Constantinople,
and in short time after went to take possession of their Duchy of Durace,
where they were received very honorably, and the whole state yielded up into
the Dukes hand.

When Palmerin saw that the most part of his companions were departed, at the
earnest intreataunce of the Prince Trineus and Agriola, he set forward to
Allemaigne, accompanied with Frysoll and Armida, whom he conducted into the
Realm of Hungaria, where Frysoll was crowned King by reason of his Fathers
decease: there went with him like wise Diardo of Bohemia, the Prince Eustace,
Ptolome, and other Lords of great account* (...) good speed they made in their
journey, as in short time they arrived at Vienna, where the Emperor being
advertised of their coming by the Dwarf, came with his courtly train to
meet them, and taking his Son Tryneus in his arms, said. I see it is the
will of God my Son, that here after I shall have as great joy by thee, as in
thy long absence I have had grief and sorrow, all which I patiently put up,
for the love of thy brother, the noble Prince Palmerin, and fair Agriola of
England, that well deserves it. But in good ^^^th my Children, had you not come
in so happy time, I should have been driven to marvelous fears. For the King
of France perceiving, that I would not give my daughter in marriage to his
eldest son, demanded the King Recinde of Spain his daughter, who granted
his request: so that they twain, with the aid of the King of England, have
leueyed such an Army on the Sea, as never was the like seen to pass the
Rheine. But seeing you returned in so good disposition, the less account I
make of their angry menaces: yet are they the three principal Kings of
Christendom.

My Lord answered Palmerin, be not you dismaide at their enterprise, for ere
many days be expired, I hope to see all matters quietly pacified, and that
without any effusion of blood. The less is my doubt, quoth the Emperor, in
that with such good fortune you have finished your intentions, for nothing you
begin but comes to luckie end. Witness heerof appears in the search of my
Son Tryneus, whom the best Knights in Christendom have labored to find:
but all their travail I see has been spent in vain. By this time they were
come to the Palace, where they were graciously received by the Ladies. Alas my
Friends, said the Empress, which of you shall I first embrace? Ah my Son
Tryneus, how sorrowful have thou made me since thy departure from England?
just cause have thou to thank the Heavens, who protected thee still in so
many dangers, and forget not thy Brother Palmerin, who has endured such
trouble for thy sake. Fair Daughter, quoth she to the Princess Agriola,
welcome are you indeed. God send you better fortune hereafter, then you have
had already, which yet has been a Touchstone of your loyalty. But while
these speeches continued, how the other two Lovers with piercing regard beheld
each other, and how many gracious signs passed as secret Ambassadors
between them. Polynarda was clad in such costly (...) for the pleasure she
conceived since the Dwarffes (...) at the Court, as she seemed anoth^r Juno,
when she stood to abide the arbitr^ment of (...), or like Voluptas f^llowing
her Mother Venus.

But fearing least this amiable encounter, should decipher some part of her
former courtesies to her friend, which as yet was unknown to any but
Bryonella, she locked up all secrets with so sweet a kiss, as would have
contented the rudest of the Gods, had it b^ne Vulcan or Neptune themselves. And
coming to salute the Princess Agria^a said. No marvel (fair sister) if
your love wrought wonders in my brothers mind, for unfeignedly I speak it,
your exquisite graces deserve the greatest service in the world. Alas Madame,
answered Agriola, if nature, or they that had the charge of me in my youth,
could have painted me with such beauty as I see in you, or enriched me with
wisdom, able to devise with my Lord when he came to see me: then could I
have said somewhat of the pains he has taken for me, but I know my self so
full of imperfections, as the love he bears me proceeds of his own good
nature, not by any merit he can behold me. Then Palmerin kneeling before the
Emperor, said. I beseech you my Lord grant me one request, which shall be no
way prejudicial to your Majesty. Arise sir Palmerin, quoth the Emperor, ask
what thou will, and thou shall have it.

My Lord Tryneus, and the Princess Agriola, said Palmerin, are religiously
married between themselves, let me entreat your highness to confirm it wit^
open sol^mnization, before the Duke of Mecaena here present: whom I mean to
send into England, that he may resolve the King how himself was an eye
witness of their marriage. The Emperor liked so well of Palmerins motion, as
soon after the wedding was solemnized, and he coming to Bryonella,
courteously taking her by the hand, said. My good friend Brionella, I am now to
be discharged of the promise I made at my last being here: in witness whereof,
I have brought your knight sir Ptolome, and him I commend to your further
favor. So highly am I beholding unto you my Lord, quoth she, as never shall I
be able to return sufficient recompense: but were we equal in joy with the
Prince Tryneus and fair Agriola, then would I think no storm could wrong us.

Palmerin at these words presently left her, and persuaded the Emperor so
well, as Ptolome and Brionella were likewise espoused together, when Palmerin
conferring with the Princess Agriola, thus spoke to her. Now may you judge
Madame whether I deceived ye or no, and if the estate of my Lord Tryneus be any
less then I told ye. Had I not given faithful credit to your speeches,
answered Agriola, I would not have forsaken my Parents and friends so rashly:
but I hope they will pardon me, in that I have done nothing but to their
honor. On the morrow, with exceeding joy and rare tryumphs, were Palmerin and
Polinarda married together, and thus was long and faithful love worthily
requited. Ptolome was now created Duke of Saxon, and Dyardo took his leave to
go see his wife Cordonya, whom he had not heard of since the time he was taken
by the Pirates.

Chap. LXI.
How Palmerin sent Ptolome Duke of Saxon (as his Ambassador) to the King of
France, and the Duke Eustace of Mecaena, to the King of England, to treat of
the peace between them.

Certain days before the departure of Dyardo toward Bohemia, Palmerin in the
presence of the Emperor and all the Princes, gave the charge of his Embassade
to the Duke Ptolome: which he should deliver not only to the most Christian
King of France himself, but also to his youngest son, who now had espoused the
Duchess of Buroundie. So departed Ptolome from Vienna, accompanied with many
Lords and knights, and at length arrived at Digeon, where the Prince L^wes
being acquainted with the cause of his coming, thus answered the Ambassador.

My Lord, sometime I had acquaintance in France, with the most renowned
Palmerin, and because he is the only man of the world, to whom I owe all
friendly affection, I will persuade my Father to join in peace with him. Now
was Ptolome in good hope that his travail would sort to successiue end:
wherefore they presently iourneyed to the King, who as then was with his
estates at Paris, and having heard Palmerins request, who now was wedded to
the Princess Polynarda, and therefore his intended war with the Emperor,
would extend to the hurt of the man he loved, thus answered. Duke of Saxon, I
am sufficiently acquainted with the bounty of thy Master, and very well I
do remember, that at his being in France he combatted for his Lady
Polinarda: yet was I ignorant till now of that has happened. But least he
should conceive, that I seek to make a commotion in Christendom, let him
enjoy his Lady and Wife in peace, although she was sometime promised to mine
eldest Son, reserving the conditions of our amity, that our first Nephews
and Neeces may match together in marriage, thereby to continue the honor of
their predecessors. As for the Kings of Spain and England, who moved me to
give them assistaunce, on there behalf I can make you no certain answer,
until my Messengers be returned home again. Gracious Lord, quoth Ptolome* I
dare assure you in the name of my Master, that he has evermore esteemed your
favor among the best Christian Princes, and will not refuse the marriage
between your Children hereafter. And this conjunction of your amity, will
cause that neither the Kings of Spain or England will seek to molest him: but
with your highness join in love and friendship. With this answer Ptolome
returned to Vienna, where the Emperor and Palmerin welcomed him with
exceeding honor: and by this time had the Duke Eustace taken landing in
England, where delivering the sum of his charge to the King, his highness
returned him this answer. Although my Lord Ambassador, both your Master and
the Prince Tryneus did me manifest dishonor, yet not to withstand peace, which
still ought to b^^ preferred before war, I grant his request, and will
presently call home my Garrisons, shaking hands with him in honorable concord.
As for the wrong done to my Daughter, I am content to excuse it, believing
that she was not conveyed hence but with her will: thanking the Prince for the
honor he has done her, seeing she would leave her Parents and friends so
lightly. I think my gracious Lord, answered the Duke, that when you consider
what your Daughter has done, you will not touch her with want of wit or
judgment: for in respect of the long enmity between the Emperor and you,
she desired that her marriage might sort this happy end. Nor would she have
departed hence with the Prince Tryneus, without a faithful and resolved
promise of marriage: which is performed, with as great honor as ever was done
to the daughter of a King. Think you, quoth the King, that had not the great
friendship of Tryneus, (when against his Fathers will, he came with Palmerin to
assist me) quallified the weight of mine anger against him, but I would have
pursued the injury he did to me? yet did I refer his service, to the
judgments of my Lords of England, who persuaded me to revenge, which you well
perceive as yet I have not done.

Prince Palmerin, quoth the Duke, is so virtuous, as rather would he have
run on a thousand deaths, then your daughters honor should any way have
been impeached: but being assured of this fortunate issue, both he and
Tryneus adventured as they did. And sorry am not I, said the King, that all
things are come so well to pass, but seeing we are entered thus far in
speech, tell me (I pray you) how Palmerin came to the knowledge of his
Parents, and how he finished the adventures at the Castle of the ten
Rocks, and the dangerous Isle of Malfada, which never any Knight could
compass before? Then the Duke rehearsed every accident, how amourous the
great Turk was on the Princess Agriola, and each several occasion as they
fell out: at which report, the Queen with her Ladies were present, who hearing
the discourse of so strange and variable fortunes, said.

I thought my Daughter had learned more modesty, then leaving her Fathers
Court, to follow a Knight unknown to her in strange Countries: but seeing
the end has fallen out so well, henceforth I shall remain in better
contentment, seeing a Prince of so great renown has now espoused her.

While this conference endured, the Duke earnestly beheld the Princess
Sabinda, Daughter to the Prince of Sansuega, and Niece to the Queen: and of
such excellent grace and beauty he esteemed her, as forgetting the death of
his Father, who deceased since his departure from Allemaigne, he became so
amourous of her, that he demanded of the Queen if she were her Daughter.
She is not my Daughter, quoth the Queen, but the Daughter of my Brother, the
Princes of Sansuega.

Right glad was the Duke thereof, and resolved to request her of the King in
marriage, who knowing the honorable place he held among the Prince of Greece,
and what account Palmerin made of him, consented thereto, so that within few
days after they were espoused together. Hereupon, to accompany the Princess,
and to confirm the peace, the King sent the Duke of Gaul, and another great
Lord with them into Allemaigne, the Queen likewise sent twelve English Ladies
to attend on her Daughter.

Thus returned the Duke of Mecaena to Vienna, where (...) was worthily
welcomed by the Emperor, Palmerin and Tryneus, especially the young Duchess,
and the Ambassadors of England, by whom the peace was faithfully ratified and
confirmed.

Chap. LXII.
How Palmerin and Polinarda, departed from Vienna toward Constantinople, where
after the decease of the aged Emperor Remicius, Palmerin was crowned Emperor
of Greece, and what joy was made at the birth of Polinarda her first son.

AF^^er the Ambassadors of England were returned home, Palmerin pereciuing the
Empire of Allemaigne was in quiet, took his leave of the Emperor, minding to
conduct his Polinarda to Constantinople, not without many sorrowful
lamentations, of the mother to forgo her daughter, and fair Agriola her new
acquainted sister, yet the Emperor pacified them well enough, by showing what
benefit this contract would be to Christendom, and so proceeded to his
daughter in this manner.

Thou go Polinarda to the seat of a great Empire, but more pleases me the
peerless name of Palmerin d'Oliua thy husbands, then the regiment of such a
mighty Monarche. Farewell fair Daughter, continue in faithful love and
obedience, remembering the reverend honor a Wife owes to her Husband.
Polinarda hearing with what earnest affection her Father spoke, was so overcome
with modest duty of a Child to her Father, as she was not able to answer
one word: which Palmerin beholding, kissed the Emperors hand, embraced
Tryneus, and took a courteous farewell of all the Ladies, commanding the
Pages presently to bring away the Princess (...), saying to her. Madame, the
longer you stay here, the greater will be your conceit of sorrow, by absence
the grief will be forgotten: let us then merely journey to the City of
Constantinople, where they that never saw you will rejoice more at your
coming, then all the Allemaignes can sorrow for your departure. With like
comfortable speeches Palmerin frequented his Lady by the way, till at length
they entered the Realm of Hungaria, where Frysoll with his cheifest Lords
attended their coming, to whom Palmerin in jesting, said.

Brother, I have adventured to bring your Sister Polinarda into your Kingdom,
take heed if you lay claim to her now as sometime ye did, for I am ready
to defend her against whosoever dare. I perceive my Lord,(quoth Frysoll) that
you will have my folly generally known, I pray (...) let no such youthful
pranckes be now remembered: for as you are the cheifest in chivalry, so have
the destenie given you a Lady, whom no one in the whole world may paragon.
Well may it be said, that God and Nature fore-pointed this match: nothing
inferior to lovely Paris and fair Helena, or puissaunt Hector and wise
Andromacha.

Frysoll accompanied them so far as Alba, where courteously parting from each
other, Frysoll returned to his Kingdom, and Palmerin soon after came to
Constantinople, where no little joy was made for his safe arriual, especially
for the Princess Polinarda, who was a right welcome Lady into Greece, the
old Emperor providing such devises and tryumphes, as the Chronicles to this
day record the memory thereof. About ten or twelve Months after,
Polynarda was delivered of a goodly Son, who was named Primaleon, whereat the
good old Emperor so inwardly rejoiced, as his spirit only comforted in the
good fortune of his Sons, and fearing afterward to see any sinister chance
fall to them, departed this frail and transitory life, whose death was
signified three days before, by the enchaunted Bird. His Funeral was
performed as beseemed so great an estate, and feign would Palmerin have had
his Father the King Florendos crowned Emperor, earnestly laboring the Princes
in the cause. But he desiring them to hold him excused, returned them this
answer.

Great offense were it to God my Friends, that the honor due to him, who gave
me liberty, defended my renown, and saved my life, should be taken from him
and given me: for if virtue, authority, and good fortune, are the properties
whereby to make choice of an Emperor, Palmerin is very many degrees before
me. As for his generositie, it is so well known to you, that it were but lost
labor to make report thereof. For his authority, the ^arbarous nations among
whom he has lived and conqueringly controlled, deliver sufficient
testimony. And for his high good fortune in all his enterprises, where is the
man that may be equalled with him? or what has he at any time attempted,
but he has finished the same with wonderful honor? I could name Kings and
Princes that reign only by his means. To speak of the victories he has
obtained, either in battle or single Combat, your eyes have beheld, and the
whole world apparently witnesses. This dare I boldly say, and some of you do
know it better then I, that his only name will be more feared in Greece, then
all your fore-passed Emperors have been by their greatest puissance.

So well did the people like what the King Florendos had said, as immediately
was the Prince Palmerin proclaimed Emperor of Constantinople, and the same day
he was crowned according to the accustomed rites and ceremonies. Not long
afterward did the King Florendos stay with his Son, but returned with his
Queen to Macedon, where he goue^ned in love and justice among his Subjects:
daily sending Messengers to Constantinople, as well to understand the health of
the Emperor and Empress, as also of young Prymaleon, who daily increased in
strength and beauty.

Chap. LXIII.
How the Prince Olorico and Alchidiana, thinking to travail to Constantinople
to see the Emperor Palmerin and the Empress Polinarda, strayed on the Sea.
And what sorrowful moan she made, and how she was found by Palmerin.

IN one of the Chapters before you have heard, how Olorico promised the
Princess Alchidiana, that he would bring her to the Emperor Palmerins Court,
which she imprinted to deep in her fancy, as but for the common malladie
incident to young Ladies, which is to become great soon after they are
espoused, she would have betaken her self to travail, within three Months
after her marriage. Notwithstanding, within short time after that trouble was
past, she came to beg a bone of the Soldane, which he would not deny her,
thinking she would demand no matter of weight. Father, (quoth she) you must
needs give leave to the Prince Olorico, that he may accompany me to
Constantinople, for I desire to see the Emperor Palmerin.

Daughter, said the Soldane, the travail on the Sea is very perilous, and
oftentimes great estates p^ri^^ by shipwreck: but seeing you are so desirous,
and I ^naduisedly have past my promise, you shall not in ought be (...) by me.
H^ereuppon was presently prepared term Ships and Galleyes, the greater part
whereof was laden with Horses, rich Tapistry, and other things of great
v^^^lue, which should be given to Palmerin and his Polinarda. In the rest were
embarked chosen Knights for her defense, with Ladies and Gentlewomen to
attend on her, and all needful necessaries: thinking to show her sumptuous
magnificence in the Emperous Court, which in conclusion fell out otherwise.
For Fortune who is ever variable and never permanent, at the instant when
Olorico and Alchidiana builded most on her favor, and were come within ten
days sailing of Constantinople: she altered their opinions in most doubtful
manner, as they expected nothing but the end of their lives. The wind now
arises contrary to them, a sudden and terrible tempest ouertaketh them, and
with such rough billows their Ships were beaten, as in their sight fire of
their Galleyes were drowned, the residue were very far scattered from them,
and the great Carricke wherein themselves were, against a Rock was spilt in
the midst. Now are they left to the mercy of the waters, and Alchidiana
wasting on a plancke for safegarde of her life: and had not one of the Pylots
by swimming recovered a little Squiffe, wherewith he presently made to her and
got her in, otherwise there had the Princess unhappily perished. This Pylot
was so expert and cunning, as cutting through the unmerciful waves, he gained
landing at a Port distant from Constantinople about thirty miles. The
Inhabitants where they came on shore, wondered to see her so gorgiously
attired, and had not the Pylot friendly persuaded them, that she was a
Princess travailing to the Emperors Court, and by mishap had lost all her
company on the Sea, they would have dealt with her very hardly. But when they
understood the cause of her coming, they entertained her with favor and
civility, causing her to be lodged at a very welthy Merchaunts house, where
she wanted nothing she could desire. Alchidiana seeing she had escaped the
danger of the Sea, and was now in better assurance then before, comforted
her self with this good fortune: but when she remembered her loss, into what
want and poverty she was now brought, and that through her foolish desire,
her Husband was drowned, (as she thought) she was so overcome with grief,
that neither her own noble mind, nor the daily presence of the Greeks that
came to see her, could dissuade her from ceaselesse lamentations.

Ah wr^tch that I am, quoth she, how well have I deserved this wreakefull
adventure? Ah ill advised Alchidiana, what moved thee to cross the Seas? if
not an inordinate desire to see him, of whom thou may expect no remedy for
thy sorrow: or else to see her that is Mistress of his heart, and so make
thine own conceits more languishing? My Lord and Husband Olorico, I am the
unhappy cause of thy death, thy love has ever been to me sound and
perfect: Why could it not then make thee forgette the man, who always
disdained my passions, and never loved me but with dissimulation? If thou
escape death as I have done, just cause have thou to have me continually.
Could not I remember, how thy people spent their blood for me, only to
witness thy never da^nted affection? and I have requited thy love with
monstrous ingratitude. Why then did not our Gods make me alone to suffer the
desert of my folly, but take revenge on them that never offended? Ah noble
Ladies, how heard is your recompense in my service, that your tender and
delicate bodies should be food for the Fishes? And you worthy Knights and
Gentlemen, in ^leed of purchasing honor and renown with your Master, you are
lost for ever, to my no little grief and vexation. The Merchaunt in whose
house she was lodged, hearing her heavy and lamentable complaints, thus
comforted her. Be of good cheer Madame, your Husband (by the grace of God)
will well enough escape this danger. As for your treasure, it is a matter
soon gotten and soon lost: and to mourn for your Ladies and Gentlemen, it is
to purpose, because it can no way benefit them. When we poor^ men loose our
goods, wives and Children, we must with patience please our selves: you then
having knowledge of virtue, and that we are all subject to the transitory
chaunges of the world, to despair is far unseemly your estate.

My Lord the Emperor is bountiful and liberal, and the most virtuous Prince
that ever reigned in Greece: he will so well recompense your loss, as you
shall not complain of your coming. With these perswasio^s she was somewhat
pacified, and having stayed there nine or ten days to see if any other of
the Galleyes would arrive there, seeing none came, she sold diverse of her
precious Jewels that was about her, for half the value they were worth, and
provided her self of fix Horses, for her self, her Hostess and her two
Daughters, the Pilot that had saved her from drowning, and one of the Merchants
Servants, with which company she rode toward Constantinople, having changed
her rich attire into mourning weeds. As they were in a great Forest (...)
miles from the City, the Princess calling to remembrounce, how poor and
simple she should come before the Emperor, having been one of the welthiest
Ladies in the world: was so overcome with this conceit, as hardly could her
hostess keep her (...) wherefore seeing they were near a goodly Fountain,
there they alighted to rest her a little. And after she had walked in the
cool shaddowe of the Trees, she found her self in better disposition,
preparing to mount on horseback again: but it came so to pass, that the
Emperor Palmerin having been hunting in that Forest, and by earnest pursuit
of the game lost all his company, so that at length he came to the Fountain
where Alchidiana walked. His arrival greatly amazed the women, and before he
would demand what they were, he alighted and drank of the Fountain water.
Alchidiana earnestly beholding him, and ^^eling inwardly a strange alteration,
presen^^ye (...) again in her Hostess Arms. Alas, said the Emperou^, have I
so offended the Lady, that the sight of me should endaunger her life? tell me
my Freende quoth he to the Pilot, do^st thou know of whence she is? No my
Lord, answered the Pilot, but I understand she is a noble Princess, who
coming to see the Emperor, has lost her people and goods in the Sea. Me
thinks I have seen her heertofore, said Palmerin, but I cannot remember the
place where. Then beholding her more advisedly, he said. I (...) of this the
Princess Alchidiana? that cannot be: my Ambassadors told me that she was
married to the Prince Olorico.

By this time was she a little recovered, and seeing how he held her in his
arms, thus spoke. Ah Sir Palmerin, why do you hinder the departure of
miserable Alchidiana? thinke^ o^ she can end her life in better time and
place, then in this Country, and between his arms whom she loved as her
life, yet never received courtesy by him till this instant. Ah my Lord, here
may thou behold the foolish and indiscreete Alchidiana, who for thee has
lost her Husband Olorico that loved her deerelye: Knights, Ladies and
inestimable treasure has she likewise lost, all which she makes no account
off, but of her beloved whom she shall never recover. But may it be Madame
quoth the Emperor, that you are indeed the Princess Alchidiana, Daughter to
the Soldane of Babylon, the flower of all the Ladies in Turkey? The same am I
^saide she, who loved thee so vnmeasurably, as the loyalty of marriage, ^eare
of dangers of the Sea, nor thy ^oo rigorous refusal, both in my presence and
by thy Messengers, could not (...) me from this shame, only to see thy Court
and the beauty of Polynarda. And that at leng^h I might (...) my desire, I
brought my Husband with me, who I fear the cruel waters have swalowed, and
as brave Ladies as (...) were seen, with riches that well might decorate^^^.
Empire. By Heaven, Madame quoth Palmerin, if the Prince have lost his life in
this adventure, never will my heart be merry again. Now see I the
unspeakable love you bear me, which I have in some part requi^ed toward your
Olorico: yet dismay not (sweet Lady) nor fear his death before further
trial, for by mine honor I swear, no sooner shall I come to Constantinople,
but I will cause his search presently to be followed, not doubting but he may
be found again.

And now fair Princess, tell what virtue or desert you saw in me, that
might value the least pain you have endured? committing your gracious person
to so many doubtful hazards, of fears, affrightes, perturbations, heat^ and
cold, which your choice nature could hardly brook in travel: unworthy were
I the name of a man, if now I should not pity you. And I swear to you by
the living God, that if your mishap sort to an evil end, never will I, wear
my Diadem longer. Alas Madame, if heretofore I have deluded you, consider it
was a Lovers deceit: that had bequeathed his heart to such a Lady, as loves
you as if you were her Sister. But have you, quoth she, among your amorous
delights, acquainted her with my unseemly boldness? what may she theen
conceive of me, but as of a Girl^ given to loose and lavish appeti^e? The love
of wedlock^ fair Princess, said Palmerin, cannot make me disclose her
prejudice that honored me so much: let it suffice you, that for the favor I
obtained when you found me in like place, she remains to recompense you with
all possible kindness. Let us then depart hence toward Constantinople, that
you may be used as beseems your high calling. Here despised that I am, quoth
the Princess, had I entered into conceit of your former illusions, never had I
fallen into so great danger: but as for matters past, either of your rygour or
disdain, your present affability compelles me to forget, set on then when
you please, and I will bear ye company.

The Pilot, the Merchants Wife and her Daughters, on their knees, desired the
Emperor to excuse them, in that they had not reverenced his Majesty as they
ought. Worldly honor I expect not, said the Emperor, come with me, that I
may recompense your pains taken for ^his worthy Princess. So rode they on,
and as they issued forth of the Forest, their stayed the Knights and Hunters,
attending the Emperors coming, they all maruailing at the great courtesy he
used to the Lady: then his Mai^stie calling the Duke Eustace to him, said.
Thou must presently with thy Companions go Arm ye, and travail to find the
Prince Olorico, whom the tempestuous seas has separated from his Lady. Who
brought these heavy tidings to your highness, said the Duke. This Lady who
is his Wife, quoth he, having myraculouslie escaped shipwreck by the means
of this Mariner. When they were come to the Palace, the Duke of Saxon came to
hold the Emperors Horse while he alighted. Ptolome, said Palmerin, know you
no better your Mistress Alchidiana? you must now remember her passed favors,
when she redeemed you from base servitude. And that shall not I forget my
Lord, quoth the Duke, while I have a day to live: but I cannot think that
this Lady is she^. It is even she without further question, said the
Emperor, do you and the Duke of Mecaena help her from her Horse, and conduct
her by into the Palace, while I in mean time go to advertise the Empress.

Madame, quoth Ptolome, yet can I not be thorowlie resolved. In sooth Ptolome,
said she, I am Alchidiana, who to accomplish what thou and thy companions
could not, am come hither in this poverty: discovering my want of knowledge
by an unrecoverable loss, except you my Lords take the greater pity on me.
Think you Madame, quoth Ptolome, that my Lord Olorico is lost? never fear it
I beseech ye, but think you shall find as great favor in this Court, as if
you were with the Soldane your Father.

Palmerin coming to the Empress, said, Madame, as I was hunting this day, I
found in our Forest the Princess Alchidiana, of whom I have so often told
yeee, she being wife to the Prince Olorico, that named himself my Dwarffes
Brother when I was with you last at Gaunt, I desire ye to entreat her as her
calling deserves, because I am not a little beholding to her. So taking her by
the hand, they came and met the Princess, and Palmerin taking her*
courteously in his arms, delivered her to the Empress saying.

Fair Princess, you shall remain with my Lady, till our knights have found
your Lord an^ Husband. God will requite your kindness to a distressed Lady,
said Alchidiana, although I fear for my offenses his fortune will be much the
worse. Madame, quoth the Empress, so noble and debonaire is your Lord and
Husband, as no danger can any way prejudice his life, but think him as safe as
if he were here present with you, which doubtless will be right soon, and in
good time: therefore let me entreat you to be of good cheer, as if you were
now in Assyria. And although we cannot compare with the Court of Babylon, yet
theere shall you be used as be seems so great a Princess.

I doubt not thereof good Madame, said Alchidiana, the more am I indebted to
the Emperor and you: yet can I not forget the absence of my Lord, being
separated from him in a place so uncouth. He that ^s the defender of the just,
quoth the Empress, will send ye to meet again in place more comfortable, and
in that hope I pray ye to persuade your self, laying aside these moutning
garments, the very sight thereof cannot but affend ye. These gracious speeches
somewhat contented her, and expelled all private conceit of sorrow: yet would
she not change her habit, till she heard either good or bad news of the
Prince Olorico.

Chap. LXIIII.
How the Prince Olorico was reskewed from the Moors, by the young Knights that
the Emperor Palmerin sent in his search: and what joy was made at
Constantinople at his arrival.

Upon the Emperors resolution for the search of Olorico, the Dukes of Mecaena
and Saxon, with each of them fi^tie Knights, were prepared to see with two
Gall^^s: and Colmelio, Bellechino, Sergillo Son to Gardino, and the Merchant
Estebons two Sons, whom the Emperor had newly knigh^ed^ with thirty hardy
Soldiers departed in an other. Eight other vessels were sent on the Coast of
Propontida, and the Bosphor, to seek the Prince.

It so cause to pass, that the same day Alchidiana was preserved from
drowning, Alibarbanco, a Pirat, was sailing toward Natolia, and passed very
near where the Princes Carricke was split, and him did he epsy floting on a
Chest, which was filled within with Martin skins, being then moved to behold
him in such danger, he caused his men to take him into the Ship, who ready
to yield up his ghost he was so ^^^^mmed with cold. When Ali^arbanco saw
him so richly appar^lied, and the Chest stuffed with things of such value, he
imagined him presently to he some great Lord, for whom he should have some
large ransom, wherefore he used him very courteously. Olorico se^ing he was
so happily escaped, lifting his eyes to Heaven, said. Great is thy mercy O
God, that have so favorably vouchsafed to regard thy poor creature, nor were
loss worthy reckoning, so my Lady Alchidiana were safe in Assyria. What
angry planet reigned when we be took our selves to Sea? what answer shall I
make to the Soldane your Father, that gave me such charge of your person at my
departure? hardly may I dare to come before him any more.

Alibarbanco hearing these complaints, reioiced thereat. By Mahomet, quoth he
to himself, nor shall thou see him any more if I can hinder it, for I will
present thee to the great Turk his mortal enemy, and for thy ransom I
shall receive a bountiful recompense. So thinking to strike toward Natolia, he
happened among the Emperors young Knights ere he was beware: wherefore he
thought to taken their ships likewise, yet therein he ^ound him self greatly
deceived. For Bellechino knowing them to be Turks by their Banners, said to
his companions. We are now I fear in the danger of Turkish Pirat^, let us
therefore with courage win our deliverance. Heereuppon they fiercely assailed
Alibarbanco, and buckled so closely that in the end they hoorded him, making
such a slaughter among his men, and throwing him likewise slain into the Sea,
as none were left to resist their further entrance, where they found the
Prince Olorico, and being not a little glad of their good success, they each
one embraced him with gracious courtesy. Alas my Friends, quoth the Prince,
how knew you my being here? who gave you in charge to seek me forth? who
has been the Messenger of my misfortune? My Lord the Emperor Palmerin,
answered Colmelio, understood thereof by your Lady Alchidiana, whom he
found by good hap as he r^de on hunting.

But may I give credit to your words? said the Prince, is my Lady with his
Majesty at the Court? She is in truth my Lord, said Bellechino, and the
Mariner likewise that saved her life, whom the Emperor has highly
recompensed for his faithful service. I beseech you quoth Olorico, let us
ho^^e ^aile presently toward Constantinople, for my heart cannot be
persuaded till I have seen her, ^so great is my doubt, considering our
unfortunate separation.

Never may I bear Arms in Knight-hoode, sail Bellechino, or lift my Sword in
honorable Chivalry, if Alchidiana be not at Constantinople, where I both saw
her, and spoke to her, before our departure. So taking the vessel that
belonged to the Pirate Alibarbanco with them, in short time after they arrived
at Constantinople, where their cheerful sounding of Drums, Trumpets, and
Clarions at their landing, delivered testimony of their good success. If the
Emperor was glad for the recovery of his Friend, the Princess Alchidiana of
her Husband, and every one generally for the man lost by such mishappe, I
leave to your judgments, that can censure the rare joys of love and
freendship. What Triumphs, Tournamentes, Bonfires, Maskes, Momeries, and other
delightful exercises were performed, for joy of the Prince Oloricos safety,
whom the Emperor made account of, as you have heard before, it would demand
a larger volume to set down: you must therefore here imagine, that you behold
his Majesty highly contented, Alchidiana thorowlie satisfied, and the whole
Court well pleased by this happy event, giving themselves to express the same
in open and manifest signs, beseeming so great estates to prosecute, and
therefore of as great honor as may be devised.

The young Knights are especially welcomed for their worthy service, the
Dukes of Saxon and Mecaena likewise, though they failed of bringing the Prince,
yet they brought two Foystes belonging to the Pirate Aliba^banco, richly laden
with many wealthy spoils, which were given among the young Knights, in
recompense of their pains. During the time of these surpassing pleasures and
delights, there entered the haven of Constantinople three ships, laden with
merua^lous sumptuous gifts and presents, from the Queen Zephira, and her
Brother the King Maulenno, being sent to the Emperor Palmerin, and his
Empress Polynarda, by two great Lords Ambassadors from Persia, to request
familiar love and alliance with the Emperor, the Soldane confessing his
injury to Trineus, while he was in his Court. When the Persians came before
the Emperor, who was honorably accompanied with Kings, Dukes, Princes,
Counties, and many brave Ladies, they were gr^atly abashed, yet thinking on the
argument of their Ambas^ade, one of them began in this manner.

It is no marvel (redoubted Emperor and Monarch of Greece) if thy subjects
both love the^, and ^site thee, when thy beha^^our has conquered the minds of
foreign Pote^tates, who to enter a^ititie and peace with thee, some have left
their Countries to send their Ambassadors hither, other dare not stir, or
assemble their men in warlike manner, so is the name of Palmerin feared through
all Asia. Hereof bear witness the great Turk, the Cal^^^^ of Siconia, and
the heirs to the Prince Amarano of Nigrea: not much inferior in this
condition, is the Soldane of Babylon, whose daughter with her Husband I here
behold. The victorious Ambimar, King of Romata and Grisc^, the worthy
Maulerino, and the pui^^aunt Soldane of Persia my Master, Husband to the
virtuous Queen Zephira, who with their Brother have sent your high^esse three
Ships laden with the most wealthy riches their Countries can yield. My Lord
and they humbly kiss your Majesty's hand, desiring you to forget his
disceur^^sie to the gentle Knight T^yneus, when he became ^^amoured on the
Princess Aurecinda. But if their love then sorted to a philosophical trope or
figure, it has sithence pr^ued effec^^uall in procreation, to the no little
joy of my Lord and Master.

The Princess was delivered of a goodly Son, growing in such exquisite form
and feature, as it is expected he will one day resemble his Father in
ch^ualrie, as he does already his Mother in amiable perfection.

Ambassador, quoth the Emperor, for the great virtue and nobility I have
found, as well in the Princess Zephira, as also her noble Brother, I grant
the freendly all^ance thou demaundest. Yet hereof am I sorry, that the Son to
the Prince Tryneus, should be nourished and spend his youth among Ma^umetists,
without knowledge of hi^ God and Redeemer: for in such sort should he be
instructed, after he is come to the years of understanding, that all the
Alchoran is tales an^ fables, and doubtless God will so deal with him in
time, as he shall imitate the steps of his noble Father. As for the presents
sent Us by the King Maulerino, the Sol^a^e, and his Queen Zephira, we accept
them as from our Freen^s, and will return them some remembrance of our
thankfulness. His Majesty commanded the Persians to be lodged in his
Palace, and continued still their former joys and tryumphs: but to alter
those Courtly pastimes and delights, this misfortune happened which hereafter
follows.

Chap. LXV.
How the great Turk refused to assist Lycado, Nephewe to the Admiral
Olimaell, against the Emperor Palmerin: and what trouble happened to
Constantinople by the Traitor Nardides, Nephew to the King Tarisius, Lycado,
Meuadeno, and their father.

SUch was the humanity and pity of Palmerin, when he finished the
enchantments at the Isle of Malfada, as he gave liberty to all the Turks and
Christians, which were before transformed, as you have heard: among whom was
Lycado, Nephew to the Admiral Olimaell, he that at the taking of Agriola, had
the Prince Tryneus for his prisoner. This Lycado, seeing himself in his own
Country, and out of danger, where he heard how the great Turk was slain,
and his Uncle likewise, he came before the Sultane that then reigned, saying.
Worthy lord, as men are naturally inclined to bemone their losses, so are
Subjects bound to advertise their Sovereigns, of any shame or injury done to
their Majesty's. This speak I my Lord, because you have not as yet revenged the
death of your deceassed Brother, now sleeping in the Arms of Mahomet, albeeit
trayt^rouslie slain by Palmerin and his Companions: at which time my noble
U^cle was likewise murdered, with many Knights of chief and especial
account. And least you should be ignorant in the truth of the deed, and who
also ^arryed hence the Princess Agriola, I have credibly understood, that
Palmerin is Nephew to the Emperor of Greece, one of his companions is the
Emperors Son of Allemaigne, and all the rest were Princes and Lords of
Greece, only sent as spies into Turkey. Wherefore, seeing you now hold the
state in such peace and quietness, it were necessary you should leauie a
mighty Army: and please you to commit the charge thereof to me, I will loose
my life, or make an absolute destruction of all Greece. I remember, said the
great Turk, that your Uncle made like entrance into my dec^ased Brothers
Court, as you by your speeches now labor to do, but I will so warily look
to such intrusions, as no Traitors shall rest here if I can hinder the^. Your
Uncle vexed the Christians, what followed thereon? the death of his master,
and a dangerous confusion. By you likewise may ^nsue as bad fortune, depart
you therefore from the Court, and but that we are loath to be noted with
tyranny, thou should presently be dr^wne in pieces with Horses. False
Traitor, thou that come to counsel us in a matter wherein we cannot
meddle but with great dishonor, it beh^ues thee first to regard the end of thy
intent, and what he is that gouerns in Greece. Go villain go, and on peril of
thy life never presume before our presence again.

Lycado was greatly astonished at this sharp answer, and seeing he could have
no better success, he went to his Father the Brother to Olimaell, being one
of the cheifest Magitians in all Turkey, to him he made his complaints, saying,
he would die in that resolution, but he would cause the Turk to know that he
was no Traitor, and this (quoth he) shall be the mean whereby I will compass
it. I mean to disguise my self, and trauaille to the City of
Constantinople, where privily I will murder the Emperor Palmerin, so (...) my
Lord the great Turk t^uch me with no further suspicion, but will reward me
with greater benefits then ever my Uncle had. My Son, answered his Father,
think thou that thy devise will sort to effect? thy Brother Menadeno would
help thee herein, but he is too young: yet when time serves for thy
departure, I will not only tell thee, but conduct thee my self. I beseech you
good father, said Lycado, further me in what you may, for never will my heart
be at rest, till I have paid Palmerin with the self same coin the great Turk
was. In mean while do you study, and search all our Book^s of (...),
Divination, Magique, and Nigromanc^e, as Zabulus, Orpheus, Hermes, Zoroastres,
Ciroes, Medea. Alphonsus, Bacon, Aponius, and all the rest that write of the
black speculatiue: read them again and again, deui^e such sp^lles,
exorcismes, and coniurations, as the very ^pirits may spea^e of the feast I
will make at the Citt^e of Constantinole.

Hereupon the old man made his Son Menadeno Knight, and with Lycado betook
themselves to Sea, saying. My Sons I will bring ye to Constantinople, where
(by virtue of mine art) we will arrive before three days be expired: remember
your uncles death, and behave your selves in such sort, as you may be
Registered for ever. The time does now favor you with sufficient revenge, and
therein shall you be assisted by a Christian Knight, whom we shall find
ready landed there for the same cause.

Their Ankers being w^yed, they launch into the deep, and cut through the
waves with such violence, as if the devil himself were in their sails, so
that they took landing at the self same hour as Nardides arrived at
Constantinople. As concerning what this Nardides was, you remember the two
Traitors Promptaleon and Oudin, Nephews to the King Tarisius of Hungaria,
whom Pa^merin and Frysoll slew at Constantinople, he was their Brother, and
Son to the Duchess of Ormeda. She understanding the death of her two
Sons, could not conceal it from the Duke her Husband, who presently died
with very conceit of grief: whereupon, she to revenge this mishappe caused
by her report, as also the death of her tw^ Sons, made promise to Nardides,
(then being eighteen years old) that so soon as he was knighted, he
should go to Constantinople, and there (if it were possible) to murder the
Emperor and Frysoll. All this he ^owed to perform, and two or three days
after, having married the Kings Daughter of Polonia, he embarked himself
with ^orty Knights, determining by a Combat for treason, to compass his intent.

These wreakfull aymers at revenge, landed all in one instant at
Constantinople, when the old Magitian calling to Nardydes, said he would
gladly sprake with him in secret, as concerning matters greatly for his aua^le.
Hereupon they went all closely together into one of the Cabins, and the old
man entered into the^e speeches. Sir Nardides, needel^sie is it for you to hide
your affairs from me, for I know that you depart from Poloma with forty
Knights disguised like Merchants, only with this determination, to destroy the
Emperor, in revenge of certain iniuryes done to your Brethren. But if you
will give credit to me, and go to work in such sort as I shall advise ye,
ye shall happily obtain the end of your desire. By God, said Nardides, you
(...) me wonders, there is not one in the ship that knows mine intent, yet
you have said the truth, whereat I cannot marua^le sufficiently. Seeing then
you know so much, it were but foll^e to dissemble, say then your mind and I
will hear ye. This night, said the old man, the Emperor will suppe in the
great Hall with the Prince Olorico, and the Princess Alchidiana, the King of
Sparta and his Queen, with many other great Princes and Lords, so that such
store of people are in the Palace, as little regard will be had of strangers
or household s^ruants.

You then with my Son M^nadeno, being Armed, as besee^es a cause so (...),
shall suddenly enter and ^ill the Emperor: my Son Lycado and I will stay
your return here, and I that can command the wind and weather, will carry
ye hence without danger of following. And true it is, that there is a Bird
pearched in the Hall, which the wise Muzabelino has so enchaunted, as neither
good or ill tidings can come to the Emperor, but she bewrayes the same by her
song or fearful cry: yet doubt not you thereof, strike boldly, there will be
none Armed, so that you depart again at your own pleasure. My Friend, said
Nardides, happy be the hour I ^ette with thee, assure thy self, that if I
can kill the Emperor, and thou afterward deliver me safely, such recompense
will I bestow on thee, as both thou and thine shall for ever remember me.

Other recompense I demand not, said the old man, then the death of the
Emperor, prepare thy self therefore so follow thine intent. The night being
come, these Traitors Armed themselves, and casting their mantles about them,
entered the Palace, were among the Pages and servants, without suspicion they
came into the Hall: leaving Lycado and his Father at the Port, where he threw
abroad such enchauntments, that all such as came forth of their houses,
presently fell down a sleep in the streets. No sooner were the Traitors
entered the Hall, but the Bird gave a horrible and fearful cry, beating her
beak against her breast with such fury, as though she would have rent forth
her heart. My God, said the Emperor, in mercy behold me, for the cry of this
Bird does foretell great misfortune. Look about my friends, quoth he to his
Guard, and see if any Stranger or unknown body is entered our presence,
Nardides by these speeches knew he was the Emperor, wherefore drawing his
Sword, he thought to have cleaued his head, yet he failed of his intent, for
the Emperor seeing the blow coming, with a great Golden Cup awarded it
indifferently, notwithstanding, the Sword in slipping from the Cup, gave him
a ^ore wound upon the head. Olorico sitting on the other side the Table, ran
at the Traitor, but the Emperor had received two strokes more ere he could
come at him, so that his majesty fell from his Chair as he had been dead.

As the Prince Olorico held the Traitor Nardides by the arms, Menadeno str^oke
at him so rigorously, as if Ptolome had not borne off the blows with a great
silver plate, Olorico there had lost his life. Duke Eustace seeing this
shameful outrage, wrong the Sword out of Nardides hand, and gave him such a
sound stroke therewith on the head, as made him tomble his heels upward, and
by the help of Bellechino, who found the means to get off his Helmet, he
smote his head from his shoulders. Bellechino who had been newly baptized,
loved the Emperor as he had been his Father, and coming to Menadeno, whom
Duke Ptolome strongly held in his arms, gave him so many stabs on his
throat, that he likewise fell down at his feet. The Empress seeing her Lord
so wounded, rent her garments, tore her comely locks of hair, and smote her
fair face with maruailous violence. Ah my Lord, quoth she, thou art not
wounded alone, for if thou die, as God forbid, right soon will my ghost follow
thee. Cease Madam your complaints, said the Emperor, and comfort your self
so well as you may, for this is the hour wherein I must leave you: I have lost
such abundance of my blood, as longer may I not live with you: O my God
forgive my sins, and receive my soul. In uttering these words he swouned
again, and the Empress with him for company, to the no little amazement of
all the Lords and Ladies, who were well nee^e at their wits end to be hold
this unexpected alteration. Alchidiana likewise was in wonderful perplexity,
fearing also that her Lord was wounded to the death, but to comfort this
sorrowful and desolate Court, good fortune sent this help ensuing.

CHAP. LXVI.
How the wise Muzabelino knowing by his art, the cruel treason done to the
Emperor, came to succor him, and of that which followed.

MVzabelino the Nigraman^er, of whom we have already spoken, by chance this
day was turning over his Book, and ^ound the dangerous strat^g^me devised by
these Traitors, and calling his familiars together, demanded the danger that
would ensue by this treason: whereto one of them replied, that if he went not
speedily to Constantinople, the Emperor, the Prince Olorico, and their Ladies,
would hardly escape that day with life. Then armed he himself, in the self
same manner as he was when he succored the Prince Tryneus, and calling two
spirits of the air resembling Giants, their faces so ugly and fearful, as
no humane creature durst behold them: them he commanded to carry him to
Constantinople, and with a great flaming firebrand in his hand, he cut through
the air with such horrible thunder, as cach one thought the world had been
ended. When he beheld the old man that defended the Port, he said to him.
False and disloyal Traitor, dare thou meddie with the man whom thou
know to be in my guarde? take him to ye, (quoth he to his two spirits)
and convey him to your Court, and there keep him alive for me, for I will
give him a pain a thousand times worse th^^ death: you know how to use my
gentle guest, let him be dealt withal as his behavior has deserved. The
miserable old man astonished heereat, and thinking to help himself by his
Magique, was presently transformed into a Serpent. Now thou shall perceive,
said Muzabelino, that I am greater in power then thou art. So taking two great
Golden Chains, he tied the Serpent about the neck therewith, and his Son
together, setting such a coniuration on them, as he should never be changed to
hi^ former shape.

Then came he to the Palace, where taking off his Helmet, he entered the
Hall, saying to the Knights. Ah my dear friends, the Traitor that thus has
molested you, is taken, rejoice therefore, and be of good cheer, your Lord is
not dead, he lives, he must live, and in despite of envy shall flourish more
then ever he did. The princes and knights hearing him speak so friendly, and
yet knew not what he was, notwithstanding his promises they were greatly
amazed, but when they saw Bellechino and Colmelio so reverently embrace him,
they began to conceive better opinion of him. Alas my Lord and Father, said
Bellechino, in a happy hour came you hither, and your presence puts us out of
al further fear, vouchsafe to succor the Empress Polynarda, for pity it is
to see her thus changed. Hereupon Muzabelino embraced the Empress, whose
face was cold, pale, and w^n. Why Madame? quoth he, where is your former
wisdom and discretion? leave these d^solate countenances to common people,
your Lord is in no danger, but within three days he shall be well again.
Convey her hence, said he to the Ladies, I am ashamed to see your folly,
suffering her to lie in this sort and no one help her. Then was she conducted
to her Chamber, and Muzabelino with the aid of his Son and Duke Eustace,
carried the Emperor to his bed, where staunching his wounds with a precious
Ointment, Mu^abelino gave him some of the water to drink, which before had
healed the Princess Zephira, and which he had brought with him in a little
vial of Crystal, when the Emperor being some what better recovered, lifting
his eyes to Heaven, said. How (...) art thou in mercy my soueraign Redeemer,
sending (...) from the furthest regions, to help me in so great (...)? Ah my
noble fr^ende, what have I (...) at any time for thee, that might induce thee
to favor me so much* My Lord, answered Muzabelino, so precious are your
deserts in mine eyes, as I can do no less, except I should be accounted the
most in grateful among men. So ^athing his wounds with the juice of certain
virtuous herbs, he will^^ all that were present to depart the Chamber, and on
the morrow they should see their Lord in better estate. So left they the
Emperor to his rest, and all the princes, Knights, and Ladies, came to welcome
Muzabelino, who comforted the Princess Alchidiana, ass^ring her that the
Prince Olorico should do well enough, for he had likewise bathed his wounds,
and left him in his chamber quietly sleeping. On the morrow he commanded the
bodi^^ of Nardides and Menadeno to be burned, afterward he loosed Lycado from
his father, causing him to be put in prison till the Emperor were amented, and
taking the Serpent by the chain, he brought him by the help of his two
spirits into the great court, where by his cunning he erected a goodly Marble
pillar, and on the top thereof a strong Cage of iron, saying to the old man
transformed. Accursed creature, to the end thy pain may be the greater
during the Emperor^ life, thou shall remain in this monstrous shape, and die
thou shall not, till the God of heaven call him hence whose death thou did
contriue. Incontinent the spirits thrust the Serpent into the Cage, and
afterward vanished away, leaving the monster casting fearful flames of fire
out at his mouth, and howling with strange and pitiful cries. Then went
Muzabelino to the Empress, who still remained sad and pensive, and bringing
her to the Emperor, said, See Madame, am I not so good as my word, your Lord
is well and perfectly recovered, be you then pleasant and mourn no longer. Not
a little joyful was (...) this sight, embracing his highne^^e with such
affection, (...) she had been absent from him a long time: but when the Emperor
saw (...) face so martered with lamenting, and her sweet countenance so much
altered, Alas Madam, quoth he, (...)

CHAP. LXVII.
How the So^dane of Babylon sent for the Prince Olori (...) and his Daughter
Alchidiana, and of the sorrow the Emperior and E^^resse made for their
departure.

(...)


