AN ITALIANS dead body, Stuck with English Flowers. Elegies, On the death of
Sir Oration Pallauicino.



LONDON Printee by Thomas Creed, for Andrew Wise, and are to be sold at his
shop in Powles Churchyard. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous, his singular good Lady, the Lady
Pallauicino. Theophilus Field, her deuote servant, dedicateth these mourning
weeds.
RIght virtuous, and fair Lady, may it please
Your fair, now slubbred eyes, with weeping long,
To take a truce with tears, that whilst you cease
To mourn, with which you do your beauty wrong,
There may be time for me, for to express
My loss, which by your loss is comfortless,
Some comfort may from hence to you arise,
(If it be comfort not to weep alone)
Oh give me leave to speak, that which mine eyes
Have writ in tears, with which my heart does groan
To be delivered. Lo this child of grief
Seeks unto you as Nurse for some relief:
Be a dry Nurse to it, let it not draw
From nipples of your eyes one precious tear,
You need not give it suck, for it can chaw,
And what it chawes, his stomach well will bear:
Uphold it not with helping it to moan,
It Is big enough, and now can go alone.
This Infant newborn of my moyster brain,
I clothed in black, exposing it to view
Of many witnesses, some of their train
Not well trained up, but of the ruder crew
Disroab'd it, robbed me, without privilege
To touch a holy thing is sacrilege.
No less was this, nay more (o foul disgrace)
They did not only touch, but took away
A holy Poem from a holy place
Upon a birth, and on a burial day
A mourning, weeping birth day to my vearse,
A day of burial to Horatios hearse.
Hence you profane, what had you there to do?
Lady my babe was on your alter placed,
Sacred, deuote, and consecrate to you
By your eyes gracious aspect to be graced,
They were Church robbers who did dare to spoil
The holy labors of an others toil:
After long search and much enquiry made,
The lost child by his mother found again,
Who travailing a new on childbed laid,
Seeks unto you as Nurse to ease her pain,
After your clouds of grief be over blown,
Desires you to adopt him for your own:
His father would be yours, (for yours he was)
Whilst he belongd to your deceased mate
No patron of his poems now he has,
And therefore does them to you dedicate:
Love them for his sake, from whose sorrowed death
Half dead for sorrow, they have borrowed breath.
An Italians dead body, stuck with English Flowers.
The Heralds office, I Will assume to me,
Forward my Muse, chief mourner thou shall be:
Impute it not to pride I for most go,
It Is a poor pride, to be the chief in woe.

Upon the death of the Right Worshipful Knight, his very honorable Patron,
Sir Horatio Pallauicino. Verses thrust out by force when tears fell, and
followed of their own accord.
NAy spare not Envy, malice spit thy gall,
Say what you can against my Horatio,
Against my Maecenas: be not partial,
Virtue, nor dead, nor living, wants a foe.
Him living, against you both I have defended,
He dead, in spite of spite shall be commended:
Envy lays hand on mouth, nay sheare thy teeth,
O art thou toothlesse? she points to the grave,
And says she is buried with him. Dead* and sees*
She win-kes. Nay that is not that we would have.
There needs no winking where there is no error:
Look on this sight, thy sight confounding mirror.
Put on thy spectacles and thoroughly view,
We crave no favor: still she will be blind,
Because that virtue shall not have her dew,
She can no fault, she will naught praise-worth find.
I could says she, say then and say but sooth,
Envy still has, though she does hide her tooth:
I for Horatio held my hand at bar,
Of what small blemish can thou him endite?
I have withdrawn my action, dead men are
Dead to the law, who bites that cannot bite?
A dog.
Such is that many headed Cerberus*
The common people, whom Horatio fed:
Yet could not stop their mouths. Now woe to us
They cry, and to our staruelings. He is dead
Who when with hunger we were all nigh dead,
Refreshed and revived us with bread.
And yet (oh how far envy carries men?)
He carried and transported, stop tongue there,
Recant a lie, thy words call back again.
He did transport corn. When? when corn was dear?
Whither? to heaven: even corn of life the staff,
Which when God winowed, he found no chafe:
And for he found no chafe, he stored it up
In his own garner.
Liuor post fata quiescit
Virtutem incolumem odimus
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus inuidi.
Theophil. Field.

Upon the same.
PAtrons and Poets have been always scant,
Is now there number then increased* no*
Shall dead Augustus then a Virgil want*
Oh for a Horace for Horatio,
Horatio, Maecaenas call him rather,
Or if ye will, the Muses foster father.
Rimesters, enough, enough can make a song,
A Ballot, or such like, and thereunto
Annex a woeful tune: they do thee wrong
Apollo, and thy true borne sons undo.
For why are Poets clogd with poverty*
Because these bastards imbase poesy.
Augustus nor Maecaenas nere till now
Were missed and wished till Horatio did,
In him they died both: the laurel bough
Did wither, as his body putrifide.
Hence neither Horace, nor a Maro lives,
Since Poets are their Patrons relatiues.
Deceased Augustus lives by lively vearse
Of Maro, Maro lived by his purse:
Horace reuiueth his Maecaenas hearse,
Whose bounty had been erst his Muses Nurse.
Life given for living, and bread given for breath,
Virgil gives most, he gives life after death.
How can you spend your treasure better then
Then treasuring up eternal memory?
(You muck-wormes of the world, the scorn of men)
This gift is in the gift of poetry.
My Patron was a pattern for you all,
Whose fames life is his bodies funeral.
Virgil and Horace, I envy you not
For having so great Patrons as you had:
In poetry you had a greater lot,
Augustus for bad ware so much nere bad,
Nere gave so much. He gave to Publius
A Bakers dole, a box to Chaerilus.
Bread, bare allowance for life's sustenance,
Dry morsel beggars alms (necessity
Did ask no more) more royal maintenance
Gave my Augustus. Superfluity
So thinks the baser clown, what is given to us
I mean to Scholars, is superfluous.
I Chaerilus, or Poet worse then he,
Had royal Phillips for my quarters pay:
Virgil and Horace did deserve their fee,
To give them, is to sell, not give away.
No gift (to sell for gain) but greediness,
The less my worth, the more my worthiness.
I Chaerilus, do pity Chaerilus,
No verse did sound ill to Augustus ear,
But Charilus his ear must strait untruss
Like school boy, and his fists correction bear.
Are not such Patrons rife? say Satyrist
Who bear in open hand bread, a stone in fist.
Maro be silent in thy Patrons praise,
Let Chaerilus Augustus dead fame rear,
Commend him for his fist, thy Muse vpraise:
As high, as he is arm: a box on the ear,
A pox upon his hand, much kinder they,
Who with a flea in ear do send away:
It bites not half so much, who looks for more
Then flap with Foxe-taile? nay it is well if so
We escape: yet make a cross upon his door,
Nere beg more there: O my Horatio!
My patron when I view these Carles in gross,
Thy death presents to me a greater loss:
I was a dear, dear plot of ground to thee,
I was waste ground, till in a barren field
Made fruitful by thy liberality:
You sowed and planted, yet I nere did yield
Better then flowers: in them thou look delight
Living, with them thy deads corpse shall be dight.
Six winters did thy bounty rain on me:
Six summers with thy Sunbeams ouersplead,
So many summers brought not into thee
One harvest: I still green, thou withered
Before my fruit be ripe, for I could pay
Tithe of thy April shewres, in flowers of May.
Would thou had lived till Pan the shepherds god
Had entertained me into his rout,
I might have charmed men's ears with Arons rod,
Shimey his railing tongue have pulled out.
Give virtue her due praise: which never lives,
Till death to envy, death and honor gives.
Would thou had lived till then, and then thy field,
For all thy cost and labor would have paid
Some better use, now only it does yield
Ten in the hundred, being ouerlaide
With too much seed. If tears were spent and all,
My Landlord might have lost his principal:
But I am rich in tears, oh that they could
Supple thy withered roots, reduce thy spring,
My earth should turn to water, and I would
Weep Oceans: when I could no longer wring
One poor tears sap from fountain of my eyes,
My heart should be thy tomb, I here he lies.
Namque prius timidi pascenter in aethere Cerui
Et freta destituent nudos in littore pisces,
Ante perratis amborum finibus exul,
Aut Ararim Parthus bibet, aut Germania Tigrim
Quam nostro illius labatur pectore vultus.
Upon the same.
Death went a rouing for to find a mark,
His day is night, his white is black and dark:
At last by chance a pair of Doves he spide,
Who had three lovely Pidgions by their side.
Five lovely birds in all, all full of life,
Too fair a booty for so foul a thief:
His arrow to his bowstring he did fit,
And so the biggest and the fairest hit
But in the foot, who could not run away,
The other fled, so he seized on his pray:
And well they did to fly, for sure he meant
To Have killed them all, but missing his intent,
He does excuse his fact, and says that he
Meant to kill none, but skare the yoonger three.
How comes it then, this fair Dove lost her mate?
He killed him sure for love and not for hate:
For Death indeed with Cupids arrows dight,
Sought the love shaft, on deadly shaft did light.
Why shot he not at her? He often did try,
She was too glorious object for his eye:
Had he killed both, I would have surely thought,
That Venus for her chariot had them bought.
Yet see not how of price they could agree,
Since the two Doves could no way valued be.
Why killed he not the young ones? Oh quoth he,
They smil*d upon me, 'thad been cruelty.
Besides ripe fruit* fed foul make death best cheer,
As yet young Pigens out of season were:
It Is well thou slew'st not them, for on their death,
Did hang a fiuefold thread of vital breath.
It Is well thou slew'st not her* for had she died,
None but death should have been his second bryde:
And mother to his young ones. So in this
Death has been merciful, our comfort is
He lives, and still shall live in his, whom we
Murdered by deaths dead hand suppose to be.
And yet then so lives better, for indeed
The cause why this my Dove to heaven did speed,
Was this: Jove's Eagle was in some disgrace:
This Dove made Eagle does supply his place.
The same.

An other.
Dead doubtless death thinks Sir Horatio is,
But death, deceived, he took his marks amiss:
Two young Horatios he has left behind,
The lively Image of the fathers mind.
In them Horatio lives in spite of death,
And shall so long as they on earth draw breath.
Good luck it was: doubtless had death them seen,
These two fine boys now living had not been.
Your Ladyship he saw: but thought you might
Be killed with grief for your deceased Knight.
Deceive wise Lady his expectation,
In making moan and lamentation.
Cheer up your heart: yet look still as you cried,
And see your pretty sweetings be not spied.
The same.

An other.
Once Sir Horatio from the Pope did steal,
He stole away into our Commonweal:
But well and wisely from hence he stole,
Where still he lived in peril of his soul.
But ill thou did to steal the second time
Away from us, that was no venial crime:
True it was mortal: death was is in the faut,
That stole him hence: for some looked on and saw't,
Who did their part in making hue and cry,
Which forced the thief the while forgo his booty:
Yet afterward he spied his time and sped,
Do what they could that stood then by his bed.
I rather think he got himself away,
At least consented to his dying day:
Nor can I justly blame him for his deed,
What brought him hither made him hence to speed,
His souls estate, which was not at the best,
Until it came to everlasting rest.
The same.

An other.
If when the party has penance done,
And in a white sheet stood his time,
For him that law and penalty will shun,
It is not good once ^o object the crime.
Deserve not they be taught to rule their tongue,
That now he lies lapt in his winding sheet,
Stick not to do that noble Knight such wrong,
In saying still (their dove will with them meet.)
He robbed the Pope, did other things beside,
Wherein he was the while he lived belide.
The same.

Another.
A wandering Knight was Sir Horatio,
In this, the low, and other Countries mo:
He lived and died a stranger with us here,
Why name I where? that is neither here nor there.
All men on earth they run a strangers race,
Pass on along and have no biding place.
Wherefore Horatio died not for age,
He died, because our life's a Pilgrimage.
The same.

An English man Italionate,
Becomes a devil incarnate:
But an Italian Anglyfide,
Becomes a Saint Angelifide.
Ed. Ma* Pemb* Hall.

To the right virtuous* his much honored Lady, the Lady Pallauicino.
THus have I clothed my child the second time,
Because I had no flowers, in mourning weed:
Both fields and flowers, and weeds are past their prime,
Do on them all a charitable deed.
It lies in the flagges exposde, rejected,
Unless by your fair hand it be protected.
Like Pharo's daughter take it into grace,
Though meanly borne, yet brought up by your hand*
It may in time aspire to higher place,
And effect wonders by enchaunting wand.
It has already turned earth to water,
It may dry up your sea of tears hereafter.
This color suting to the time I chose,
Hoping it might be precious in your eyes*
This black, those fair, and that it would expose
By foul your fairness, as two contraries
(Let them be white and black) together placed,
Are by their opposition jointly graced.
My book's a perfect mourner, see it wears
Your livery, and mourns for your Lord
His patron, drops of Ink in steed of tears
Have blubbred his leaves. His strings accord
Unto the mourners fashion, all in all,
It goes as they went to the funeral.
In this respect you ought to welcome it,
That it will be copartner of your grief:
Nor suffer you alone lamenting sit,
But mourning with you, give some relief.
'Twill tell you, he you mourn for is not dead,
But from this country to a better fled.
My child I called it for his infancy,
Because it cannot tell his tale of woe
As it conceaues: but only yet can cry,
And sound the name of dead Horatio.
When it grows troublesome, do you but will it
It soon will cease, cease crying and you still it.
It only yet can cry, but when it is grown
Able to tell his mind in better words:
If you mean while vouchsafe it for to own,
It then shall give you what his skill affords.
Then shall you gather for these weeds I yield,
A Coal-wort at the hardest in your field.
Your Ladyships bounden in all duty and service. Theophilus Field.

Horatio's departed, so men do say:
Great pity he could here no longer stay.
Say he is departed, say not he is dead:
Nor as of others, let of him be sed.
He was not quelde, nor conquered of death:
But him did combat while he was in breath.
His breath him failing, cause he would not fite,
He challenged death; and for he has his rite,
His body challendg'd: as a challenge glove
He gave his body: plighting faith to prove,
Death in a deadly combat and affray,
When the last sound shall call all men away.
Till then his soul, above, does heavenly pleasures gain,
Then will his body win from death, for aie to reign.
T. S. Pemb.

Horatio's departed, so I heard them say:
Pity he could here no longer stay.
Say he is departed say not he is dead:
But from one place unto an other sped.
Say not of him that he is dead and gone,
Say only he is gone. With company or alone?
His wife and children he has left behind,
Though to have borne him company was their mind.
But thus he thought: a long dead way and ill
For them poor souls to go, it would them kill.
Alter Idem.

Another.
Who says Horatio died in his bed
He lies: he died like a dubbed head,
He di'd I say like knighthood in the field,
Encountering death, which forced him not to yield.
I saw the fight: the knight nere shrunk for death,
But stoutly stood to it while he was in breath:
When breath him failed, his foe him did confound,
With deadly blow he feld him to the ground.
A cowards part. Might he have took his wind
The knight had lived, yea killed I bear the mind:
Who dying mindful of his honor, graspt
And held his arms (men dying use hold fast)
Nor did his foe out of the field them carry,
You saw the Herald did them with him bury.
The same.

Another.
A Knight of late death challen'd into field,
To fight a combat at sword and shield:
The Knight him answered as did become,
And when they met as I have heard by some,
He felly fought, and stood to it to the death,
He tried it out till he was out of breath.
A noble knight, death did him valiant find,
And had the worst while he might fetch his wind.
Pity our life's no better then a blast,
And brauest mind should so be spent at last:
When breath him faild, that day was at an end,
He ceased hi^ sword against his foe to bend:
And giving death the glory of that fray,
Dared him to try*t again another day:
Withal* his corpse his challenge for to prove,
He cast in steed of gantlet or of glove,
And swore by the honor of his head he would,
Again recover what was cast on mould.
Death took up one, and undertook the other,
And bids him point both place and places brother:
He points the Churchyard, and the latter day,
When sound of Trumpe shall batle bid array.
The same.

What is it thus many eyes one object have?
And all are bended to yon new made grave.
O it is on yonder Corse their eyes are fixed,
It sor to see, thus people here are mixed.
And as the twinkling diamonds of heaven,
When all things are of Phoebus light bereuen,
B^ spread the heavens appearing to our sight,
And lend the earth their little borrowed light:
So they all deeming this thrice worthy Knight,
Worthy more days, his day now turned to night*
Endeavor to illustrate with their light,
In spite of clowdie death to make him bright:
They do not look upon the fatal bear
As most of them before accustomed were.
His body having lost his soul and breath,
They says become a soul unto the earth:
His Coffin is a Coffer as they say,
Wherein this wary world thought good to lay
This precious Jewel brought from farther parts,
An ornament to Scholars and the Arts.
T. S. Pemb.

Horatios Coffin no more it call,
Death's Coffin called, if ye called at all:
Wherein he has laid up a precious Pearl,
A Noble man, though neither Lord nor Earl.
Muse you on earth death would not let him tarry,
Men in the earth their Treasure use to bury.
Alter Idem.

The conquest of two Traitors, Envy and Death, by the worthy Knight, Sir
Horatio Pallauicino.
Envy and Death conspired both together,
Against Sir Horatio, two leane-fac'd fiends,
Which ever haunt the best, birds of one feather,
Void of all love, that pray upon their friends.
Both qualified alike, both treacherous,
Envy is deadly, death is envious.
The One to the body mortal wounds does give*
The other does impeach a man's good name:
The One pines, the other lives by them that live,
Yet fretteth at the livings living fame.
The One is (like Sagittarius) with shafts dight,
The Other (like Scorpio's venomd teeth) does bite.
This the conspiracy was which they wrought,
That Envy for his life's uncertain lease
Should wrack his fame, whose overthrow she sought*
When death should warning give, then to surcease*
Death vowed not to hasten till that hour,
When Envy on his name should have no pow're*
Envy who never looked with cheerful eye,
Was glad at this, wishing no longer date
Her malice all-bewitching force to try,
And exercise her inward-boyling hate.
Thinking that sooner heat would fire fail,
Then any thing her force abate or quail.
Eftsoons she as impatient of delay,
With tooth and nail endeuor'd to outrace
His rising fame; taking the cause away,
Virtue I mean, and good deeds which win grace.
Which builds up more high admired fame,
Then the Pyramides sky* climing frame.
At first an ill opinion she raised,
(Oh how much first opinions prevail!)
She rent her hair when once she heard him praised,
And for ones praise, she made a thousand rail.
He stole from Rome, he for no goodness fled,
Coosned the Pope, transported Englands bread.
These falsly-bred and misconceiued tails,
Feeble at first, grew too headstrong at length:
And flew about more swift then ships full sails,
And by their farther flying got more strength.
Thus Envy had his name in credit placed,
With others helping mouths well nigh defaced*
But his true virtues beams obscured before,
In spite of Enuies teeth at last appeared:
And could not be by Envy hidden more,
But his decayed fame again vprear'd.
This sight astonished Envy, like that head
Of Gorgon, caused men down to fall stone-dead.
Who to her self reviving came again,
And seeing his good deeds the more encreast,
(The more his goods deeds, the more Enuies pain)
Could not suppress them, yet she would not rest
But sought always to hinder his intent,
Hindering his fame, hindering the good he meant.
At last she said, sithence I spent my pow're
And can prevail no more, ere all his fame
He do again recover in happy hour,
Or altogether clear his blemished name,
Death (that I cannot) shorten thou his days,
Least he in time exceed his former praise.
Short after, came the appointed hour by death,
When Envy no more bitter gall could spit:
Till then he granted Sir Horatio breath,
Till then he vowed his body not to hit.
Then death approaching near, saw Envy stand
Stopping his silent mouth with open hand.
Has Envy parbrackt all her poison than
(Quoth Death) and cast her tongues three-forked sting?
Upon no object can Detraction scan?
Can Slander no more loathsome venom fling?
Envy replied, what I can does in vain,
Yet see, by me inflicted scarres remain.
Then o, then quickly cut him off in time,
Ere he can heal scarres unto his name:
Nor let his fame flourish again in prime,
Since I have labored long to stain the same.
Still while we talk, his good name does increase,
And though I cease, his good deeds never cease.
Death envious himself, by Envy moved
Soon condescends, not brooking living name:
And on his Enuies object his force proved,
Thinking to have also nipt his rising fame.
Death is deceived; his rising fame not dies,
As he to heaven his rising fame shall rise.
P. P. P.

Come doleful Muse
My soul infuse
With that death-sounding strain:
Which Orpheus played
When he assayd
To win his spouse again.
Or let me sing
Tuned to that string
Which mournfully he struck
When hellish Jove
Recalled his love,
As he on her did look.
With Cypress bow
Engirt thy browe,
Thou queen of angry mood*
That with thy quill
Do volumes fill
Of murders, death, and blood*
Thou troop divine
Of virgins nine,
Which sing on Parnasse hill:
If Castaly
With drought be dry,
With tears the fountain fill.
Fallen is your star,
Surpassing far
That glorious lamp of light,
Whose golden raye
Makes brightsome day,
Whose frown makes dusky night.
Where shall ye find
Mecaenas kind,
To cure poor Horace woe?
Horace must want,
(Since such be scant
As was Horatio.)
This Phaenix-doue
Religions love
Made fly from Italy:
And did enstall
By Latium's fall,
Alba in Albany.
(As Troy being won,
Fair Venus son
In spite of desteny,
With danger brought
(Through danger sought)
Ilium to Italy.
Then silent spirit
Unto thy merit
Give leave this dirge to sing:
Whose worthy name,
Outstrips bright fame,
And tires her flitting wing.
Since Caesar did
In height of pride,
Whom guilty hands did wound:
A fairer flower
In Latium's bower
Then thee was never found.
Since Venus son
Did Carthage shun
Bent to the Rutiles land
A worthier knight
Did never pight
His tent on foreign sand*
Since then by thee
Fair Britany
The name of Rome shall have:
She gives thee room
Within her womb,
And makes her breast thy grave.
Thee Italy
Did once deny,
Albion a friend does moan
Now not with men
A Citizen
Enstall'd in heavens throne.
Han. Pemb.

Certain verses written and sent in way of comfort* to her Ladyship.
IF those salt showers that your sad eyes have shed
Have quenched the flame your grief has kindled.
Madame my words shall not be spent in vain,
To serve for wind to chase that mournful rain.
Thus far your loss has striuen with your grief,
Whether each piteous eye should deem the chief.
Whiles both your grief does make your loss the more,
And your great loss does cause you grieve so sore.
Both grief and loss do willing partners find,
In every eye, and every feeling mind.
So have I seen the silly Turtle Dove,
The pattern of your grief and chaster love,
Sitting upon a bared bough alone:
Her dearest mates untimely loss bemone.
Whiles she denies all cares of due repast,
And mourning thus, her weary days does wast.
Thus natures self does teach us to lament,
And reasons light our sorrows does augment.
Yet reason can it self this lesson teach,
Our reason should surpass their senses reach.
Reason our sense, and Grace should reason sway,
That sense and reason both might Grace obey.
Those silly birds whom nature hope denies,
May die for grief because their fellow dies.
But on this hope our drouping heart should rest,
That maugre death their parted souls are blessed.
That their swift course, that Gole does sooner gain,
Whereto ere long, our slow steps shall attain.
Some few short years your following race shall spend,
Then shall you both meet in a happy end.
But you mean while all in a stranger coast,
Are left alone, as one whose guide is lost.
Madame what ere your grieved thought applies,
We are all Pilgrims to our commons skies.
And who is nearest to this home of clay
May find the worser speed and further way.
And as I guess, unless our Artists feign,
England is nearer heaven of the twain.
There is your home, where now your Knight does bide,
Resting by many a Saint and Angels side.
Walk on in Grace, and grieve your self no more,
That your so loved mate is gone before.
Io. Hall. Imman. Coll.

An Epitaph.
Some leave their home for private discontent,
Some forced by compulsed banishment.
Some for an itching lust of novel fight,
Some one for gain, some other for delight.
Thus whilst some force, some other hope bereaues,
Some leave their country, some their country leaves.
But thee no grief, force, lust, gain or delight,
Exiled from thy home (thrice worthy Knight)
Save that grief, force, that gain, delight alone,
Which was thy good, and true religion.
Io. Hall. idem. Imman. Col.

You Nymphs that in the meadows keep,
And midst the smiling Dasies sleep,
Your Odours power
On this dead flower:
Whose loss does make Aurora weep.
A flower he was, then crown his tomb
With flowers sprung from his mothers womb.
But if the modest Roses want,
Or maiden Lillies waxen scant:
Watch where Horatia weeps her shewers*
And you shall find a bed of flowers.
Like as of Helens tears once came,
The herb which Emila we name.
A flower he was, and as a flower he died,
But now to stars as fairer flowers is hied:
There to behold the chief rose of the field,
The fairest Lilly that the valleys yield.
Sweet flower of peace, and love both red and white,
That God and man together does unite.
R. S. Coll. Johan.

Two Countries do contend for me,
Fair Albion, and Italy:
To both I owe my self at once,
There was I borne, here lie my bones.
There did I rise, here do I fall:
That gave me birth, this burial.
That was my cradle, this my grave,
There had I life, here death I have.
But that gave life which now is run,
This life which never shall be done.
R. F. Pemb* H.

Admired Maro let me use thy name,
To prove Aeneas to Italia came:
Italian Knight, if I should dare define
That thou art come of this Aeneas line,
How ere perhaps some Critic will say no,
Yet will thy life and likeness prove it is so.
And yet me thinks Ulysses though a Greek,
Was like Horatio too, since both did seek
A tongue of eloquence, so by a chaste wise
Each of them had three children in his life.
And now to travel is Horatio gone,
Leaving his Penelope to mourn alone.
Now does she tell her self, how he does live,
And to her thread of life, that does length give:
Now does she think he is dead, and gins lament,
And wish her thread of life were also spent,
Thus like Penelopes lingering web of pain,
She weaues her life, and it vnweaues again.
But it may be when twenty years are past,
That thy Ulysses will return at last:
A ye if he were on earth: but he is too wise.
For earth to leave the heavens fair Paradise.
R. Sen. Coll. John.

See here lie Myrmidons, more hard then steel,
That no remorse, nor woe could ever feel,
This dear dear tomb that does Horatio keep,
And learn of this moist marble how to weep.
Idem.

The Elements that when he was a live,
Conspired in one to give Horatio breath:
Are since he died divided and do strive
Which shall be kindest to him after death.
The earth does promise gently to enfolde
His tender body in her cold embrace:
And for he softly trod commands the molde,
Softly to he upon his lovely face.
The water for his sake to tears will turn,
And drown all eyes in never ceasing woe,
That where Horatio they gin to mourn,
Whole streams may from the swelling circles floe*
The air will through his lightsome Regions sound,
In doubled echoes great Horatios fame:
That through the world no Kingdom may be found,
Whose utmost shore have not received the same.
The fire no more will burn his Pictures frame,
But gliding from his native seat above,
Will henceforth use the virtue of his flame,
In kindling hearts with dead Horatios love.
N. F. Reg. Coll.

England lament, thus of thy neighbors checked,
A stranger came thy fruitful womb to cherish,
But him thou suffer without due respect,
Ungratefully within thy womb to perish.
For such a one within thee is inshrinde,
As of thy own scarce one is left behind.
S. H.

The fates are Queens, they cannot be controld,
This object proves it, who can it deny?
Their law is ostracisme among young and old,
They expulse the best, for still the best does die.
But A eacus is just what ere betides,
At Plutoes Court I Will sue these homicides.
I. Cecill. S. John's Coll.

To the suruiuing Lady of the deceased Knight.
WAst Venus? no. The fates have stolen your love,
Oh cutthroat queans, (I hope they hear me not)
This year for-soothe they spunne tissue for love
To gain a thread, they will spoil a true-loue knot.
Let not his absence (Lady) be your dome,
Phaebe shines most, when Phoebus is from home.
Idem*

Noctuluctus, or his Night-mourning.
1
RIch tapird-Sanctuarie of the blessed,
Palace of Ruth, made all of tears and rest;
Day of deep Students* dead Night, nurse of death,
Who breathless seed'st on nothing but our breath,
To thy deep shades, and desolatione,
I consecrate my dying living moan.
2
You dreadful Furies* visions of the night,
With ghastly howling, all approach my sight:
And palish Ghosts, with sable Tapers stand,
To lend sad lights to my more sadder hand.
Foxes come bark, and Night-Rauens belch in groans,
And Screetch-owles hollow times confusiones.
3
Or I will furnish up a Funeral bed,
Strewn with the bones and reli^ques of the dead:
Redoubling Echoes shall like passing bells,
Chiming the dismal accent* of their knells,
Revive the dead, or make the living die,
In Ruth, and terror of deaths torturie.
4
Here lives imprisoned sorrow, clothed in black,
A doleful hearse, fit for a dead man's back:
Natures fair red, clad in pale sheets of Ruth,
Expressing in dumb show, a serious truth.
A Funeral solemnized in sad cheer,
Where eyes be mourners, and where legs the beer.
5
But ah my Muse, my Muse can but lament,
With hair disheueld, words, and tears half spent,
This dead quick-spirit, wits strange Cameleon,
Which any authors color could put on,
And not in one sole tongue his thoughts dissu^der.
But like to Scaliger our ages wonder,
The learneds Sun, wrapped in whose admiration,
The rarest wits are fired in every Nation,
6
Whose happy wit with gracious judgment joined,
Could give a pasport unto words new coynd:
In his own shop, who could adopt the strange:
Engraft the wild, enrich with mutual change
His powerful style* yet sanz respect of sweetes,
Death folded up his earth in earthen sheets.
7
O had I eyes to weep griefs great'st excess,
Or words expressing more then words express,
Each line should be a History of woe,
And every accent as a dead man's throe.
8
But tears shall serve for Ink, for paper stones,
Eyes pens, for letters drops, for subject mones,
For Epitaph these Threnes. Entombed here lies,
( In grave of memory digd with weeding eyes)
Wits strange Cameleon, dead quick-sprited Roman,
Most like himself, else almost like to no man:
Arts various-varnish, enricht so with the Italian,
French, Latin, Spanish, Dutch, and Nubian
That Rome, Rheyn, Rhone, Greece, Spain, and Italy
May all plead right in his Nativity.
9
Ye living spirits then, if any live,
Whom like extremes, do like affections give,
Shun, shun this cruel light, and end your thrall,
In these soft shades of sable Funeral.
Omnis vt vmbra. Io: May:

An other.
Muses loss lamenting treasure,
Dest'nies crosse-tormenting pleasure,
Wisdom wayling, honor crying,
Virtue weeping* Judgment dying.
Altogether all betoken,
Griefes-griefe, not without grief spoken.
Learnings Legend, Physics Phusicke,
Sense of Science, Muses music,
Pandoraes Dowry, Graces Glory,
Sad Melpomines sad Story.
Write in tears* and in tears read,
Natures grace, Horatio dead.
Dead not dead in heaven he raines*
Dying life such living gains:
Liuing-dying was his state,
Now dying living spite of Fate
Raised from earth to heaven, where living,
Lives concent, concent life-giuing.
Though bodies life here dead do lie,
Life of his soul lives never to die.
The same.

Idem Lectori In Funera Pallauicinaea.
ASpice quot vates Pallauicinaea crearint
Funera, quos nunquam vates potuere Magistri
Reddere; noctem vnam magnos fecisse Poetas
Fama est, extempso velut olim Perseus inter
Enituit summos vates, Helicone relicto.
Tu modo (si quis aues) fueris cona^ine tanto
Versifices inter* si non potes esse Poeta.
Eia age sis, delubra Deum, delubra Dearum
Sedulus implora, totumque Helicona duobus
Haustibus epotans, ingentem imitare furorem,
Atque altum quiddam spira, dignumque cothurno:
Ad fingendum audax: sic nostri ex tempore facti
Grandiloqui vates, sic tu, plaudente popello,
(Si nihil est aliud) dic occubuisse Mineruae
Aonidumque decus, dic interijsse decorem
Pol Latij* et qui omnes paene praedatus Honores
Dic obijsse diem, dic inuida Fata, colosque
Detestare nigras, nentesque ex ordine Parcas
Exagita diris, Musasque and Apollina, quoquo
Versu itera, atque illas vitam attribuisse perennem
Defuncto exclama, mortem nos viuere* vitam
Illum perpetuam* vatesque videbere tandem
(Dum nulla occurret melior, via trita terenda'st.)
Idem Pictoribus, ^que Poetis.
SIvspiam vapulet Priscianus (Bone)
Scia^ (Lector) vapular^ a Typographo.
Si verbum, syllaba, vel desit litera,
Ve^ punctum, scias, culpa est Typographi.
Est primum tempus parce, nunquam prius,
Latinas literas impressit hic Typographus:
Si non parces, nunquam imprimet imposterum.
Io: May:
Ce^ potius alter Idem, Ignotus.
FINIS.

