PANACEA: OR, Select Aphorisms, Divine and Moral.

SENECA. Optimus Orator, qui plurima paucis dicit. PROVE. 31. 8. Open thy mouth
for the dumb, in the cause of of all the children of destruction.

LONDON, Printed by Augustine Mathewes.

16^^

In Approbation of these APHORISMS.
Schediasma.
GOod Books are Gardens full of choicest Flowers,
Which Bees and Spiders equally frequent;
The Be suckes Honey (for her golden Bowers)
The Spider's wholly unto Poison bent:
Yea, so malignant are some Bumble- Bees,
That Spider-like they will turn to venom, These.
What Magicke-spell, or strong Inuocatiue,
Could ever ( yet) charm deleterious Tongues?
Yet, here behold, a fair Defensatiue,
And Panacea against pure Villains wrongs;
Even sacred Truth; whose Beams (in every line)
May dazzle the most bristling Porcupine.
S. N. Oxon.

AD PONTICVM, Cleonem insignis^imum.
POntice, quid nostrum laceras uesane libellum?
An quia te rodit, tetraque facta notat?
Ah (miser) in anis: tuate Men's Nil ego peccaui: tua te mala cognita produnt.
Ovid.
saucia prodit:
Quin, cave ne perdat sontica Barbaries.
S N. Cantabrigiensis.

APHORISMS Divine and Moral.
1 UN kindness for Love, is worse then Blows for Hate: for better is a
Blister with a Nettle, then a Prick with a Rose.

2. Affliction is to be measured rather by Faith then Fancy.

3. We must not rashly condemn them whom we have oftimes consideratly
approved; lest the change being in our Judgment, and not in them; we display
our own Weakness, by building on the Sandy foundation of Hearsay; or the
Bogs and Quag mires of blustering Malice.

4. He that believes Easily, condemns Rashly.

5. Sympathy of manners, makes Symphony of minds.

6. Love grounded upon Lust, dissolueth upon light occasion.

7. He that would have his name Registered with the pen of Eternity; let him
write it himself with the pen of Chastity: for Vbi deus, S. Hierome.
ibi pudicitia.

8. Plenty shall be upon that Table, where Charity is attendant.

9. The mercy of God is not promised to men laden with sin, but with sorrow
for their sin.

10. An insensible Heart is the Devils Anuill.

11. It isin the Power of men's sins, to make God curse his Blessings.

12. The Chair of the scorner ^s the Throne of Satan.

13. Worldly Happiness and Humblenes are seldom linkt together: ^or very
seldom is a good mind and a great Estate given to one man.

14. The rankness of Prosperity ^mpoysons the carnal mind; and ^he Daughter
of Riches is Pride.

15. There is nothing that can ^etter agree, then Patience with ^isery.

16. The eyes that Sin has ^ut with impenitency; Damnati^^ shall open with a
Vengeance.

17. A wicked man is soon Rai^^, and with like speed Depres^^^: He
flourishes for a time, and ^^isheth for ever.

18. A godly man is long kept ^wne, but when he rises his E^ation is permanent.

19. Quake and fear, to suffer ^^ sin of thy soul, and the end thy life to
come together.

20. To have the Evidence ^ Faith, is to have the Witness ^ Works.

21. Devout prayer and readi^ makes Men like to Angels: For ^ the one they
speak to God, ^ the other God speaks to them.

22. Hearty repentance mou^ God to repent him of his intend ^ Plagues.

23. Through Jesus Christ do^ God look at us, and we at hi^ that we may be
Hopeful, and h^ Merciful.

24. Love never Dineth in t^ Conscience, where Faith h^ not first broke her
Fast.

25. There may be a show ^ Charity, without Faith: But the can be no show of
Faith, with Charity.

26. Man judges by the Ha^ God by the Heart.

27. Hypocrisy is a Pandar^ ^ll other sin: and Vice is made Virtues Ape, in
an Hypocrites ^ractise.

28. The Detractor and he that ^elights to hear him, are whelps ^f a Litter:
the one has the De^ill in his Tongue, the other in his Ear.

29. The Dispositions of wicked ^en are perverse: Coaction must ^orce them to
Goodness, and Cor^ection restrain the^ from Badnes.

30. He that does any thing which God has forbidden, does ^uill: and he that
does it willful^y, is a Devil.

31. Not to restrain evil, is to maintain evil; And want of pu^ishment, is
the Encouragement ^hereof.

32. It is allowable to have plen^y of wealthinesse, where minds ^re empty of
Wickedness.

33. Next to Prayer, there is no better Sacrifice then the Punishment of
Malefactors.

34 We are in this world for Action, not for Fruition: in via, not in termino.

35. It is neither Harsh nor News to Gods children, to hear of Death, or
think of it.

36. Christian fortitude may be ouer-borne, not daunted: ( premitur non
perimitur.)

37. It is weakness of Faith, to fear to dye (for fear of death everlasting)
since we have permission to praeclude Divine judgments by our prayers, with
promise of Aid and V^ctory.

38. It is madness to run from Punishment, and not from Sin.

39. It is vain to pray against Punishment, while Sin continues.

40. There cannot be a more forcible motive to Patience, then to acknowledge a
Divine hand to strike.

41. It is a fruit of false Faith in adversity, to seek second means, with
neglect of the first, (to wit, God.)

42. He that escapes Affliction, may suspect his Adoption.

43. God is most present, when he most chastens.

44. He that hopes for good to himself, will return good for euillto others.

45. It is good so to diet the body, that the soul may be fatted.

46. Not our Afflictions, but Sins, are Crosses in our way to Heaven.

47. The less man prizes himself, the more God esteems him.

48. The longer God stays, not finding amendment; the sorer he strikes when he
comes to judgment.

49. As water does the fire, so does delight in sin extinguish repentance.

50. Temporal things are to be given to them that want; and spiritual things
to them that have.

51. As prosperity does not reveal a friend: So adversity does not conceal a
Foe.

52. A wicked man has (mostwhat) Fear for his bedfellow, Despair for his
companion, and the sting of Conscience for his Tormentor.

53. He that flatters an Usurer, does claw the Devil.

54. Strong affections give credit to weak Reasons.

55. When the unjust sinner repents and confesses; Then the just Lord relents
and forgiues.

56. He that restores not, repents not: and his sins are retained, till his
unjust gains be repaid.

57. It is reason that he that sets another house on fire, should labor to
quench it: and he that has done wrong, should carry himself so, as he may
deserve to be forgiven.

58. The way to possess all things, is to possess God the Possessour of all
things.

59. One Sin opens the door for many Virtues to go out.

60. As the Devil will not dwell in a house which is not swept from Goodness: So
the grace of God will not dwell in a heart which is not cleansed from Wickedness.

61. Hidden may be the causes of Predestination, but unjust they never be.

62. Between the Prowdest and Poorest there may be difference in Fleece, but
not in Flesh.

63. Omission, and Comm^ssion, are a wicked man's Confusion.

64. There Is little difference between Permission and Commission of evil.

65. Kindly to reprehend, is friendly to bid amend.

66. If Charity command care over thy Neighbors Body; let Christianity double
that care over his Soul.

67. It is a Virtue to bewail sin, though we cannot prevail against sin.

68. The devil still by Ignorance or Insolence persuades Men to sin.

69. They that make Peacocks of their wives, make Woodcocks of themselves.

70. Actum est de homine, cum actum est de nomine: When a man's good name is
viz. By his own mi^de^d^s not by others misdeemings.
done, himself is undone.

71. Heaven gates are too straight for Gross sinners to enter: yet not in
deficiencie of their Glory, but our Grace.

72. * Oppressors feast on others An Oppres. for is the D^uills banqueting dish.
Evils, and are feasts for Devils: for while they devour the poor, the
devil deuoures them.

73. Earth is not our House but our Bridge; which we pass over to heaven or
hell.

74. He Of this some Sip, others Sup, but most Scope, (as an Ambo^exter on^e
Pind^^izd ex A^bo^e.)
that drinks of follies Cup, has small cause to lick his Lips after it.

75. The time is Short, that pleases a sinner: everlasting, that Plagueth him.

76. Pleasure is a Channel, and death the Sea where unto it runs.

77. It were some blessing to an infamous Oppressor if his stinking Memorial
might not surviue his Funeral.

78. The perdition that Vice brings, is not so Visible as miserable.

79. The evil disposition of the soul marres the good composition the Body.

80. The faithful are dead to Ille est pec ^ato mortu^s, in quo pecatum est
mortu^^, aut saltem non reg^ans. Hug^ Victorin^^.
Sin, the faithless dead in Sin.

81. So far is the spirit quickened, as the flesh is mortified: It is therefore
a true Paradox: A Christian so far lives, as he is dead.

82. Christ at one Viz: by his death.
Blow slew our Sins, and saved our Souls.

83. He that will not hear Christ's Words, shall feel his Wounds: and he that
is now deaf to his sweet voice of Mercy, shall hear one Day his thundering
voice of Judgment, Go ye cursed etc.

84. He is senseless, who is not sensible that he begins and ends his life in
Sorrow: his first voice being a Cry, and his last a Groan.

85. Every soul shall mourn either in Repentance here, or in Vengeance
hereafter; and he shall be oppressed with desperation, that has not expressed
contrition.

86. A weak body may have a strong faith.

87. Riot drinks so many healths to others, that it leaves none to it self.

88. The Antidote to divine judgments, is humble penitence.

89. With God, weak means can never be too weak: Without God, the strongest,
not strong enough.

90. The viz. Accompanied with Contrition; and Satisfaction (in the case of
Oppression.)
Confession of our sins does no less honor God, than his Glory is blemished
by their Commission.

91. Christ dyed our Death, that we might live his Life: And suffered viz. Not
in the diabolical sense of Phrenetical Catharists, but Analogically etc.
our Hell to bring us to his Heaven.

92. Charity will allow Suspicion; where no cause can be found to trust.

93. Satan's ways have pleasant Intrats but bitter Exits.

94. He is unworthy of Gods Blessings, that has not learned to be content
with his Corrections, (which tend to our blessedness, if we make right use of
them.)

95. Beware of sin; for if thou make it thy Companion in youth, it will be
thy Master in age.

96. It is Infidelity, in visible benefits, not to see the invisible Giver.

97. Misery deserves mercy: for in doing good to others, we do more good to
our selves.

98. Afflictions are necessary, for they whip men to prayer and confession.

99. He that will not resist Temptation when it is offered, shall not resist
Tribulation when it is suffered.

100. Security is the Suburbs of Hell.

101. Sin is as crafty as the Devil, give it place in the Eye, it will soon
possess the Heart.

102. It is the part of Cain, to deny to be thy Brothers keeper.

103. Mortify thy sins before they mortify thy soul: For eternal Life or
death depends upon it.

104. Sin, and an accusing conscience, will cleave to an impenitent Soul, in
death; after death, in judgment, and for ever.

105. Two things are to be noted out of every good Book and Sermon: 1. That
which thou did not know before: 2. That which speaks to thy sins: for by
the one, thou shall increase thy Knowledge; by the other lessen thy Vices.

106. He that has an unfeigned desire to pay, and cannot, makes his debt a
Sore, not a Sin: For God will accept his Restitution mental; though Man be
content with no less then Total.

107. As Provided it be not such as some pretend, which conceit themselves to
be the only elect and can tell how many in a Town shall be saved or damned.
Dea Cotytto, quanti hi tibi Mys^tagogs!
Humility is a sign of Election: so pride is a sign of reiection.

108. As the Servants of God are known by humility and charity: So the Devils
slaves are known by pride and cruelty.

109. As a Wolf follows his Prey, and Hunters follow him: So while an
oppressor pursues the poor, the Devil dogs him at the heels.

110. There are three degrees of sin; Suggestion, Delectation, Consent:
Suggestion is the Seed, Delectation the Nourishment, Consent the Accomplishment.

111. To pretend Sincerity and want Sanctity, is mere hypocrisy

112. Death to Sin, is the Funeral of Vice, and the Resurrection of Virtue.

113. The Scripture is a faithful Counselor in prosperity, and a sure
Comforter in adversity,

114. He that is rightly wise will use humane Wisdom, as a Handmaid to Divine
providence.

115. K. lame^
Though Almesdeeds merit notat Gods hands: yet they make him our Debtor
according to his own Gracious promise.

116. Riches are taken from good men, to try them: and from bad men, to curb
them.

117. God is Verity; his Law Charity; his honor Equity: his peace Felicity;
his life Eternity.

118. All the Words of Christ are Consolation: all his Deeds, Compassion: all
his Passions, Propitiation.

119. The Kingdom of Heaven to the godly is

Granted, in Predestination. Promised, Vacation. Showed, Justification.
Exhibited, Glorification.

120. He that hears in Gods word Read or Preached, his Promises pronounced,
and his Judgments denounced, without respect to the one, or regard to the
other, is in a dangerous, if not incurable case.

121. There be 3. principal motives to excitevs to prayer, 1. Gods Precepts,
2. His promises, 3. Our own necessities.

122. To the true Believer nothing can succeed, but either to his Appro^ed
good, or Tolerable cuill: In the first, he will be thankful, In the second,
patient.

123. When we pray to the Lord for corporal benefits, we must not fix our
Confidence on Natural means.

124. He that gives God his Lips instead of his Heart, teaches him to give him
Stones instead of Bread.

125. Christ was Figured in the Law, Foretold in the Prophets, and Fulfilled in
the Gospel.

126. Christ was made not only Redemption to save man, but Wisdom and
Example to guide him: therefore learn and imitate.

127. The best Revenge of a Christian, is to correct his Lusts, and to take
Vengeance of his own Sins.

128. He that hates a good Man, hates God. He that hates an E^^ll man, hates
one like himself: therefore have peace with all men.

129. As Men would have men do as they teach; So God would have men to do as
they hear; Else Hearers shall be no more saved by hearing, then Preachers by
preaching.

130. Patience for sowing the Seed of sorrow on earth, Shall reap a golden
Crop of Joy in heaven.

131. Adversity is Gods University, wherein we learn the Justice, Mercy,
Power, and Providence of God.

132. Adversity seeks out the Promise of God: the Promise, Faith: Faith,
Prayer: At last God hears, and in Mercy answers.

133. The best Antidote for Afflictions, is to prepare for them before they
come; And to bear them patiently when they come.

134. Rich men's Heirs that wear Blackes at their Funerals, often mourn in
their Gowns, and laugh in their Slecues.

135. Gods visitations, to the Godly are Rods; to the ungodly Whips: the one,
are punished for their Instruction; the other to Destruction.

136. Seeming Denotion may be in a Reprobate: but holy Zeal in none but the
Predestinate.

137. As God will be sought with sober Fasting and Mourning: so will he be
found with holy feasting and spiritual rejoicing.

138. To humble our souls before God, is to Embase our selves, and Embrace him.

139. When death besigeth the Body, Satan beleagureth the Soul.

140. Hell Torments are endless, caselesse, and remediless.

141. A Drunkards Tongue is the closet of his Heart: for what a soberma^ thinks
a dru^ke^ man speaks.

142. A Virtuous man is

Famous on Earth.

Illustrious in the Grave.

Glorious in the Heavens.

143. Prayer is the Winge, and Meditation the Eye of the soul.

144. Repentance is the Supersedeas, wherewith all the Bonds of sin are
discharged.

145. Though sin be as heavy as a mountain of Lead, yet his weight is light in
a corrupt heart.

146. Where the cinders of natural affection are extinct, there can be no
flame nor feruor of Religion.

147. He that wants Mercy, shall find none.

148. The Usurer and Broker, are the two milstones that grind the poor.

149. Where grace within, does beautify the attire without, there good
clothes are commendable.

150. Good Laws without Execution, are like the Picture of St. George, with
his hand always up, but never striking.

151. It is as necessary a part of a Christian, to Exuere and Induere, is the
Total of Religion.
put on the new man, as to put off the old.

152. It is not enough to cease to do evil: for it is damnable, not to do
good.

153. He that will come to God, by Faith; God will come unto him, by Grace.

154. A friend is to Forbe are in Anger, Reprove in Error, Comfort in
Adversity, and Counsel in Prosperity.

155. Where Fasting is, corporal Passions are cured: Where Prayer is,
Spiritual Pestilence is healed.

156. If the Master will drink to Fullness; the man will drink to Madness.

157. Greatness is a Copy, which every man strives to write after.

158. He that hinders good works in others, makes their evil works his own.

159. Ministers of mercy can do little good, except ministers of Justice put
to their helping hands.

160. Ministers may forbid corruptions of the Heart: but Magistrates must
prohibit the Wickedness of the hands.

161. Greatness is the fairest Object to the eye of the world. Goodness, to
the eye of God.

162. The glorious splendour of earthly Honor, little auailes in Gods sight, if
Virtue give it not a heavenly Luster.

163. He that is Greatness and Goodness, is pleased to prefer Deus Opt Man.
Good before Great.

164. The Book of Grace, is the Counterpane to the Book of glory.

165. Gods hand is heauiest on the Conscience, if he suffer it to surfeit on
Pleasure till death.

166. The Burden of Sin, must make us weary, before we have any promise of
Ease.

167. The next way to abate the burden of Judgment, is to abate the burden of
Sin.

168. He cannot be true to himself, that is false to God.

169. The Lease of vanity, is but a Moment, and the Tenure of this world, is
uncertain.

170. To buy the merriment of a day, with the Eternity of insufferable
Torments, is a dear Purchase.

171. What thou dare not do, Man looking on thee; how dare do, God
looking on thee?

172. Christ gives no title of Inheritance in Heaven, to such as have no
Holiness on Earth.

173. The Evidence of Faith is weak, if it want the Witness of Works.

174. Let not Malice (in Enmity) make thee reveal that; which love (in Amity)
bound thee to conceal.

175. Hate no man: no not thine enemy; lest God love him: For to hate where he
loves, is fearful opposition.

176. In matters of Life and Death, use a just mercy, and a merciful Justice.

177. Whatsoever is pleasing to the Body, but prejudicial to the Soul,
forbear it.

178. Affect in all things, rather substance without show, the^ show without
substance.

179. Not to fear God, is to fear every thing.

180. True valor, is neither to be faint hearted, nor foole-hardy.

181. Be not confident in prosperity, not diffident in adversity: For Grande
solatium est, ^um Vniuerso rap^, S^n.
the world is in perpetual revolution.

182. Pride regardes neither Obedience to God, nor Love to Man.

183. Wicked men are plunged either in a false hope of mercy, or a desperate
fear of misery.

184. Reprehension whether just or unjust, never does a Wise man harm: for if
it be just, he has a Warning to amend: If unjust, he has a Caneat to avoyde.

185. Though men judge of the heart, by outward actions; yet God judges
outward actions by ^he heart.

186. Justice will ever have an ^pen ear to the just complaints of ^niust
dealings.

187. Let thy Bed represent to ^ee thy Grave: thy bed-cloaths, ^he Mould: the
sheets, thy Wind^gsheet: Sleep, Death: and Awak^ng, thy Resurrection.

188. Be more glad to see any ^ans Amendment, then his Punish^ent.

119. As death leaves thee, Justice ^indes thee, and Judgment doomes ^hee.

190. The beginning of Grace, is ^o search, try and examine thy self.

191. If thou find thy Heart ^ounded with sin, and can beg for ^ercy, with
sighs, Groans, and St. Bas^^ writes that Angels bath themselves in Sinners
Tears.
Tears upon thy Knees ( as for Life and Death) then art thou in the right way
to Repentance.

Divine M. DRATTOM.
Heaven rings for joy,
When once a sinner Prays.
192. If thou accuse thy self by Confessing thy sins, thou preuentest the
Devil of his purpose: For then, he cannot accuse thee at the Day of Judgment.
Panitentia (...) recess^^ (...): ^^ access^^ ad bonum.


193. Repentance, is a hearly sorrow for sin, accompanied with Amendment of
life, and a godly Resolution to sin no more.

194. Prayer and hearing of Gods word brings us to Christ, (being not used
perfunctorily, and in hypocrisy.)

195. By Repentance burn thy Sin, lest Hell fire burn thy Soul.

196. Repentance is a turning from all Sin, and not from one kind of sin to
another.

197. It is not enough to repent, but thou must proceed from grace Non (...)
greds, e^^ regre^^
to grace, if thou would atchieue the Crown of Glory:

( Nam qui cessat esse melior, cessat esse bonus.) 198. God is more Merciful
the^ man can be sinful: If he be truly contrite and sorrowful.

199. Let Repentance beget in thee as much Sorrow; as Sin bred Delight.

Let no man's Contrition be less then his Crime St. Cyprian.

200. It has been Arist. Eth: N^co^^.
anciently observed, that there are 3. Sorts of People in the world.

1. Those that can well advise and counsel themselves.

2. Those that will take good Counsel of others.

3. Those ( which are the worst that can neither counsel themselves nor will
follovv the advice of others.

Ex minimis seminibus nascuntur ingentia.
FINIS.
A CHARACTERISME OF THE FOUR CARDINAL VERTVES.

NEWLY PVBLISHT

Fato, non Merito.

CICERO pro P. SEXTIO. VIRTUES in tempestate sava quieta est, and lucet in
tenebris, et pulta loco, manet tamen, atque haeret in patria; splendetque per
se semper, neque alienis vnquam sordibus obsoleseit. LONDON, Printed by
Augustine Mathewes 16^0.

The Printer to the Reader.
THE Affinity of the Argument, and Rarity of ^he Subject, have moved me ^o
adioyne to the precedent Aphorisms, this ensuing Cha^acter; imparted by the
No^ly-descended and Virtuously ^ccomplisht, Sir R. G. Knight. And albeit ( to
sparkling Wits) ^^ suit not point blanke with Theophrastus his superlatiue
I^ea; yet, I doubt not, but it will be gratefully accepted of all
well-disposed and ingenuou^ Judgments, that (according to the Rabbinical
Adage,) regard not so much the gay outsid o^ the cup, as the good Liquor within
Considering therefore wha^ a choice Piece thou have heer^ communicated: I trust
tho^ wilt (by way of Gratification) requite the Heroick^ Founder with as many
goo^ Wishes.

Ovid.
GARGARA quot segetes, quot habet Methymna racemos. Thine in summo gradu A. M.

A CHARACTERISME OF THE FOUR CARDINAL VERTVES.
Of Prudence.
PRudence is Triple:

First, of the Heart; and this consists in disposing things present, ^n
remembering things past; in ^oreseeing things ^o come: which is ^xcellently
expressed, Deuteronomy. 32. O that men would be wise, (that is by things past) and would
understand ^ viz. things present, and would foresee the last, viz. things to
come.) All which is included in this versicle.

Corrige praeteritum, rege praesens, cernefuturum* Secondly of the Tongue:
which consists in governing our speech, Pro. 10. He is most wise who can rule
his Lips.

Whereto accords this ingenious Epigram.

Son Benjamin, since thou art young,
And know not yet the benefit of Tongue.
Make it thy slave, since thou art free;
Imprison it, lest it imprison thee.
Thirdly, of Work: and this consists in eschuing evil and pursuing good.
Psalm. 33. Decline from evil, and do good: Both must go together, for the
one, without the other, is not auail^able.

Of Fortitude.
FOrtitude, in as much as it is a Politic Virtue, teaches to bear a valiant
mind; to fear nothing but dishonesty, manfully to endure Adversity, and not
to bear the crest too high in Prosperity.

Fortitude of a purged mind, is to be void of effeminate Passions: not to
fear basely, not to be angry rashly, and to desire no reproachful thing.

Fortitude exemplar, is to be unchangeable: because it is ever the same and is
not at any time changed.

The parts of Fortitude are 4. viz. Magnificence, Confidence, Patience,
Perseverance.

Magnificence, is seen in the Meditation and pursuit of great and high Acts,
with an honorable desire of glory.

Confidence is a Virtue, whereby the mind, in high and honorable Dissignes,
reposeth it self in certain hope and Assurance.

Patience is voluntary and continued sufferance of hard and difficult things
for Honor and Vtility.

Perseverance, is a Virtue which consists in a permanent and well advised
Purpose.

The effects of Fortitude are four.
First, it triumphs over ones enemies, Judges. 4. and 5. Chapter. Debora, and
Barak.

Secondly, it keeps a man's Goods, Luke. 11. When a strong man armed, etc.

Thirdly, it enricheth, Pro. 10. The hand of the strong gets Riches.

Fourthly it adorneth: as in the Psalms, Fortitude and Majesty his Garment.

It consists in five things.
First, in aduenturing upon hard things.

Secondly, in despising earthly things.

Thirdly, in suffering Tribulation.

Fourthly, in resisting Temptation.

Fifthly, in fighting against Vices.

Five things conduce to Fortitude.
First, the exhortation of wise men.

Secondly, the Example of the Valorous.

Thirdly, Exercise in Martial Affairs.

Fourthly, Hope of Reward.

Fifthly, the Divine Assistance gotten by fervent Prayer.

To conclude:
As Hearts have great horns in vain, seeing they want Courage: So is it not
sufficient to be powerful in Wit, Policy or other things unless Fortitude be
adjoined. Plutarke.

Of Temperance.
Politic Temperance (according to Macrobius) is to desire nothing to be
repented: not to exceed the golden Mean. To bring Concupisence under the Yoke
of Reason: This also teaches us not be ouer-wise or too precise in our own
conceit, but wise according to Sobricty, as the Apostle admonishes.

Temperance of a purged mind does not only repress, but quite suppress
irregular Desires.

Temperance as it is an Exemplar Virtue, is a certain Reflex on it self,
constant and immutable.

There are three Parts of Temperance, viz. Continence, Clemency, Modestly.

First, Continence, (according to Tully) is a Virtue, by which the appetite is
ruled and reined by the golden Bit of Wisdom.

Secondly, Clemency is a Virtue, which steereth the Mind in the greatest
Storms and perturbations of Hatred, with a generous and gracious Disposition
to forgive the Delinquent.

Thirdly, Modesty is a Virtue, by which an honest Shamefastnes procures an
Honorable and durable Estimation.

The Excellency of Temperance is seen in two things
First it preserves Nature: because Nature (not corrupted) delights in the
Mean, and with Extremes is corrupted and depraved.

Secondly it adorneth the Mind. For as in Nature; Form is more Noble then
Matter: So in Morality, the Manner is more commended, then the Action it self.
Whence it is ancienly and truly said: W^e merit not by Verbes but by Aduerbes:
that is, not in speakeing or doing any thing: but in speaking or doing well.
According to that of the Philosopher, Cujusvis est pulsare citharam: boui
autem, praeclae.

Of Justice.
Justice gives to every one his own: wherein also is regard to be had to a
Religious observation; that nothing be esteemed Profitable, that may seem
dishonest.

Justice (being taken in a large Latitude and Extent) has six Branches or
Parts: First, Religion. Secondly, Piety. Thirdly, Gratitude. Fourthly, Revenge.
Fifthly, Obedience. Sixthly, Truth.

First, Religion is a sacred Virtue, of a superior and divine Nature, attended
with awefull Respect and ceremonious Observance, without Superstition.

Secondly, Piety is when Duty, Respect and Reverence is given to them that are
linked to us, in Blood or Good will: and are therefore near and dear unto us.
(So the Prince of Roman Eloquence, Tully, often uses the Word in his Golden
Epistles.)

Thirdly, Gratitude is a Virtue, comprizing the Remembrance and Desire of
requiting the Amity and Friendly Offices of another.

Fourthly, Revenge is, whereby we do in a lawful manner repel and repress
Violence and Injury and every base Affront, by a prudent Defense of our selves,
and a just Vindication of the proferd Wrong.

Fifthly, Obedience (or Obeisance) is a Virtue, whereby men excelling in Worthy
qualities are observed with all due Reverence and Honor.

Sixthly, Truth (or Verity) is an Intellectual Virtue, whereby those things are
immutably the same, which they have been, are, or hereafter shall be.

Justice may be chiefly perverted, three ways;

First, through partial Affection to the Person, or love of Money. Isai. 5.
Woe to them that justify the ungodly for Reward.

Secondly, through Fear, Mat. 10. Fear not them that can kill the Body, etc.

Thirdly, through Envy, Mark. 15. Knowing that for Envy they had betrayed him.

To sum up all: Justice is the Pillar of the State; the Queen of Virtues,
and the Empress of Humane Society. And as the Sun in his Glory is most
pleasant to the Beholders: So is a just Prince most dear to all good Patriots
and Friends of Justice.

Vivant Rex, Regina and Princeps, aeternumque Floreant.
FINIS.

