The Zodiake of Life written by the Godly and zealous Poet Marcellus
Pallingenius stellatus, wherein are contained twelve Books disclosing the
heinous Crimes and wicked vices of our corrupt nature: And plainlye declaring
the pleasant and perfect pathway unto eternal life, besides a number of
digressions both pleasant and profitable, Newly translated into English verse
by Barnabae Googe.

Probitas laudatur and alget.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Henry Denham, for Rafe Newberye dwelling in Fleet
streate. Anno. 1565. Aprilis. 18.

B G TOVTE LOVENGE AV DIEV


GILBERTVS DVKE CANtabrigiensis, in Marcelli Palingenij conuersionem.
Bellorum, vt saeuam rabiem depellimus armis
Armatoque minus gladij, vel taela nocebunt:
Ramis, vt volueres deuitant grandinis imbre^,
Nec non ventosos nimbos, gelidasque procellas
Ardens vtque calor frigus depulsat acutum.
Blandimenta, velut sedant, cohibentque furores,
Aureus vt Phoebus tenebras detrudit inanes:
Sic decus eloquij liuorem pellit acerbum
Grandi presidio Gogeum cingente Mineru^
Omnigenis herbis, vt enim ver pingit agellos
Gratum ver opus hoc Musis fic sacrat, and ornat,
En silet infrendens tua (Zoile) lingua, nec ist^
Veris dente potest florem vitiare canino.
Sit stygijs flammis acris tua lingua sepulta.
Idem in Laudem operis, ad beneuolum lectorem.
Hoc docens vitae speculum beatae
Quosque virtutis, vitijque fructus
Ducit ad sacras pietatis arces
Quasit eundum.
Anglus exultet Iuuenis, Senexque
Commodis fretus Latio dicatis:
Qua dat hoc, inquam patri^ libell^
Gogeus almae.
Sit nefas ergo violare linguis
Gog^i, lector, vigilem laborem:
Gratias gratus meritas habere and
Hui^memor esto.
CHRISTOFERVS CARLILVS sacrosanctae Thaeologiae professor, in Marc. Pallingenij
co(...)sionem.
Orbem signi^erum collustrat numine Phebi
Pax: radios mittens, spargat in orb faces.
Lumine virtutis Gogeus pect^ra complet
Nostra, ligans nostris verba Latina modis.
Anglige^^s laetor binas reperisse Poetas*
A vit^ agresti, qui reuocare student.
Alter Chaucerus fama super ^there notus,
Alter Gogeus, posteritatis ^onos
Ambo virtutes, virtut is praemia pandunt
Ambo: arts omnes ambo docere parant.
Quid deus est monstrat quaeque est diuina potesta^
Quidque Dei numen, miraque facta docent.
In Marcellum Pallingenium a Barnaba Gogeo ex Latino Carmine in Anglicum
traductum, Iacobi Itzuerti carmen.
Dic mihi quae riguis Parnasi in collibus erras,
Queque praees sancto Calliopeia choro,
Dic queso (neque enim quidque mihi Diua negasti)
Dic mihi quid mereant, qui tua te^pla colunt.
An non and virides Laurus Hederasque sequaces,
Nexaque per dias florea serta comas?
An non aeternas lauds, vitamque perennem,
An non perpetua posteritate colt?
An non sunt digni quorum post funera nomen
Viuat, and aeterna laud feratur opus?
Sunt equidem: neque enim scribunt sine numine vates
Sunt reor illorum pectora plena Deo.
Quis neget imbutos diuina mente Poetas?
Creed mihi aethereo spiritus igne calet.
Dic mihi Diua precor si sint haec praemia vatum,
Quaenam Gogeo munera digna dabis?
Ille tuos coluit largis sudoribus hortos,
Et nouus accessit ad tua templa cliens
Hic resides iuuenum mentes accendit, and altis
Eduxit tenebris, luce deditque frui.
Nempe refert magni, quis nos moderetur euntes
Et quonam pueri discimus ire duce.
Hic Anglis Anglus glaciem prescidit, and illis
Difficile ad laudem iam patefecit iter.
Addidit and stimulos, calcarque impressit eunti
Primus, and hoc magna laud subiuit opus.
Huius enim didicit been Palingenius art
Stricta quide^ numeris Anglica verba loqui
Iamque nouo insignem sese miratur amictu,
Seque stupet duplici vest Poeta tegi.
Et defixa tenens in pulchrum lumina teg^^en
Iure noua vates vest superbus ouat.
Nunc nitidum laudat cultum, variosque colores,
Nunc sua scripta stupet diuite versa stylo.
Nunc vim, nunc faciles motus, casteque fluentis
Carminis immensas s^pe rubescit opes.
Non peregrinorum foetus, nec adultera verba,
Sed nudam and castam cernit vbique fidem.
Non videt excursus, sua sed vestigia noscit,
Et latio passim consona verba stylo.
Iamque etiam cu^ctis gaudet sua scripta Britannis
Et sancta a cupida carmina pube legi,
Et te Calliope (cuius nunc munere viuit)
Per Charitum supplex numina sancta rogat,
Vt quoque Gogci super aurea sydera nomen
(Sunt etenim haec Vatu^ praemia larga) vehas
Neue quis illius cursus decus obruat ^ui,
Sed foelix omni tempore viuat. Amen.
IN GOGEI AEDITIONEM, G. Chatertoni carmen Eligiacum, Christi Collegij
Cantabrigi^ Socij, ad Lectorem.
Marmoreae turres, praecinctae maenibus vrbes
Tempore labenti, praecipitata ruunt.
Intereunt statuae, monumenta antiqua virorum
Quicquid and orbis habet, tempore cassa iace^t
Vrbs Romana licet, sublimibus alta columnis:
Occidet horrendi conscia dedecoris.
Magnificam paenis videas, Carthaginis vrbem:
Nulla loci, aut vrbis pristina signa manent.
Sempiterna manent, quae scripsit carmina Gogus
Aetnaeis nunq praeda voranda rogis.
Non opus egregium hoc, himnis celebrare decoru^ est
Hoc erit in toto notius orb nihil.
Te tamen inprimis nostra haec mirabitur ^tas
Si moriere, tuum non morietur opus.
Anglia laetatur se tali prole parentem,
Estque sibi solum, se genuisse satis.
Haec antiqua domus (tibi quo^da^ se dula nutrix)
Extulit ad verbum, nominis ecce caput
Quos et hebraea min vel quos nec greca iuuabu^t
Cuique minus forsan turba latina placet.
Huc omnes populi, vos huc generosa iuuen^^s
Confluite huc pueri, decrepitique senes.
DAVID BELLVS, IN BARnabae Gogei Pallingenium.
Carmina Gogaei crebro recitare Rotundae
Ingenium, mores, eloquiumque iuuat.
Quisquis auet veram complecti mente salutem,
Comparet hunc librum qui sine sorde fluit
Diuitie pereunt, validu^que quoque corpus honores
Florent doctrinae perpetuoque manent
Qui sapiat, librum claras qui continet istum
Virtutes querat, nam mala cuncta vetat.
Vade libelle igitur Gogei clara suppellex
Et monstres nomen traxeris vnde tuum.
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...):
(...).
Eadem Latin.
Non oculis ego te, clarissime Gogie, vidi,
Gogie natalis gloria magna soli:
Sed tua bella tamen lustraui epigrammata, quaeque
Aequent Chauceri scripta deserta senis.
Vidi and Signidici veneranda poaemata Vatis,
Sunt in maternos quae tibi versa sonos.
Omnia quae pulchre, Musisque fauentibus ipse
Scripsisti, Vatum munere digna sacro.
To the right Honorable Sir William Cecill Knighte, principal Secretary to the
Queens highness, and Master of her Majesty's Court of Wards and Liuereyes.
THe favorable accepting of my simple trauayles lately dedicated unto your
honor, has so much boldened and thorowelye encouraged me, that mawgre the
despite of most reproachful tongs, I have not feared to finish the course of my
long pretended race: with no less profit as I trust, unto a number, than
paynefull travail unto myself. Wherein if I had known at the first, as much
as since I have perfectly understood, neither had I as then taken upon me so
great an enterprise, nor since so rudely finished, the translation of so
eloquent a Poet. For when I first began to employ some part of my leisure
about it, making dilligente inquiry, I could learn of no man that ever had
attempted to english the same. So that perceiving my labor to be no hindraunce
to any other man's praise, and lamenting to see so Christian a writer to lie hyd
and unknown to the ignorant sort, I thought I should not do amiss, if all that in me lay I bestowed, in the albeit simple and slender, yet faithful and
true translation, of so virtuous a work. But since I have certaynely
understood, that when I first began to fall in hand wythall, three books
thereof were both eloquentely and excellently englished, by Master Smith, clark
unto the most honorable of the Queens Majesty's counsel. Whose doings, as in
other matters I have with admiration beheld, so in this I am well assured I
should with an amassed mind have seen: I would that either I had latelier
begone it, or else that he had fallen in hand sooner with it, whereby my gross
and homely style might have been no hindrance to the fruits of so pure a
pen. But since it was my fortune, so blindely to venture upon it, I trust my
travail shall never the more be envied. I could not (when I had long debated
ye matter with my self) find out a Poet more meet for the teaching of a
Christian life (an estate in these our days most miserably decayed) than this
no less learned than famous Italio^: Marcellus Pallingenius, a man of such
excellent learning and Godly life, that neither ye unquietness of his time
(Italy in those days raging with most cruel and bloody wars) ne yet the
furious tyranny of the Antichristian Prelate (under whose ambicious and
Tirannicall governance he continually lived) could once amase the Muse, or
hinder the zealous and virtuous spirit of so Christian a Soldier. I have many
times much mused with my self, how (living in so dangerous a place) he durst
take upon him so boldly to control the corrupt and unchristian lives of the
whole College of contemptuous Cardinals, the ungracious ouerseeings of
bloudthyrsty Bishops, the Panchplying practices of pelting Priours, the
manifold madness of mischeuous Monks, with the filthy fraternity of
flattering Friars. Which surely he durst never have done, but only that he was
heartened with a happy and heavenly spirit. Which notable audacitie of his was
wonderfully revenged by the malicious hands of such as felt themselves fretted
with his spiritual corsey. For when they had not power to execute their
tyranny upon his innocent body in time of his life, their mischievous malice
was no whit ashamed to consume with fire the blameless bones of so virtuous a
man: yea and that a great while after his death. Besides the reproving of the
lewd lives of the Clergy, he boldly inueyed against the graceless governance
of proud pompous Princes, ye licencious living of the riottous nobility, the
covetous catchings of greedy Lawyers, the ungodly gaynes of foolish Physicians,
and the corrupted consciences of deceytf^^ Artificers: affirming plainly, that
if they did not better beautify their christian names with a more christian
life, of so many thousands as have in vain receued that most holy sacrament of
sacred Baptism, there should scarce three aspire unto the enheritaunce of
Heavenly joys. What does your honor suppose this man would have written? Unto
how great a volume do you think his works would have amou^ted, if so that GOD
had appointed him to flourish at this present time in England, whereas pitifully
reigns such monstrous and horrible pride, such cancred and spiteful malice,
such false and feigned fre^dships, such lack of love and charity, such
professing of God in words, and denying him in works, as doubtless is not to
be found among the faythlesse Turks, miscreant Saraze^s, or supersticious
Jews: Better were it in my fansy not at al to profes his name, tha^ thus with
devilish life to make it be evil spoken of amongst the heathen. The Prophet
Esaias. 52.
says, Vae vobis propter quos nome^ meum male audit apud gentes. Vae qui
consurgitis etc. Esaias. 5.
It is not our christendom assuredly that living so unlike Christians shall
bring us to Heaven, as S. Chrysostom in these words does witness. Sin vero
ne tibi quidem ipse luce as, and ne propriam putredinem foetoremque detergas,
quibus te indicijs ego fidelem In Cap. 1. Mat. Ho: 4
potero agnoscere: an quia sacrati aquas fontis ingressus es? at hoc ipsu^ fit
tibi grauioris viatticu^ supplicij. I would therefore wish that we should not to
much presume of the security obtained by a Christian name, but that we should
with al our endeavor apply our selves to show such fruits as duty requires
in the followers of Christ. Whereby we should not only prevail against our
enemies, and stop the mouths of our slanderous adversaries, but also enjoy
a blessed and happy tranquillity in this world, and be assured to obtain the
promised pleasures in the world to come. For the teachinge whereof, I know no
man that has so much trauayled and perfectly profyted, as has this Poet,
which I here present unto your honor, about whom although I have lately ken
some pains, not enjoying all the while so quiet a mind as had been needful
for such a labor, nor having the familiar conference of any studious friends
whereby in some doubts I might better have been resolved. I am well assured I
shall receive for reward, the reprechfull reports of a number of infamous
tongs, as by the publishing of my first attempts I have been sufficiently
taught. What remedy? If this my travail shall find favor at the hands of
your honor and others of perfectness in judgment, I do little esteem the
fond surmisings of the scornful company, nor the rash report of so fond a
fellowship, aduising them rather to prove the like labor, than hawetyly to
reprove any well meaning mind. I have longer here continued my Barbarous style
than reason does allow: wherefore ceassing (for avoiding of tediousness) with
so imperfect an end, I most humbly beseechs your honor to take in good
part this so simple and slender a gift, which although it has escaped at
the first impression with a number of faults, I trust hereafter shall
perfectelye be purged. God long preserve your honor in prosperous estate.

Your Honors humble and faithful servant Barnabae Googe.

To the virtuous and frendely Reader.
WHat pleasure and profit the dilligent reading of virtuous Poets does
minister to the Godly and Christian mind, so evidently and plainly has
always appeared, that I need not to bestow any time about the declaring
hereof. Neither was the statety style of Heroical verse, only had in price and
estimation with the learned Greeks and ^l^quent Romans (with whom Poets were
always esteemed and carefully provided for,) but also it seems there was no
little accoumpte made, of the pleasant agreement of ^u^^ly measured words,
among those sacred Prophets that dire^ted the whole course and trade of their
life, to the pray^ng and pleasing of the almighty Lord. For as S. Hierome
testi^eth, the divine and notable Prophecies of Esaias, the Lamentation of
Jeremie, the Songs and Ballades of Salomen, the Psalter of David, and the book
of Hiob, were written by ye first auctours in perfect and pleasant Hexameter
verses. So that the divine and canonical volumes were garnished and set forth
with the sweet according tunes, and heavenly soundes of pleasant meter. Yet
will not the graceless company of our pernicious Hipocrites allow that the
Psalms of David (a most comfortable book) should be translated into English
meter. And why? Marry (say they) because they were only received to be
chau^ted in the Church, and not to be song in every Cobblers shop. O monstrous
and malicious infidels, do you so much disclose your cancred stomachs toward
the divine Majesty, that you ab horre to hear his glory and praise sounding
in ye mouth of a poor Christian artificer? May none of your sacred secrets
pass any farther than your solemn sinagogs? What say you to Chrysostom who
exhorted his audience in this sort?

Dicat vir aliqua eorum quae nunc hic sunt Homy. 2. in 1. Cap. Genesis
dicta, audiat aute^ Mulier, discant Pueri, discant and Familiares, fiatque
Domus Ecclesia, vt ^ffugetur Diabolus, in fugam vertatur malus ille Demon
inimicus salutis nostrae.

Let the goodman (says he) tell to his family some of these matters, whereof
I have here entreated. Let the wife give care, let the children learn, let the
residewe be instructed, and let the house be made a Church, that the Devil may
be put to flight, that the wicked spirit and enemy of our salvation may be
chased away. If you had lived in these days Master Doctor, for your so saying
you should have been counted an Heritike, as a good Scholar alleging of late
days to Sir John lacklattin of the country, the auctority of sain^t Paul:
will thou have it (says the Parson) S. Paul was an Heretic and so art thou.
I assure you yt Devil has a faith and so have you. To return to thee,
loving and friendly reader: Seeing that with these ancient fathers and holy
Prophets, this kind of writing in verse was so highly esteemed, that the
Godly instructions of the Scripture, and the comfortable prophecies of our
merciful redeemer, were in this sort of writing uttered, yea and since there
was such a grace given unto it that the Holy Ghost did therein prophecy of
Christ by the mouths of sinful Pagans, as it appears by the prophecy of
Uirgill.

Vltima Cumaei iam venit carminis aetas
Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur ordo.
Iam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regnae Eglog. 4.

Iam noua progenies caelo demittitur alto.
Since this (I say) appears, be not so straight of judgment as I know a
number to be that can not abide to read anyething written in English verse,
which now is so plenteously enriched with a number of eloquent writers, that
in my fansy it is little inferior to the pleasant verses of the ancient
Romans. For since the time of our excellent countreyman sir Geffray Chaucer
who lives in like estimation with us as did old Ennius with the Latins.
There has flourished in England so fine and filed phrases, and so good and
pleasant Poets as may counter^ayle the doings of Virgill, Ovid, Horace,
Iuuenall, Martial, Lucan, Perseus, Tibullus, Catullus, Seneca, and Propertius.
Amongst whom (as most inferior to them all) I have for thy commodity brought
into English verse this virtuous Poet Palingen^. And though I have not so
eloque^tly Englished it as a number that may better tha^ I would have done, and
as the worthynesse of the autour seems to require, yet have I faithfully and
truly translated it: giving in some places verse for verse, and word for word:
in other places (where I have not precisely observed so strick^e an order) yet
have I no whit swarued from the perfect mind of the au^oure, to the entente
that with these sundry kinds of translations I might please every head. And if
it so happen to fall out that I satisfy not thine expectation, yet accept good
Reader my good will therein, which only means to please and profit thee.
For which I accoumpt my trauayles reco^penced, if so be they shall be
thankfully received of thee. And for the other sort, I say unto them with
Martial.

Qui ducis vultus, and non legis ista libenter
Omnibus inuidias, liuide, ne^o ti^i.
Fare thou well most heartyly in Christ.
Faults escaped in the Auctors absence.
Letter. Leaf. Side. Line. Faults. Corrected. U 7 2 5 when God, When that U 7
2 16 and left at last U 7 2 20 nygher Myser CC 3 2 24 their they CC 4 2 17 not
no CC 6 2 24 leave out but with stroke of Tortoys lost his life. CC 8 2 15 with
mighty fall. etc. CC 8 2 25 Poets Prophets FF 7 2 14 doubtful doleful GG 2 2
11 beasts hoastes HH 5 1 12 Belbowes bellows his right KK 5 1 18 his horn
horn.

The first Book of Pallingen, entitled Aries.
MY mind with fury fierce in flamd
of late I know not how,
Does burn Parnasus hills to see,
adournd with Laurel bow,
The Camps so clear of Castaly,
where Muses sweet do sing:
The town Cyrrha does me delight,
and trees that ever spring.
What darkness oh shall I now fly?
to me appears plain
The blissful beams of Eous bright,
the day returns again.
O darkness fade thy way from hence,
hyde thou thy self in hell.
The love of Muse and hie Iehoue,
does both within me dwell.
And virtue does not labor fear,
the way though hard it be,
O Phoebus father Poets help,
disclose the doubts to me,
With Aganippes wholesome fode,
replenish thou my days:
Thy temple eke to come unto,
do thou direct my ways.
Defend me from the common sort,
that seek me to disprayse.
Not worse vnlikde now shall I be,
if that thou wylt me bless,
That I thy priest unknown and new,
my self to labor dress.
Thou liftest men from base estate,
to honors them to call,
Without thy grace, the wit of man,
would perish sone and fall:
His voice and al would ware full horce
nothing would swetely sound,
All sweet and pleasant melody,
would fall unto the ground.
And if thou will me favor now,
I will ascend the Skies,
And there thy hie and Godly works
contemplate with mine eyes.
Oh favor me, thou Phoebus hie,
take thou from ground away:
Thy Poet prostrate here on earth,
if that by fates I may.
And you (O Nymphs) of Castaly,
if with unfeigned heart
I have approcht your learned doors,
if riottes fylthy art
Could not wtdraw my youthful years,
from honoring of your name,
Ne fylthy lust of beastliness
could ever me defame:
Then let my fame go fly abroad,
least that unworthily,
I shall be after thought to live,
and so my name shall dye.
For hope of glory and renown,
a man for to obtain,
Has caused men in vertuousnesse
to take both care and pain.
And thou O famous worthy Prince
that Hercule have to name,
Amongs the doughty Italian Dukes,
of most renowned fame.
And of the hie Estensian blood,
the chief illuster flower:
Whom Pallas in Parnafus caves,
has nourisht every hour,
Whom Muses nine with sacred milk
from tender years have fed,
Whereby a fame they hope to have
that never shall be dead:
Of Cyrrha eke the Laurel tree,
shall spring they trust again,
Though Mars does let in spite of them,
and seeks to retain
Your noble heart into his tents
by all the means he may:
In tents where honor you shall have
that never shall decay,
Whereas your arms as right requires
shall richly decked be
With triumphs due to such a Prince
of lusty Laurel tree.
Draw nere and with a joyful face
thy Poet look upon,
Willing to tread unproven paths
that have not yet been gone.
And shewe-thy favor to a wight
that now abashed is:
So may Ferrarra see thee long
in perfect joy and blis,
Till after this thy joyful life,
a long and happy time,
Departing from the earth thou shall
the starry heaven clime.
And if my Fatal years be long,
in time shall come the day,
When as your grace and worthy deeds
I shall at large display,
When Indie aye with Tartesse brinkes
thy name shall cause to sound:
Thy fame shall fly in every place
of Hiperbores ground.
In utter parts of Afric to,
you shall be known by me:
Then I with greater rage of Muse,
encouraged shall be,
And shall declare unto al men,
how that you do embrace
Justice, and eke what Godliness
and faith is in your grace,
What counsel does in you abound,
what valiant worthy power,
How liberal with gentleness,
you are at every hour:
By me shall also wonder much,
the world in every place,
To see what wit and manners mylde,
consists in your grace.
But now the things that I you give,
receive with gentle heart,
And take my present doing here,
a while as in good part.
My mind desires sore to write
of much and diverse things,
And not always to stay at one,
but as the sprite me brings
I go now here, now there I swim
amid the waters deep,
Sometime I toss the boistrous waves
sometime to shore I creep.
And though sometimes by reasons rule
I shall assay to find,
The secret ways by nature hyd,
and bring them unto mind:
Those things yet will I follow most,
whereby a profyt shall
Arise, and add a holy life,
to men that be mortal.
A life alas now banished clean,
if I the truth may say
In this our age, than which a worse
was never seen the day.
Such things I say, that shall expel
the vices of the mind:
A thing that more the Muses fyttes,
than this I can not find.
This makes a man for to be sound,
of wit both prompt and fine,
Although by nature he be dull,
and do no whitte decline
Ungodly, and neglecting right,
that horedome does not spare,
Or on whom earthly avarice,
has caused for to care,
Or he whom envy in his heart,
does evermore possess,
Unconstant, or a lying man,
or takes in drink excess,
In fine what ever vice he has,
by this he may forsake,
The hurtful harms of perverse mind,
a Godly life to take.
This worthy men does cause to be,
and fyt for honors hie:
Which to themselves, their house, and realm
can council prudently,
And unto doubtful things they can
bring present remedy.
So much the face of beauty fair,
ought not esteemed to be,
The pleasant eyes with shining locks,
each part of royal blee,
As manners well composed, and
a pure and honest mind,
Where virtue bears so great a stroke
that vice is hard to find.
Does not the righteous man or he,
that virtues much does love,
Live al in mirth, and hopes for help
of only God above?
He nothing cares when whispring worde^
be closely spoke in ear,
When judge, or King, does for him call
his heart does nothing fear.
Contrariwise the wicked man,
defamed fears to be,
And when the lightnings thu^der rores,
then gilty trembles he.
If men do chance in ears to round,
or whisper when they walk,
Alas then cries he to himself,
of me these men do talk,
What shall I do? the Judge or King
does call, and shall I go,
Or rather fly the perils great
of wretched life? now lo,
By fyxed law of GOD does fear
the wicked men torment,
And though sometime the evil man
to mirth does seem as bent,
As Strongilos amyd the seas,
yet does he boil within,
Or Etna when his flaming darts,
Pyrackmon does begin.
But were it better to declare,
with thousand ships assaylde
The cursed chance of Pergamus
that folishly bewaylde
The periurde chance of Sinons deed?
or else Ogiges town,
Which by the cruel chance of war,
was raced clean adowne?
Or shall I praise, as Poets wont,
some man with forging lies?
And judge a color fair to be,
contrary to mine eyes?
Or were it better here to feign,
how Dedalus did fly,
The woeful hap of Icarus
that fell out of the Sky?
The bodies often transfourmed aye,
of Gods and eke of men:
And so delude the idle ears,
with trifles of my pen?
Or had I better to declare
the wanton toys of youth,
And slander Gods with profane acts
which is a greater ruth?
For what do these our frantic heads
now fear at any hour?
The Gods (we say) with lecherous lust,
both boys and maids defloure.
A hoar in heavens hie to be,
a lechoure to they say:
O shame, is this a Godliness,
or right to use such way?
Are these the thanks we owe to God?
be these our odoures sweet?
Be these the duties that we owe,
or praises for him meet?
What thing will now the wit of man
forbear to feign or lie:
By means whereof they may obtain
in sin a liberty?
Of writers vain both lewd and ill,
O rude unruly route,
You need to take Elleborus
to pourge your humors out.
To you I speak that others harm
whose tongs do spare no man:
If lightning should you all consume,
what marvel were it than?
Show me the cause both night and day,
why do you take such pain?
Is it but only for your selves?
why then no praise you gain.
For he that only private wealth
regards always still,
And laughes to scorn an others harm
whilste he enioyes his will.
A savage beast by right desert,
deserves calde to be:
And not a man for to be namde,
for so to write ought we,
That men may get some good thereby,
and not complain to spend:
Their times in trifling tricks and toys
that have no certain end.
And first ought to be known that we,
do good in three divide:
In pleasure and utility,
and honesty chief beside.
Some one of these or greater part,
may Poets always use:
So that the bonds of honesty,
to break they shall refuse.
But O what titles and what crown,
did he deserve to have,
Which things not only vain and naught
good fruit that never gave,
But wrote such things as might corrupt
the life of any man,
And make him worser ten to one,
than when he first began?
He left behind him monuments,
of wanton wicked ways:
And left such foolish doting things,
to men of latter days.
O Lord how much does wanton words
to wicked life entice
And with a fervent poison great,
does draw men unto vice.
From ears a wanton wicked voice,
dare pearce the secret thought.
And unto mischief move thereby,
the members bent to naught.
A noble man such things delight,
(some man perhaps will say:)
Who in his house a lusty route
does keep in rich array,
Whom for to fear, excessive goods
compels a man thereto,
With any part of worthy wit
who never had to do.
What then may these be suffered thoe,
or praysd, because they please
The rich, or else the noble men
that always live in ease?
Not so, for what a sort there be
of twolegd Asses clothed
In Gold and Silk, and Purple fair
to al men is not showed.
There be, there be full many now,
whom Pearls have puffed with pride,
And whom the Asians have beset
with Silk on every side,
Whose fingers fair with rings of gold
be dashed and decked about,
With precious stones and pearls of price
that India sends out.
Those men a man would almost swear,
that Plato they excel,
Or Socrates who (Phoebus judge)
of wisdom bare the bell.
And yet these Princely painted walls
do naught within contain,
A blather full implete with wind springs
they may be termed plain.
Where Fortune fawnes, there pleasure
and pleasure brings folly:
And so the light of reasons rule
is darkened utterly,
Whereby it happes that seldom wise,
these children chance to be.
To suffer pain for virtues sake,
who will, if so be he
Have no reward? reward who sekes,
but he whom need constraynes?
The rich man follows joyful things,
and lives void of pains,
He hates the prycking thorny ways,
the clyffes both sharp and sour,
By which we do assay to clime,
to Lady learnings tower.
I can not stay my self as now,
when anger co^mes upon,
But needs I must defye both verse,
and Poets al as one,
When boys we see decline to naught,
whom masters do embewe,
With verses filthy to be namde,
which most they should eschew.
Their first possessed shame fastness,
to see them clean forsake:
And eke how apt and prone they be
a noughty way to take,
And foster mischief so in youth,
that he may always dwell
In them, whereby they may prepare
in age a way to hell.
But yet it does me good to see,
how hoping al for praise,
They get themselves immortal shame,
that never more decays.
For who will judge them void of vice,
or that they liude not so,
As they themselves did give precepts
to others for to go?
The talk it self does well declare,
the nature of the mind,
And every man does most frequent
things propre to his kind.
Of Oxen, rake, and culter sharp
the plowmans ^ong does walk,
Of Sail and Cable, Mast and Ore,
is all the Seamans talk.
Of Horses, harness, Spear and Shield,
the Captain still will boste:
So bawdy mates of bawdy things,
their tongs do clatter most.
I warn you syrs above the rest,
of youth that takes the cure,
Whose part it is the tender minds
of boys for to allure,
To bertue and to Godliness,
like wax do them prepare,
Hate you the wicked works of those,
for greater matters care.
Read not such things as are but vain
unworthy to be told:
But teach the worthy histories
of ancient fathers old.
Herein let children nouseled be,
let these be borne away:
Here of may spring a Godly fruit,
direct their life that may.
They show what things we follow should
and what we should reject:
And fables al among the rest
we may not well neglect.
For oftentimes a Comody,
may wholesome doctrine bring:
And monish men by pleasant words,
to leave some noughty thing.
There be I grant some Poets works
not altogether vain,
Which with a plesaunt sugared style,
proceed from sobre brain.
These things do help, and void of vic
these works do profit much:
In youth bring up your scholars with
none other food but such.
And when their young and tender age
they once have passed out:
Then may they safely void of harm,
go range the fields about,
And gather flowers where they list,
for danger is away.
But now a while for to discuss,
I think it best assay,
Of which of these is needful most,
or most to be esteemed:
The man that good and honest is,
or he that well is learned.
The good or else the learned man,
of two which is the best:
Learning is hie, beco^mes the meke,
and does the proud infest.
It does refuse the belly gods,
and such as sleep has trainde:
Without long time and labor great,
it will not be obtainde.
This City rules and moves Mars,
and this can wars refell:
It shows the earth and goodly stars
and sickness does expel.
This teaches figures fair to frame,
of sundry sorce and kind:
This teaches us to number well,
and music calls to mind.
This does ascend the heavens and
bring hidden things to light:
No perfect man without this same,
may called be of right.
Unlike to beasts and like to gods,
this causes us to be:
Sometime and yet of little price,
his virtue lost we see.
As often as with the dregs of vice,
defylde he does put on:
Deformed hew amid the durte,
as does the Jasper stone.
Or as the Sun behind the cloud,
or shadow of the Moon:
Ne is it only vile in sight,
but hurtful very soon.
For if a wicked man it have,
then may it be comparde:
Unto a frentyke fool that has
a sword without regard.
Whereby he many does destroy,
and runs more astray:
But he that void of harm and hurt,
to live does well assay.
Observing well the law of God,
and of the higher power:
And sin does fly as open throat,
of dragon to devour.
The sheep, the moyle or horses kept,
whose office is to see:
Though he be one, if learning lack,
estemde he ought to be.
Such one I say no man nor God,
can ever well despise:
But he that virtue does envy,
at least that is not wise.
For who but such will not him love,
and worthily commend:
That fears God and righteousness,
observes to his end.
Whom gold can never overcome,
who wills no man's wrong:
Who helps the poores afflicted case,
who flies the naughty throng.
He feeds the humble and the meke
ill tongues he does reject:
No man to hurt he does rejoice,
but rather to protect.
And that which is the worthyest praise
at every time he can:
In every thing a modestye,
use, happy is that man.
More happy yet I do him judge,
that does in both excel:
Who that is good and learned to,
a crown deserves well.
For other men he far exceedes,
as gold does copper pass:
And as the flaming Piropus,
excelles the duskey glass.
And seldom sin thou shall discern,
a man of learned fame:
At least not much, unto the rude,
there is no heed of shame.
But headlong rushe they into vice,
which they forbidden be:
And holy laws be laughed to scorn,
by foolish fond decree.
Like as the blind cannot beware,
but fall in ditches deep:
As men amid the dark be hurt,
when Proserpine does sleep.
So mind of man, which is but blind
take learning once away:
In every vice it does not doubt
to fall and run astray.
Except it be comprest by fear,
of pain that may ensue:
No things but those that pleasant be,
it judges right or true.
Yet many times it may be seen,
that nature does supply:
The masters room and gives grace,
in youth abundantly.
Whereby that school did never teach,
by grace they may obtain:
What lets such to lead a life,
as virtue teaches plain.
The greater thanks be due to him,
for evermore to give:
Whose book does show a Method true
declaring how to live.
O famous Gods of hie renoume,
which rule the forked hill:
To whom my years I always gave,
and dedicate them still.
If that such weighty things a wretch,
may safely you desire:
In this my work I take in hand,
your aid I now require.
Let not dishonor me deface,
nor in his blasing rage:
Let limping Uulcan me destroy,
at any time or age.
And thus an end the ram that kepes
the entrance of our door:
Does leave his place unto the bull,
that hastes here before.
The book approaching next at hand,
does will me to have done:
In have and biddes me finishe now,
that I of late begone.
The Second book entitled Taurus.
LOng time yt have thee rested well,
my boat in pleasant baye:
Now time us biddes to hoyse up sails
and ancour up to way.
The washing winter now is fled,
the hoary snowes be gone:
From down the hills they fast distill,
that once they fell upon.
The earth again does florishe green,
the trees repair their spring:
With pleasant notes the Nitingale,
begins new to sing.
With flowers fresh their heads be decked
the Fairies dance in field:
And wanton songs in mossye dens,
the Drids and Satirs yield.
The wynged Cupide fast does cast,
his darts of gold yframed:
And lusty youth with pleasant heat,
has fervently inflamed.
Now may we safely wander out,
amid the waters plain:
The floudes be calm ye western wind
is present here again.
O fool why art thou now afraid,
the air is fair and bright:
And Atlas daughters risyng up,
persuade thy course of right.
For idleness what kind of praise
can happen unto thee:
To stouthfulnesse no good reward,
may well ascribed be.
Lift up thy heart and courage eke,
be bold and of good chere:
For fortune most does favor those,
that all things least do fear.
To fearful folks at any time,
she (...)umphe has denaide:
But as I guess the monsters teeth,
does make thee sore afraid.
Great shame it is that virtue should,
for monsters hyde their face:
Go to therefore leave of thy lettes,
and walk the depth apace.
The king and Lord and mighty power,
that rules the world so fast:
Who with a beck the golden stars,
shall govern whilste they last.
Who made the earth inhabited
with beasts of sundry sight:
And diverse fish within the sea,
to draw their vital sprite.
Least destitute of dwellers be,
those elements they should:
And only man among the rest,
discern he reason would.
And unto him he granted speech,
where beasts be dumme of sound:
Declining down their bodies great,
do lycke the massey ground.
With reason he has under brought,
the strongest beasts of might:
The Lion fierce, the Tygre swift,
alone has put to flight.
The serpents though their bodies foul
with poison do abound:
Do stand in awe and fear him to,
when that they hear his sound.
The mo^struous mole ye thurlpole great,
of mighty form and strength:
In Occean sea does give him place,
when he does walk at length.
Take him away what were the earth?
a place with briars grown:
And would bring forth no kind of corn
vntilde or else unsown.
He cities built and ordned laws.
whereby they ruled be:
With temples trymmed for their state,
the Gods adourned he.
Full many arts he searched forth,
and instruments he found:
Which like the lightning flashe and flame,
and like the thunders sound.
Wherein the fire fast inclosde,
inforceth all he may:
Out of his mouth to rumble out,
the pellet far away.
Whereby the Towers hye be bette,
and walls of every town:
His strength not able to abide
come topsy turuey down.
And he that hears far away,
the bouncing of these blows:
With dreadful noise ye thu^der thumpes
as present there he trowes.
Unhappy had you been O Gods,
if in Phlegreus ground:
Whereas with giantes huge you fought
such weapons had been found.
He found out ships whereby a man,
to pass the seas may know:
And wander far whereas he list,
if wind at will do blow.
In places far abroad and nie,
to Tytan in the East:
And where the Su^ne does slip sometime
and fall under the west.
And in the North whereas the Bear,
her color clear does give:
And in the other part again,
where men there be that live.
Whose feet contrary quite to ours,
do always use to tread:
And like to fall their heels aloft,
do downewarde hang their head,
And though he do excel in wit,
and vigor of the mind:
So much that well he may be thought
to come of God his kind.
Yet knowethhe not nor seeks to know,
a thing to badde to tell:
How for to live, what ways to fly,
or what to follow well.
O mortal breasts where darkness blind
does evermore abound:
And eke O minds where foolishness,
may always well be found,
By wicked ways they run astray,
and few alas do know:
Which way their journey well to take
or where in safe to row.
Whereby the chief and happiest life,
in time they may obtain:
The knotty science of tho laws,
will never show it plain.
Nor he that can in medicine skyll,
in eloquence or grammar:
But only wisdom must the way
detect, the chief defender.
Of man and ruler of his life,
which if the Lord m^^ give:
And if the systers three me let,
until my time to live.
What kind of thing is blessed life,
I will my self entreat:
And how it may be got although,
it be a labor great.
The greatest part of men do think,
felicity to stand:
In purses puffed up with pens,
and so much gold in hand.
To have as in the Lidius streams,
among the sand does grow:
Or else as much as Tagus up,
continually does throw.
To have so many acres of
good ground and pastors ^^aine:
As he has hairs unto his head,
of men a bushing train.
Of beasts so huge a drove to have,
as Polyphemus not:
At any time did foster up,
amid the pleasant plot.
Of Sycyly as never had
the shepeheard Aristeus:
As never took away by force,
the man that hight Tyrinthus.
With orchardes fair as ever had,
Alcinous the King:
And as the systers fair did hold,
by force of cruel sting.
Of dragon ugly to behold,
for to possess alone:
With houses hye adourned fair,
with crust of Marble stone.
These are the things that every man,
does now a days desire:
Which nature careful for her son,
does instantly require.
With earnest prayer to the Gods,
these things who does possess:
The common sort beleues he lives,
in perfect blessedness.
What Hiders great in flowers lurk,
the blockheads do not know:
Ne yet how many pricking thorns
among the Roses grow.
For needs he must no remedy,
that riches will obtain:
Both night and day be vered sore,
with cares and cruel pain.
His luck uncertain every hour,
now this, now that he wayeth,
No sooner sittes he down to meat,
but avarice him frayeth.
No meats almost do please his mouth
he hastes to forsake:
The table yet vnsatisfyde,
for filthy lucre sake.
And little rest the wretched soul,
does take at any night:
Sometimes on side, sometimes on face,
sometimes he turns upright.
He tosseth round about the bed,
like as the weighty stone:
That Sysyphus continually,
does toss and turn alone.
What he has done the day before,
he muttereth in his mind:
And what the next day he may do,
he museth for to find.
Behold (says he) my catraile dies,
to morrow if I may:
Some fother I shall seek to get,
O cursed wynters day.
How much this cold has hurt mi beasts
full sore am I deluded:
My bailey and my shepeherd eke,
have both me foul misused.
My fold the wolves, O woeful chance,
alas have broken in:
And now my cattle to destroy,
the souldyer does begin.
He has destroide my tenements,
by flame consumed quite:
My corn and now my vineyarde to,
he scorcheth down a right.
My detter fled from hence away,
my money with him gone:
No faith there is that fears God,
I think there be not one.
The world is naught but great disceit^
O Lord he was estemde:
An honest faithful man and true
but all is not as it semde.
That rule is not to be obserude:
to trust a man by face:
But wherefore should I now lament,
my ship returns a pace.
And home she bringes I leap for joy,
such wares as will away:
Both pepper spice and franckincense,
with sylke and amber aye.
With clothes that Sydon sends for the
and wares of diverse kind:
Which through ye waves of surging seas
she brings forth of Inde.
Whom if the great Symplegades,
had chaunste to burst a sunder:
Or Scilla with the Caphare rock,
the seas had suncke her under.
Then should I fill my house alas
with great complaynt and cries:
The tears would ouerflow my breast,
that issued from my eyes.
I will no money lack I trow,
till life begin to starte,
Corn bears to low a price what then
of oils I make my mart.
I must go delue I must go sow,
and harrow well my corn:
I must go build and see my vines,
well trimmed cut and shorn.
This will I bye this will I sell,
I will receive and pay:
My dettes no otherwise this wretch,
is tossed then ball in play.
The multitude beholding hye,
is used to be cast:
Now here now there among the croude
is driven very fast.
Some one does strike it with his hands,
some other with his feet:
In joy in grief in fear and hope
so does he always fleet.
As seas be wont when winds do blow
an Irion is he just:
Who with a cloud as has been told,
perfourming filthy lust.
Begat a son of double form
wherefore he then was judged,
Of gods upon a snaky wheel,
for ever to be turned.
For what is riches but a thing,
which aptest we may like:
Unto a cloud which Bore as if
descending hap to strike.
Thou shall behold whereof it came,
to smoke resolved than:
Of riches monsters he begot,
that have the face of man.
Then outward face of welthy man:
what thing does more excel?
But when the course of all his life,
we once have marked well.
We shall behold the hinder parts,
to differ far away:
From those that we did first discern,
whom fortune without stay,
Does turn about upon her wheel,
the carkes and cares be snakes,
Which always gripe and gnaw his hea(...)
with sorrows that he takes.
The rich man either knows or not,
what goods he does possess:
If not what help they then thereby
no good ne yet distress.
He does receive but as a man,
that riches is without:
If he do know he either loves,
or loves them not no doubt.
If he them hate, why keeps he them,
what joy takes he thereby:
Such as who drinks the juice of grapes
and wine does clean defye.
If he them love he them regardes,
and seeks to defend:
Them, and to keep the sorrows much,
and labors till his end.
It does him much unquiet when,
He thinks for to see:
Some harm approaching to his wealth,
and vexed most is he.
When any part thereof by loss
does escape out of his hand:
As many times for to be fall,
by needful rule does stand.
When nothing long in state abides,
thou shall behold and see:
So many harms as ever seen,
in have at hand to be.
When all is done how much the more
of goods he does possess:
So much the more of carke and care,
shall ever him oppress.
What shall I here declare or show,
the dangers incident:
That he does pass by seas and land,
his living to augment.
From thieves by land from thieves by seas
full often he flies fast:
And yet for all the wyles he has,
he taken is at last.
And often his bowels do become,
a pray unto the wolf:
Or Fishes foul do him devour,
up swallowed in the golfe.
And often he whom worldly wealth,
had moved to be bold:
Is forced under his masters yoke,
his captives neck to hold.
At home at boorde ne yet in bed,
he cannot safely be:
But poison strong they will him give,
whom least mistrusteth he.
Or else the wicked hands of some,
unthrifty servant will:
In bed a stepe and snorting fast,
him quickly s^ey and kill.
As fattest beasts in sacrifice,
be soonest ever slain:
And as the worthiest tree is first,
deprived of his grain.
And as the grape is first destroyde,
that sweetest is of wast:
With flies and bees and other worms
that always them do wast.
So he whom nature most has lent,
is always most intrapt:
And evermore in dangers great,
is readiest to be clapped.
Note well the crafty wit and head,
of Dionise the King:
Behold good man and art thou blessed,
what else thou lackit nothing.
Thou lackst no meat you lackst no drink,
thou lackst no pleasant boys:
Thou lackst no scepter nor no crown,
thou want no wished boys.
With glistering gold and precious stones,
behold thou do abound:
A sword but lo hangs over thy head,
that will the wretch confound.
With envy richesse eft be vexed,
all things of good estate:
Does malice harm and happy things
it evermore does hate.
So dear (O misers) do you seek,
of gold the wicked mine:
Whereby your hearts may always prick
the sisters Pales^ine.
And sooner down descend the pit,
of ghastly Plutoes reign:
Was not the gifts that Bacchus gave,
of gold to Mydas gain.
Of all men laughed to scorn by right,
to whom thou Phoebus much,
An angered gave an Asses ^ares,
all things quoth Myde I tutch.
Be gold I wyshe and by and by,
he asked his fatal end:
For down his gredy g^^ping guts,
no meat could then discende.
Such fortune ha^^ thou sparing wre^ch
the more thou ha^t of goods:
The more thou lackste as Tantalus,
does thirst among the ^^oudes,
If thou migh^t all things free o(...)e,
thou would thy self require:
Would thou but take yt should suffyce
excess or else desire.
This one does hurt the other mean,
all men may soon obtain:
For nature with a little thing,
contented does remain:
Except that headlong ^aine to vice,
i^ does repugne again.
The chiefest fruits of seas and wood,
to rich men's boardes be brought:
There lacks no Hare no goat nor Heart
no ^id no Bore nor ought.
Amongst the flock of flittering fowls,
the Throstell fat and round:
The Partrige, Colmouse, nor ye birds,
that bredes in Colchis ground.
With Capons great and mighty Doves,
and Turbots in be brought:
The Lopster, Lamprey and the Shrimpe,
and Mugil fat is caught.
The fish that took his name of gold,
the chopping Dy^^er new:
Which Cizicus does foster up,
amid his seas so blewe.
With many more that seems hard,
in verse for to declare:
And wines yt may with falerne fi^loes,
and N^^^are sweet compare.
But now I ask and will this wretch,
all this himself devour:
I think not so for if he would,
it semes not in his power.
And if he might his belly sure
would burst a sonder thoe:
And swollen to tomb with roaring route
him following should he go.
For he that does his stomach charge,
with more than will suffice:
Is hurt and then phisicions help,
with groaning voice he cries.
Then up he throws and all his house,
does filthy stincke possess:
Whereby him fervent fevers vex,
and humors sharp oppress.
What sickness great excess does bread,
no man there is but knows:
What hurts by to much drink let down
within the body grows.
Wherefore he must be modest needs,
of much and little take:
Who that before thapointed time,
sweet life will not forsake:
Nor more than does yt pore he must,
his hungered body s^ake.
With purple fair and clothe of gold,
the rich man is arrayed:
His gorgeous shirt does cast a show,
with sylke and ^uerlayde.
About his head he wears aye,
the fleece of S^ithian ^ow:
And Jewels fair about his neck,
of price he wears but now.
Are these of greater force for ^o
expel the bitter cold:
Than if in garments made of wolle,
thy body were infolde.
Or does the wouen web of ^^axe,
not so repulse the heat:
When as ye Sun does fervent flame
amid the Lion great?
Or when the raging dog the fields,
of green does quite defeat.
As if the fine and tender sylke,
enclosde thee round about:
But thou will say he is estemde,
whom gorgeous gear settes out.
Unto him passing by the way,
the people ducke and rise:
And only he is counted then,
both noble good and wise.
And worthy worship to receive,
and friendship for to have:
No ^eede at all they take of him,
whose garments be not brave.
The common people laugh to see,
his cote then worn to naught:
Though thou should Tully represent,
whose eloquence was thought.
For to excel all Italye,
or else Demosthenes:
Whose famous voice the Athens men,
did wonder at in plees.
Or if thou had as great a gift,
as Maro had in verse:
Or could the ancient Homers tunes
celestial well rehearse.
For all this same yet should not thou
the price of praise obtain:
But as re^^ct of every man,
thou shall receive disdain.
In vain thou shall behold the hew,
of Ganymedes face:
In vain and often thou shall desire,
thy damsel to embrace:
If that with vile apparel thou
do run the poor man's race.
I not deny that clothing fair,
esteemed ought to be:
But if the mind does virtues lack,
with vices eke agree.
Thy beauty all biddes then adewe
and glory leaves thee quite:
And every man that knows thee well,
will have thee in dyspite.
They will thee floute behind thy back,
and grievous mocks thee give:
Thy servant to that of thy food,
has always used to live,
If that he know thee for to be,
a gredy Churl or such:
As cruel is of hauty mind,
or uses wine to much.
Or one that lacks wit he will,
regard thee then but light:
And grudging efte these words will he
unto himself resight.
O such a master fortune false,
why did thou me give?
Me under such a master long,
shall fates enforce to live?
Can other men commend him then,
whose servants so despise:
But if thou valiant be and just,
both sober sad and wise.
If so be that, that learning great,
does cause thee to excel:
Then to thy worship does agree,
all kind of garments well.
And no man will thee then despise,
except that he be mad:
And first whatsoever that thou art,
desirous to be had.
In honor to be praised much,
and much to be beloved:
Embracing thou virtue fly thou vice,
and that of right reproved.
May bring the aucthour to a shame,
beware thou not commit:
For often the common people ^ude,
do use as void of wit.
The noble virtue to despise,
if so be that they see:
With little spot of any vice,
defiled her to be.
But what is he upon the earth,
that lives void of crime:
And from the true and beaten way
departs not sometime?
Or does not swerve or run astraye,
from out the ruled line?
But he that least and seldom sins,
him best we may defyne.
But greatest grace has such a one,
that learnedly and wise:
All things he speaks with order just,
can well himself devise.
To wise and filed speech may be,
great force and strength assynde,
Tt diverse passions does provoke,
and gouernes well thy mind.
Much more will this than costly clothe,
set forth thy worthy name:
Use not the love of boys take heed,
such love is sinful shame.
For children have no love ne wit,
no reason faith nor trust:
A vengeance light on him I wish,
that joys in such a lu^^.
If that the pleasant portrature
of maids do thee delyght:
Go take a wife thou nedest not lack,
a ^ormouse for the night.
What had thou rather fool to wyshe,
and hope for things denayde:
When as with easier medicine thou
may have thy grief alayde?
Perchance for this yet riches are,
to be desired plain:
Whereby a man may sooner so,
to virtue hye attain.
If void of money clean thou art,
no man will take the pains:
Thee to enstruct for teachers sure,
require no little gains.
Nor little price will thee suffice,
thy self with books to store:
Whereby thou may apply thy self,
to Lady learnings lore.
Lest poverty with other cares,
does occupy thy head:
And so from learning draw thy mind,
with other business lead,
O lord how hard a thing it is,
how few does God permit:
To fly from base and poor estate,
in honors hye to sit.
How seldom does the sely soul,
ascend to honors hye:
And more besides what is his life,
to death and eke how nigh.
How much to be despised tho,
when pleasure none his mind,
Does ease, amongst his travails great
when he no joys can find.
When never cares absentes themselfes
with griefs when all habounde:
Yet better pass the Stigian lake,
and feed the gredy hounde.
And mixed be with shrikyng souls,
then never joy to find:
^n happy things when never mir^he,
shall glad thy wretched mind.
For to this wretch what joy at all,
or pleasure can remain:
That lackes both meat and drink full of^,
sometime his bed again.
Sometime he lacks co^ee and cloak,
and often his to^s be spyde:
From out his clouted sh^es to pepe,
where seames sit ga^ing wide.
With pain draws on his drudging life,
much less he able is:
Those things to haunt ye here d^^ bring
a mortal man to bliss.
But he that ha^^ the golden mines,
in him these things do ^^owe:
And every thing he straight obtaines,
whereat he bendes his how.
Such rule and swaye has money now^
such force in every place:
That nothing long she will permit,
for to resist her grace.
From hie she raceth hills adowne,
and valleys up does hoyse:
If that therefore with swifty course,
of dogs he does rejoice
To take the Heart the Goat or Wolf
the flighty flying Hares:
If birds to take or fish deceive,
with hooks and nets or snares.
If for to serve in Uenus court,
if meat or drink delight,
If quiet rest, if Lu^e or Harp,
him please or songs to shright:
All these the rich man does possess,
through mighty moneys might.
New hark again what I shall say,
^o this in contrary:
If any man desire ^o learn,
he shall i^ soon come by.
So that his mind ^e constant thoe,
and fears not to tread:
The sharp and crabbed thorny ways,
to virtue that do lead.
If money lack what then perforce,
let household stuff be sold:
With house and all and meddowe to,
how may my life then hold?
Then shall I be constraynd to beg,
and walle^ up to take:
Far better wretch it is to beg,
when learning shall thee make.
Like to the heaven saints above,
than if thou should possess:
The Persians herds and droues of beasts
with all their welthinesse.
Believe not thou the judgment blind,
of rude and common sort:
No more who can than beasts discern,
the truth or it report.
If thou be wise, mark what I say,
in mind and print it sure:
Excepting vet tue nothing is,
that here may long endure.
For riches fade and form and strength
and honor eke does fall:
And virtue only does remain,
in strength and ever shall.
Which never fortune may suppress,
nor age can take away:
I never saw it yet nor thoe,
believe it well I may.
The virtuous man for hunger ^^eru^^,
or left to beg his bread:
Though fortune sometime does assay,
him for to ouertread.
Yet veertue hastes fast anon,
and learning does defend:
His clients nor does suffer them,
their years in care to spend.
But offers them a boorde to help,
when sail and ship is lost:
Whereby they may the shore attain,
from waves of Seas ytost.
Who follows virtue may go see,
tharabian deserts fell:
The Ethiops black the rugged getes,
the Indes in health and well.
For only virtue of her force,
will fortune false wythstand:
And often with her in doubtful match,
does strive with fighting hand.
For costs thou ought not to spare,
nor doubt the lands to sell:
Whereby thou virtue may obtain,
if fortune be so fell.
That naught to sell at all thou haste,
let goodness then remain:
In thee, If learnde thou can not be,
with learnde thy self retain.
With ears atte^tiue mark their words,
sometime and question find:
The rest to God do thou commit,
and with a lowly mind.
Receive thappointed fates from hie,
if joys thou do frequente:
And hurtful pleasure thee entrap,
and in her ginnes thee hent.
And covet so thy youthful days,
to pass in pleasant sport:
And therefore do desire to bear,
a rich and wealthy port.
These things that reason does thee tell,
peruse thou well in mind:
A greater ill and hurtful more,
than pleasure none can find.
It takes counsel quite from us,
and does the mind oppress:
Resisting virtues evermore,
increases wickedness.
It is the chiefest nource to vice,
enfebleth aye the strength:
With bitter end and many hurtes,
procures man at length.
But playnlier of this same anon,
we will entreat and tell:
The poor man has his joys also,
if that thou markest well.
Not much perchance inferior to,
for pleasauntest be such:
Obtained joys that seldom happes,
and ioyfuller he much.
The pleasure is believe me now,
that long has been absented:
And more desirde so meat is sweet,
to him that is an hungered.
So rest to him that labors sore,
so drink is to the dry:
So flame unto the friesing wight,
so cold when sun is hye.
So long forborne is welcomer,
to Lady Uenus fair:
For contraries by opposites,
their strength do eft repair.
The rich man now will suffer naught,
but always does abound:
With deynties so that lothsomnesse,
in him may eft be found.
Sometime he does desire and much,
on earthy roots to grash:
Sometime on pescods fast he feeds,
sometime on other trash.
And royal fare with deynty dish,
abhorring naught esteems:
Nothing so sweet he then receives,
but better lo it seems.
And lykes him not if any time,
it chances to endure:
But chaunges new does him delight,
and for to have in ure.
Forbidden things are sweeter much,
such things be naught and ill:
That always are at hand to have,
so not the thing but will.
And judgment of the mind does cause,
a man to be content:
And worthy is to be imbrasde,
that pleases his intent.
What profits it unto the sick,
to offer deynty meat:
Whose taste away does quite bereft,
the fervent fevers heat.
Or what auayles it unto him,
the pleasant wines to bring:
Who evermore refrayning wine,
does joy in cleared spring?
Some one with Kid some other thoe,
with porke refresht to be:
Desires more some songs delight,
some other plays to se^.
So love to all men is not like,
some man a boy desires:
And some a maid and some a gyll,
and some a wife requires.
The mind and not the thing therefore,
does cause a quietness:
Whereby the poor no less their joys,
then rich men does possess.
Excess the rich man does desire,
few things the poor suffice:
To him does greater charge of house,
but lesser joys arise.
The shipman or the laboring wight
much pleasure more do take:
With eggs and leekes and homely food,
his hungered mawe to slake.
Than kings and Queens with deinty dishe
of seas and land to dine:
The worthier pleasure then I think,
of right we may define.
That used neither causes harm,
nor honesty resystes:
For best it is to covet least,
and live within the lystes.
Of counsel good nor vexed be
with vain and fond desire:
For who the things he cannot have,
does earnestly require.
With frustrate hope is tormented,
and loses time in vain:
Wherefore desire thou nothing else,
but that thou may obtain.
And rule thy mind with bridlyng bitt,
but he that does habounde:
With riches, always couets more.
then lawful may be found.
With little and content to live,
he knows not yet there fore:
Whom least of all do full suffice,
him happier judge I more.
For lofty lands do cause a man,
for to excel in pride:
Thimmortall gods for to despise,
and men for to deride.
Without all rule, a carpet knight
and virtues mortal foe:
For who does virtue ought regard,
when riches swells so?
O famous worthy poverty,
O gifts of God vnkende:
Of virtues aye the safe defense,
to shamefastnes a friend.
The bridle tryde of wantones,
and patron of the life:
Thou only can and well despise,
the shameless fortunde ryfe.
The raging of the Seas and wyndes,
whilste in thy little bote:
Thou kepest the safe assured foordes,
and rydste by shore a flote.
The loftye hills on hye full often
the flashing lightnings smite:
And spiring ashes long be bette,
by northern Boreas might.
Low things do lie unknown to harms
the tempests never greues:
The lowly shrouded Junipers,
nor shakes the Mirice leaves.
The famous Anaxagoras,
and Democryte the wise:
With many mo whose worthy fame
throughout the world now flies:
Did silver gold and riches eke,
as heads of ill despise.
And why? but yt they thought they were
not virtues good nor true:
Which let the mind with diverse cares,
and hedlong down eke threw,
Full many men in diverse vice,
but always mark thou well:
What Fabrice Calo and Curious to,
these holy men thee tell.
Regard not what the common sort,
and foolish route do say:
Therample of the good always,
before thy eyes but lay.
Did not Ouirinus conqueror,
his banners often display:
Commanded weapons up to take,
and plough a down to lay.
And rest his deluing spade a while,
then would the cottage small:
Content the men and deinty fare,
not used then at all.
But Princely meats and roufed rooms,
bring forth as now a days:
A weak a fayn^ and tender fruit,
and apt to sport and plays.
O learn you mortal men at length,
put darkness from your mind:
Lift up a loft your dimmye eyes,
whereto does will so blind.
You lead? take heed in any wise,
you thither do not go:
By reason like the gods above,
you are created lo.
By reasons are the seas and land,
unto your power subject:
Let errors not therefore as now,
but reason you direct.
The certain end of every thing.
peruse you well always:
And let the meat your selves suffice,
that hunger drives away.
And garments eke your skins to hide
and called for to expel:
Let aye the sleep that does refresh,
your weary limbs be well.
Of these three things above the rest,
most need we have always:
Since these our bodies are compact,
of vile and brittle claye.
But yet thou oughtst those things to use
as Physic for to heal:
The diverse sickness that to man,
dame nature wontes to deal.
Some one we see in daynty fare,
does riot most embrace:
Some other in ercesse of clothes,
and some whilst they apace.
From learning fly do uneath know,
nor once this life perceive:
When evermore with sluggish sleep,
their eyes together cleave.
But happy is he that is content,
with little to remain:
Nor puts his trust in things so frail,
that death will him constrayne.
To leave behind as none of his,
and wayeth well in mind:
How short the space is of our life,
how all things vain we find.
That here on earth created be,
who always one remaynes:
In prosperouse eke and adverse chance,
the judge nor Sttgian pains.
Regards not and naught esteems,
what ever fortune flyng:
Unhappy is he whom will does lead,
unmindful of the thing
That is to come, but like to beasts,
regardes the thing in sight:
Who knows not that by how much,
the mind is more of might.
Than is the corpse, so much the more,
in gifts it does excel:
Riches be not the chiefest goods,
therefore appears well.
For these because for bodies wealth,
they only out be sought:
The manners of the owners eke,
we see they better naught.
Who will account them chiefest goods?
for often times we see:
Such men with riches as abound,
like brutish beasts to be.
As much therefore as will suffice,
thy life no more require:
For in excess do fools rejoice,
in vain thou do desire.
Thy barnes vnheaped and hugye mowes,
of corn when thou as well:
With lesser measure though by much,
thy hunger may expel.
When little cups shall thee suffice,
why do thou tons desire?
But yet if Putus do thee love,
and plenty on thee flyre.
And eke the will unknown of fases,
has riches del^e to thee:
What would thou do? that thou had learnde
it seems best to me.
Least by possession thou be worfe,
a dolte and counted plain:
And tell me now I thee require,
what wisdom does remain.
Or counsel else to him in whom,
great riches ever ^^owe?
And by what means them for to use,
the fool does nothing know.
Hereby does strength and often hurt,
and beauty eke anoye:
By reason like the aucthour often,
does eloquence destroy.
And by these means are diverse arts,
full hurtful often to many:
Let not the snare of avarice,
thee catch but from her fly.
Than this there is no fury fierce,
assuredly more fell:
Begotten once in Acheron,
amyd the reign of hell.
She was where flaming fyerbrandes,
she dreadfully does cast:
A hundred thretning heads she bears
with ugly adders brast.
Her gredy jaws with blood of men,
could never have their fill:
With churlish chaps devouring mea^,
yet food requir the she still.
She spares none nor god his church,
once fears to defyle:
This cursed never filled beast,
and wicked monster vile.
Of her come plagues and slaugh^ers sharp
with discord and distress:
With treasons brawlings and disceits
and loss of shamefastness.
Contempt of God with periuries,
and chydings fell with fight:
With many more which in my verse,
I cannot well resyght.
From this therefore ^^ye thou thy way
nothing does more infest:
Nor nothing more than this declares,
a vile unworthy breast.
So women, aged men and boys,
do covet most always:
Because they lack both strength and force,
in mind and have no stays.
An other vice contrary now,
to this does yet remain:
This same from the to banishe quite,
thy senses look thou strain.
If thou do spend without respect,
in vame thou shall behold:
An hungered eft another spitte,
with deinties manifold.
When all thy living quite is spent,
by ryote clean destroyde:
Between them both the virtue lies,
the vite therefore avoid.
As reason does require so give,
and evermore take heed:
Be not to bold to use excess,
within thy tether feed.
This end has riches we are bound,
all men to profit thoe:
But first our own dame nature sure,
has us ^reated so.
That not alone to us and ours,
we should commodious be:
But also if that power will serne,
to all of each degree.
What thing more famous is than this,
what more deserves the place:
Of gods above then for to help,
the poores afflicted case?
So shall the people honor us,
so get we fame thereby:
And by such acts to gods full often,
we see do many fly.
Nothing does more a man become,
nothing for him more meet:
As says the old and ancient school,
of Philosophers sweet.
Than man to aid and succor soon,
his fellow fallen to ground:
But now alas O doleful times.
and fashions nothing sound.
All godliness is clean extinct,
to no man geues doubtless:
The welthy wretch although he has
wherewith to give excess.
Of no man thoe he p^^ie has,
all hearts do iron seem:
Who gives the beggar now a myte,
their tears they naught esteem.
If ought they give to seoffers now,
or else to rake hell knaves:
They do it deal to Colmon birds,
and eke to baudy slaves.
No man does give the learned ought,
the muses be despised:
In every place some one we see,
so much has exercised.
The dyse and tables till his purse,
at length the gorge does cast:
So often an other vies at Cards,
till all his goods be past.
And is not this a greater shame,
thus money for to spend:
Whereby no honor is obtaynde,
nor thank is got at the end.
O mind forgetting God and eke,
with vices vile defilde:
And is it lawful this to do,
did thou not once a child.
Come naked from thy mothers womb,
and shall return again:
Resolved unto durty earth,
from whence thou camste certain?
O fool these goods be none of thine,
but underneath the hand:
Of God above and thou but here,
a stranger in the land.
And bursser for a while of them,
ne be the goods at all:
But only now the use of them,
to our subjection thrall.
For when the Gresilde Charon old,
shall be are thee past the lake:
By which the gods above to swear,
do tremble eft and quake.
Then here you wretch to other heirs,
the goods thou shall forsake:
Wherefore we ought to use them well,
while line of life does last:
In occupying about our selves,
and helping others fast.
Now have I well declarde I think,
if riches ought to be:
Accounted for the chiefest goods,
all men may plainly see.
My bote draw back we have assayde,
the seas sufficiently:
Lo causing clouds the southern wind
begins fast to fly.
Upsuckt the floudes from out the seas,
the whirle winds up do bear:
Which does declare a ssorme to come,
not best we tarry here.
Believe me now for sore I fear,
to ships untrusty Orion:
Whilst time we have let us dispatche,
to port and get us gone.
When as the banished clouds above,
shall make the day be fair:
Then Triton shall us call from hye,
and we to seas repair.
The third Book entitled Gemini.
VPrising was the dauning day
and fading stars did shu^ne
The heavens hie of Ti^a^ thoe
and half to apeare begun.
To them that under us do dwell,
and half discernde our eyes:
I meruayld much to see as then,
the sier up to rise.
Amyd the floudes unquenched thus,
these contraries no doubt:
Each other now do quite destroy,
but is the sun put out.
With floods? it is not fiery then,
or else to touch the brinke:
Of Occean sea, the common sort do lie,
thus did I think.
While as by shore I walked alone,
behold there began me meet:
An aged man with staff in hand,
in clothur near and sweet.
His hoary beard with silver hears,
his middle fully rought:
His skin was white and joyful face.
of diverse colors wrought.
A flowery garland gay he ware,
about his seemly hear:
When as we met and made unto,
each other friendly cheer.
From whence I came, what place I seek,
my name he does desire:
I answered him and did the like,
with shame fast voice require.
But after that he had declared,
his proper name certain:
For Epicure this man he height,
I was astonished plain.
Like as the poor and laboring soul,
in deluing of the ground:
A hydden chest amyd the earth,
by lucky chance has found.
And thus I said good father old,
such favor may thou find:
Amongst the gods that al things well,
may satisfy thy mind.
Sith wisdom great and wondrous eke,
within thy breast does dwell:
If falsely men do not affirm,
as eft they do. Now tell
Unto me here I thee beseech,
of grace the good precepts:
With witty sawes and eke instruce,
my youth if nothing lets,
More wayghty affairs: quod he again
no wayghty affairs me let,
But for that cares and work I shanne
often times my self to get.
Unto this place I wonted am,
and flowers up to take:
Of diverse hewes amid the meades,
head garlandes for to make.
Willing therefore with all my heart,
to answer thy request:
I am for old men all to chat,
it does delight us bess.
But least by some that pass the way,
we here disturbed be:
Let us go hence, and underneath,
the shaded holmey tree:
That by the waters side thou see:
our selves we will repose.
We went and thus with pleasant voice
his mind he began disclose.
Some god young man thee hither now
assuredly has sent:
Whereby this day thou might perceive,
by wisdom what is meant.
For O the gods in what a mist,
and darkness of the mind:
Is drent as now the whole estate,
of mortal human kind.
Of them that bear the face of men,
two thousand thou may see:
But one that shows himself a man,
is scarcely found to be.
A den of doltes that now the world,
may termed be full well:
And place with errors stuffed therefore
give ear what I thee tell:
If wretched darkness from thy mind
thou seek to erpell.
And first of all thou ought to know,
the true felicity:
Which wych a reason firm and good,
ought searched forth to be.
Hereof does wisdom flow with streamee,
hereof she does appear:
But few there be that can attain,
the truth away to bear.
For riches to be chiefest good,
the greatest sort do say:
An other part does honor take,
to be the chiefest away.
And diverse men in diverse things,
the chiefest good do find:
But I the price abeue the rest,
to pleasure have assignde.
And this my part I trust I can,
by reason good defend:
It is the mark that all shoot at,
and eke the final end.
To which, the acts and deeds of men,
be altogether bent:
Even as unto thappointed mark,
the shooters shaft is sent.
Who ever would the earth with rakes,
or Seas with Ores have tried?
Or martyall power by force of arms,
who durst have occupied?
In fine, who ever would have sought,
virtue to come unto:
If pleasure then or hope thereof,
did not enforce him so?
For this the chiese beginning is,
the midst and eke the end:
Of labors all, for proof thereof,
thy mind a while attend.
All works if chagent reason have,
unto some end are done:
The workma^s hands it moves thereto,
and first in mind begone.
It is: But last of all the dead,
it self comes forth to light:
The end thereof is good therefore,
the work does more delight.
The will thereof, with great delight,
the end for to obtain:
Does force the labor light to be,
the cause is pleasure plain.
For truly nothing else it is,
but pleasure of the mind:
And since by reason hard it is,
to teach the rude and blind.
I will attempt by simlitudes,
the truth for to declare:
Why delues the plowma^s clubbishe hand,
and tears the earth with share?
For all the heat of flaming dog,
his work he does not space.
Nor hoary winter froste. Why fears,
the shipman not in mind:
The raging rage of surging Seas,
with threarning Rocks so blind?
Despisyng death at hand in hope,
of maste with sayly pyne:
Why does the Captain to the field,
his manfull mind incline?
And u^ersly does reioicewhen as
he hears the Trompettes blow:
With hynteng noise of foming horse,
his heart begynnes to glow.
Why does it some delyght always,
with papers pale to be:
And books of diverse authors made,
with daily pain to see?
Certes for that that after time,
when labors long depart:
So^e gain or same may give him cause
for to rejoice in heart.
For if so be that fame and gain,
should not the mind ascend:
With joy both virtue and arts withal,
would soon be at an end.
For of it self the end is sweet
and for the end is thought:
Both midst and former facces so sweet,
it forces also naught.
Of vile or else of honest state,
the dcades do seem to be:
For as the lewd lycentious man,
reioyseth vice to see.
In virtue likewise evermore,
the good man's Joys do stand:
All things therefore for pleasures sake,
we surely take in hand.
For pleasure men decline from harms,
for this they gains require:
Things worthy praise or else reproach
through this they do desire.
With only this the Gods above,
contented surely be:
For profit is for them unmeet,
since naught they lack we see.
But thou perchance wilt say the gods,
with honest joys abound:
What then? If with such joyful goods,
in them no joy is found?
As if thou should with glistering gold
and pearls a stock array:
An other thing here add, as often,
as cause be perfect may.
It needful is the like effect,
from thence should then proceed:
When as therefore that force of ly^e,
is well disposde in deed.
And ch^efest good object to it,
it always does retain:
That this is happiest happiness,
denies no man plain.
But now from out such fountain, lo,
is pleasure forced to run:
With music so the ears rejoice,
of numbers apt begun.
So is the sight with beauty pleased,
the nose with goodly smell:
This judgment eke I do pronounce,
of other parts as well.
What say thou now to Uenus work,
that creatures all does make?
And this the pleasauntst pleasure is,
except thou truth forsake.
Moreover yet both pain and grief,
since greatest yls they be:
Contrary eke to pleasure now,
by right we pleasure see.
To be the chiefest good deserves,
of contraries also:
The reason like contrary is,
that sad things to forgo.
By natures force all things do seek,
and pleasures do embrace:
Who may believe that once will us,
deceive that natures grace?
The chiefest good therefore it is,
that creatures all do love:
But what love they, or seek they for,
but pleasant joys to prove?
That we must virtue seek again,
some sort there be that say:
By swet and cold while here we live,
and pleasure cast away.
And after death they say we shall,
in perfect pleasure live:
Which good to those that do him love,
prepared has to give.
This voice with reason cannot stand,
but shows it self as vain:
For that the soul does after live,
when death the corpse has said.
Or that it lurkes in loathsome lake,
of Tartares griesly den:
And pays the pains of his deserts,
and takes rewards as then.
Of former factes ought none believe,
except his senses fade:
(...) fools it is your Poets mad,
that have these fables made.
Who ever wonted were to write
such foolish feigned toys:
Whereby they might delight the ears
of fools with frustrate ^yes.
The yrksome place they feigned have,
of Stig^an ^iraun^ fell:
Where flames ye ^ouds of Phiegetho^
that burns with roaring yell:
Whereas the triple headed dog,
and Tisiphone does dwell
With adders arinde of pay^ted hew,
and gressly Gyaunts great:
with dreadful darkness doide of light
and fyres whose flaming heat.
Consumes no wood, where frieseth cold
without the wynters space:
The boat without the force of oak,
here creketh in this place.
wh^lste her with souls does ^uerlode
the aged Ferriman:
Here Sisiphus the stone torments,
and Tantale waters wanne.
The s^isty ristye vessels hear,
matemurdring systers bear:
From whence the waters out do gush,
that kept in vain are there.
Much more than I have hear declarde
these Poets p^lde have taught,
In hell to be, which are not true,
of children to be thought.
O gods how great a lack of wit,
there is in every place:
How prone the way to trif^es is,
and credit you this case,
O void of wit? which never could,
by reason ought be proved:
Nor by no sense may be desernde,
with fear why are you moved?
Of things so vain, who credites mos^,
is most himself deceived:
These are I say deceitful things,
whereby be priests releaued.
For when that once our vital breath,
is faded clean away:
No more we be than first we were,
before our natall day.
O to much weak to frail and proud,
O nature bold of man:
whereby do thou persuade thy self
to live for ever than?
Leave of therefore thou lump of claye,
the years of gods to will:
^ll things begone shall have an end,
nothing remains still.
Both cities great, and mighty men,
and vastye realms withal:
The hautiest hills and greatest floods
does time at length let fall.
And think thou (O fading dust)
for ever to remain?
Is hope of mind with thee so great?
we travail but in vain.
In trusting dreams for virtues sake,
and fayning fancies strange:
That be but fools that things assured,
for vnassurde will change.
Forsakyng thus assertainde here,
with doubtful things to meet:
But yet of old, and ancient fame,
rewards remains sweet.
Of little force this nothing is,
when death has had his right:
Thou nothing art, for what is fame,
if it do naught delight?
The corpse in grave, what does ye s^one
or stock rejoice in prays?
If here thou have not them, thou shall
have never happy days.
Therefore while this our brittle life,
uncertain eke does last:
The wise man, to his power will joy:
nor strait will down be cast.
As often as fortune on him frowns,
will seek the pleasant life:
If any thing to him shall hap,
of bitter eygre strife.
Wherefore because I will not now,
thee frustrate here retain:
(O young man) joy while time permits,
and banishe doleful pain.
When these his words my berded sire
had moved me to believe:
Good father then (quod I) for these
thy pains I cannot give.
Thee worthy thanks, but whilst I line,
I shall to thee be bound:
Within my heart, and eke I shall,
reserve thy sayings sound.
One doubt within my breast does yet.
assuredly remain:
For not the deeds we only must,
but learn them to obtain.
Therefore I do require you now,
to teach me here the way:
That will me lead to pleasures place*
whereby it have I may.
The way is short and plain withal,
then grayherde to me tells:
Nor far from hence voluptnousnesse,
that lusty Lady dwells.
Whom if thou do desire to see,
come after me a pace:
Whereby thou may by me rejoice,
in finding out her grace.
One part of three the starry orbs,
had scarce past over than:
When stackring up himself did raise,
thunweldy aged man.
Who leading forth I followed on,
and hand in hand we went:
By strange unhaunted ways we go,
and space a little spent
Behold appears a sumptuous house,
and straight I ask my guide:
What honor kepes that precious gem
and princely palace wide?
Plutus quod he possesses this,
and eke an armed knight:
The way to keep and men to pass,
forbids by his might.
Except they come him first unto,
and please him with some gift:
But he himself does hold his hall,
amid you towry clift.
Three daughters eke he only has,
within his bower to dwell:
Whose names if thou desire to know,
I shall thee briefly tell.
The first of them is filthy excess,
the second puffed pride:
The third is foolish ignorance,
with countnaunce bold beside.
Who then quod I shall lead us now,
unto this famous king?
Three maids he has quod gresil thoe,
that there to will thee bring.
Chance, fraud and usury, by these,
have all men easy way:
I have no gifts then answered I,
that give these maids I may.
Nor safe it is such girls to trust,
some other way declare:
There is quod he another way,
there is a way to spare.
which if thou say the word we go,
lead me there to quod I:
Together both we went therwyth,
where deep a vale did lie.
with stones the way was all beset,
by which our journey lay:
And so be grown with cra^^ed shorns:
that searce we see the way.
Hereby we found the ragged house,
of seely poverty:
With top vntylde we past it thoe,
and straight a wood we spy.
Behold, then says my guide to me,
behold you trees so hie:
Which with their tops do seem to touch,
the steamed starry sky.
There dwells ye worthy queen (quod he,)
by whom we shall be blessed:
But first thou must wash hand and face
and get thee neatly dressed.
The Goddess loves no nastinesse,
nor s^ouens can abide:
A river small I then perceiude,
by grauayle ground to glide.
Which with a pleasannt hushing sound,
provoked the joys of bed:
Here washed I fair my face and hands,
and combde my rugged head.
I trimde my clothes in order fine,
and lightness has expelde:
All grave and earnest things: so that
with mirth my way I held.
No further of than once a man,
a stone may from him sting:
The wood was then whereas we hear
the birds full swetely sing.
And flowers sweet and fair we smell.
of which inowe there grows:
Such woods tharabian never saw,
though franconcense there flows.
Nor yet the Eastern Indian thoe,
nor Scith the like does see:
Though round about he is beset,
with bows of laurel tree.
Nor Atlas that the rolling skies,
with shoulders does ^nstayne:
Though Satirs in the place does dau^ce
whom Fayries love does pain.
A river mild about it runs,
with comely water clear:
The banks so far asonder stood,
as leapes the chased Dear.
And in the depth a doughty drove,
of scaley beasts they play:
And for a wall it compasde is,
with lofty pines so gay.
With pines that in their crabbed barks
does Cibels love contain:
And Phoebus Cipresse stands them by,
of equal height again.
There lackes no mastes Esculus,
no Mapple, Holme nor Oak:
Nor plaintree, Cork, nor yet the nutte
that color does provoke.
The Arbute, and the Alder tree,
the Chestnut, and the Ash:
The Filbert, Pechtree and the Palm,
the Byrch with spriggy lashe.
The Firretre, and the myrtle eke,
and broad leaude Beechy wood:
When Saturn ruled the golden world,
which was our fathers food.
The Uine, the Fig and Apple eke,
and Lotos Pryaps friend:
The Juey and the Laurel tree,
that Poets heads does shend.
The Mulberry and the Poplartree,
that Hercule once estemde:
The Peartree, willow, and the Prime,
with Bore that whitley semde.
The Medlar and the Olive tree,
the Elm and Cherrey red:
The Codtree and the Almon eke,
whose flowers first do spread.
What should I here the Cedre tree,
or Hebron call to mind:
Or Cytre fit for Tables fine,
whom gold his place resynde.
Or other more whose names if thou,
do take in hand to tell:
Thou sooner may in number bring,
the Egiptian lands as well.
Thus in we go whereas the bridge,
does join the banks in one:
Of ample space and semely sight,
their alleyes long they gone.
With Purple Roles red and white,
and Paunseys painted hew:
White Daffodils and violets sweet,
with flagrant Lillies blewe.
Sweet Amaranthe that long does live,
with leaves of crimson die:
The Cloue with Balm and Cassia to,
Mynt Time and Sauerie.
With Saffro^ Myrhe and Maioram,
the Gardens only gem:
Of sauoure sweet in I dale woods,
ynow there grows of them.
Both here and there in every place,
sweet savors up they sum:
A thousand kinds of Birds do fill,
the woods with every tune.
With diverse notes the cleared air,
they caused to resounde:
There Progne wayles the great vn^rot^
that in her love was found.
And Philomela does bewail,
her own and Itis case:
In human voice and painful throat,
the ^ara^ pr^tes apase.
Their varying softly notes so fine,
the Goldfi^ch fast does sing:
And waters flows the flowers upon,
from clear continual spring.
And here and there their courses run
and moystes the hear^es so grene:
No Dragon there nor greedy wolf,
might ever yet be seen.
No Bore, no Bear nor Tigre fierce,
nor Serpent foul there dwells:
To harm with triple hissing tongue,
with poison fierce that swells.
In fine no kind of beast there is,
but such as peace has ^worne:
The longeard wat, the Heart, the Buck,
the Goat with harmless horn.
The middle heavens then almost,
the flaming Phoebus held:
When first we saw the gorgeous place,
whereas this Lady dwelde.
Amid the woods an aumple space,
full of grene herbs we see:
No tree there grew but tables round,
in order placed be.
With de^^ties such as Capna did,
the oneyde duke prepare:
Such deinties as they once did eat,
the sacred shieldes that bare.
The time is come quod Gresill now
let us go drink and fill:
Our bellies: Strength for to repair,
it is the goddess will.
That none shall pass with sober head,
nor yet with hungered mawe:
For scotfree here may all men feed,
this is the Ladies law.
When meat does fail, her maids do fill
the table full again:
A pace we feed and scarce can rise,
so wetes the wine our brain.
With doubtful steps our feet do trede,
with stackryng stumpes we go:
More earnestly we then desire,
the Queen to come unto.
Whom in the field we walking find,
with mighty mirthfull train:
Young lusty guts with boys and maids
and doting age again.
On her right hand a woman goes,
with pleasant shining face:
And in her hand a boy she leads,
from down whose shoulders place.
A dreadful quyuer hanges with shaf^es,
both cruel sharp and kene:
And in his hands a bow he bare,
and drew the string so tene.
Though blind he was yet straight he threw^
at every man his darte:
And fier^^ye to without regard,
he perced to the heart.
The shaft returns straight again,
when wide the wound is left:
The people all incontinent,
he had of life berefte.
But that a certain woman there,
that pityed much the sore:
Of Godly zeal unto these men,
began help and health restore.
For when the wounded breasts she saw
whereas the darte went in:
Of any man, and blood so warm,
that gushing out did spin.
Then strayte she runs her cure unto,
and healthful drinks him gives:
Whereby though cruel wound remain,
the pacient yet he lives.
An other woman yet besides,
in left hand leads the Queen:
Whose chaps do always chaw ye cudde,
her golles they gresy been.
With musty dusty loathsome clothes,
whose stynke does all anoye:
And only to she does delight,
in beastly belly joy.
Great tanckards deep she turns quite
the bottoms vpsey down:
And in her hand a boy she leads,
with drousy droupyng crown.
And winking eyes, he scarce could wake
nor would his dame permit:
With meat and drink thus ouercharg^e
to have a waking fyt.
A moyster strange on her he flyngs,
heer^ soundes with wheasing noise:
The boxen shalme, with stroke ye harp.
is forcde to show his voice.
Here Orphens does bewail his wife.
with tooth of serpent torn:
The dire decrees of darksome den,
and labors past and worn.
And after him both beast and stone,
by musyck sw^^e he draws:
To Delphins eke Arion here,
^oth swetely sing his sawes.
With harp the noble Amphion here,
does Thebes walls renew:
Declaring here his cruel case,
by shipmen eke vnt^ewe.
And after these with fr^skyng l^gges,
comes Dancing all the rest:
Whose eyes a certain dymnes darcke,
had fully then oppressed.
About the heads of every one,
their flies a stinking mist:
And one amongst them all I knew,
that held this writ in fyst.
Sa^danapalus here am I,
that ruled with princely power:
T^assyrians Realm lo this have I,
for that I did devour.
O foolish wretches, whylest you live,
let never Joys so go:
For after death alas there are,
no Joys to come unto.
Learn you by me O mortal men,
the trewest way to know:
Now last of all two Monsters came,
amyd the vtterst row.
Whereof the one with diverse tongues,
these fellows foul arayde:
The other vexed them sore with pricks,
that grief their Joye alayde.
So much the heavens us do hate,
rejoicing at our ill:
So far the Gods above do seem,
contrary to our will.
And though with these adversities,
we pass our days in pain:
Yet have we not one hour to joy,
in quiet to remain.
If ought we have it is but short,
and joy imperfect framed:
O life that doste of right deserve,
erilement to be named.
Why does the harms of mortal men,
the Gods above delight:
Why had they rather sad we were,
than live in joyful plight.
Whereof did first spring out to us,
such mortal hatred fell:
Win thou the gods with pacient mind,
in bearing evils well.
No space we were of any length,
from this unruly game:
When from the right side of the wood,
came forth a comely Dame.
With body fine and virgins face,
and sober semely gate:
Such one as Joue his wife is thought,
amyd her great estate.
with hair, and bosom torn, she runs
to us in doleful plight,
And not to be despysde she was
though clothes were base to sight.
And from her ruddy rosye lyppes,
these witty words did spryng:
O caytifes whereto pace you thus,
whereto shall phrensy bring.
You now? stay here, set down your fete
and leap nor to the snare:
And hearken to my words a while,
that I shall here declare:
First this (quod she) no goddess is,
nor her no goddess bare.
As you (perchance) beloue she is,
to whom as now you go,
To tents of whom you covet now
to Join your selves unto.
But is a dredefull drery sprite,
deceiving all that lives:
Unwares of her deceitfully,
and gall for honey gives.
Let not the face deceive you now
that seems sayre without:
That glisters aye with shining gold
beset with gemmes about.
You know not yet how foul she is,
within those garments gaye:
A thousand spots within she has
and castes her men away.
Deceiude with false defrauding toye:
as ^ishe their bane come by:
Whom crafty fysher does hegyle,
with reed deceitfully.
When from the rocks, into the floudes
he casts down his line:
With harmefull bait the hook so hyd,
with hastye course they hine.
And snatche with gredye jaws ye bayte
and fast they hang thereby:
And following fast the twyrling threde
their dance full dolefully:
The quiuering sands of Libiaes land
we need not for to fly:
Ne fearful Atiphates house,
ne Scillaes rock so hye.
Nor dreadefull drenching Charibdis,
nor other monster fell:
So much as ought we pleasure shun
what harms hereby do dwell.
In mortal men? what towns? what realms?
what men of worthy fame
Has it destroide? I will be short,
and one example name.
Who ever yet Alcides past,
who durst such deeds assay?
That slew two serpe^ts foul sometimes
in cradle as he lay.
He tore the tushes from them both,
and thrust his hands so small:
In midst their throtes. He caused has,
Molorchus beast to fall.
He cut the foul Echydnaes head:
destroyde the dreadful drake:
The fearful bull adowne he threw,
and swifty Heart did take.
He has expelde the Stimphalides
by force of valiant bow:
The Thracian tyrauntes stable eke,
his hand did overthrow.
He turnde thy course Achelous,
and brake thy winding creke:
He took the Apples from the maids,
and spoilde the Spanishe freke.
Of hugie kyne. He did descend
adowne the pyt of hell:
The dreadful dog from thence he drew,
that fometh poison fell.
The Bore of Erymantus to,
was slain of that same hand:
And Anthenes eke the u^rength of him,
lift up did understand.
He felt it eke that Oxen stale,
Dan Uulcanes wyly whelpe:
And after all the weary sire,
he could old Atlas help.
The stars above and swaying poules,
whose shoulders do sustain:
But O thou hurtful pleasure lo,
deceatful eke and vain.
The Lordly hests of Gigian maid,
with will he did obey:
And he whom dire Megeraes force,
nor fend might once affray.
Nor quiuering Lartares frosty cold,
nor flames of Phlegethon:
Nor vggly Charons dreadful look,
with bristled hairs upon.
Did often fondly fear the threats,
of mild vnmighty maid:
For shield in hand a distaffe bears,
for helm with coyfe arayde.
The hand also that once was wont,
unwieldy clubbe to shake:
In maydely guise then towe to spinne,
and eke accountes to make.
Of task performed. And unto her
the bondled flax he bears:
whilst clothed in wome^s wed the stroke,
of mistres whip he fears.
Amphitrions son, what beastly toye,
has made the thus so blind?
For as that hag dame Circes did,
transform to swinish kind.
Ulisses mates bewrapt their bones,
in stubborn bristles hard:
So does your Queen (nay rather slave,)
change them that her regard.
For dish in hand to them she geues,
of pleasant poison full:
Of which who drinks is straight transformd
in Lion, Bore or Bull.
Or made a dog or else a wolf,
the common plague to sheep:
And other into diverse shapes,
are thus compelde to creep.
But few of that same sort there be,
this deathly cup that fly:
And you your selves these fearful fates,
shall shortly sure come by.
If thou perchance will after run,
the banners of this hoar:
Wherefore be wise and fly the snares,
I warn you sirs before.
Whylst time will serve with brideling bits,
and rule your wilful mind:
And in the privy hidden snares,
let not your eyes be blind.
Least she like as the spyder does,
begyle the siely fly:
whilte as in tender web she lurkes,
and in her bower does lie.
But when that she does perreyne,
the gyltlesse soul in trapt:
Then out with cruel course she comes,
the corpse in cords so clapped.
The dusty twyst with nimble legs, through,
about it fast she winds:
with deadelye styngs she thrustes him
and suckes the blood she finds.
O mad to mad, which when he may,
to gods compared be:
By reason ruled, yet brut^^h train,
to haunt delights he.
In using eft of lecherous acts,
and pampering Uenus friend:
His gredy paunch and beastliness,
he follows to his end.
These words with patience could not bear.
my lusty gresild gyde:
But mourning this his will so broke,
and angered eke beside.
With mumbling words: I know not what
he turns from us his face,
And, unto his acquainted mates,
ran three legde sire a pace.
Arete then (for this her name,
she termde her self to be)
Let Gresil fly from hence away,
regard not thou quod she.
The Owl to darkness used, cannot,
the glistring sun abide:
And as the sick whom fever long,
with raging heat has tried.
Refuses such as may to him,
his health again restore:
Things worse and hurtful to his life,
desiring rather more.
So fools do follow false things most,
and from the truth they fly:
But fly not thou my warning hear,
if elth thou do set by.
Which that you may more aptly hear,
walk now this way with me:
For with these sights the mind is let,
and ears disturbed ^ee.
Then toward the right hand forth she leads,
and underneath a bay:
That stood thereby, we both sit down,
and thus she began to say.
That workman first that made the skies
the earth and seas also:
As all the spheres he has compelde,
gaynward the first to go.
So would he that theffectes of mind,
should reason eke gaynsay:
Least mind alone within the corpse,
with dullness should decay.
For as the Horse by force of spur,
and Ox, with good a right:
Are forcde to go, and by the smart,
receive the greater might.
So sharp with force, theffects the mind
increased by restraynt:
The which effects if they were not,
the mind straight ways would faint.
And would no worthy thing perform
like as the ship does slugge:
Except the winds her sails do puff,
and Ores by force her drugge.
Some greatly err therefore that say,
such tumultes of the mind:
A wiseman never ought to feel,
like form in marble sinde.
These men do think a man to be:
and doting preach in vain:
For then in vain had nature dealt,
to man such motions plain.
Which is to base for to confess,
we may them therefore use:
Most lawfully if reasons rule,
and art thereto we choose.
These great affections of the mind,
with bridle strong he guides:
And as the horseman rules his horse,
so rules he them besides.
Nor once is over run of them,
he, that deserves to be:
A wise man namde, and not in vain,
but few there be we see.
That virtue knows for to obtain,
in measure for to stay:
Some sort therefore this same do love,
some take it clean away.
Both sorts thereby in error hault,
for, only gods alone:
By reason lives, and beasts again,
with only sense do groan.
But man with both is full adornde,
commanded to rejoice:
In both also: in reason most,
this part is worthier choice.
And more celestial eke it is,
and lifts men alofte:
Where lust does throw me^ hedlo^g down
and makes them dote full often.
Wherefore we ought it least to bey,
although (O nature blind:
Of men) that every man it hauntes,
and few can reason find.
A sort therefore amyd the wood,
saunce number saw we play:
To which even thou with doltish guide,
had held thy foolish way.
But that our voice did thee withdraw,
and did thou nothing fear:
Those mo^sters two, with stealthy steps
that followed after there?
Know thou their names? the one is grefs
the other slander hight:
I not forbid nor grant such joys,
of sense proceeding right.
But rare I would that they should be,
and eke no virtues foe:
For which it never lawful is,
things honest to let go.
But bridells strong thou nedest sure,
and closely them to take:
For else they hurt: and joyful things,
will malice not forsake.
Disordring all and look how much,
a man does from them fly:
So much the more he does approach,
the sear of Joue on hye.
And he that hauntes them most of all,
is worthy least of praise:
Abasing eke himself therwyth,
with beasts he leads his days.
They hurt besides when as they be,
to daily use retainde:
And dangers dire be got thereby,
and mind with lets is painde.
Nor can the mind be always yet,
to severe things addict:
For frail it is and joy it must,
when ends the sad afflict.
And down the highest hills descend,
to valleys deep and low:
No otherwise than when on earth,
does Joue his lightning throw.
Hating the crimes that here be done,
the Egle bearing fast:
With byll or feet, the three edgde tole,
in Cicil furnace cast.
Ascends the tops of heavens hie,
and maruayles much to see:
The Princely walls with precious stones
that there adourned be.
Astonished is to see the place,
of glistering gold confect:
That shines with stars she does behold
with Diamond pillars decked.
The costly roufes she looked upon,
of Indian teeth compacte:
She meruayles at the ample field,
and light that never lackt.
The great delights that gods are in,
that rong cannot express:
Nor never heart of man could think,
the worthy pleasantness.
She flying fast both here and there,
desires much to play:
By skies so clear and pleasant airs,
begins her wings to spray.
The earth, and quite she does forget,
her nest is out of mind:
In princely rain of thundering God,
such pleasure does she find.
But after that by hungers prick,
with fasting strength decays:
And he ate lackes food to work upon,
that now she began to praise.
The heavens hie she does despise,
and down her self she speedes*
To ground, that late she did contemn,
and there apace she feeds.
Then I which held my peace so long,
(such silence for to break:)
Addressed my self and not affrayd,
her tale to stop, began speak.
Because (quod I) the sun as now,
began westward first descend:
And night does have his course to use.
before this light do wend.
Away from us and darkness co^mes,
a few things show to me:
O goddess mild (no matrone thou,
but seems a ghost to be.)
What name the woman had, of late,
that I saw yonder stand:
Besides the Queen, and what the boys
be, that she led in hand.
Then in this sort she answered me,
doubt not, thou shall discern:
By me (if time do nothing let)
all that thou seeks to learn.
Unworthy things thou have not asked,
I will therefore resight:
Her now, that on the left hand goes,
and greedy but she hight.
Her great delight is for to eat,
and night and day to drink:
The greatest sort do worship her,
and for a god her think.
With joyful hearts the flaming wines,
in gilded holes they mash.
And costly cates on bourdened bourdes,
the gredy guts they grash.
The chiefest good they think to be,
this belly god to serve:
But out of doubt I thee assure,
they from the truth do swerue.
For nothing is more vile than this,
nor harmeth more the state,
Of man: The beasts for only life,
did Joue above create.
But man for life and reason to,
and that he should excel:
And so be like unto the saints,
which in the heavens dwell.
He ordaynde has to rule the earth,
but they that love the yoke:
Of gredinesse and belly joys,
are dull, and with the smoke.
Of fuming meats their wit is darckt,
(like as the clouds the sun:)
Ne may they yet the truth discern,
but chiefly when begun.
Has boiling wines within the breast,
to blind and dull the wit:
And when the paunch is stuffed full,
for books they be unfit.
Whereby it often co^mes to pass,
their wit but small to be:
The end that nature plaste them for,
they clean for sake we see.
Nor more they know, than does ye herd
of Sheep or Oxen dull:
Yea less sometime when as with wine
their beastly brains be full.
When as for one, two lights they see,
with board and wall to dance:
O drunkenness, the death of mind,
the brood of all mischaunce.
What thing do thou not force ye mind,
of man to take in hand?
What dare not he attempt through thee
both strife with brawling, and
Most cruel frayes thou mouest him to,
thou ioyest when blood is shead:
By thee are secrets eft reuealde,
with mind and tongue made dead.
Both fear and shame fastness also,
full far they fly from thee:
Shun you this plague (O wretches) now
that makes you mad to be.
And even as as mad as once Drestes
was with mothers might:
What filthier thing? what beast more vile
than is the dronken wight?
The meat that he not long before,
has fast devoured up:
He perbrakes out, he trembles eke,
and stinketh of the cup.
Full often he falls and breaks his brows
his eyes and legs withal:
His stutting words he stamereth out,
no man perceive him shall.
Much things he says, and much he does,
that when the night is gone:
And sun is present here again,
he sorrows sore upon.
The Mace donian King, the son,
of Phillip graund le Roy:
In dronken mode, at table once,
his friends did all destroy.
But when the cups their fumes had left
and wit returnde again:
He found the fault, with tears he mournd,
and wished himself as slain.
Why boast you with your Orgies vain
in woods of Citheron?
Your Thias dau^ce, why brag you now
your foolyshe dru^ms upon?
No God your Bacchus is Iwis,
that comes of Cadmus line:
Nor Joue him got of Semels womb,
as Poets do define.
But hell has him engendered, lo
Begera is his dame:
No God he is, but does despise,
the gods, and hates their name.
For godliness they naught estreme,
that haunt the pots of wine:
Nor well can use the dronken priest,
the Sacraments divine.
What need I here for to resite,
what sickness, and what pains:
Excess of meat and to much drink,
does bread within the veins?
From hence do flow: even as it were,
from everlasting spring:
The axesse, and the botche, the byle,
with scaule and scurfe itching.
The gout oppressing hands and fete,
with bleared dropping eyes:
With wine the quiuering joints they quake.
from jaws the teeth out flies
With sudden death, and stomachs pain,
and fulsome stinking breath:
A greater sorry than sword has slain,
excess has done to death.
Besides the goods be straight co^sumde,
and down the guts do s^ing:
The field, the house, the household stuff
and every other thing.
And now both poor and base he is,
whose riches late were great:
Eat thou, where by thy life may last,
but live not thou to eat.
I have thee here declared now,
the woman what she hight:
And now the boy with nodding noule,
I will thee here resight.
The boy is hers, and of her borne,
and labor him begat:
His name is sleep, his nourse is leth.
his fode is poppey fat.
He brother german is to death,
but not as she does last:
He does refresh the weried limbs,
with daily labor past.
He does expel the cares of men,
and calls strength again:
Without the aid of him, no man,
his life may well sustain.
Yet hurtes he much and does the mind
in certain wise oppress:
Diseases breeds, and ouls the corpse,
often used with excess.
If food be small, he small will be,
for when the meat is spent:
The corpse does wake or else does rest,
with little sleep content.
More lightly then his rest he takes,
and better sleeps does breed:
But unto troubled minds it is,
a comfort great in deed.
And much it is to be desired,
when love the heart does pain:
When sickness greues or when yt man,
does heavy chance sustain.
Then is it more to be esteemed:
than gold or precious stone:
As death, so sleep does make the wretch
and happy man as one.
But he whom nature has endewed,
with long and happy days:
That does desire expert to be,
in every kind of ways.
By virtue eke a famous name,
in earth for to obtain:
Must watch: for famous things, by sleep
none are performed plain.
And for to sleep in feathers soft,
renown does eft refuse:
Shun thou this same, with all thy might
thy self to watching use.
For, O what times of quiet length
shall fares permit to thee:
When last of all the night shall come
and day shall banished be.
And breath has left ye quiuering ioints
like air that fleting flies:
With long and everlasting sleep,
then shall thou shut thine eyes.
While as the goddess thus did speak,
descended down from hye:
Thaumantis, lo when su^ne does shine
that glisters in the sky.
With diverse hew that shows her face,
amydde the misty cloud:
with ruddy rosye purple lips,
thus began she speak aloude.
God speed thee goddess here on earth,
Panomphes gem most dear:
Arete chief of goddesses
(as does to me appear.)
Come on thy ways for all the gods,
desires now to see.
Leave thou the earth, and earthly reigns
where dwellers ill they be.
Here is no place for ghostly men,
all wicked crimes here reign:
Religion none, no faith, nor grace
but virtue in disdain.
Here foolish fondenesse holds ye balle,
imperial Scepter aye:
Fraud and disceyt all men amongste,
is used here always.
Go to therefore in have, as now,
break of thy tale begun:
Let lettes be losed, and with like course,
let us to heaven run.
Arete than, beholding me,
these words began to say:
I cannot now (as feign I would)
all things to thee display.
But when the day again repayres,
and night away shall slide:
To thee, shall I send one, be glad,
to tell thee all beside.
Farewell therefore: and with these words
gain ward the skies they spring:
The western wind did them receive
and upward fast them bring:
Like as when wicked Scilla flies,
her father following fast:
Aloft by little up she hyes,
and he began after have.
With gredy mind, and through the air
he sores both here and there:
Desiring much to wreke the fault
of cutting of his hair.
She strives her self in clouds to hyde,
and mounteth out of sight:
And Nisus thither perceth fast,
that both be out of light.
Adowne the floudes, does sun descend
and forth the stars they shinde:
And I the way that gray berd led,
full sadly then declinde:
And home I come, my promised joys
in heavy hope to find.
Cancer the fourth Book.
Su^ne that with perpetual course
about the world do fly:
The parent chief of every thing,
and dyamonde of the sky.
The Prince of all the Stars, and spring
of everlasting light:
Beholding every thing abroad,
while as with color bright.
Of crimsyn hew, thou leauest aloof
the brinkes of Persean land:
With rising face, and passing forth,
do hyde thy fyerie brand.
Amydde the western fluddes, and last
of all, doste burn the hill:
Of Calpe great, and eke that course,
frequentest always still.
By thee, do all things plain appear,
whose color late the night
Bereft, her darkness by no means
abiding ones thy light.
The sight and eye of all the world,
who parts in four the year,
And changest times, and with the time,
all things engendered hear:
while as by crooked line thou runste
in lively pictured sphere.
O star divine, and of the gods,
o fairest God all hail:
We worship thee, and from the heart,
where never trothe does quail.
Our prayers here we make to thee,
behold us now therefore:
With joyful face, and joyful day,
with joy thy self restore.
Disperse the clouds from hence, and let
the day be bright and clear:
Let seas lay down their roaring lokes,
straight, when thou doste apeare.
Let shipmen safe frequent their course,
upon the waters plain:
Defend the corn, the trees, and vines
from pouring shoures of rain.
And from the boystrous whirlwind mad,
and stormy stones of hail:
Let pleasant aires on us be blown,
from fiery Pyros vail.
And make all things by thy return,
in quiet rest remayn:
O chief defense, and Poets aid,
all hail to thee again.
Thou fillest the minds of Poets all,
with sacred holy sprite:
And mouest the heads of every one,
with sugared verse to write.
By thee they gain the laurel leaf,
and everlasting fame:
Al hayle therefore, and help me now,
my singing verse to frame.
And succoure these my first attemptes,
direct my course withal:
Til unto long desired port,
my bote, and I may crall.
Thus, whylste at castale sprynges on knees
my humble suit declarde:
The muses all about me plaste,
the God my prayers hard.
From towers of Delphos hie he heard,
and straight as semde to me:
The steple be^^, and therewythal
a shining light I see.
From out the Chauncell came, and eke,
a wondrous voice I hear:
Which with these words, as then me thought,
resounded in mine ear.
O young man void of bliss, and whom,
such destnies dire do pain:
That spendst thy life with bitter years
pull up thy heart again.
For pacient pain does overcome,
and in thafflicted case:
The valiant ought for to despise,
the fawning fortunes face.
For fortune then does most prevail,
when that she is restraynde:
Do thou not see, whom fortune often,
had fully once disdaynde.
The same with changed hand she ayds,
and lyfteth up on hye:
Now this, now that: nothing endures,
beneath the heavens sky.
when glouming weather foul is gone,
then pleasant days ensewe:
At length the swelling seas be caulme,
that erste the winds so blewe.
when winters season sharp departes,
apears the floured spring:
Fix sure thy mind therefore as now,
and faint not in the thing.
That bitter seems: prepare thy self,
for better destenies:
The time shall come (the stars above,
altring their course in skies.)
(If death before, thee not destroy)
when this thy present name:
That now does lie both drownde and hyd,
shall gain immortal fame.
For I my self will present be,
and eke my learned route
The Sisters nine, in every place,
shall stand thee round about.
And take thee from the common sort,
and cause thy name to live:
For evermore. This aunsweare here,
to me did Phoebus give
So praying. But scarce can I the Gods
believe such things of me:
Under so crabde aspect of stars,
I know my birth to be.
So sore the heavens do me vex,
but yet from thence I go:
with joyful heart I wander forth,
alone, and always so.
These words in mind I muse,
O Lord that hap might be:
That God or man I might now meet,
as promisd late to me.
Arete for to send to teach,
that I the rest might know:
O that from heavens hye she would,
descend the earth below.
And me with pleasant words instruct,
as erst I did her hear:
A valley long there lay between,
two hills that bounded near.
A narrow path there was, that shows
the trauayling wight his way:
This path I took, and straight I saw,
two shepheardes there that lay.
In grass full grene against the bank,
who (bags and bottels down:
with crab tree staves where with they walkd)
desirous of renown.
Began to strive who best could sing,
but judge they lacked than:
Whose sentence should the strife appease,
and praise the siner man.
As soon as they me present spyde,
they both me calde unto:
And wild me for to sit them by,
and judge who best could do.
Then one of them, (when that he had
with oten music played)
His staring eyes on heaven cast,
and on this sort he said.
O flower fair of Dardany,
of Joue beloved (o child:)
That seruest the gods with frothing cup
of pleasant Nectar mild.
Come down from hie now from ye Skies,
a fayrer far than thee:
In earth remayns that unto Joue,
cupbearer now shall be.
Him, Jupiter despising thee,
shall take from hence, and place
Among the stars from envy burst,
(O thou in wretched case.)
Yield up for grief thy woeful ghost,
but rather not depart:
Thou shall with wines the Gods salnte,
and I enjoy my heart.
Philetus dear (without whose sight,
no kind of thing is sweet:
To me,) no not my life to have,
without his presence mete.
As often as him on horsbacke swift,
(the Got, or Heart to chase:)
The Fayries spy, with love they burnt
and wysh that lovely face.
With thousand kisses for to mete,
as many gifts wythall:
And floured garlands trim him give
contending, best who shall.
And apples fair in baskets bring,
and grapes of pleasannt taste:
O that neglecting to be pleased,
in him were not so plast.
O that this lively Impe would show,
himself always at hand:
To ease the wretched lovers grief,
then hapiest should I stand.
No man in all the world my mate,
but he does clean despise,
My plaints and faithful lovers suits
and hates my doleful cries:
And as the shaft from bow departes
so from me fast he flies.
But fly not from me thus, nor hate,
me so (Philetus dear:)
I am no cruel Canniball,
whereby thou should me fear.
But worthy to be loved I am,
perchance if thou me know:
For though upon my body rough,
the hoary hairs they grow.
And though from chin with locks vnke^pt
my griesly beard does fall:
I am not yet ill favored sure,
for beard and bristels all.
Be decent eke and mete they be,
for fyghting folks and strong:
Let maydly men have tender skins,
the sheapheardes all among.
In richesse none does me excel,
of beast I lack no store:
A thousand kine my pasture feeds,
of swine full fyfty score.
Amongst my grove of Oaks they run
my kine with calves do sway,
My lusty gotes with kid they swell:
ne want I whigge, nor whay:
Fresh cheese, and old enough I have
take what thou likest, away.
All mine is thine and I thine own,
though cruel thou denny:
If thou me louedst and would thy self
sometime come sit me by.
I would thee pleasant apples get,
that hangs on branches hie:
with golden sides like yellow wax,
and red, as strawberies die.
I would thy lap with fylberts fill,
and nuts of diverse kind:
How often, how often mine arms should I,
about thy myddle wind?
Two thousand kisses would I give,
those rosey lips of thine:
Dout not (sweet boy) but walk with me
by cleared spring so fine.
we both will rest, and grateful sleep,
with hausing arms will take:
Alurde with shade of hushing trees,
and noise that rivers make.
while Greshops in the heat do chirp,
alas, and do thou now
Despise both me and all my gifts,
that here to thee I vow?
Do not my woeful tears thee move,
nor all that I can say?
More fiercer far, than Tiger stout,
(whose whelp is taken away.)
More deaf than pictures made,
of Parus Marble stone:
And harder eke than are again,
the mountains every chone
Of Alps hie, and Diamond strong,
what does thy beauty good:
If all men so thou do despise,
with fierce and cruel mood?
And slayest the souls of woeful wightes,
whose hearts thine own be tried:
Thus wise her self in flowers fair,
the dreadful Snake does hide.
And thus with poison honey myxt,
lay down dis(...) aside:
A monster vile, and unto God,
is ancient e(...)y, pride.
Nor be not thou with grace begilde,
or form of fading hew:
For beauty lasts but little time,
like flower fresh and new.
Full fair at first, is gone in time,
while flouring age does last:
while tender skin in face does shine,
let not in vain be past
Such happy times, but use the gifts,
now granted unto thee:
While time does serve, for every thing,
by use commended be.
The time shall come when this thy chin
with bristled beard beset:
Shall vggly seem, and eke thy face,
shall riueled wrinkles fret.
And when thy golden locks shall turn
to ghastly gresild hears:
To late then shall thou fodle bewail,
the loss of youthful years.
And often thy self shall say, where is
my beauty old now gone?
Where is my color fresh become,
both red and white in one?
Uayne hope, alas, of this thy face,
then shall thou sore lament:
Thy changed cheeks, and face so foul
thy self, when represent,
Thou shall thy glass perceive, but why
thus waste I wind in vain?
What mean I thus in barren soil,
to let my seeds remain?
Unhappy wretch in vain I toil,
my destnies will me so:
O cruel destenies, that now,
so sore against me go.
And chiefly now, when wretched love,
has pearst my woeful heart:
Of greater force is luck in love,
than all the swelling part.
Of richesse great, or noble blood,
to destnies virtue ^hrall:
By luck in love the prince despisde,
and John obtaines the ball.
But though more fiercer thou remainst,
than fearful raging drake:
Or doste my love no more esteem,
than weeds in fenny lake.
Yet thee sweet heart I serve, and thee,
for ever shall I love:
And nothing shall thee from my mind,
(Philetus dear) remove.
This said, he held his peace, and thus,
this other began to say:
Mellina, passing flower of wheat,
and whiter far away.
Than frothing foam of raging seas,
or Allablastar stone:
And boiled milk, more red than are,
the Cherries every one.
When ripe they hang, or Mulbry fruit,
while yet no black they wear:
More fair than trees in time of spring,
when branches blossoms bear.
More sweet than are the withred figs
or wines that new be made:
Such lips, such breast, or eyes I think,
dame Uenus never had.
What should I here commend her thies,
or places there that lie?
Such parts in practice put, than speak,
with better will would I.
Not only here of mortal men,
her praise Mellina gaynes:
But Gods her love I saw my self,
a Satire take the pains.
To hunt her once, and when he had,
the game possessed in paws:
Anenst a Cork he taught her tricks,
of wanton lovers laws.
She called and shrikt, and I, as wood,
would straight her aid have borne:
But sore afraid I was to meet,
the shagheard horsons horn.
Nor once I durst my enemy try,
his pactence for to prove:
How often she beckes and byds me come,
with eyes that rolling move.
And of her self she calls me thus,
and fast begins to twine:
Her arms so white about my neck,
like Juy, or the Uine.
That wonted are their neighbor trees,
with winding course to brace:
And fast the wanton bytes my neck,
and softly on the face
With hand in sport she smites me often,
and by her troth she swears:
That none on earth but me she loves,
nor none good will she bears.
But yet am I not such a fool,
that I hold this for true:
For women all in lies excel,
and when with fawnings new
The naughty queanes begin to fliere,
the more thou ought afraid
To be, these words in song he spoke,
and more ve would have said.
But seven wolves by chance therewith,
came creping close the way:
From rocks adowne amyd the trees,
desirous of their pray.
And on the flock they run, now these,
now those they slay and byte:
And mouths in blood they stain, again
the masty curres they fyte.
With barking boughing noise, to beat,
their enemies from the ground:
A noise full great made in the dale,
with roaring cry does sound.
Then both the shepheardes rise in haste,
the wager quite undone:
With sling, and staves of Oak in hand,
together both they run.
And I, behind alone remaynd,
and forth another way:
With doutfull mind and diverse thought
I went, as far as may
The brazen canon cast his stone
at thrice, and there a spring
That spouted up with bubling sands,
where thick the Plantrees cling
I found, and round about the grass,
full grene, it does embrace,
With seats of sandy Tophus stone,
I guess it was the place
Where Fayries set in Summers rage,
when Dogdayes heat does glowe:
Not far from hence I saw me thought
a Service tree to grow.
Whose fruit did make ye branches bend,
and thereto fast I went:
(For ripe I them perceaude,) and some,
with have in hand I hent.
And eat them up, desyring then,
with water for to slake:
My burning thirst, and to the well,
my journey forth I take.
And down I bow my self, and there,
my lips in water fine:
I dipped, and whilst I drink, the stones,
in Cristall waters shine.
Whilst these are done, a young man down
from heavens to me sent:
That Goddess good, Arete fair,
of me not negligent.
With falling flight he cuttes the air,
more swifter much he flies:
Than hawks that strive by force to take
the pray before their eyes.
And straight to me he co^mes that then,
with weary limbs did rest:
Amid the grass he bids god den,
then up my self I dressed
And worship there to him I make.
He (passing man in fame)
I am did say Aretes son
Timalphes is my name,
My mother has me hither sent,
that all that does remain
Behind unfold, I may disclose
to thee in order plain.
Then both together down we sit,
and thus he began to say.
The woman, and her boy, that stood
on left side yonder way,
Thou know, my mother told ye plain:
now restes there for to tell
What hight the woman, and the boy
that on the right hand dwell.
Her Venus men do call, and say
that of the salt sea sud
She then created was, when that
old Saturn in the flud
Unkind his fathers stones did cast,
so said the Greekish sort:
A people fancies fyt to feign
and lies for to report.
Vranius her (of troth) begat
of Lopades by rape.
Vranius sire of every thing,
than whom of larger shape
Was Atlas not, nor yet the fierce
Enceladus so strong,
Nor gorbellied Typheus huge,
nor all the Giants long,
That ever earth did yet bring up.
Nine heads him nature took,
Whereof the highest is void of eyes,
and Westward still does look.
Gaynward the East the other stand,
above a thousand eyes
The second has, and on a piece
does all the rest suffice.
His right hand Northward out he casts
the left to South he sendes,
With both his hands ye world he metes,
his feet the flock of fendes
Does touch, his head the skies does rech,
a shepherd rich in deed
Above al men, of every flock
through all the earth to feed,
He puttes them out, the number would
of them excede, if not
That monster Pamphagus his son
with greedy ravening throat
Should them devour continually
with Attropos his wife.
This Venus now Vranius got,
and ioynde in wedlock life
To one Pedogenes a God,
and bad they should increase.
This is that Venus, without whom
the use of earth would cease:
And all the world with briars thick
unseemly should be thought.
Her God has ordeynd, that she might
the loss which nature brought
Full recompense, which God appoynts,
that hurtful can not be.
What then of them shall I report
content with chastity
That fair increase do not esteem.
but void of issue die,
And leave no signs of them behind (...)
they sin assuredly.
And if the truth may here be said,
unworthy birth him gives
Nature, of whom not one is borne
unworthy eke he lives
By whom another has no life.
Yet they whom sickness let.
Or other means do them constrayne
no children for to get,
Oppressed with cursed poverty,
do fear that they shall see:
Their children beg, intend saints life
of whom but few there be.
Let them refrain, good leave they have
but many will no wife,
That they may others efte defile,
and lead a lechours life.
And for because that more they might
the common sort beguile,
Under pretense they give them selves
to sacred things a while,
And churches haunt, and priests of God
they counted are to be.
They diverse laws and garments strange
do use, and think to see
The heavens hie with scraped crown,
clean things the beasts do fly,
And after things unclean they run,
while as the panche they plye,
And give themselves to drowsy reast,
which both do foster vice.
Stale Uirgins are they thought to be
while close they cast the dise,
The dark night al in vice to spend,
their minds they whole apply.
None truly use a Uirgins life,
but such as come thereby:
When crooked old unlusty age,
or sickness lore them fret.
Or restless pain of carking mind:
or gift of God then let.
Al overplus from out the corpse
does nature clean expel.
Hereof it co^mes that in night dreams
sometimes does Venus dwell,
In dreams that show the joyful art
and pleasant sport in deed.
Let them more chaste than Sibels be,
or Nuns of Uestal weed.
Of two which worthier is I ask
esteemed for to be,
The barraine bows that frutelesse fade
or else the fertile tree?
The ground that gives good increase,
or sand where nothing grows?
O thoughts of men of none effect,
O fond and foolish vows,
Apply your selves not to despise
the sacred natures hest
Which would the bred should bread again
which made such joyful rest,
In wedlock bed thee not to fear,
but rather to allure,
Why will thou nature thus withstand
no hurt in Venus lure
There is, if her thou lawful use
with mean, and not excess.
But to much used she strength abates,
and drownes the valiantness:
Destroys the wit, and shortneth life.
Now must we here display
dame Venus son whose force does cause
both man and God obey.
Who brond withal, and quiuered shafts
makes all the world afraid.
To whom (though yet a boy, and blind)
has every thing obayd,
That earth, or sea did ever breed,
or heavens hie contain.
O Lord what rage of flames, and fire
in every place to rain
This boy has causd? what force haste ye
O quiuered Cupide now?
No strength thy power may once resist,
thy conquest makes to bow
Both beast and Man, and Gods above,
with darts of thine alone.
(His heart through pearcd) full often has made
the thu^dring God to groan:
And diverse shapes on him to take
his lightning laid a side.
(And region left of starry skies)
on wretched soil to slide
Has not disdainde, sometime the form
of Egle swift to bear,
Sometime, a bull with frowuing face,
sometimes a shepherds cheer
On him to put, sometime to seem
a snake, and now, and than
With flames to come, in Satirs shape:
now gold, now like a swan.
Neptunus also once ychanged
to fluddes of Enepey,
While he poor wretch thy dart did feel
with Salmonide he lay.
And often a Dolphin would he seem,
a Ram, or Horse to be.
With all the seas he could not quench
the flames that burnte by thee,
In breast so blind, and heart of him,
a tale to long it were,
Like acts of all the Gods, to show
to thee in order here.
How Phoebus did a hawk become
and eke a Lion kende:
Or call to mind the wood attemptes
of raging Tartares fend,
But vain it is so time to spend:
for if I should expound
The Lords, and Ladies euerychone,
whom cruel love did wound,
My tale would run to much at large,
and down (before) would hide
His glistring beams sir Titan bright,
the smoking wheels should slide,
Amid the washing western waves.
But here I think it best
Such things to have, since many men
have plainly them expressed.
And now the truth we will declare,
this boy did never flow
From Bacchus raines, as Greece did feign
no sure: if it were so,
Each man that hates wine, should love
but destny him begot:
Because in every kind of love
this destny knittes the knot.
All morttall things, this desteny rules:
she does to all bestow
Conditions eke with fortune to,
and end of life does know.
Of greater force than beauty is
this desteny assurde.
Though beauty cause of burning flame
has lovers linckes procurde:
Of greater might than gold it is
though once with gold did bye
Old Saturnes son, inclosde in towers
with Danae fair to lie.
Familier sight, and license had
full often to talk, and live
Together both, when none shall see
which sliding way does give,
By which to love we in do come,
by which is Venus got.
All this can nothing sure prevail:
if destnies favor not.
By destny ioinde, by destny broke,
the lovers knot, and ring.
By this the vile deformed slave
sometimes obtaines the thing,
Which rich, nor fair can have: by this
the fair and gentle wife
Is of her husband eft despisde:
and more contents his life
A ragged jade, in house to keep.
By this the wife disdaines
Her husband fair, of gentle blood
and greater joy sustaines
A lither lousy lout to have,
or unacquainted wight.
And if so be that love were not
by Gods aduisement right
To every man appointed here,
by limittes parted just:
No doubt of all might one be loved,
and on them all should lust,
And every man might safe enjoy
the Damsel that he likes,
But as the fisher does not take
the fishes all in dikes:
Nor foulers all the birds do catch,
nor hunters all do kill,
But every one his chance does take,
obtaines and has his will,
So, love to every one is dealt
by Gods arbitrament.
So does the servant base full often
his Lady well content.
So shall the bursten bleared lout,
and crooked father old
A blissful girl to wife obtain.
For as the Merchant bold,
That underneath unhappy star
with wares his ship does freight,
And cuts the fearful fouring seas,
is often spoilde of weight
By lost of ship, or Pirates fierce:
so he that flames with love,
The stars, and luck against him both:
does seek the rocks to move.
An evil name, and cruel wound,
receives he again.
And ef^e his love to get, does he
the loss of life sustain.
But he, whom destnies favor well,
and fortune smiles upon,
His heart, and joy may sone obtain
with quiet rest anon.
But sure of few this grace is had,
so good are Gods to few:
Except such one as close does keep
his joys that none them know.
No trust there is at al in man
disceytes are used vile,
Now every man does practice how
his fellow to beguile.
If any man unto his friend
his secrets does disclose.
Then must he stand in fear of him
least he his friendship lose:
Least he in angry mood reveal
that erst in heart he hydes
If free, therefore thou sekest to be,
and safe to live besides.
Let no man know thy secret deeds:
thy friend have always so
While friendship lasts, that thou foresee
he once may be thy foe.
Which thing in proof has eft ben known,
for few such friends we see
That always love: and much herein
ought envy fearde to be.
Which ever strives the happy chance
with poison fell to stayne.
Take heed therefore of envy syrs,
I warn you lovers plain.
Let no man know thy mind in love,
but hide this love of thine,
(If wit thou have) and let not thou
thy fire forth to shine.
A monster vile is envy sure,
a plague that rages fell,
A deadly hurt, than which a worse
is hard to find in Hell.
It hunteth virtue in every place,
good deeds asunder tears.
Good men she hates, and does disdain
the happes of others years.
Although no man can well keep close
his own unfeigned love,
If Fates against him let, and nyll
the envious lights above,
Small force in wit of man there is,
where Gods do not agree.
In vain he toils that seeks ought,
when Gods against him be.
Yet ought we not for this to leave
our wills and wits to strain:
For he that has the race forth run,
and palm cannot obtain,
Is worthy praise: and envy all
upon the Gods he lays:
Who often good men down have put,
and fools exaiting raise.
A happy man is he to whom,
from tower of heavens, grace
Is granted, who^ God guides himself,
whose birth with lucky face
The happy stars have shinde upon,
to him co^mes joyful love:
And void of woe, long sweetness he
with pleasant life may prove
For love is daynty, sweet, and mild,
if destnye cause not pain:
Whose darts, the man that never felt,
does senseless still remain.
What beast might ever yet be found,
that felt not Cupides flame?
All creatures vile, and base we see
have tasted of the same:
God willing so. Wherefore who seeks
this love, a thing divine
He seeks: for if the king, and Lord
of all the world, should not
All things created here retain
in loves assured knot,
The world should straight be at an end,
and the elements decay.
That each man loves he keeps, and it
defends eke always.
But no man seeks the thing to keep
that he sets nothing by.
Wherefore the order of all things
shall last continually.
For, everlasting is the love
of God, that all does guide.
Though all things made do fall and fade,
the kinds yet never stide.
For those the blessed God does love,
but not the bodies so.
Whereof the cruel death has power,
for no man suffers tho
The thing he loves to perish quite,
if he can it defend.
But who denies? God all thing can.
and he can them defend.
But be the bodies does not love,
wherefore he lettes them die:
But not the kinds he so permits
from their estate to (...).
What does the potter care if this,
or that his pot be burst,
Turning the wheel, and chalk in hand
despises now the first?
A newer sort of them he makes
now over all this same.
The sky, the ground, the seas and air,
and raging fires flame,
And eke in fine, the world it self
(by loves enduring knot)
So many years does stand and last,
for if this love were not:
The elaments altogether would
with bursten bonds go fight:
Nor down to earth, the Heavens would
show forth their blissful light,
And beams so warm, no seed should grow
and eke the fiery flame
This air his neighbor, would consume,
he would, but out of frame,
His shoures on earth yt air put down,
full bare would seem each soil,
The seas should quench the (...)er quite,
or rather fire boil,
And waste away the fyshy seas,
As once, when Phaeton ruled not well
the fyry foming beasts,
(I dreading sore the monsters hie,)
his own good fathers heastes
Believing not, unhappy wretch
was drowned in his desire.
Then all the world therewith began
to burn with blasing fire.
Till he by force of lightning smytte
came tumbling headlong down,
And in the floods his flames did quench.
Love breeds in every town
Assured peace, peace worthiest is
of al things here we see.
In time of peace do al things grow,
and al things lively be.
Then live men safe, in safety ^ke
the trauayling wight he stands,
And takes his journey void of harm
and scapes the robbers hands.
Then buzzing Bees in hiues be kept
by good advise and care,
And beasts in pastures fat are fed,
the ground is torn with share,
And yeldeth far increase in time,
then plenty bears the sway:
In bread, and milk and noppy drink,
then every where they play.
The sounding shaume does the^ provoke
to dance, the Thiase round:
But idiotes, none do envy peace,
and covet Martial ground.
Such times did flow when Saturn ruld
his Empire here alone:
O worthy age more worth than Gold,
but now O grief to moan.
All things does discord vile disturb,
with raged mocion mad:
And filles and fears every place,
with broyling tumult sad.
Now fierce we forced are to be,
all laws with sword to slake:
The furies al of hell they swarm,
a thousand brondes they shake
A thousand snakes wythal, and move
the proud hie minded Kings:
And common people mad to be,
what good to you it brings?
(O wretches mad) your death to haste,
with battes, and bylbowe blade:
To late when as she never commes,
but mischefe this has made
That plaguey pride and hunger mad,
dominion for to have:
O dust, what makes thee proud to be,
whose stinking guts in grave
The filthy worms anon shall tear,
why sekest thou for gold?
Thinkste thou for ever here to live?
O wretch, O wretch, by hold,
How vain, how short, how fleeteth sone
dur life before thine eyes?
A grave anon shall close contain,
thy bones, and shall suffic^.
And if so be that love should knitte,
the hearts of men in one:
This would not be, for every man,
his friend would tend upon.
And all men for their parts would aid
the friend that they hold dear:
Assuredly, nothing more good,
nor sweater does appear.
Than truly while we here do live,
of many loved to be:
A safe defense are always friends,
against adversity.
The mind in deubtful things they ease,
and helpers seek to be:
Thy cares and loss they lighten much,
they weep and wayle with thee.
But seldom perishes the man,
that thus is rich in friends.
When fortune laughes upon thy luck,
and happy chance thee sendes:
With thee thy profyts they embrace,
with thee they joyful be:
With friendship they thy haps increase,
and feast in mirth with thee.
Who list therefore to lead his life,
in safety, and in joy:
Great store of friends for to retain,
let him his care employ.
By many means this thing is got,
which (as I can) I shall
Declare: but now to know,
is needful first of all,
Which love the people call of mind,
a motion for to be:
For well to will it is the same:
that men call love we see.
The mind always it self desires,
the good thing for to prove:
And seeks the evil for to shun,
these (...) alone her move.
These two therefore the causes be,
and loves assured ground:
But good in three divided is,
whereof one part is found
Delighting for to be,
the other honest eke appears:
The third utility.
So likewise, ill in three we part,
first hurtful we esteem:
The second vile deformed is,
the third does grievous seem.
Who so that loves, refusing these,
or else desiring those:
He loves, love diverse is, like as
the spring from whence it flows.
Not worthy praised like to be,
nor worthy like disprayse:
Nor only differ three foresaid,
in general kind always.
But diverse special kinds himself,
does each of these contain:
Which kinds when as they diverse be,
make diverse loves again.
What so ever aids, that profit is,
but is not yet as one:
Much goods upon the body wayght,
and much the soul upon.
Strength, beauty, health, actiuity,
these four the body owes:
These things whatsoever creature gives
from them the profit flows.
Two goods again the soul contaynes
as manners mild, and Art:
Like as the soul has virtues two,
the will, to whom the part
Of manners all, belong, and mind,
to whom the truth to know
It proper is, and from the mind,
like diverse goods do flow.
The learnings nine this mind adourn,
which Poets Muses call:
Equivalent to circles nine,
that roll above us all.
The will does diverse goods possess,
of which these four excel:
Wit, justice eke, and virtue strong,
that conquers troubles fell.
With her that bridleth eke our minds,
and modesty does bring:
From these, as from the fountain first
do all the other spring.
Which whosoever seeks to know,
let him go toss the book:
Of Stagerite, or (if he list)
in Platoes works go look.
Which two are lights to all the world,
whatsoever then it be:
Such like to us that gives, that term
may profitable we.
As to the body medcine is,
and eke the physic leach:
And to the mind the book likewise,
is master that does teach.
But those that profits the soul,
more profitable be:
And better eke because it is,
of greater dignity.
As is the master than the man,
the shipman than the ship:
Than is the cart is he that holds,
the clashing carters whip.
But by delay, or out of hand,
does profit us each thing:
As to the hungered man the gold,
and he that gold does bring.
The coke, and eke the fode it self,
the like I do declare
Of pleasing goods in diverse parts,
divided is their share.
Of which the body some do please,
and some the soul delight:
But yet the pleasures of the soul,
he always more of might
And common eke to Gods, and us,
whereas the bodies joy:
As granted unto brutish beasts,
to them a proper roy.
Not lawful unto them it is,
with joys of soul to mell:
Nor have they all the senses five,
and only know they well.
What taste and sense of featling means
they music naught esteem:
No sweet perfumes with princely smell,
to them does pleasant seem.
Regard they ought the painted lines,
of fine Appelles hand:
Or muse they on the brazen plate,
of comely Corinthes land?
Or wonder they the sight to see,
of shooting Circus game?
If ought they smell, if tune or sight,
them please, it is the same
That ^aste, or feeling makes, as when
the Lion fierce does spy,
In fields by chance a cow, he leapes,
and liftes his maine on hye.
And twines and twirls his twisting taste
desrous of his pray:
Or when the fomey horse beholdes,
the gadding mare astray.
With hauty head vpheld he runs,
and here and there he kickes:
And leapeth hedge and ditch abroad,
while lusty guts him pricks.
And causes all the skies above,
with hineying noise to shrike:
When meat therefore, and gendring act,
the beasts do chiefest like.
And sith to them it proper is,
it is therefore most vile:
And fit for villaynes to possess,
fine wit it does erile.
To often used, it body hurtes,
who therefore this obayes:
Is made a fool and for to serve,
is apter eke always.
Than over others for to rule,
but use them moderately:
And if thou minded art to know,
the goods of honesty.
Remember what before I said,
for of the mind they be:
The manners mild, and learning eke,
as I declard to thee.
But give good ear what I shall say,
those goods that do delight
While as they last, do pleasant seem,
and after of no might.
Example for, behold the joys,
of song and Uenus play:
But that that brings the body good,
that profits men do say.
The goods thereof be pleasant eke,
as health obtaynde does please:
So profits it again we see,
that heals each disease.
And that that causes goods of mind,
we well may profit name:
But these, as soon as they be got,
then pleasant are the same.
And honest out of hand they be,
for all that virtue brings:
Does profit much, and dealt her self,
above all other things.
She pleases most, and honest is,
her just reward and hire:
Is honor only due to her,
therefore who does desire.
Much love, while he here lives to have,
let either him devise:
To please or profyt them he loves,
or else in any wise,
Let him have virtues good in store,
the which the dogged sort
Shall force and eke constrayne to give,
a praise and good report.
Whom though they hate yet shall they fear
and first of all he must:
Of those whom he does seek to please,
mark all the manners just.
For all men's wylles do not agree,
nor all their studies one:
Such seeds unlike dame nature sowes,
engendring us upon.
The one does hate that the other loves,
that one does most disprayse:
The other lifts above the Skies,
whereof appears always,
That each love al things not a like,
nor al men do desire:
One good that profits, like to have,
nor honest like require.
Wherefore we first of all must learn,
what pleases best his brain:
To whom we seek, lest else perchance
we labor all in vain.
In doing things of them vnliked,
this is not hard to know:
The talk assuredly declares,
the deeds from them that flow
And hidden heart, al men talk most,
of that they most do love:
And most attentive are thereto,
full many things that prove.
His love at home may eft be spied,
the plowman holds at home
The plow, the goade, the yoke, the rake,
the spade to temper lome.
The Knight his fearful armor has,
that hangs at home full bie:
So he whose house with books abounds
a student rightfully,
May demed be: and this I say
of every other man:
The hand and tongue declares the heart,
such things as pleases than.
Who seeks friends let him perform,
for fawning love does get:
But most men yet do gape for gain,
and all men's hearts are set
On gold, and gifts and many friends,
by gifts obtained be.
But sure such love endures not,
for when that gain does flee:
Then fails friendship, chiefly then
when hope to have, is gone:
But some there be (though few of them)
that still remain as one.
And mindful eke of friendship showed,
do never cease to love:
But grant the vnthankfuls frendshyp fail,
it does not yet behoue.
The good and friendly man to leave,
(who may as rare be found:
As Phoenix bird in all the world,
that breeds in Arabs ground)
To profyt many men, and aid,
with all his power the same:
This way to heaven only leads,
by this obtaynd the game
Great Hercules, and many more,
whose worthy fames remain:
As yet with us, whom never age,
can cause to die again.
The gentle and the liberal man,
is like to God above:
Great sorts of men again there be,
delighting things that love.
Whereby such men they most esteem,
that pleasant things do bring:
And chiefly children, youth, and such
as are of great living
Do covet joys, and pleasures seek,
but such love is not true:
For when that pleasure once is gone,
then frendships eke adewe.
Yet sometimes sure it profyts much,
and many get thereby:
Riches, and many favor get,
therefore let him apply
His mind, to please who friendship sekes
(so he go not astray:
From bonds of right and honesty,
but each man profyt may)
And pleasure eke two sundry ways,
by words and deed beside:
But safer eke and easier it is,
such friendship to provide
By words, than deeds, but now it is best
for to declare the way:
By which it may be brought to pass,
which thing perform you may.
If wholesome counsel thou do give,
and warning hurt declare,
And teach how profyt may be got,
of evil to beware:
In praying Gods to send them health,
and send them well to fare.
In askyng grateful things, for them
in whom consistes thy care.
If thou desyrest any man,
with words for to delight,
Of him, and eke of all his things,
do praises thou resight.
And if he ever any act
performed worthy prays,
Commend it much, for wisemen now,
and fools at all assayes
Would praised be, sometime again,
with sweet, and pleasant style
Delight that tentiue ears of theirs,
prouokyng them to smile.
Or tellyng of some pleasant tale,
though new, or old it be
(If it be worth declaryng) tell
some worthy history.
If thou perceiuest any thing
that does his mind delight
In any case, disprayse it not,
but say the crow is white.
And if thy conscience be so straight
thou dare not say so much,
Then hold thy tongue, say never a word,
for now the time is such,
That wisdom great it is to feign,
(as true the people say)
He cannot live that knows not how
with both his hands so play.
Sometime, believe me, now it hurtes
the truth for to defend,
The place, the people, and the time
in mind do thou perpend,
That naught thee hurt. But some there be
that rather love to praise
A man behind his back, and take
the same for better ways.
They do but well such kind of praise
more thank deserves sure:
Unfayned eke and vnsuspect*
it seems to be more pure.
For some do use to cousin men
when as they present be:
True friends whereby they might be thought*
whom when they absent se
With bifyng words they laugh to scorn,
best is it to reject
Such clawyng gestes, it is the use
of Gnatoes fawning sect.
Not few again at least, some one
such merchant shall thou find:
That all things will abroad declare
that issued from thy mind.
Such praiyng mates tnow there be
he speaks much good (says he:)
And does commend your maystership,
of him dispraysde you be.
In few words now the truth to say,
nothing does more delight:
All kind of men, than manners good,
and life lead all upright.
Of greater force than riches, this,
or learning eke it semes:
Though evil men be learnde, or rich,
yet no man them estemes.
Nothing more odious is, than vice,
but if thou honest be:
And good, al men shall thee embrace,
at least (I think) none thee
Will hate. A sentence old it is,
that manners like in all:
And study like is it (they say)
that love is fed wythall.
So merry it is when knaves be met,
so learnd with learnd remain:
So haunt al kind of beasts their herd,
I speak not this again.
For how can they be joined in love,
whose minds contrary be:
When one thing for to will and hate,
friends use it is we see?
Love lastes not long in wicked men,
fools friendship lastes not long.
For private wealth that ill men seek
by right and ^ke by wrong.
And cruel lust to harm and hurt
that ill men all possess:
With pride, and wrath together both
the friends of folyshnesse
Makes fuming humors rage abroad,
and ioynes them by the ea^es.
That only love endures long,
whose root dame virtue beats,
Which honesty engendered has,
this only knittes the hearts:
Of godly ^ke and faithful men,
with love that never parts.
And more it is to be estemde,
Than is the love of kind:
By which the father loves the son,
and eke with loving mind.
^^he other k^^smen do embrace,
for children e^^yn hate:
Their parents dear, and fathers e^^
have grudgd the childs estate.
The brother has been seen (er this)
to work the brothers wyl^:
But never true Dresses yet,
did Pylades beguile.
Nor Pylades Dre^^ to aid,
did death esteem there while.
But here it comes in question, if
by any means we can:
Procure the love of euerychone,
the good, and evil man.
For lone in many parts disperst^
is weaker every hour:
In few of greater force it is,
in two of greatest power.
Denided thus in many parte^
it vanishes away:
Who byddes secke not to many mates,
do therefore truly say.
For hard it is to line among
so great a company:
With them as it does friends become,
eke conversant to be.
For fyxed faith denies her self,
with many for to dwell:
With few her self the does content,
wherefore believe thou well.
Thou shall not many faithful find,
love not in any wise:
The common sort: nor seek their love,
for discord thence does rise.
And pleasant peace with few remains,
the common prease forsake:
Of pressing men with troubles, they
their troublous name do take.
A few, and good choose thou thy self,
with whom to lead thy life:
By many years in safe thou maiste,
and also void of strife.
Like as therefore, thou can not love,
so many fervently:
So, can thou not of such a sort,
be loved faithfully.
For who so loves not for troth,
is worthy of no love:
A civil common love there is,
wherewith it does behoue.
The common sort to love, with which
each good, and evil man:
We ought assuredly to love,
which is performed than.
When as we no man's hurt procure
by words, or else by acts:
When as we lead our life that none
may well control our factes.
When we to all men curteyse be,
and eke with friendly fare:
Do them salute with honors dew,
and praising them ^^brace.
But yet, at first it does ^ehoue
with few to lead thy life:
If thou dost^ seek (...) peace to live,
and (...) from foolish (...):
Them (...) shun whom ^^^ght thou knows:
it can not be perdye.
That we in thorns, and thistles tread.
and escape (...) thereby:
Nor care thou not a whyt, if that
the wicked love not thee:
Think it enough if he not hate,
ne shall thou hated be.
If thou from them do stand aloof,
such hur^eth not the snake.
But if, sometime it does thee please.
the company to take.
Of tag, and rag, and neighbor John,
let tongue in silence dwell:
And take good herd what thing you say,
and alwa^es ha^ken well.
And seldom speak, i^ is the sign
of one, whose head is light:
So much to pra^e, be ef^ o^^^ndes
that so ^oth words resight.
But such as rare, and wisely speak,
des^^ue the chiefest praise:
And in the pru^^^t mouth it is
a goodly gift always.
Speak ill of none behind their ba^ke,
ne yet before their face:
Let this the chiefest warning be,
and ^ule of chief^st place.
Nor pr^^e not thou to no intent,
nor idle words let ^all:
For then shall each man laugh at thee,
and eke a fool thee call
If thou shall answer any man,
or if thou question find:
Before thou speak in any case,
record it in thy mind
For when it once is ^^edde from thee,
thou can it not retain:
The word that once is flowne abroad,
can not come home again
A goodly thing, also it is
in talk to tell sometime:
The pithy sense of aged laws,
and ancient poets ^^me*
And now and then examples sound*
in worthy stories old:
Do give the talk a greater grace
if they ^lude, so told.
Always therefore, it needful is
on diverse books to reed:
And, as the Bees now there now here,
on sundry flowers to feed.
Expel thou anger far from thee
away with pride that elfe:
Such kind of men cannot be loved,
and always show thy self.
Of gentle mind, and lowly eke,
so shall thou all men please:
If any man thy hurt procure,
prove thou, him to appease.
Rather with wit, than furious mode,
to wit does strength give place:
She conqueresse does all things tame
the Tigres stout in pace.
And Lions fierce by art are won:
and ships in seas do swim:
And towers strong by art does bear
the Oliphant on him.
By this the Bull does bear the yoke
and horse with spouting might:
By this constrained is to bear,
the bridle, and the knight.
Wit all things rules with aid of force,
to threaten much with crackes,
Is cowardes guise, and women's strength
to men belongs factes.
The wise man does dissemble hurt,
the valiant prates no whitte,
But when he sees the time then dare
he do that shall seem fytte.
First take good heed that none you hurt,
and if by injury.
Thou harmed art, when thou see time
revenge it rightfully.
If thou can not let grief a while
within thy heart remain,
Least that by foolish bosting words,
thou may more harm sustain:
It is naughty playing with edged toles
the wise man will refrain:
And spy his time, and eke give place
his foe with words to train.
That pleasant seem, and fawnings eke
till he him bring to snare:
So winnes the wild unruly colte
the witty horseman ware.
So on the Oxens neck the yokes,
the plowman puts on:
So Lions fierce the Charret draws
that Cibell syttes upon.
So (tigres wood) you do obey
to Bachus bridell raines.
Great wit it is to conquer thus,
and hide the inward pains.
Till time convenient come, therefore
this must be marked beside.
Whersoeuer thou remainest, let not
thy mouth be stretched to wide,
With laughings loud, but when need is
then laugh thou moderately:
It does declare a simple wit,
to laugh excessiuely.
And on the other side, it is
not fyt for any man:
Always in dumpes to be, therefore
fly thou them both, and than.
The middle keep, there virtue sits,
no gester would I thee:
And yet, if that thou can, I would
that pleasant thou should be.
Enough (me thinks) I have now said,
my message here does end:
For which, to thee, my mother me
from heaven hie did send.
Now time co^maundes to leave ye earth,
and skies above to clime:
From whence I wonted am the earth,
to se full many a time.
Musing that it so little semes,
and round as any ball:
Amid the air to see it hang,
having no stay at all.
Sustainde only with his poise.
the sea does eke appear
About the earth full serpent like
to crangle here and there.
And like a little brook to run,
here eke I do behold.
The Padus Tanais, Ganges and
that Histre waters cold.
As often as showers do cause the dikes
with wet to ouerflowe:
And when thy mouths alofe I see
(O Nilus then I trow.)
They be (though great in deed they are)
but seven gutters small.
And hence I vewe the bloody broils
with shining swords that fall.
And fields be sprent with purple blood,
And foolish kings thereby:
Who (while they covet more to have
and never think to die.)
With dire debate do battles bring
the giltlesse souls to kill:
And show the Gods a gasing grief
repugnant to their will.
And there I se their places change
both rivers, springs, and floods
Hills fall to dales, and dales to hills,
and place (where once grew woods)
With coulter ^^lde, and whereas plowes
before have run their race,
Their woods to grow, transformed cowns
and al things changing place.
He blessed is that may the like
prospect to this obtain:
Where Asia, and Affricke he may see,
and Europ eke again.
That swells with wealth, and wepons eke,
and diverse nations strong:
That there do dwell, who^ Cancer burns
the Ethiops them among.
Cilicians fierce, and Tartars turks
and men of Scithians ground.
The shoting Parthes, Arabians eke
where franckinsence is found.
The Thracians wild, and Arimaspes
those valiant men in fight:
The french, the Italian, men of Spain
the dreadful English wight.
As many people more beside,
on whom the sun does shine,
While he above, or under goes,
the horisontall line.
Wouldes thou not hither will to come,
if it might lawful be,
For any mortal man to do:
if body let not thee.
But this can hap to none, but us
whose bodies framed were:
Of finest air, and not of earth,
a while therefore forbear.
Till death thy soul shall lose from bonds,
and till that time a dew,
I go, this said, and aunswering I
away from me he flewe.
In haste he flies with swifter course
than winds themselves my thought
And spreading wings abroad the skies
with course again he cought.
The fithe Book entitled Leo.
I Seek not here Arabians wealth,
nor stones of value hie:
That read seas breed, ne golden sands
in Tagus streams that lie.
Nor people proud to govern here
with sceptred hand and mace:
Such things my luck has me denied,
nor once I wail the case.
That desteny has not given me such,
so even the naught as good:
May like obtain to reap the gold
of wealthy richesse flood.
Full often we see rhunworthy heds
of witless people crownde:
Whose bodies eke are trun bedeckt
with robes of purple rownde.
Those things I would the Lord of all,
on me would here bestow:
Which neither fools nor wicked men
may ever hap to know.
That makes a perfect man in deed
and nere to saints above:
O mighty Joue what is the cause,
or what should thee thus move,
Wisdom to none or few to give?
in every place we see:
Both pleasant, fair, and lustye brutes,
and wealthy men to be.
But uneath may the place be found,
in all the world so wide:
That brings forth such any one
in whom does wit abide.
Do thou percha^te more worthy think,
a guide of fools to be:
More noble is that power, under
the which more noble be.
For worthyer it is assertainly
to rule by force of powers:
Both castles strong, and fortresses
with large and ample towers.
Than Lord of fold and flock to be,
and droues of beasts to guide:
Perhaps thou do it to that end
our doings to deride.
And make man thy laughing stock,
for nothing else to be:
The life of men on earth does seem
the staged comedy.
And as the Ape that counter feits,
to us does laughter move:
So we like wise do cause and move
the saints to laugh above.
As often as stately steps we tread
with look of proud disdain:
As often as richesse we to much
do crane or honors grain.
As often as we like Saunder snuff,
our selves do brag and boste.
What less is it, what part is played,
when holding honors most.
With sceptred hand, a crowned owl
an Ass of stature fair:
Of them beholden is to sit
a loft in stately chair.
Despising every other man
though he be like in case:
Desiring yet to hear the sound,
of God preserve your grace.
And to be duckd and knelde unto
and have them kiss his feet.
Nor sees the mad man what he is
how vain and apt to fleet:
Like water bleb and thistle down,
that flies in every place:
I am no such, nor seek I do
to live in such a case.
But you O Gods above that dwell,
and blessed are alone:
That live in everlasting joy,
if case you think upon.
The cries of mortal sinners here
and if you not despise.
The humane prayers that we pour,
and tears of wretched eyes:
I you beseech to grant me here,
a pure and perfet mind,
By which the truth I always may
from falshode aptly find.
And virtue eke from vice discern
least I as void of wit,
Should fly the things yt I should haunt
and follow things unfit.
For if so be it may pertain
to any mortal man:
To line as thus in blessed case,
by this means think I than.
That I may blessed be. But sure
I am therein deceived:
And with me also are all these
that have the same believed.
For no man ever happy was
nor ever yet shall be:
Not though the goods of all the world
in hand possessed he.
Nor though he did in wit excel.
but some perchance will doubt:
Except my leaves by reason strong
do boult the matter out.
Park thou therefore this present book^
that sekest this to know:
According as they best can do
my verses thee shall show.
Your sacred doors (my muses sweet)
set wide and open here:
To me your Prophet and refreshe
my mind with waters clear.
Of Parnas hills, which sore I thyrst:
disclose your secret ways.
Show me the truth, for well you know
what has been done in days.
Of alder time, and presently,
and what shall eke ensue:
Now first of all I will declare,
with name and not untrue.
Whom we ought happy for to call,
then will I touch the thing:
Whereto the God Appollo hie,
by wisdom shall me bring.
I say therefore that only he
can have the name of blessed
Who has the chiefest good in hand
now presently possessed.
But all men this not truly know
when each one beff does deem:
The thing ye most his mind does please,
the ass does more esteem.
And mule, the barley grain, than birt
that deinty dishe of meat:
Than flesh of fender thrushes sod,
than loins of Hares to eat.
So gold the gredy snudge does wish,
and always praise for best:
Which honors thinks thambitions man
and milksop, Uenus nest.
How few alas the truth may know,
what mist of errors blind:
Our judgments hide, because that few
have now a perfect mind?
Each man does judge, and each man speaks
according to his will:
Of their own selves some things ar good
which never can be ill
And never varme, so good there are,
not of themselves that be:
Which sometime help and eke beside,
do sometime harm we see.
These are the bodies outward gifts,
use makes them good or naught:
As if a man his country save,
by strength, this strength is thought
Then good to be, but if he harm,
the giltlesse innocent:
And with this strength his country war
then now incontinent,
This strength shall counted be for ill,
like sentence I declare:
Of riches, honors, eke of rule
and all things else that are.
The owner eft such goods destroy,
although he use them well:
So hurtes the Bees their honey sweet,
so makes the Beuer yell.
His hoystring wax, like rivers stream,
they fade and fleet beside:
And doubtfully in error pass,
and never certain bide.
Not therefore they be chiefest goods,
nor who se does abound:
With such may counted be to have,
a happy life then found.
But rather if the truth be said,
those goods imperfect be:
which unto us do profyt bring,
and hurt in like degree.
For else might poison good be iudgd,
that sometime health us bringes:
And nothing should be counted ill,
among all worldly things.
When as nothing so hurtful is,
but sometime helps again:
But those that of themselves be good,
and always good remain.
Does make the happy man in deed,
but what these goods now be:
All men knows not, with reason sharp,
therefore them seek must we.
Minerua granting grace, and some,
these things perchance will say:
Is nothing hard to know, sith them,
both chance and corpse denay.
Then must they needs be good of mind
that makes us blessed alone:
This bolt of theirs is well bestowed,
but mark they have touchd none.
First must we common things declare,
our purpose show that may:
Like as the torch amid the dark,
does show the gadlings way.
work, working, or the man that works
in every kind of thing:
The work it self an end we grant,
and him as beginning
That works we take the middle eke
the working for (...) ^ee:
Now which of these more worthy is,
becomes us to see.
Each thing that moves does far excel,
the moved thing thereby:
This plain apears, the end does move
the workman certainly.
For what is he takes ought in hand,
but he before perpend:
And in his mind do full conceive,
thereof the final end?
The end therefore more noble is,
that working eke beside:
Is much more base than is the end,
by reason like is tryde.
Hereof we must conjecture needs,
the chiefest good to be:
A certain end, but every end,
is not of best degree.
But only that which is the end,
of every other end:
To which the other ends have all
recourse as floods descend.
Together all in roaring seas,
for reason would that so:
Unto the sure and perfect thing,
thunperfect things should go.
And for to come to better state,
because it is more base:
No otherwise could well be kept,
good order in this case.
That thing therefore that is the last,
and end of all the rest:
That needs must be the perfectst good,
the chiefest and the best.
Again of every kind of thing,
contaynde in compass round:
Of all the world some having life,
some void of life be found.
But those that life retain, excel
the bodies life without:
Then whatsoever is chiefest good,
must live ensewes no dout.
Of things that live, some reason want,
and have no speech to use:
The rest have speech and reason both,
and them we best do choose.
The chiefest good therefore has speech,
and reason perfect tried:
Of those that reason have, great part,
their lives in pleasure slide.
And part again their lives consume,
in labors great and pain:
But of them both their state is best,
that pleasant life retain.
We must needs (Ergo) think the life,
of chiefest good, most sweet:
Of those that live most pleasauntly,
some part away do flete
Ju little time, and some again,
remain for longer days:
They that continue longest age,
their state for best we praise.
The longest time therefore does live,
the chiefest good of all:
Whom thundering Jone and great Jehoue
wont mortal men to call.
He shakes with fearful noise ye flames,
and flashing lightnings fell:
Black storms he sends with thu^ders roar
he makes the skies to yell.
Unbindes the blasts and sets them forth
that makes the seas to roar:
That drives the foming floods with force,
unto the rattling shore.
And shakes encldsde in caves the earth,
whereby commes tumbling down:
The buildings byg of every bower,
and strength of every town.
But some perchance do doubt if God,
whom we chief good do call:
An end may be, sith we have told
before that end of all
A framed thing must be, and here,
this end to have we say:
Beginning and a midst thereto,
which all men will denay.
He always was and still shall live,
no end to him can be:
All things he made, and of no man,
was ever framed he.
Before him nothing could be seen,
nothing can after bide:
This doubt with answer for to loose,
lo thus I do provide.
The workman first and maker hero
of all the world and all
Things in the same contained clear
this same we God do call.
The end of all the world likewise,
and all thing in the same:
Him God that guides the stars above,
him god we also name.
Yet lawful therefore is it not,
a work to think this same.
For every end is not a work,
his mind that work does frame.
Sekes not the work alone to make,
but farther does intend:
As he that frames a chest does not
his pains and labor spend
The chest alone to make, but for
some other cause it frame,
As something for to keep therein,
or else to sell the same.
More worthy ever is the end
the later it does fall:
And worser things to better drive,
so God is end of all.
To whom each either thing contendes,
for whom the world does stand:
And all things eke therein that be,
and for himself his hand
Created al, and not for us,
as some sir John's do say,
That call and bawle in every church,
and lead pore souls astray.
With words they doltes of Dawcockes make
what cause, what wit of ours?
What nobleness, what goodness is
contaynd within our powrs.
For which the world so vast should frame
so great a prince as he:
We all are full of fylthy vice,
and fools we also be.
Scarce one in all the world there is,
whom poison does not try:
Of greedy scraping avarice,
or fylthy lechery.
Whom swelling pride does never vex,
whom ire or pleasure blind:
Does not throw hedlo^g down, why then
what goodness can we find
In us, or what deserts, that might
so great a workman move:
The skies, the seas, the fruteful earth,
to frame for our behoue?
Loves not he gentle vndeserude?
so thou perchance wylt say:
This is but fond, for who will love,
the unthankful wretch always?
But he that wit does lack belyde,
whose natures disagree
So much, what means, or how
may love between them be?
For God himself all times surmounts,
in whom no end is spyde
Nor never he beginning had,
yet end of all beside.
And first beginning eke he is,
most chief omnipotent,
Above all things, than whom more good
can no man's head invent:
Or yet a Lord of greater power,
or one more excellent
Who has no need of any thing,
yet all things need his might:
Who each does behold, and yet
not subject to our sight.
Containing all good things in him,
and void of each ill deed:
We contrary as misers borne,
of vile and fylthy seed,
To wayling woes and doleful tears,
and thousand dangers dyre:
Continually with these or those,
diseases set on fire.
But little tyme^ remaining here,
and that in grief and pain:
Alas in what an errors mist,
our lives we here do train?
How each one weak of mind we be,
with diverse chances dolde:
Lamenting this, and wayling that,
in fraud and vices bold.
Who after that we waded have,
through cares and ^arking thought:
Are here compeld this life to yield,
resolved sone to naught.
The distance us between and God,
this (ergo) does declare:
More great to be, (...) if we should
the seely flea compare
Unto the mighty Elephant,
what knot of amity:
Can knit these two good geffes in one.
that so unequal be?
Think thou this flea may have ye love,
of this same monster strong:
With like does love and concord dwell,
and eke th'vnlike among
Always does hate and discord rain,
small faith at least, with them there is,
Hereby some sort appear,
(whom men profane, our law do judge
and they that cowles do wear
Call heretics) account us mad,
and doltheads us do call:
Because we hope the Skies to see,
and live the Gods wythall.
For evermore in happy life,
with diverse other toys:
Which folish mind and prating tongue,
do promise us as joys.
For speech does make us beasts excel,
where if we lackd the same:
Which God us gives, and eke our hands,
by which we all things frame.
No beast more vile than we were then,
no beast in worser case:
For these two above the rest,
gives nature all her grace.
Here of does all our pride arise,
there of each Art begone,
For voice does warn the present, what
to do or what to shonne.
And letters to the absent speak,
for if a beast might show:
By words the secret motions hid,
in heart that he does know.
If talk among them might be had,
if that their syngers fine:
were apt to write, no doubt we might
bcholde an Aue sometime
Of greater wit than we: and beasts
of every other kind:
would greater reason have in them
than man in us may find.
And boldly durst themselves prefer,
each other wight before:
And eke the Asso would prove himself,
of estimation more
Than us, the tongue and hand therefore,
not reason causes thus:
Each other kind of beast to be,
a Subject unto us
This they affirm and more beside,
if men be borne they say:
Of parents dumme, whose hands are maunde
or cut from them away.
And line in woods not nere to towns,
and tongue and hand do fail,
Like other beasts: (I pray thee) what
can human wit prevail?
what reason shall in them ayeare,
think thou they will not lead:
Their lives as vils as other beasts?
what wisdom may they plead.
More than the reast of brutishe sort,
one sprite they al possess
Though it unlike do seem to be,
because they do express.
In body diverse form and have
of great diversity:
Their members all where to is toynde
a diverse faculty.
If diverse Carpenters you bring
like learned in their feat:
If some of them lack instruments,
no doubt the diffrence great
Must needs amongst them be,
for they can nothing do:
That want each kind of tole that does
belong their work unto.
Nor after him shall Orpheus draw,
the beasts and rocks so hie:
If he should lack his music sweet,
ne once would Paris fly
(Being armed well at every point)
unarmed fierce Achill:
With such a sort of reasons vile,
these fools our cares do fill.
But more of them perchance I will,
hereafter bring to light:
When I shall of the soul of man,
some sentences resight.
For there I will it prove divine,
immortal eke to be:
which two of beasts no man will grant,
now where we stayed will we
The chief and perfect good is God,
and who so him possessed:
May called be of every man,
the happiest man and blessed.
But who can him obtain to have,
for ethe thing had as yet:
Is far more vile than he that has
obtained it to get.
And every kind of thing possesr,
is eke of value less:
Than is the owner of the same,
that then does it possess.
For even as sone thou may contain,
the Occean sea as wet:
Within the compass of a did,
or of an Oyster shel.
(O candle set before the winds.
O subject dust to grave)
Than Lord of such a mighty power,
by any means to have.
Alone God al things does possess,
and has himself alone:
He only has the happy life,
beside him blessed is none.
A rertayne chiefest good there is,
beside this same foresaid:
Which every creature may obtayns,
yet like to them denayd.
For diverse natures all they have,
some one thing this does please.
Some other thing does seem again,
to be the others ease.
Al thing therefore may well obtain,
a certain happiness:
If not so perfectly a God,
himself does it possess.
But by some means, and for a (...),
while things that does agree,
With nature best, he can obtain,
ne feels adversity.
But (al things past) now time requires,
that we should speak of man:
Who has the chiefest good in hand,
and counted happy than,
When seeming unto nature good,
he all things does possess:
And feels in all his life no harm
nor kind of bytternesse.
This may be counted chiefest good,
that all good things contaynes:
That gives all kind of pleasant things,
that puts away al pains.
For only pseasure does not make,
nor virtue yet does give:
The happy life, as some do write,
in ground of Greece that live.
Since many goods of greater worth,
than few, are counted plain:
As is the bushel counted more,
than one pore seely grain.
One good thing gives not happiness,
though it be chief and best:
But one in all that makes the life,
compact in all the rest.
So can not only one that rules,
a town procure to stand:
So can not of a thombe be framde,
a full and perfect hand.
And sith that of two parts we are,
the body and the mind:
Then happiness the happy man,
in both these parts must find.
He must be whole, and sound in Corpse,
and of a lusty might,
He must be fair, he must be fresh,
and of a lively spright,
He must be good, wise, learnd, discrete,
and gifts of both retain,
Pore life not know, nor hurtful chance,
and if he not remain
In long estate of happy years,
yet blessed can he not be
Though all the same commodities
foresaid to him agree.
For happy life that does not last
almost is worth nothing,
As well have certain said before,
not one day makes the spring,
Ne brings it on Swallows swaps.
But at his latest day
With easy death and smallest pain
must he depart away,
And pass with joy the Stygian lakes
resoulde from mortal days,
Nor in his life time glory wantes
nor at his death his praise.
But may there any one be found
with us that mortal are,
Which has al these things in his time?
I think him very rare,
To whom nothing disyrde is lackt,
nor doleful chance does light,
In all his time and years, who lives
and dies in happy plight,
This is the very Phaenix byrd
whom dust the Grecian feign,
The Grecian of a foolish head,
and of a frantic brain:
Who thought of one might issue come,
and bones consumde that be
To ashes cold, a byrd to breed
which never men could see.
But so that she may wonders sing
this nation not esteames
The truth to say, a nation whole
addict to toys and dreams.
At whose example Latins dote,
the happy man therefore
Is rare as Phaenix byrd. But we
are al both less and more
In wretched case, although yet some
than some more misers be,
Because that like estate to al
is not, nor like degree.
He that therefore does most good things
and evil least sustain,
May counted be a happy man:
but he whom cares do pain,
And few good things at al possess,
may called be full well
A wretched man, sith none therefore
is happy, we must tell
How least unhappy we may be
and how in better case
Our lives to lead in greater joy,
and with more pleasant grace.
And to begin I not believe
it true that al men prase
How Bishops great and mighty Kings
do live in best estate.
For as in every other thing
extremity is thought
But il to be, the mean as good,
so here excess is naught
In riches, for to much of each
does hurt, who has therefore
Most riches, has no better life,
than he that most is pore.
With evils like they vered be.
^o he that is to fat,
And has his pau^ch with guts bumbast
not lighter is for that,
Nor sooner moves than does the wretch
whose skin does leanness fret:
The one does feblenesse forbid
the other fatness let.
And as the Seas with greater floudes,
and foming force does yell,
And casts himself in mountains hie
while he discouers Hell,
Amid the deapth the tempest roares
and yet does least appear.
Is moved most with raging winds,
but now the shore full nere
The shallow Seas with louder noise
does bounce upon the sand:
So Kings that have the power
and rule of realms in hand,
With greater cares tormented are,
and greater griefs of mind,
Although the common people yet,
these wounds do never find.
For secretly within their hearts
their torments they do hide,
Add this thereto, they always have
a mischeus mate beside
That vexes them, and fear it is
suspecting every twigge,
Here of sometime do treasons breed
sometime a Spanish fig.
They dare not walk alone, nor eat
except it tasted be.
More dear than any kind of price
O worthy liberty,
The chiefest Gem, and Jewel fair
which taken once away,
Be sweet, and pleasant unto men,
nothing invented may:
And death it is alive to be.
The pore and seely soul,
Where as he list both night and day
in safety may go proule,
Either within the Cities wall,
their places fair to see,
And plays behold, or view the signs
of old antiquity,
Or if his pleasure rather be
without the wall to walk,
In Orchards fair, and gardens gay,
amyd the flowers to stalk,
Or if desire of country sight
remain within his heart,
Nothing him lets but may alone
when he sees time depart.
He needs no shuffling sort of men,
nor croude of clientes thick.
As often beside as he does thirst
or hunger does him prick
Apace he falls there to, nor fear
of poison does him let.
For baser food the birds abroad
in woods had rather get:
And greater pleasure far they take
in pecking seeds with pain,
Than if a cage of pearl and gold
their bodies should contain:
And there be fed with daynty meats.
Full often a king therefore
May live in wretched case no doubt,
nor makes him happy more
(Believe me now) his regal crown.
But on the outward show
The fools do gase, and what within
remaynes they little know.
For I him count in best estate
whom Fortune gives a mean
Whose living does not much exceed
nor substance is to lean,
Who has himself a pretty house
to which does ground belong
That gives his master malt and wheat
and other grain among
O what a great and goodly gain
the ground well tillde does breed
The husbandman that labors well
of few things stands in need.
For either trees of diverse kinds
a long in order set,
With little cost on them bestowde
do greatest profyt get,
Or sundry sorts of fruteful grain
and Corn in furrows cast
With great increase co^mes up again,
Or if to labor fast
It pleases him in Orchards fair,
of whose increase does spring
Such pleasant fruits that may compare
with dish of any king:
Except one list rather excede
than reasonably to live.
The mean estate therefore is best
which either chance does give,
Or dead men's will, or dowry of wife,
or travail of the hand,
Or cast of mind by merchandise
to fetch from land to land,
In breding heastes, with cattels heird,
thy stables full to drtue,
In keeping doves on houses hie,
or homed Bees in hiue.
Or winter milles black oils to grind,
or milles that meal do make,
With these and diverse other means
sufficient gain to take
Does wisdom teach such as give not
their minds to slothfulness,
Nor suffer ill and poison sweet
of drousy laziness.
But chiefly yet this is the gift
of lady Fortunes grace,
She sets whom she will aloft
in rich and welthy case.
She lady is of every thing
and riches all does give.
It is not to be sought beside
in service for to live,
For nothing more an honest man
becommes than liberty
But he of nature is a slave
and of no dignity,
Unhappy rather, and a wretch,
who can the yoke sustain
Of masters hestes, and them obey
for hope of foolish gain.
The meddowes fat, nor all the Gold
nor price of Indian sands,
Is so much worth that thou shuldst have
thy meat in others hands,
And rest at others will, and when
thy master byds thee go,
Then like a ball from him thou must
be tossed to and fro:
And serve a man perhaps more worse
than thou thy self sometime,
An Ass, vnlearnde, a surfetter
that vows his years to wine.
A fond and filthy thing it is,
when thou may lead thy life
With little living safe and free
and void of al such strife
To bear the yoke of bondage vile
for hope of greater gain
And freedom sell, the chief of all
and stately check sustain.
O minds of men degenerate
why seek ye great men's halls
To be an honor unto them
and make your selves as thralls?
Woe worth you all that shepherdes need
like beasts of brutish sort,
That of your selves not able be
to keep an honest port.
For who so serves by any means
can no ways happy be,
It is an Asses part to bear
the saddle still we see.
Therefore who co^mes of parents free,
or of a noble kind,
And does possess as much as may
suffice himself to find
He nedelesse then his chance be wayles
But some perchance will doubt
The married or the single life
which best of them, for stout
And proud the wives are often seen,
and often to chide and brall,
And catch their husbands by the pates,
and often naught wythall:
^esides the cares of children vex
whom grieves the sickness rage
Or else untimely death does take,
the daughter come to age
With monied bags a mate requires,
or else Dame Lais schole
Does practice there, and stayns ye house,
the son proves often a fool
L^mfingred often, and harlots kepes,
a brawling merchant stout,
A swearing Gose, a Rusfian wild,
a vile unshamefast lout.
He seems not to be free beside
who so ever has a wife,
Must alter needs conditions al,
and leave his youthful life,
Forsaking frayes must bide at home,
not ride from town to town,
Nor in the night time walk the streets
in beating doors adowne,
And keeping Jone. Its nedeful then
to live advisedly,
And see thy goods they not decrease
but may augmented be,
Least in thy age the wallet come.
Although these things be so,
Yet think I sure with marted bed
and nature for to go
More better far, as she to us
of birds and beasts vntame
Example shows, how both the kinds
themselves together frame,
And join in one of duty must,
and always so remain
Increase to get and nourish up
their young with equal pain.
Whereby the kind may still endure
and never more decay,
For we as every kind of beast
are moved to Venus play
By natures will, a worser thing
shall hap to thee be sure
If thou thy self wilt never seek
this thing for to procure.
And void of issue shall thou dye
and yield thy corpse again,
A stranger then shall have thy goods
for which thou tokest pain.
And when that aged hayres shall hap
and sickness shall thee hent,
Who shall thy wearied age relieve?
who shall thy hurtes lament?
Thy brother or thy kinsman nere,
or will do this thy friend?
No sure, for to be heir to thee
they rather wish thine end.
On thee alive they wayt and fawn
thy goods at grave to take,
And each man loves and fears thy good
of thee no force they make.
O mischief great, O beastliness,
and vile desire to get,
O piteous plague each where dispersed
on profit all be set
The virtue left. Who seeks now
the righteous thing to use?
What man is he that will not now
al goodness clean refuse
If any hope of gain he have?
Gold guydes the laws we see,
And might of Gold than strength of blud
of greater force to be.
For Gold both shame fastness and faith
are set abroad to sell,
For Gold the Gods above be scrude
and we set free from Hell.
But now the wife her father leaves
and mother dear beside,
With all her house and household friends,
with thee alone to bide
For evermore both night and day,
and of thy seed she bears
A sweet and goodly golpowlde Boy
of small and tender years:
And kindred now to thee she brings
and does thy house enlarge
And helps thee eke in every thing
and takes with the thy charge.
Between you al things common are
both good and evil things,
Whatsoever harmeth one hurts both.
and that which profit brings
Unto the one, that profits both.
If sycknesse make thee weak
Or greater age, then does she straight
exhort thee well and speak.
She comfortes thee, she helps thee then,
she never leaves thee there,
She watches thee and watching serves.
Likewise thy children dear
With all the means they can they keep
for both your bloods are one,
And Image like: And when the day
wherein thou must be gone
Is come, thou art not clean extince
but shall alive remain
In them who then shall represent
their fathers face again.
But some there be that rather had
in common harlots bed
Uncertayne children get, therefore
they list not wives to wed.
Such kind of men I can not praise
nor wise I have them thought,
For wife with dowry helps thee well
where harlots bring thee naught.
A wife does bring thee store of friends,
where harlots bring thee foes,
A wife thou shall in safety have.
a hoar with grief and woes.
The one will trusty still remain.
the other false always,
And fearing to be cast at large
she steals al she may.
And for her self she heaps up all
her state for to repair
When thou have plucked her belles away
and cast her up to air.
More, if thou kepest a hoar, thy goods
are but in queasy case,
Of wives are children lawful got,
of harlots bastards base.
To wed therefore it needeful is
but fyttest first to see
The maids estate, the parents ^ke
their manners what they be.
For oftentimes the children do
their parents after take,
For trees according as they are
like fruits are wont to make.
Ask counsel of her neighbors, close
(so that she faithful be)
And if thou hau^ a woman send
her whole estate to see:
If she be fair, if she be foul,
if she be sore to know
If she lack wit, if she can spinne,
if she can knit or sow.
These are the works for them to use
and virtuous women's deeds,
For to eschew all idleness,
which chiefly vices breeds.
For idleness the mind corrupts
and leads it unto evil,
To wanton lust and filthy vice,
and fancies of the Devil.
This idleness does overthrow
and Cities down does pull.
For if that Lucresse had not given
her self to works of wul,
And if the chaste Penelopey
which webs had never wrought,
But both amyd their halles had sit
with idle wanton thought:
This might have pleased percha^ce among
a thousand woers one,
And of the others Uirgin death
should never fame have gone:
But best it is for thee to view
these things thy self alone.
For other men among (for troth)
firm faith remains none.
For all men now will feign and lie,
and truth is quite exilde:
Few faithful shall thou find, but if
thou will not be beguilde.
If thou would al things better prove,
then make thy self a spy:
And seek al things thou go about,
to see with present eye.
Wherefore I warn thee earnestly,
take heed that thou her see:
(If that thou can) what one she is,
to whom thou think to be
In marriage ioynde, least afterward,
in vain thou do lament:
And least it do when time is past,
thee of thy deed repent.
But if perchance (as eft it happes)
thou live in wretched case:
With wicked wife deceyude by fate,
and frowning Junoes grace.
First mildly do such one exhort,
sweet words with her frequent:
And give her gyfts, and all that may,
her wayward mind content:
With sweet deceyts her overcome,
now fast thy arms embrace
About her neck, and though she shun,
cast kysses on her face.
With all sweet means apease her ire*
if this do not prevail,
Use bitter words, be angry then
and chyde her fast, and rail,
Put on thy brazen face, and fume
and fear her then with threttes.
If this do naught procure, and by
thy words she nothing settes,
Try thou the matter then with stripes
and softly on the back
With bouncing blows bebast her well
that all her bones may crack.
If thou suspect thy wife of play,
then keep no lusty men,
Nor fellows fair, with whom she may
be prating now and then.
Thou art deceived, if thou do think
that any kind of man
Will faithful be, in Uenus case
no men are faithful than.
For the reioyseth to beguile.
by fraud is love possessed
And unto Uenus always fraud
a thing is counted best.
But as a chiefest thing take heed
there enter not thy door
No friar fat, ne lusty Monk,
nor priest of any lore.
Eschew the knaves, a greater plague
than these can none express,
These are the dregs of every sort
and springes of folishenesse,
The common synke of mischiefs all,
and Wolves in felles of sheep,
For pence and no devotion sure
to God these wretches creep.
And with a color false of truth
they simple souls be guile.
And underneath religious cloak
a thousand mischiefs vile.
A thousand heinous deeds they do
deflouring maid and wife,
Whore hunters vile, and Sodomites
the servant all their life.
Of beastliness, and belly joy,
the things divine they sell,
What wonders great invent they not?
what dreams do they not tell?
The common people to deceive
and to procure again.
Hereof does superstition rise
and thousand fansyes vain^
Which if the gods be wise they scorn,
and do refuse to vewe:
The Godly man does worship God,
with earnest love and true.
And not for gold, away with gain,
thou shall see them deny:
All sacred service here on earth,
and God himself on hie.
Themselves therefore this flock does serve,
and not the saints above:
And profit causes Gods to be,
which if thou once remove,
Both temples and their alt are stones,
shall flat lie on the ground:
Nor any more amongst them al,
shall any God be found.
These iuggling mates and foxes false,
expel from thee therefore:
And take good head that none of them,
do enter at thy door.
Least thou do cry the Cuckees note,
through feigned virtue such:
Nor if thou any gossyps have,
believe them not to much.
For under color of this name,
the Knaves do many play:
Take heed beside that from thy house,
she often do not stray.
Nor let her haunt thy neyghbors house,
it has been seen full often:
That whoremasters have hid the^ selves,
amyd thy neighbors loft.
Appoint her mates for company,
of chaste and honest fame:
Let mother Be, be put from thence,
and every bawdy dame.
And seek thou not with other whores,
thy self for to relieve:
Nothing does cause her more to frown
nor nothing more her grieve.
For nothing more reuengement seeks,
than when she is begilde:
And sees that with unsteadfast love,
her bed is thus defilde.
Then all with ire she flames and hates,
then does she eke begin:
To work her housband like despite,
then choler boyles within.
Then rages she like Bacchus priest,
whom to much wine does prick:
Believe me well she is but rare,
that does not use the trick,
That harlots use, when that she is,
deceyude of lawful part:
At least if she can not in deed,
yet sins she in her heart.
For will with vice provoked thus
in vice will farther slide.
But if thou takst her with the deed
let laws on her be tried.
Be not ashamed but let the laws
be reuerencde of thee,
For they are as a certain rule
by which we guided be.
Least thou should give a greater pain
amid thy raging ire
(Offending God, in felowing men)
than does the fault require.
For common people never use
the rule of reason sage,
But are seducde with furies fell
like beasts of brainles rage.
Ne have thou lost thy liberty
by marrying of a wife
Because thou may not walk ye streets
and lead a ruffians life.
This can be calde no liberty
but rather license naught
Who so is free does seem to serve
such is not to be sought.
It bringes the owner to much harm,
and not to can do ill,
Is better sarre than have such vice
adherent to thy will.
How many men have been destroide
by to much liberty?
How many men in safety live
with bridles do thou se?
And if thy children sickness vex
why should thou weep or wail
Go seek in have to make them whole
if that will not prevail
And if that death will have them needs
then use a pacient mind
Thou art not in this case alone
but fellows shall thou find.
The grief that we with many bear
we better may sustain.
We all are borne to this intent
to render life again.
For of our first beginning does
the fatal end depend
And certain is the time decreed
for all away to wend.
And either sone or latter does
each man his grave descend
To death which is of evils alt
the last and final end.
Not of the valiant to be fearde.
what does it ought avail:
The deaths of them with tears, yt here
have lost their life to wayle.
Is it a thing so wretched here,
to leave this foolish life:
To ryd thereby our mortal corpse
from all unquiet strife.
And for the hurly burly here,
eternal life to win:
Perpetual reast by death we gain,
or eke the coming in.
To life again, but weep thy fill,
in time thy tears shall stay:
And all thy cares and grief beside,
from thee shall time conuaye.
But if thou wanton children keep,
or of a greater shame:
O father fond deserving stripes,
then thou art most to blame.
And causer chief of all their hurt,
who taughtst not them to know:
Both manners good and vertuousnese^,
while tender years did grow.
Not yet with vices foul defaced,
neglecting thou the mind:
Diost only bring their bodies up,
like beasts of brutishe kind.
Hereof so many foolish geese,
and noughty men remain:
With whom each city pestred is,
for all in age retain.
The manners that they did receive
when younger years were rife:
And each man as he lived in youth,
so leads he his life.
The tender twigge at first may bow
according to thy mind:
But when the bows get elder strength
no more thou shall them wind.
Nor from the place that young it held,
thou shall it cause to fly:
So does a child in tender years,
each way himself apply.
But when that elder age is come,
look which way first he went:
That kepes he still, and will not change
his first conceiude intent.
Of custom long is nature bred
and yeldes her force always:
To use that long time has been kept.
yet ought we for to pray.
To God, within the mothers womb
that he may give good seed:
For so we show our selves in life,
as we therein do breed
Whosoever does come naught from thence
will seldom virtuous prove
Though manners good, the schole him teach
and thousand masters move.
Well may thou nature rule sometime,
but never her expel
For she is still of greater force
thau all thy guiding well.
Yet something will she altered be
with use and daily toil:
So with continual husbanding
does bear the barren soil.
So Lions fierce of mighty force
obey to man as king.
So by continual exercise
each Art in time does spring.
Wherefore instruct thy children well
while tender years do grow
And teach them honest ways to walk
and virtuous life to know.
Permit them not to rampe abroad
according to their will,
Than liberty no kind of thing
for children is more ill.
If thou be wise hold fast thy raynes
and warely well them guide
For mortal things by naturra force
are moude in vice to slide.
And willingly thereto they run
if help no labor bring
For without Art is nature wone
to give no perfect thing.
For God himself will not permit
that we with slothfulness
Should heavy ware, but stirs us up
with cares and business:
And as with spurs the slothful pricks
a pleasant place there lies
That ryseth up with craggey rock
amid the steamy skies,
Full of delight than which more bleft
a place can not be found
To whom the sweet Elysius fields
and Temp, of Thessale ground
Does place resign, here nigh the pole
and night the stars that shine,
Dame virtue dwells, and there enioyes
a thousand pleasures fine.
But vengeance crabbed is the paths
^oth narrow and vnplaine
And so be grown with thickes of thorn
that never can attain,
The vile and slothful mind to pass
of earthly cares possessed:
And few pure mind a loft does bring
whom God has chose as blessed.
Above to dwell amid the skies,
full crabbed is the way:
To virtue sure, but plain to vice,
by which we sone do stray.
To which we all run easily,
who therefore does intend:
To trade a child in vertuousnesse,
must labor him to mende,
For without labor nothing good,
can well performed be:
The force of daily labor does,
all things dispatch we see.
First ought you fathers to take heed,
above all other things:
Your children haunt no ill resort,
for custom always brings.
Each kind of manners unto men,
yea though they saints should be:
Ill company will them corrupt,
but chiefly let them fly.
From haunt of lustye youthful brutes,
for youth is always bent:
Lo vices all, and filthy be,
all filthy talk innent.
For wholly is this age advicse,
to naughty ryots deed:
That they use not the haunt therefore,
of young men take good heed.
Thou that intendest for to keep.
a child in vertuousnesse:
Now use to chide, and now the rod,
and plain the way express.
By which they may their feet direct,
in no wise favor show:
And ever angry, let them not,
the love of Fathers know.
For nothing can more hurtful be,
than speak them fair unto:
Then greater heart in vice they take
then all things dare they do.
When thou for truth shalt take their words
and makst of them to much:
Bewitched sore with doting love,
to children favor such
Is hurtefull sure, for fear alone,
does make them vice to fly:
Not reason then, and sone they sin,
if they be not put by.
With brydels hard, and as they do
full often in vices fall:
Done causyng them, so seldom they
return if none do call.
According as they bring them up
so all men children have.
Beside all this we must invent
our bodies health to save.
For health is far more worth than gold
the healthy deluing loute
In better state accounted is
than crased king no doubt
First ought the cause be known whereof
such sickness vile are sown,
In corpse of men, tormenting them
for once the causes known.
More easily may thou shun theffects
and causes pulde away,
The effects of them that did ensue
incontinent decay.
The causer first of each disease
is chiefest nature sure,
As often as under naughty stars
the birth she does procure:
While as the child does inward take
the motions of the say
Or else begot of naughty seed.
the cause does eften lie.
Amyd the parents of the child,
when they perfour me the act
Disposed ill, with naughty blood,
or sore diseases racte
More causes are there yet beside
as labor toil and rest,
Both cold, and heat, with sleep, and meat,
and joys of Uenus nest.
Each one of these, does strength abate
and hurt the lively sprite,
As often as we use them to much
or use them else to light.
Excess of both does sickness bring
of measure health proceeds
The perturbations of the mind
diseases often breeds.
And to much sadness, fear and grief
and to much myr^h as well
Does kill if we will credit such
as hystories do tell.
The air does hurt, the water harms
when they be both infected.
Hereof does come the plaguie sore
whereby the guts are vered.
The common rot does many kill,
and diverse sickness sore
Does brawling, fight, and fawle procure
with thousand perryls more.
These springs and grounds of mischiefs all
(if thou thy health set by:)
By all the means thou can invent.
seek thou from them to fly.
If thou be syck as needs thou must
sometime, what will thou do?
Desire not then the medcine long,
but look thou sone thereto.
While as thy sore is yet but grene,
nor yet thy mortal fo:
Possessed has his fired place,
amyd thy corpse to go.
A little water does suffice,
to quench the breeding fire:
But when that it is fully grown,
and flames begin to spyre.
With vaunting course again ye stars
scarce river, spring, or lake
Will then suffice to quench it out,
shift therefore timely make.
To know the cause of thy disease,
and sone to put them out
Use contraryes, contrary things,
each one expel no doubt.
If cold have thus procurde thy harm,
use things to heat again:
If travail, toil, or meat thee hurt,
from them likewise refrain.
If need require then seek the aid
of some Physicians hand:
Or Surgians help in Surgians Art,
more knowledge sure does stand.
For plain and sure appears the work,
that in his hand he takes:
But Leache, whom we Physician name
while he the water shakes.
Whereby he does his judgment give,
and feels the beating vain:
And rakes the dung, he is deceaude,
and does deceive again.
But with unlike estate of harm,
the simple soul does die:
And gives the balde religious men,
a cause to sing and cry.
The other having gotten gold,
accuses God on hie:
And says that be was only cause,
whereby the man did die.
And fast with silver stuffes his purse,
with sweet reioicing heart:
All men (alas) are healed now,
by chance and not by Art.
For he that any Art knows well,
in practicing of it:
But seldom he does chance to er^e,
or does offend no whitte.
But these among whereof we talk,
amongst a hundred ill:
There scarce is one whom they can save
or whom they do not kill.
How chances this? But for because,
that few of them does know:
What thing they do, what Physic is,
but while they seek to flow.
With wytty words, and Logiks Art,
the vulearned sort to bind:
Of Phisiks cure the principles,
they scarcely seek to find.
Instructed thus with nedelesse Arts,
themselves they home wards hie:
And fast with Ergo there they prate,
and bygge they look thereby.
Hereby they stipendes do require,
and think enough the same:
(Nor are they here deceyude) for this,
that with an honest name
They may be murderers of men,
O laws of wretched kind:
That can permit such mischtefs great,
O Kings and rulers b^inde.
That spy not this deformed thing,
O you that guide and rain:
Permit not such a wickedness,
chase hence this plague again.
And succor bring to mortal kind,
by these same murdring knaves:
How many men both night and day,
have found their fatal graves?
Let them have perfectly their Art,
or let them not profess:
For other arts if they do err,
the harm of them is less.
But this except it perfect be,
is full of perilles great:
And privily does rage as does
at home the plaguey heat.
It is not good therefore to trust,
such men, whose learning stands:
In precious habit to be seen,
and to adourne their hands
With rings and hoopes, and precious stones,
but this that I shall tell:
Whereby thou may thy self retain,
in mind reserve thou well.
See that thy diet wholesome be,
and eat not thou to much:
For mischief great has come to men,
by over feeding such.
Here of do most diseases breed,
beware especially:
As of a poison strong that does,
enforce the corpse to dye.
That thou no meat again do take.
till that received last:
Be well consumed and perfectly,
his full digestion past.
And every day use exercise,
by pace or other feate:
Whereby thy joints thus moved may,
procure a warming heat.
For moving is the cause of warmth,
and aids the stomach well:
Increases strength, and humors naught,
from out the flesh expel.
Break not beside thy quiet rest,
for sleep the body feeds:
And helps the mind where harm to both,
excessive watching breeds.
Expel thou sorrow far from thee,
and heaviness exile:
For it dries up the sinowes all,
and makes the body vile.
And grested hairs untimely plants,
the joyful heart again:
Does make thy limbs and members strong,
and youthful years retain.
The other things behold thy self,
that erst I told to thee:
A thing more precious far there is,
by which we happy be.
And like to Gods, and heavens haunt,
in earth remaining here:
Although his grace to few is given,
few worthy do appear.
Such honor hie for to possess,
and if to know the same:
Thy mind desires, I will thee tell,
dame wisdom is her name.
This is the greatest good of all.
than this of greater grace:
The Gods can give nothing to man,
to this resigneth place
All that that breeds in red sea sands,
or all the golden goods:
That Lagus keeps, that Hermus has
or in Pactolus floods.
Whatsoever grows if truth be said,
to her no Princely raygne:
May be comparde, she is the Mother
of all Godly train,
And greatest virtue is. O blesf,
yea blessed, and blessed again,
As much as mortal man can be,
is he that does obtain
Of God, this goodly gift to get,
but some perchance will seek:
What wisdom is to know, and sure
the troth hereof to speak.
Naught else but knowledge chief she is
by which the pured mind:
Whom neither mortal weight does pres
nor earthly thought can blind.
Does scale and clime the skies above,
and there in ayry place:
With God does dwell, despising here,
all things in mortal case
As vain, ascending always up,
much like the flames of fire:
Regarding light these earthly things
does things above desire.
And does discern the good from ill,
and truth from falsehode naught:
And things of blind and mortal men,
that chiefest here are thought.
As pleasures, realms, and riches great
with hie triumphing gear:
For which both night and day they toil
esteming not a hear.
Bewayls the vayn and fading thoughts
declaring here the way:
Of living well in order just,
and eke the dying day.
The rest among the wiseman shines,
as does the sun full bright:
Amid the stars, and does despise,
the force of fortunes might.
And underneath his fete does tread,
each harm with constant mind:
Nor moved is beside with fear,
or dread of death unkind.
Nor fears once the pains of Hell,
but takes with mirth his grave:
And laughes to scorn the fancies fond,
that common people have.
Not douting here this life to leave,
repleate with wretchedness:
And full of toils hereby to get,
eternal quietness.
In fine he equal is to Joue,
to him adherent be
Four things: For well he counsel gives,
and clearly judges he.
All error quite from him remoude,
he guides also right:
Both human things and eke divine,
are subject to his sight.
This last that I have here rehearst,
is chiefest of all the rest:
Than which there is no greater thing,
that here may be passest.
But no man can this wisdom have,
till clean he purged be:
From every heinous vice and crime,
and all iniquity.
For wisdom does deny to dwell,
amyd the sinful heart:
And hates eke the minds vnpure,
since she is purest part.
And no man can this wisdom have,
except he be discreate:
And learned be in many Arts,
know these to be the feate,
With which is wisdom free obtaynd,
whereof I would say more:
But time commaundes me here to shut,
and end this book before.
My Lions tale has long enough,
continued here her style:
Wherefore my muse now hold thy peace,
and rest thy self a while.
Virgo the sixth Book.
SOme I believe of cancred mind,
and of malicious face:
Who think they only know the troth
and only have the grace
Al doutful things with judgment right,
and knowledge full to try:
Will say I never tasted yet,
the blessed springs that lie
In Aone fields, nor sacred floods,
that Phocidos does frame:
Nor that the Laurel leaf I do
deserve, nor Poets name.
Because I write not fancies fond,
and monsters marvelous:
And fayning not deceive the ears,
of such as credit us.
For they suppose the Poets part,
is only lies to tell:
As if it were a thing to vile,
for them with troth to mell
And lawful not. their judgments I,
account both naught and vain:
And sweeter seems far to me,
the truth for to retain.
To aged wives and witless boys,
such trifles I be take:
Some bark abroad the battles big,
that Giauntes great did make.
With Gorgons grun, and Harpies vile,
and mighty Ciclops wild:
And shipmen sore enflamde with song,
of plesaunt mermaides mild.
with Circes old that monstrous hag,
and beasts that three heds wears:
Chymera vile, and Atlas strong,
whose mighty shoulders bears.
The starry skies, ichangd to rock,
that clouds has forrowed eft:
with Persea hie, and Tantalus,
Promotheus wretched theft.
And Titius stout, and Belides,
and what so ever more:
The doting greece has Latins taught,
in long time here cofore.
I wish not I, so much to drink,
of Aganippes streams:
Nor seek I so the Laurel leaf,
of glistring Phoebus beams.
with Juey leaves the hears to deck,
whereby I so might fain:
A poet thus to be I blush,
and am ashamed plam.
If needs we must such trifles wright,
and use such pleasant lies
Troth thus despisoe: of many tongue
is had, but few are wise.
Believe me well: and many wright,
with hauty verses hie:
And many have the Grecians tongue,
and latin perfectly.
And while so many things they know
their wisdom is but thin:
With regal words their style is dekt,
but small effect within.
The outward Image only shows,
and picture light we spy:
But what good thing remains therein?
what fruit is had thereby?
What learneth he that reads them?
what knowledge has he got?
But dreams and folish fancies fond,
that lise here profit not.
which for to know, and not to know,
is all of one effect:
Though they me Poet call or not.
I will not yet neglect.
The troth to say, and lies to shun,
truth makes the perfect mind:
which who so ever most does know,
approaches niste the kind
Of saints above, and happiest is,
although the folishnesse:
Of people rude him not commend,
nor praise his worthiness.
Nor favor him as he deserves,
nor titles of him tell:
Wherefore my muses now approach,
and Sicophants farewell.
Behold, I enter now the way,
which with a loathsome shade:
The Cipresse and the Yeutree hides,
with leaves that never fade.
The doleful fields and darksome reign
of Proserpu^e I see:
Wherein the Letheus river runs,
with streams that darkened be.
Amid the poison fields abroad,
does slepy Popey spring:
On silent shores, Calliopey
whereto do thou me bring?
What monsters for to se do thou,
command? what noise to hark?
With doleful noise of irksome Owls,
soundes all the wodes so dark.
The Howlats cry with woeful tunes
and loud lamenting noise,
O muse, whereto do thou me bring:
behold, with wailing voice.
The hills and valleis all do roar,
and ^ccho back does beat:
The mourning times, an answer gives,
what grief is this so great?
What is the cause of mischief such,
what kind of people those:
That all be cladde in mourning blacks
and wailing vesture goes?
What men are they that thus in black,
with weping fill the skies?
Alas, what sight of bodies slain,
lie here before mine cies?
What has here causde this bloody broyle
who made this slaughter fell?
How many kings and bishops bones
lie here? I know them well.
Is yen same death aloof that comes
with bloody sith in hand?
With dredful face, and ghaslley look
before whose face does stand.
A thousand heaps of sicknesses,
a thousand dangers cake:
O armed with to fierce a guard,
my thinckes I hear him speak.
With clamoure great as he does come,
to him I will give ear:
And what I hard with all my heart,
I will declare them hear.
That death I am that with my sithe,
right down do cut like hay:
All things that live upon the earth,
the rule and eke the sway.
Of all the world, has I oue me dealt,
and biddes me none to spare:
But hie and low, to slay and kill,
them down with equal share.
Whereby may none escape my hands,
not one can fly from me:
The hauty heds of mighty kings,
by me suppressed be.
The pride and pomp of prelates flour,
I cause a down to fall:
No kind of creature here does live,
but unto us is thrall.
Although he (flying) pearse the parts,
of northern Boreas ground:
And pass the ragged ^iphean rocks,
yet shall mine ire be found.
And he my power and stroke shall feel,
or though he do descend:
The southern parts, where shines bright
the stars to us unkind.
Yet there he shall me surely find,
and finding me shall die:
^y sith, both East, and west does kill,
I set not richesse by.
How many men has this my hand,
down cast from state on hie:
And hedlong shoued with mortal might,
in darksome grave to lie?
I well remember Priam once,
when stain at altar stone:
He sacrificed was to me,
the guide of Macedone.
The proud, with fighting hand that put,
so many realms to flight:
To whom no like could then be found,
by force and deadly might.
Of this my dart, in Babylon,
sore wounded down did fall:
What should I here the Latin Lords,
and Mars his neuewe^ call
To mind, the Lords of all the earth,
whose valiant virtue plain:
Did join their rule to Ocean seas,
and fame with stars to rain?
Could I not when me list all these,
^slaine to hell throw down?
Depriude their hands of scep^ors ^^ou^
their heads of regal crown.
Of words their mouths, of sight their eyes,
of moving members all:
And eke their bodies thus destroyde,
in filthy grave let fall.
Me fears the Ind, the Arabian,
the more, the Scithian fell:
All they whom Asy and Europe kepes,
in Affricke all that dwell.
Both kind and place are one to me,
nor times observe I than,
Nor manners way, nor years esteame,
the good and evil man.
The wise the foolish dolt shall die,
the little sucking Will:
The young and old, the fair and foul,
with reason like I kill.
And he that yonder I do se,
approaching to my land:
When as his destenies permit,
shall feale my deadly hand
These fearful words with hellish mouth,
this churlish thief out brayed:
Wherewith my senses all did fayl,
and I remaind affrayd.
My blood therewith forsook the veins,
and left the outward part:
And shrouded close within my breast
to succor there my heart:
But chiefly when this fearful fiende
had sent the plagues of Hell
To them that ranged on the earth
amid the croude to dwell,
Which knew not of that mischief great,
then forth abroad they fly
And here and there they catch and take
each one they can come by.
Then bodies sick on ground are laid
and deep for pain they groan,
And many there with Sithe in hand
does death dispatch alone:
And passing forth she did reserve
till slaughter next begun,
The lives of all whom Lachesis
not yet had fully spunne.
Thus trembling all my ioints therewith
and all amassed then
My self unto began say these words:
O cares, O vows of men
O labors vain, deceiving hope,
O seeting joys of mind,
O time that evermore do change,
O fading human kind,
How vain and how uncertain is
this transitory life?
How subject unto every harm
of thousand evils rife?
Which outward shows a pleasant face
both sweet and framed well,
But inward, O what gall, what grief,
what poison there does dwell?
What are we wretches here but dust,
with wind and rain vpcast?
And like the brittle breaking glass
and shadows fading fast?
Much like to Roses that do show
a gorgeous gaudy face
When funne does rise, and when the night
apears do lose their grace.
To day with mirth alive, and foot
to worms within a while,
This day in fair and lusty plight,
and straight a Carrian vile.
Alas what does it us avail
to hourd up heaps of Gold
And plate to have, and clothing rich
and Gems of price to hold,
Great realms and cities strong to guide,
in houses fair to lie
Aloft to look, and think himself
full like to Gods on hye?
If death do al things take from hence
if we like smoke or dust
As wretches fade, if that so sone
our pride, our pomp and lust
Do pass, and end for evermore?
as I these words had said
With whispring voice my self unto
beholding al afraid
With quaking pace this Ghastly fiend:
sir Orpheus mother dear,
Why art thou thus she says aseard?
be bold and of good cheer,
For fear is sign of beastly mind,
unfit for men is such,
What is the cause that should thee move
to fear this death so much?
Then answered I: Good Lady mine
nature does force me so,
What living beast her not abhors
and seeks from her to go?
She takes from us both life and goods
delights and al at ones
The corpse to naught resolves, for what
remains but dust and bones,
Which bones in time return to dust?
in fine all goodly things
She here from us does take away
and chiefest mischief brings.
Whom would not therefore such a beast
and vgley Monster fear
Except his heart were made of steel?
Then Jove his daughter dear
With smiling lips began to say
thou runst beyond the white,
And art deceiude with form of truth
and shadow of that light.
It is not easy for each one
the truth it self to know,
This is the self same bow that does
amid the great wood grow
With trees of order thick embracde,
that misty errors hide,
Nor ever might this golden twig
of many men be spide,
But only unto them to whom
the milk white Doves it show,
But I of seed celestial borne
the truth do fully know:
And can it well to thee declare
if thou to here require.
I aunswerde then: Good lady sure
I nothing more desire:
We must depart from hence quoth she
come after me a while.
And forth she leads, not far from thence
where Phoebus hye did smyle,
With beating beams upon the hill,
whose pleasant shining light
Did put the misty clouds abroad
and darkness all to flight.
Beside a spring we both sat down
and under Laurel shade
Begins my guide with pleasant voice,
and thus her words she made:
An Ape (quoth she) and jesting stock
is man to God in sky,
As often as he does trust his wit
to much, presuming hie,
Dare search the things of nature hid
his secrets for to speak,
when as in very deed his mind
is dull and all to weak.
If he be ignorant of things
that lie before his feet
How think thou those things shall he se
which God and nature sweet
Within their bosoms close have hyd?
yet al at fingers ends
This hasty blind unhappy fool
persuade himself he kendes,
So much himself he bears in hand
of al your folishnesse
The spring and chief this selfeloue is,
A darkness great that causes you,
to know the truth the less.
Away with this, and better things
thine eyes shall quickly spy,
And those that erst for good ye thoughtst
thou shall for good deny,
And those that evil now thou think
thou will not evil trow,
This darkness from thy mind expeld.
I will therefore thou know,
That mortal state is nothing else
but blathers full of wind,
which here and there on rolling bal
enforces fortune blind,
To whom if any wit they had
should death more welcome be
Than life, sith living here all men
with harms oppressed be:
And few good things they here do use
not full of bytternesse
which true I think thou will believe
when I shall here express
The goods and ylles of mortal life
as briefly as I may.
These two conferd the human life
we plainly shall display.
What thing it is, and whither death
ought so much fearde to be.
But first of riches will we speak
which every land we see
Does praise, does seek, does wonder at
and covet instantly:
I will endeavor them to blase.
Good Lady then quoth I
If it you please, this labor spare
for once and long ago
This lesson learnde I perfectly,
Minerua taught me thoe,
Now forward show some other case,
not things fore known retel.
The whole estate of pleasure to
Arete told me well,
So did her son Timalphes eke
let this thoe passed be
Therefore, and then declare at large
what else it pleases thee.
Then answered she, of nobleness
I something here will say,
For that is one of chiefest goods,
and at this present day
Al men do seek this same to have
and think they it obtain
Although as far from it they be
as is the Spaniard plain
Removed from the man of Inde.
But what is nobleness?
Of value what? the truth I do
intend for to express.
But what avails it as now
the truth of ought to say
Sith no man will it now believe
sith al men it denay?
Some kind of beasts do fly and hate
continually the light,
And rouing still amyd the dark
do wander eke by night.
So, many neither can, nor love
the light of truth to find.
For God with nature so deuides
the state of mortal kind,
That unto him that sees aright,
the state of man alone
Does seem to blase the nature full
of other beasts each one.
So diverse are the thoughts of man,
and so unlike they be,
For many still pursue the dark
and truth can never see,
And on the Sun do always look
with watrish winking eyes,
A few with open sight it vewe
whose mind is of the Skies.
Nobillity therefore as does
the common people say,
In heaps of riches does consist.
or in the Golden sway,
Or else in blood, as often as he
bred up of gentle like,
Of Belsiers, and of Grandfathers
can brag and arms define,
And can his valiant parents praise:
this judgment I refuse,
For still the common people lie
as they were wont to use.
A like opinion many have,
but few have reason plain.
If he should be a Gentleman
that riches does obtain,
Why then good Gentlemen may be
the Dowrers and their fears,
The Butchar, Barber, Fishmongers,
and he that horses reares,
The shepherd, and Jack Baker, and
the Tanner with his hide,
The Baud, the Chief, the Graftex
and other all beside
Of fylthy sort, for them among
full many riches have
And many may, for fortane often
extolles the wretched slave,
And often she does throw a down
with her unequal hand
Such as of late she did permit
aloft on whele to stand.
At that time only Marius was
therefore, in noble state
When as a victorer he came
within the Romans gate
(The Counsel and the Commons al
rejoicing much thereat,)
With crown of Bays, and horses white
ydrawne on Chariot sat,
But after that from thence expelde,
by wicked Syllaes might,
A banished man to Minturne fled
lay hid, and wanted light
In dunge on vile, or when he was
constraynd to beg his bread
In Afric land, (O laws of Gods
O powers to little dread,)
And bread most apt for ditchers tough:
was not this noble man
A wretch as now? from him aloof
fled nobleness as than
And strayghtwayes she did eke return
when Marius came again
By lot of changed star to Rome:
their sentence sure is vain,
If noble state consist in gold,
of earth does Gold proceed
Of fraud, of stealth, of Usery,
we ergo then do speed
Of nobleness by fraud and stealth,
and eke by Usery,
O judgment blind of common sort
of reason clean without,
No Gold can make your noble men
no riches thus can cloute,
For worthier is nobillity
than any precious good,
With gold it is not bought nor sold.
But some now brag of blood,
And praises of their kindred prate
while they most wicked be,
And of their parents acts they tell
and old antiquity,
Of Grandsirs deeds, and bloody spoil
of Unckles winning ground,
And though ye slouthful beasts themselves
with thousand crimes abound,
And virtue lack, yet are they thought
good Gentlemen to be,
Because they come of ancient blood,
and noble auncestrie.
Why bragst thou thus with others acts
and talkst thy Parents praise,
When as thou art a shame to them
that liude in alder days?
The Crow a Swan would seem to be
and eke the prating Rooke,
With Pecockes feathers false ystolne
would like a Pecocke look,
But nature does forbid, which is
the spring of nobleness.
Hereeof comes beastly minds and minds
addict to Godliness,
Of her proceeds every kind.
The body causes not
Thee for to be a Gentleman
but mind procures that.
For many Clownes have bodies big
of fair and lusty state,
An ornament is nobleness
to mind appropriate,
And certain force of nature bredde
which mighty things and hie,
Desires still, and things of base
estate settes nothing by,
By which the mind does strive aloft
like fiery flame to rise,
And like the Herne, to pearce the clouds
and baser things despise
whosoever can this strength obtain
by gift and force divine
He shall be good and pain full eke,
of power in counsel fine,
And royle sustain something to do
that shall seem worthy praise,
That he himself may praise deserve
^n long and after days.
But not to al does nature give
a thing of value such,
Yea unto few she does it deal,
whose worthy fame so much
For ever lives in peoples mouths
long after deaths distress.
But O conditions ill to ^el,
O wondrous fransinesse:
Who would not now be calde and thought
a Gentleman by name:
O Knauishe sort, O creatures vile
beyond all kind of shame:
Triumphing names do thee delight,
and fame abroad to yel,
Thee glory likes, then why not pain,
and vertuousnesse as well,
Contents thy mind that worthyly
thou may be named than
A Gentleman, lykes it thee more
a wise and sobre man,
Deserving not, than of desert
accounted for to be?
Why is not chalk for cheese as well
delighting unto thee
As lying name of Nobleness?
O vile disguised spright,
O Monkey, learn to bridle will,
to guide thy mind aright,
Reason to use, to fly the things
that shameful are and vain,
Haunt righteousie and know thy self,
and labor hard sustain.
Fly flouthfulnesse, whereby thou may
attain to virtue hie
Then may thou well a Gentleman
be calde, and worthy lie,
This, this, is true Nobillity,
these gifts the Gods bestowne,
And these rewards to men, unto
the unlearned sort unknown.
This way the ancient Romans went,
by this their Empire flew
Above the Stars, and when it ceaste
then bad their state adieu.
For when as their unthrifty seed
(their Empire thus encreast)
Did spring amid more prosperous years,
they following inward preast
Great riot, plays, and wantonness
did clean for sake the state
Their fathers held before, whereby
did nobleness them hate:
And went again the Heavens to
till riot forewarde wrought
And vice, whereby was Rome at length
clean sacked, and spoilde to naught.
It is not kindred thoe nor blood
nor spechelesse Imagrie,
Nor heaps of Gold that can thee make
a Gentleman to be.
Virtue, virtue, by her was made
both Hector and Alcide
Of noble state, by this again
right Gentleman was tryde
That wight to whom the Iliades got
an everlasting name.
With diverse other worthy states
of still abiding fame.
Why bragst thou that thou doste descend
of noble stock and blood?
Great spres thee got, what then, if thou
thy self be nothing good?
If thou a villain do defyle
and stain thy familye
Then is thy blood no honor sure
but mere reproach to thee.
Thou art a Monster, shame to them
from whom thy blood does pass
As when the stately Lion stout
begettes a sely Ass
Or Ape of Eliphant is borne:
for nobleness not so
Is left you here by Testament
nor virtue given so,
As house and land and household stuff.
this nature clear has dealt
Unto thine Auncetours before,
which yet they all not felt.
For if thou shall the line well search
from whence thou first were twinde,
Thou shall percha^ce of thine own blood
full many a cobbler find,
And many a Carter clean, and one
of them thou shall well see
was first that causde in time thy stock
such Gentlemen to be.
which as it did in time increase
so time shall it decay
For time does here bring every thing
and time takes all away.
Amongst us all what man to come
of Pompeis blood is found?
Of Cesars line, or of that man
to whom did Affricke ground
A surname give by virtue great?
what man would once have thought
That such a stately stock as these
should ever come to naught?
The highest houses often fall
and come to mere decay:
Often comes the little house aloft,
of man the srate always
Can not endure. The skies above
do alter mortal things.
But thou wile say, what kind of seed
is sown, such fruit it brings,
If I of noble stock do come
then shall I noble be.
Not so, for often a squall is borne
of goodly men we see
And fair and eke welfauourde men
ill fauourde knaves have got,
Of witty men have Asses come.
The mind engenders not
As does the corpse of fathers seed,
nor in the fathers sure
It lies, to give the children mind.
This, nature does procure.
What fruit can noble seed up bring
if skies do not agree?
Most true it is that people say
the year, not husbandry
Does give the corn a good increase,
if see de amyd the ground
Though best be cast, and thereto stars
agreing not be found,
There of will either Darnell spring
or lost it else will be,
Thus noble children for to get
the father not (we see,)
Sufficient is except the grace
of Heavens him permit.
That many base, prove noble men
of this here chances it:
Who by their virtue and deserts
obtaining fame thereby
Did after noble make themselves.
What was the Vergill hie?
What was the famous Cicere
what Cato wise, divine?
Or what else was Horatius?
all borne of franklynes line.
Of whom did learned Homer come
whose sire nor country we
As yet do know? Demosthenes
his father tell thou me,
And mother of Euripides?
declare the worthy line
Of Socrates, of him I say,
from whom the sawes divine
Did Plato learn, who counted was
as then Apollo thought
The wysest man, him Mason got
that in the Marble wrought,
And eke a Midwyfe was his dame.
We also well do know
That many have been crowned Kings
whose parents were but low.
Not seldom Emperors have come
from base and small estate
To honors hye, what say thou then
sith all degenerate,
Both horse and dogs and other beasts
from their long wonted kind?
For nothing can long time endure
but all things worse we find
In time to be by natures rule
and law that still endures
Of destenies, till that again
an other birth procures
Restored state, this altering
the worlds chief grace I take
This is the htest workmans praise
of little things to make
Great matters, and the ample things
reduce to small estate,
To change the face of every thing
and still to renouate
Most prudently al things in time.
I do not here deny
But that it is a goodly thing
to come of parents hye,
And to be borne of ancient blood:
for it is worthy sure.
With aid and good examples eke
such fathers do procure
Their children like themselves to be
if Fates do not say nay,
Or nature strong of force to much:
which who so seeks to stay,
As well may clime with heaped hylis
in heavens hie to dwell
Depriving Jove of regal seat
as fame to us does tell
When Phlegurs fields the tumult felt
of ghastly Giants stout,
How then the great Enceladus,
by force did bring about
The great and huge Olimpus hill
with Ossa for to lie
While Ossa then was over pressde
with mighty Pelion hie.
But yet we count not this enough
though all therefore thee call
A Gentleman, and thou art fair
and framed well withal
Of pleasant face, and farest well
and go in proud array,
And thereby she west thy noble stock,
for this no man can say
Thou art a Gentleman, but that
dame Fortunes grace is thine,
And thou full like a golden puff
and like a marble sign.
But who regardes, for now enough
it is, to have the name
Of virtuous, and of gentlemen,
each man to seem the same
Desires more than it to be.
O Gods, above that guide,
Now names of great magnificence
and titles hie beside
All men desire and arrogate,
they hunt and it possess,
The Ass a Libarde calls himself
the Ant a Lioness.
Who will not gentle, just, and wise,
well learnde and honest now
Be counttd here? contented well
with bark alone of bow
And outward shadows of the thing
that under such a cloak
His wicked manners he may hide.
Now name bears all the stroke
And not the thing: well take therefore
this noble name to thee
As Pasquill is at Rome and as
both Thecues and Harlots be,
Be noble thou like marble sign.
I put the case a Gentleman
by name and eke in deed
Thou art, what good shall it thee do,
hereof what shall proceed?
Thou answer wilt, I shall have praise
and honors shall obtain.
Are these rewards not to be sought?
or seem they to be vain.
Of nobleness does virtue breed,
of virtue praise does spring
And honor eke. I will not (for
it seems no lawful thing)
With virtue find a fault: but if
with clear and perfect eye
Thou shall behold the truth in deed,
then shall thou plain espy
What grefe and payns this virtue brings
and bytcer life does make,
Though they that are of Stoik sect
this for to grant forsake.
And first we will the mortal part
behold so difficil
That who so seeks it for to keep
must needs employ his will
Great cares and labors for to take,
with nature wars proclayme,
And fight he must: for nature so
does mind of man constrayne
Both weak and prone in vice to be
and virtues enemy.
O God, full soon in vice each one
does fall full readily,
What is the cause that nature is
of man so naught and vile?
Was this thy fault Promotheus?
or does the fiende beguile,
And plant such illes in mortal breast
as fame does plainly tell,
And causes love of wickedness?
The way that leads to well
Full hard and sharp and paynful is.
who can we good now find?
Of his own self not one, who not
of ill and wicked mind?
Such one as fear of King or laws
prohibites to offend,
Or such as cannot well perform
the crime he does entend.
It is not easy sure to win
and nature put to flight,
Nor for to stay the furies fell
within the heart that fight,
Wherefore it needeful is to strive
from years of youthful train,
With daily flight and labors great,
the vices to restrain.
For custom wonted is to break
the force of nature sure
If that by many years it has
been used to endure.
Man's life a warrefare (ergo) is
each field the enemy
Possesses full, al full of thieves,
such gynnes who then can fly?
So many nets who can escape?
for when that fortune smyles
Then creepes in fond lasciviousness,
and stings with thousand wiles,
Fast by encampeth swelling pride
with sloth and gluttony,
And folish boldness straight does rise
with grief and fear thereby,
And ^ayson fell of envy and ire
does then possess his mind.
When as he lives in great unhap
then seeks he for to find
Al means he can away to drive
his wretched poverty,
Then false he plays, he robs and steals,
his lack for to supply.
Oh Lord thus wise are mortal men
between the cruel rocks
Of Charibdis and Scilla tossed,
of both receive they knockes.
And while they seek these yls to shun
to other straight they fall.
If valiant they do seek to be
then dangers dire they shall
And yrkesome labors also feel
if virtue they do heed
That guides the acts of mortal men,
then them commands need
Al joys away to drive and put,
and eke with saged saw
A life unpleasant for to lead.
If just and righteous law
Seek any man for to observe,
then profyt must away
This justice is of many praysde
and few retain it aye.
If prudence any man do please
he must in any case
Beware he put his trust in none,
for now in every place
Are great deceytes, and perils rise,
and with simplicity
In fine who that is good receaues
most often harm we see,
He least in safety lives and feels
more hurt than all the rest
For this same world a storehouse is
where mischiefs al be pressed,
All goodness here exiled is
the simple Hares thereby
The fearful Heart, the harmless gotes
their bane come sonest by,
But rare the hunter hunts the Bear,
amyd the woods so hie
The Lion reasts, go now thy ways,
and lead thou simply
A gentle life with innocents,
that sooner so thou may
Unto the greedy gaping wolves
become a grateful pray.
The world (alas) does now abound
with tirants over al,
The strong tread under foot the weak,
the mighty hurt the small.
The Egles chase the fearful Swannes,
the Hawks do Throstles kill,
And sary simple seely doves
destroys with crooked byl.
The speckled Serpent kylls the Frogs
and Lizartes up does eat
And in the woods the greatest beasts
of lesser make their meat.
Thou monsters also do possess
O seas of mighty power
That with a gaping greedy throat
the little fysh devour.
Not sea, not earth, not air is safe,
the enmy every where
Is now at hand, it profits small
to live vnhurtful here.
Behold how good is virtues part
that goodness here does train,
For when ye have it gotten once
with labor and great pain
Amid your enmies al she does
you thus unarmed send.
But thou will say, such vertuousnesse
do laws and Kings defend.
O would to God that this were so,
but now in every place
With money laws corrupted ar^
and eke the Princes grace
Is pleased with precious gifts and suit,
the laws set them on rack
That either have no pens to pay
or friendship else do lack.
The other escape as innocents
howsoever judgment try:
Like as the fly that smallest is
in weaued Cobweb hye
That Spyder makes remains wrapped
where if a greater stray
She breaks the nets, and flies abroad
The laws (as well does say
That Barbarous sage of Scythia)
the seely soul does tie
Where as the rich and mighty men
burst through full easily.
The other part of virtue, that
does search with studious pain
And for to know the causes hyd
of nature, does obtain,
And froth to learn, that scarce you can
at any time come by:
How hard and full of pain it is
they know that it do try.
First under masters rule with strypes
they are constraynde to live,
And there accoumpt of lessons hard
with fear and tears to give:
Shut up as it in prison were
whereby they may not go
Abroad, without the tyrants leave
although them forces thoe
The office of the Campo Clubbe,
restraynt of Blathers might,
Though hunger prick, and lust to play
wherein they most delight.
But when the years of youthful state
approaching present stand,
Then need requires more diligence
some one then sekes the land
Wherein Anthenor last arrived
with raging floods to strive
Of Venice gul^e, to Naples else
through Tuscan seas does drive:
An other fast to Perouse sails
or gayneward Rome do f^eete,
There from his country far exilde
with many woes to meet,
With lack of meat and quiet sleeps
and want of Venus play.
On books with study for to look,
applying day by day.
For otherwise can none be learnd
except with untrue fame,
For few are learned now in deed
but many are in name.
Joys hurt them much and pleasures ^ke
that seek for to attain
To top of learnings palace hie:
for this beats back again
Their minds from treading crabbed paths
by which the journey bends
To fair Mineruaes holy house.
For he that thus intendes
A name throughout the world to get,
must suffer daily pain.
Great griefs hereby some men with ill
digestion eft sustain,
Of many whilste to much they read
both sight and eyes decay,
By study great their stomach raw
their color falls away.
Then leanness co^mes with wayward age
nor marvel is it thoe,
Since for to know the truth does still
beyond man's nature go,
And proper is to God alone.
Like as the Owl of night
Can not behold the shining Sun,
with clear and perfect sight:
So fares the mind of man as often
as it intends to fly
Aloft, to search the secret things
falls headlong straight from hye.
Now mortal men dare reach at things
to Gods appropriate,
And foolisher they prove themselves
the more they seek the state
Of things whereof the knowledge does
pertain to them no whit?
Except that God grant them from hye
both reason grace and wit.
But happy are the Angels all
for they the world do know
What thing it is, how much, how great
whereof it first did grow,
The Lord and maker of the same,
all things that may be thought,
The Causes hid, the privy strengthes
whereby all things are wrought.
This is the life that they do lead
and this their pleasure all:
On meat or sleep they never think
to griefs they are not thrall,
No hope of gain, no fear of loss
does cause them for to fret,
But always are of perfect power
this knowledge true to get.
Sapience to Angels does belong
and Gods above you see
Where only prudence does pertain
to men that mortal be
Whereby they may take good advise
from harms and hurts to fly
And gather things that may give aid
and live here quietly.
What thing to do and what to leave
to man does prudence show
Therefore who wysheth well to live
and eke where thorns do grow
With feet vnpricked for to go,
let him seek her to know.
Who will not him acount a fool
that things of greatest gain
Forsaking quite, does seek to get
things strange and also vain,
Who sekes above his reach to roue
and while he climes to hie
Comes tumbling down like Icarui
in waters deep to lie?
The Tode that late did seek to match
the Ox in drinking vain
His panche asunder bursten thoe
does never drink again:
while as sir Phaeton sought to rule
the brideled iades on hye
with earthly hand, was he not forcde
in Padus streams to lie
His life and chariot both resygnde
with this unhappy fall?
The prudent man contains himself
within dame natures wall
Nor more he dare than him becomes
except that God him moves:
Let mortal men such things regard
as mortal men behoues.
Let them not search beyond their power
least if they clyme to hye
They hedlong fall and prove themselves
a laughing stock thereby.
As if an Ox would upward clime
abroad his flight to take,
Or if an Ass a Lute would sound
melodious noise to make.
But let it be that one obtain
all arts in memory,
By which he many books can make,
what good gettes he thereby?
what just reward shall conteruaile
the pains that he endures?
Fame, praise, and glory, thou will say
reward to him procures,
His name thereby shall ever live,
and always eke remain.
But (...) would have the well perpende
(...) (...) view more plain
What praise, what fame, and glory is.
For many things we see,
In other shapes than in their own
transformed for to be
Which with a cloak and shadowing mist
deceive the mind and eyes.
Hereof good things are counted naught
and evil good likewise:
All foolishness hereof does spring.
Full often is Copper tried
In Silver round enclosde to lie,
often Gold does Iron hyde,
And purest shelles within contain
the nuts that rotten be,
In skins of sheep full often to lurk
the wily Wolf you see.
Do not the gorgeous hangings hyde
the dusty mouldred wall,
Where gaping riftes unseemly sit
and worms consuming crall?
There is a sharper sight that sees
what hyd in secret lies,
Who uses this shall judge aright
and wonders see with eyes.
I here demand what fame does help,
what praise? or what renown?
To them that sleep? or unto them
whom death has stricken down?
No more for troth than does the harp,
the deaf vnhearing wight,
No more tha^ gorgeous plays does plese
the man that lackes his sight.
Thou answerst here, that they that live
and they that here awake
Rejoice therein, and for the same
no perils they forsake,
But breath and blood do both resign
this thing for to obtain.
Ambition many does enforce
and drive to glories gain
Much like a spur, and many brings
to tops of virtue hye
With pricks, provoking sluggishe folk
by force of sword to try
Some worthy thing, and if they nil^
by force perform the same,
That then by wit they take in hand
some thing of worthy fame.
Yet is ambition sure a vice
and no man will we see
Be called so, and they that are
ambitious, counted be
Both vain and proud of naughty mind
as once the Romans war,
Requested of the common sort
(rejecting shame afar)
As often as they their voices sought
with humble suit did pray
Good will of Rascalles for to get
that they might bear the sway
In common wealth, their own things left
whereby they might go ^et
Amid the streets with train of men
and stately countenance set.
For her own self is virtue sought,
and not for honors sake,
Though she of right deserves sure
chief honors for to take.
No virtue moves the common sort
they rather her despise
Wherefore must Fortune favor needs
and richesse eke suffice.
Then praise renown and worthiness
will also present be.
In every place if living lack
does virtue beg we see.
But yet it forces not if that
the donghill cock do guess
A precious stone as nothing worth,
this makes not it the less
Of value: so the virtuous man
content with each degree
Despising praise of common sort
regardes not vanity.
The face that well preporcioned is
requires no painted hew,
And of it self may bare be shewde
the gold that tried is true.
But he that virtue is without
does counterfeit the same
And underneath disguised cloak
procures a virtuous name.
wherefore if thou do well discern
thou shall behold and see
This mortal life that here you lead
a Pageant for to be.
The diverse parts therein declared
the changing world does show
The maskers are each one of them
with lively breath that blow.
For almost every man now is
desguised from his kind
And underneath a false pretense
they sely souls do blind.
So move they Gods above to laugh
with toys and trifles vain,
Which here in Pagea^ts fond they pass
while they do life retain.
Fame, glory, praise, and eke renown
are dreams and profitlesse
Because with chance they are obtaynd
and not by vertuousnesse.
But let it be they granted are
to such as worthy be
Tell me do they the body good?
no whit I promise thee.
Help they the mind? as much for truth,
they blow them up before
Depriving them of sobrenesse
they make them careful more.
For he that after honor seeks
must cap and crouch full low
With bribing gifts beseching men
his simple state to know.
This is therefore a wretched life
and full of business,
With envy often it compassde is
and often in great distress.
But he that virtue true can get
he lives most quietly
And happy enough, let him commit
the rest to Gods on hye.
Sufficient honor unto man
is to deserve the same,
For to the unworthy honor dealt
you can not honor name,
To such it is a burden great
and more a scorneful thing
As when upon the stage a fool
comes dressde up like a King.
Now will I here declare and tell
of man the mischieues al
As Soon as he from mothers womb
with blood embrued does cral,
He strayghtway cries, and weping luck
him brings to wretched life,
For seeing well by nature shewde
the cares and bitter strife
Wherewith this mortal life abounds.
So deep with groaning wind
The merchant sighs, and fears as often
as he does call to mind
The perils great that ships are in,
the force of Pirates hand,
The boystrous winds, and raging Seas,
with rocks and drenching sand.
Then by and by but scarce yet borne
him binding bonds do hold,
And straight his tender joints and lims
the swaddling clothes do fold:
As tokens ill of bondage great
that he in time must wear,
For who is free? laws, kings and crimes
have al thing subject here,
And each man serves for hope of gain
or else with force constraynd.
Al beasts as soon as they are bred
with lymmes are straight sustaynd.
And walk abroad immediately,
where man is nothing so,
But long his mouth and mind he lacks
and strength of limbs to go.
Much like a sounding picture made
with crying never still
Disturbing al men night and day
with voice and waylings shrill.
And when on limbs he stiffer stands,
and words can well pronounce
Then bound he is, and suffers threats,
then masters on him bounce,
With lashing strypes, and often his sire,
often mother on him lays,
Sometime his brothers buffets fly,
sometime his stepdames frayes,
with blows not few that stepsyre gives
and when this age is past
Then lusty youth approaching co^mes,
and strength increases fair.
Now from his mouth he shakes the bit,
now council none he hears,
He rages now with furious mode,
and burns in youthful years,
With rage and riot runs he mad,
and rash without advise,
No counsel will he take therein,
but wytty sawes despise.
No dangers now he does esteem
so he the thing obtain
Whereto lascivious lust him moves
and force of wilful brain.
Neglecting laws he brawles and fyghtes
and braynsicke runs astray,
The greatest part of youth are now
with surfets led away.
A few whom fear, or shamefastness
or wisdom does restrain,
Their youthful days uprightly lead
and void of vicious stayne.
Now grauer age and wiser co^mes,
and cares with her she brings,
And labors hard, then toils the man
about a hundred things,
And all the means he can he sekes
his living to provide,
At home he never idle stands,
but here or there must ride,
In town, or else at field he works
with labor great and pain,
His wife, his children and his men
whereby he may sustain.
Alone for all he cares then,
he tastes no daynty meat,
Nor quier sleeps, but forward nows
him drives ambition great
And gives him rule in common wealth,
where while for honors hie
The fool does gape, he malice does
and mischienes great come by.
Then wrinkled age with hoary hayres
encrocheth in apace
The body fades, the strength abates,
the beauty of his face
And color goes, his senses fail,
his ears and eyes decay,
His taste is gone, some sickness sore
frequenteth him always,
Scarce chawes his meat his tothlesse chaps
scarce walks with staff in hand
His crooked old unwieldy limbs,
whereon he scarce may stand.
The mind like wise does ^eele decay,
now dotes he like a child,
And through his weak and aged years
is wisdom quite exilde.
Each age therefore his mischief has,
but mischiefs more there be,
That does belong to every age
to al of each degree.
Sometime does cold to much them vex
and Snowes that flakey fly,
And Northern Boreas wind so brym
when Ise does hang full hie
On house, and when the waters deep
congealed still do stay
Now raging heat of Summer burns
while Sun does keep his way
Through blasing breath of Lion fierce,
the fields depriude of green,
The ground by drythe does gape for rain
and moisture none is seen,
The herbs and grass their lines resign,
the Pooles and Fennes be dry
Now hunger pricks, now thirste does grieve
and dearth does make the^ cry:
Who can in verse declare to men
the sicknesses that raynes
In mortal life? the Agues hot,
the grief and raging pains
That over all the body runs?
each member poison feels,
The hand, the side, the sight, is vex
and al from head to heels
Does grief and sickness sore sustain,
Why do I them resight?
Why seek I here the Cranes to tell
in Strimon floods that light?
Or number great of Swans that swim
in streams of Trojan land?
Often times the mind does lose his state
by herbs or Witches hand:
Or when at sacred Ceres feast
some fiende in breast does lie,
Or when possessed with Bacchus force
abroad with rage they fiye,
Though grief with ire and covetousness
ambition and delight
As much the senses do confound
as does of wine the might
Procuring darkness to the mind.
If truth we therefore say,
Al drunk with beastly affects of mind
are most men at this day,
But few (alas) there can be found
that reele not here and there,
That can discern what they should do
with beams of eyesight clear:
And guide them selves by reasons rule.
Here of advisedly
One said the number endless was
of fools abroad that fly.
For who needs not Helleborus
that gives the purging stools?
But seven wise the Greeks could find,
among ten thousand fools.
The nurse and dam of mortal kind
dame Folly sure is thought
Without whose grace all thing would fade
and men would here do naught,
She Captain chief are wars begun
and all that thereto long.
As armor bright, and Targets fair
with Ancents eke among,
Where colors fair abroad do blase
with sundry sort of beasts,
Of her comes plays and daunces fine
and dronken Bacchus feasts,
All nice delights and wanton gestes
with suits of fond array
From her does come, with heaps of books
compyled day by day.
The floudes of trifles fond do flow
by her, and every thing
Most part at least that man here does,
proceed from such a spring.
But now the woeful hurts and harms
and doleful destenye
That man sustaines, can none declare
though eloquent he be,
Now drownde in fluds here sinks thereon
and unto fyshes great
The simple wretch of soul depriude
becomes a dainty meat.
An other down from house does fall
and shows a tumbling point,
And through his have receives a clap
that crackes his chiefest joint:
Or batters sore his tender limbs
and some the lightnings smite
Or tempest kills, on some again
the falling house does light,
And does unload him of his brains,
some fire fries to death,
With hurtful herbs or Mushroms vile
some yield their vital breath.
And some when as to fast he eats,
while gredy guts do gripe,
Does ouercharge his piece with lumps
that stops his drinking pipe.
How many tears the raging beast
with teeth something to keen,
With Iron shoes of Horses flame
how many has been seen
And many goarde with wild Bulls horn
that roaring mad does bring?
What should I show the dangers great
that man to man does bring?
No beast he needs more to fear
than fellows of his own:
So many knaves and thieves hereby
and persons vile are known,
So many witness false that bear,
so many vicious slaves,
So many living on the spoil,
and cut throat swearing knaves,
Disturbing reast of mortal men
and in none other plight,
Than does the merry beasts disturb
the Lioness in sight.
He with his tongue procures harm,
he with his sword does fray,
The greatest sort with craft does hurt,
one robbes in open way,
An other filcheth privily:
some sort there also be,
That under cloak of friendship strong
or of Hypocrisye,
Such men deceive as they do know
to be of credit light.
All men almost (O wicked kind)
in others harm delight,
The brother scarce may brother trust,
each man his friend must fear
The father of his son in doubt
does live, sure Hell is here,
The furies and the stinking floods
that lie in Lumbo lake
The gaping grenning Helhound wood
and all that Hell does take.
Sleep only peace to man does bring
amid his fleering life,
Nothing than this (if dreams fray not)
more sweet or void of strife:
For cares and labor it extles,
and with his pleasant wings,
The wretched body resting brodes,
and sweere estate him brings.
Yet nature seems this rest to hate
and ordainde has hereby
The stinging Gnat and biting Flea,
to vex continually
With twinging prick this pleasant joy,
whereby both night and day
Might mischiefs ever present be.
More better far away
Therefore is death, than picture his,
For who so once the seas of life
in joyful bote has past,
And in the quiet haven fair
his Anchor safe has cast,
With merry heart does laugh to scorn
the blastes of raging wyndes
With tempests black, and Leucoths head
which floury Garlandes byndes,
Does honor much, and Melic^rt
with gifts he does salute,
And safe amid the shore he joys
with plays of sundry suit.
Death ends al pain, al bonds does lose,
death causes fear to fly,
And dangers all by death are forede
to rest eternally.
And as no grief nor pain thee vexed
before thy Sire thee got,
So shall thou feel no grief nor pain
when death her dart has shot.
Who can conceive the times as ill
he felt his birth before?
Or judge of days he never saw
or shall see never more?
Or who will once dispraise the night
as wretched, naught or ill
Wherein possessed of deadly sleep
he senseless lay full still?
For what is death continual sleep.
what sleep? for small time death.
But many think souls never die
but after loss of breath
The dead they say do live again,
and flesh forsaking quite
As cockels from the shell outdrawne
to Pluto take their flight:
And downwarde hedlong fast they run
in kingdom black to sail.
There feign they woods of Mirtel trees
where woeful lovers wayle.
There rivers run with flaming floods
and dreadful Monsters be
That poyso^ foam, with gaping throtes,
their places may you see
Of diverse form, where Infants cry,
and where the gilty Ghostes
The furies fierce of Hell do burn,
and whip fast lynckd to posts,
And where the pleasant fields do lie
with goodly green arrayed,
As due to blessed men that here
their pagents well have playde.
But other now say otherwise
and souls they grant remain
But those that well in earth have liude
with stars above shall rain,
And they again that like to beasts
have serude licencious mind,
And God neglect, in form of beasts
to live are all assinde:
In brutishe shape to wander long
by judgment just are made,
Til time that purged front their crime
they come to highest grade.
Which things in deed if they were true
death fearful might be thought,
Or at the least a better life
and void of sin be sought:
For to the just hereby is got
the joys and pleasures true,
Whereas the wicked shall receive
their pains and merits due.
But whether that the dead do live
or that they nothing be
And soul with body has his end,
pertains not to me.
For I me thinks have said enough:
enquire of Sister mine,
Whom Grecians, wisdom ever call,
these thoughts she does defyne,
And always searches secret things
and verity does show,
Her teaching, well thou may attain
the state of souls to know.
Except it serve to tell thee that
death is not to be dred,
At least unto the just that here
a righteous life have led:
For either quiet rest they have
in sleep that still does last,
Or happy else they shall receive
rewards for virtue past.
wherefore go to live Godly now,
put vice from mind away,
So death shall seem but light to thee
and grave thee not shall fray.
But now in mind these words reuolue
both speak and think this thing:
What hurt shall death to me procure
what loss shall grave me bring?
No whit for troth. what will it have?
of richesse me deprive.
But richesse then I shall not need,
for nothing then I strive.
But richest then I may be calde,
for welthyest is the wight
Not that does most possess, but he
that lacks least in sight.
Gold, silver, precious stones, and lands,
with sumptuous fine array
With other like, I will despise,
as things that I not way:
Nor pleasure past shall grieve me then
no more than greueth beasts
Sweet pleasant sparkling wines to lack
or Custards fine in feasts
The things that no man does desire
what if they not be had?
But friends and children sweet to leave
will make (thou say) men sad.
why should this thing me grieve so much,
were it not hurtful more
If in my life my friends should dye
and I lament therefore
Continually? as some do write
how for Antilochus
Sir Nestor wept, as for his son
(whom slew the King Turnus
While he the Trojans armies helped)
Euandre liude in woe.
I go before, and what for this
they all shall after go,
When God appointed has their time,
and me again shall see:
If souls be ought as we believe,
as Christ declares they be.
Well whatsoever that it is
death ill I may not call
Because it riches takes away
and pleasant joys wythall.
For unto us these are but lent,
the use does nature give,
And not the thing it self she deals
to mortal men that live.
Since nothing then to me belongs
to death I will resign
Al other things that here I have
as nothing sure of mine.
What if I others goods do leave?
wherefore should I lament
If nature now do ask again
the things that she me lent?
I naked came into this world
and naked will I out.
For this world is an Inn where hosts
of men a wondrous roure:
Who for a time do use the food
that lays before their face,
Their host and therewithal does say,
syrs take and eat apace,
Not for deserts of you we give
these things, but of good will
These pleasant dishes here we set
therewith your selves to fill
Until such time as I think good
to bid you hence depart
And say from up my table rise,
now ease with joyful heart,
But when the hour last shall come
wherein I bid you go,
With willing mind obey me then,
and place resign you thoe
To other gests that here shall sit,
let them rejoice a while
with dishes these: who will repine
(except he be to vile,
Lack wit, or else unthankful be)
hearing these words to go
From others doors, or else will sit
while he commands so?
But he shall cry come forth you Knave
and thrust him out by the ears
And ill apayd he forwards goes,
with woeful weping tears.
Wherefore should I if he do call
that all things here does guide
^epine to go from hence, or seek
in wretched life to bide
As many do? nor fyt it is,
nay willing hence I go
And leave this fylthy world I will,
where thousand mischieues flow,
Where faith is none, where godliness,
where justice none does dwell,
Where peace and quietness is fled,
where vices bear the bell,
Where brother sekes the brothers blud,
where son the father hates,
Where discord evermore does reign,
and guile in married mates.
No man there is, at least but rare,
who (if he can) not steals,
Who robs not, who does not feign,
and who not falsiy deals.
That well this world may now be calde
of thieves a gaping den.
Lo, Kings and Bishops proud beside,
by name of Godly men
The commons poor do powle and pyl,
and Citizens do shere
And simple innocents destroy.
what should I reckon here
The horedomes great committed now?
all flows with vice we see,
The naughty act do young men use,
and close misused be,
Who plants not horns in neighbors heads?
the balde religious frye
Who should be chaste, abroad with hores
or close with boys do lie:
To widows grave or tender maids,
the holy priests do crepe.
And some within their kinsfolks bed
have great delight to sleep.
Some slaves with bests themselves defile:
the fields and grove of tree
And every town is now a stews.
And harms that instant be
And dangers great that haps to men,
and labors great and sore,
And all the supersticious sort
of false religious lore.
What need we subjects now to be?
sith (O the shameful state)
Unwytty and grosseheaded fools
and they that learning hate
(To whom the dice, and Dogs to keep
with birds of ravening kind
And horses ride, with other toys
is all their chiledish mind)
Do Scepters hold, and peoples guide,
and govern Cities strong?
Here of such errors up do spring
with folishnesse among,
Hereof so many vices breed
if this thou call to mind
Thou shall not fear this foolish world
and naught, to leave behind:
Yea thou will count it well that once
Calanus and his fears
Did bring to pass, who slew themselves
to escape these wretched years
And staying death with hand did haste,
nor longer would preserve
The dying Corpse, nor wretched flesh
with labor long to serve.
And if religion said not nay
and laws of Plato hie
And GOD himself, I would persuade
thee forthwith for to die,
And wicked chance and wretched earth
to leave as vain and naught,
Not wine as wine desired is
but wine and good is sought.
So life as life is nothing worth
if goodness lack we see,
If it be naught, as wine corrupt
let it despised be.
For life it self we need not wysh,
nor fled it ought to be.
The worm, the fly, and every stone
and bark of every tree,
And every vile and little thing
does life in it possess,
No kind of thing desired is
where wants pleasantness.
If it be not both life and good
I see no cause whereby,
It should be wished or may be loved.
Therefore who fears to dye
Is but a fool since he desires
such hurt and harm to bide
Both of the body and the mind
with labors long beside
Before he would al kind of grieves
with flesh from him expel,
And ever in tranquillity
and perfect rest to dwell,
Or leaving members here behind
to live for evermore,
Where he shall want no kind of thing
nor sorrow feel nor sore,
And with the saints together there
about the world to fly,
More swift than all the winds that be
beholding things on hye.
Except the dregs of vice him stay
and force him still to dwell
Beneath in Corners deep of earth
amyd the raygne of Hell.
When thus this Lady fair had said
she rose and stood by me
And on my head (refusing I)
she put the Laurel tree,
And thence departing forth she flewe
where shining stars we see.
Explicit media Pars.
Libra, The seventh Book.
MY muse a lof^, raise up thy self
and use a better flite:
Mount up a hie, and think it scorn
of base affairs to write.
More great renoune, and glory more,
in hautye matters lies.
Uiew thou ye Gods, and take thy course
thorowout the starrye Skies.
Where spring time lastes for evermore,
where peace does never quayle,
Where Sun does shine continuallye,
where Light does never fail.
Cloud causer Southwinde none there is
nor boystrous Boreas blows,
But mylder breaths ye Western winds
where sweet Ambrozia grows.
Take thou this way, and yet sometimes
down falling fast from hye,
Now up, now down, with sundry sort
of Gates aloft go fly.
And as some hawty place he seeks
that couets far to see,
(...) The cause is first before the effect
the workman work above.
The perfect thing, because it does
each part in it contain,
And nothing lacks, is stronger far
of greater force again.
Therefore it makes, co^maunds, and moves,
and so by challenge due
The cause and Auctor eke of all
it may be termed true.
But otherwise thunperfect thing
that maymde can not consist,
Is overcome, and move it must
even as the perfyte list.
It does obey and not command,
and therefore must be named
The effect, and eke the framed work,
and not the thing that framed.
So far behind it ever ought
the perfect thing to go.
For if imperfect were the spring
from whence all thing do ^^oe,
It were but vile and nothing wrought
thereof should perfect be,
As always of thunperfect Art
imperfect work we se.
Wherefore beginnings more than one
no reason forth can find,
Because there is not to be known
but one of perfect kind.
From which, the never failing course
and order of all things
Does come, as from the Union first
each other number springs.
Besides it pure and syngle is,
that mixtures all has made:
For nothing can compounded be
but symples first is had.
For first it needful is alone
the symples to be tryde,
And then in mixture all in one
compounded to abide.
Therefore no principal there is
but one, as I have taught:
Which simple in degree we judge,
and purest must be thought.
Whom if we think not for to live,
in ^rror great we fall:
If he live not, how lives the reas^,
since by him live we all?
Doubtless he li^es, and wisdom has,
or else in order dew,
How could he frame such goodly sightes
except he all things knew?
Nor doubt we must, but needs confess;
with mouth and eke with heart,
Him to be good: Can he be ill
of whom each good is part?
Can bitter ^reames at any time
from sweetest fountain run?
Or can the rivers pleasant be
of bitter spring begun?
For either nothing must be good,
or good must he be thought,
That is the spring of all the rest,
by whom the world was wrought.
Him men do call by diverse names,
but we that Latin wright
Do call him God, and more we say
that Jupiter he hight.
Who, fynce he is the first that was,
and maker of each one,
Lives of himself both good and wise,
receiving state of none.
But all by him their states enjoy,
who may lose that they have,
Whenever he list for to restrain
the thing that first he gave.
As Kyuers must leave of their course
when springs their stremes deny,
And yet it follows not therefore
the spring it self be dry:
(For of it self it yeldes the stream
and hanges at no man's tail:)
So God does of himself consyst,
and therefore cannot fail.
If altogether perish should,
yet fayles not he therefore,
For what consysteth of it self
must last for evermore.
When only of himself he s^ayes,
and needs no helper by,
When as by force he cannot quayle
and will not willingly.
He is all and whole, the rest but part,
yet in no such degree,
That of those parts he purest should
himself compounded be.
But by his virtue he is all,
because he first did frame
The world so wide, and all things else
contained in the same.
All things that live and void of life,
all things that do appear,
And hidden syghts he only made,
and does preserve them here.
In this wise therefore is he all
as seed is all the tree,
Whereof springs up the mighty boole
whose branches shadowers be.
Some doubt if God a body have,
and thus do they believe,
That nothing void of body is
that sense cannot perceue.
And therefore now we will attempt
the troth thereof to see,
Of quantity and quality
all bodies needs must be.
For by these two state sensible
the body does receive:
Take these away what does remain
that senses may perceive?
All quantities and qualities
compounded ever be,
And God of nature syngle is
as late I told to thee.
Add more to this that bodies all
of form and matter be.
Nor God can be of such a power
as bounds may comprehends,
When he abides for evermore,
least so the world should end.
Nor body none is void of bounds,
but all are measurable.
The compast form has his precinets,
whose fashyon is most laudable.
So has the Square and Triangle,
and all the shapes that be.
This reason proves no body is
but it may measurde be.
And thus I prove, this body here
in equal parts divide
Whereof the half let A possess
and B the other side.
I here demand if A as much as B
can do? or if these twain
Be infinite? so one shall serve,
and the other shall be vain.
If both have power determinate
the whole must have the same.
But who so seeks the unbounded thing
of bounded parts to frame,
Shall prove unwise and thus ensewes
the maker chief of all
No body has. But some there be
perchance that answer shall
God is a body infinite.
hut this do I deny:
For so should he each place fill up,
and leave none void: whereby
The rest should never be containde.
so world there should be none,
Nor we remain, nor any thing
save he himself alone.
Besides, since body here in life
is of more noble state
Than sensses Corse, we must not doubt
but life of higher rate,
Than Careasse is. But here I ask
if life a substance be?
If not, then substance were more vile
and of more base degree,
Than that which substance is without.
and if you bring in this,
In suffering such absurdity
the scholemen all will hiss.
But if that life a substance be,
then body is but vain,
Since of it self is can consyst
and severed (...) remain.
And why should ^od a ^ody take
since he at liberty
Does best enjoy his state and has
no such necessity?
It is a thing super fluous eke,
by which the life enclosed
As prisoners like is barde the place
whereto it is best disposed.
Therefore that chief Almighty Prince
eternal good and wise
No body has. Now will I show
why many do despise
This reason, and do think it vain.
the cause hereof does spring,
That drounde in bodies gross, and blinded sense,
they know no other thing
But bodies here. as through a glass
with any color stainde
Whosoever looks, each thing shall judge
of color that is fained.
Yet must we know, and doutlesse think,
that diverse things there be,
That either void of bodies live,
or of such pure degree
Their bodies are, that neither eyes
of ours can them behold,
Nor sense discern, and so more worth
than ours a thousand fold.
Which thus perchance may proved be.
all gross and wayghty things,
How much the more of earthly drofse
annexde to them forth brings,
So much more base and vyler be
than that which seems to flow
Of fine and purer matter wrought,
all metals this does show.
For look when as by fervent heat
of Fyrie flames they frye,
They straightwaies melt, and basest parts
wherein most earth does lie,
As nothing worth, falls out to dross.
the purest and most fine,
With better sound and better shape
before the eye does shine.
So Bread is best of purest meal
whereof the Masters eat,
Of grosser is the servants food,
the worst is Mastyues meat.
So Water, Wine, and Oil with like
the worthyest of them be,
Such as most clear and subtle seem
and lyghtest in degree.
So meat the baser and grosest part
by syege away does fade
The finest part remains, whereof
Flesh, Blood, and strength is made.
What is the cause that common stones
so rude and rusty lie?
Where marble, and the precious gemmes
do glyster in the eye.
Naught else, but that in one of them
less dross of earth is found,
In the other, gross and heavy moulde
has sight and value drounde.
Therefore more foul, and baser far
such things are indgde to be,
Wherein most earth remains, whereby
they are calde of less degree.
As dross we take less gold to be,
or gold of baser mine
We can not call so justly Gold
as that already fine.
For of all Elaments the earth
the vylest has been thought.
And as the rubbish of the re^^e,
cast by, when they were wrought
Therefore the wysest workman first
did cause it low to lie,
That distant far it should remain
removed from the sky.
And thick in ball he cast it round,
more less and small to be,
That saints might have more plain prospect
that list the world to see.
For when God had dect the world
with Stars in trym array,
What dross remaynde he bade ye winds
to cleanse and swepe away.
Then in with hasty course they rushe
their Lords awarde to do,
The Northwinde blows ye Southwind huffes,
the West, and East set to.
With striving blasts they swepe ye fields
and round in heap they cast
Whatsoever they find, constraining it:
the earth is framed and left.
Which, banished from the heavens hye,
straight down to center fell,
No place more far nor base appears
where nygher she might dwell.
Beside, of weaker force it is,
and eke of smaller power,
Than all the reast of Elaments are,
and feblest of the four.
For if by fervent heat of Sun
it be constrained to gape,
Or pierced with Plow, it cannot join,
nor take his former shape.
The waters if they parted be
do straight return in one,
And void of all diuisyon semes
as if there had been none.
So does the air, and fire eke,
if these divided be,
At first they join again, so that
no sign of hurt you se.
And why? because they are more pure,
and perfect in degree,
And of their proper force alone
they always moved be.
But now the earth unwieldy thing
of nature ever stays,
And more, is cause that sundry things
can move no kind of ways.
For where most earth habounds, most weight
is found, such things apere
Less apt to move, the light more quick,
and unto life more nere.
For life in every thing is cause
whereby they move alone.
It needs no proof the senseless Corse
does stir as does a stone
Since things in life have chief estate
(for life excels all)
Doubtless the light and moving things
the chiefest we may call.
They err therefore, that do believe
no other things to be.
But such as senses gross perceive,
and eyes apparent see.
For what more subtyle is than air,
what less is felt or seen?
By which have many thought it void
as no thing to have been.
It is but s^ight: what tho? yet has
it here a substance sure
And body is, of four chief, one,
than earth or stream more pure,
And therefore placed in hyer seat.
for things approaching nere
To skies, and blessed stars above,
of chiefest state appear.
Besides, are not the wyndes so pure
that no man can them see?
Yet nothwithstanding none there is
but knows that winds there be.
Which when they have a sunder burst
the bars of Eolus strong,
The monstrous Hills by force do shake,
down torn the trees along
Do lie, the Seas from channel deep
are tossed above the shoares,
The clouds are caused, the lightninge flashe,
the dreadful thunder reares.
Since thus their force does rage think thou
that substance they do lack?
Because thou can not them behold,
or in thy hands them take.
To judge as senses lead is fond:
for oftentimes the eyes
In taking one thing for an other*
this error plainly tryes.
As if into the clerest spring
a staff most straight be thrust,
The eye shall judge it to be Crooked
though it be never so just.
As if a boat row nere the shore
the shore shall seem to fly
And still the boateis thought to stay,
the senses therefore lie:
Which many times deceived be,
and changed sundry ways
By age sometime or sycknesse* great
the force of them decays:
Nor every man has them alike,
some thinks it fair and meet,
The thing another says is foul,
and some do count it sweet,
That others judge of bitter taste:
the air is cold says he,
Another says the wether is hot,
thus senses diverse be
In diverse bodies, diverse seems,
deceived sometime by chance,
As when the drunckardsees two lights
for one, and stools to dance,
The wine in troubling of his eyes
does much disease his sight,
The air besides deludes the sense,
sometimes it seems bright,
Now dark, now thick, now moist, now dry,
whereby we often guess
The Sun as, red as blood to be,
the Mo^e now bygge, now less.
Hereos does also come to pass
when one aloud does cry
Deceauing folish cares a doyce
does seem to answer nigh.
By this and other means they err,
but reason is more sure.
Who finds amongst a thousand toys,
the certain truth and pure.
This reason is most dear to him
that wisdom does retain,
Whose mind is of a lively force,
and sprite of heavenly vain.
The blunt and doltish common sort,
with blind and bleared eyes,
Does not her see, hereof does fault,
vain hope, and fansy rise.
This reason guides the wysest men,
Opinion leads the lowte,
Let us the steps of reason ^read,
and ioyle her ways about,
This reason may be calde the Sun
that moves in order just,
By which alone from brutsh kind
of beasts we differ must.
The dark and dim uncertain Moon,
Opinion may be named,
But what does reason bid me write*
that many creatures framed,
Alive there are that we can not
by senses understand:
For if that God should not have made,
wych hye and glorious hand,
More noble creatures than the state
of fading mortal kind
He had not then deserved such praise
as is to him assinde,
Unperfect eke had been his rain
for underneath the kind
Of man the wild and saluage beasts
consyst of brutishe mind,
To sleep and feed, addicted all:
and if he had not framed
No better things than here we see
the world might well be named
A fold of filthy feeding flocks
with thorns and donge set out
What should we then this God account
a mighty heardman stout
But he created man besides:
now sure a goodly thing:
Was this his best? is this the power
of that Almighty king?
But let us try if this be true
if we may credit give:
It is not good nor reason will
that we shall this believe.
For what is man? a foolish beast
a creature full of spite
And wretched far above the reast
if we shall judge upright.
Who is not of his nature naught?
the way to vice is wide,
Wherein the feet of mortal men
continually does siyde:
No warning, law, no pain, nor fear
can cause them for to stay.
Again the path of virtue is
a straight and painful way,
Wherein but few do use to walk
and them you must constrain.
Who is wise? the woman? or the child?
or all the Cobblers train?
The most (alas) are foolish doltes
in darkness blind we tread,
And fond affection bears the sway
by which we all are lead.
For none at all or few there be
(whom he that guides the sky
Has chosen to himself alone)
this reason ruled by.
For who can now behold or how
may leisure we obtain,
Whereby we might search out ye troth
that secret does remain?
Cares pulles us back: the greatest part
of life in sleep does wast.
The rest does pain or sycknesse let,
or poverty does taste,
And stouthfulnesse sometime does hurt
and pleasure often annoy,
Hereof springs fools and wisdom eke
by this we not enjoy
For she with great continual toil
and study long is got,
And does require a quiet mind
that troubles hinder not
The troubles of the state of man
(if I remember well)
Among my books the syrt I think
before does plainly tell:
Of mischief, grief, and foolishenesse
alas this is the place,
And darksome den of Hell wherein
all live in wretched case
But yet the gross and common sort
do never way this thing,
But in the midst of all their toil
the foolyshe knaves do sing
And gaping laffe do not perceive
their own calamity,
But are when pain does plague them sore
as ioconde as a Pie,
And suddenly does all forget
so that some sweetness fall
Hereby does come forgetfulness
that ryds them clean from all.
For nature wise and provident
our state did well fore see
In giving us so slender wy^
for our commodity.
For if that wisdom were in us
what man could bear the strife,
The cares, and tedious troubling to^^es
of this our wretched life.
For sadness joined with carke and car^
this wisdom in does bring,
And nature seems to Foster man
with hope of hopeless thing:
Without the which each man himself
would covet to destroy.
So hope and folly medicines be
that nature does employ
For our behoue by sage advise,
least we by chance should faint,
When many mischiefs swarming thick
our wytlesse sense does taint.
And if no creature else excel
this man in hye degree,
The chief Creator of the world
what shall we think to be?
Of Misers, Fools, and eke of them
by whom does mischief spring:
He shall be calde a Lord, a Prince
a Father, guide, and King.
O noble power, O princely reign,
companions fine and brave,
What wants there now O God to thee?
what sekest thou more to have?
Alone thou doste not now remain,
it well became thy Grace
To frame so fair a world as this
to make such creatures place.
Let Heaven serve their only use,
the Stars, the Moon, the Sun,
The Air, the Earth, the surging Seas
what else? it shall be done.
But straight they shall consumed be,
and vanishe clean away:
As Snow does fade in summers heat,
or flower in frosty day.
What state have they that do consyst
of body weak and frail:
What state baue they that in the space
of so small time do fail?
May we believe the seas and earth
alone replenished be
Which are compared to the skies
as nothing in degree,
And if the mighty compast spear
in mind thou well do way
thou shall perceive the smallest Star
more great as wysemen say
Shall then so small and vile a place
so many fish contain
Such store of men, of beasts and fowls
and the other void remain?
Shall skies and air their dwellers lack?
he dotes that think th so
And seems to have a slender wit
for there are thousands mo.
That better state and better life enjoy
and far more blessed be.
Moreover if we will confess
the unfeigned verity,
This earth is place for man and beast:
beyond the clouds, the air,
And sacred sky, where peace does rain
and day is always fair.
The Angels have their dwellings there
whom though we cannot see
(For pure and fine their substance is)
yet numberless they be.
As thick as are the sands in place
where waters ebb and flow,
As thick as stand the flowers and gras^^
that in the meddowes grow.
For who so thinks the Heavens hye
of dwellers void to be,
And may upon this earth so vile
so many creatures se:
He dotes deceived by ignorance,
and foolishness of mind,
And semes all drounde in earthly dross,
as beasts of basest kind.
Nor wonder I at this a whit
that happy Islands found
In Occean seas they say there be
where all things good abound,
Whereas no grief the life does vex,
where no misfortunes raygne.
The shyes perchance the Occean sea
to name does here retain,
Because in color like it seems
and eke in moving round,
Each Star an Island shall be thought
why not? have we not found
That diverse houses are so calde
because that far away
They severed from their fellows ^y^
who otherwise does say
He says not true, for if there were
such Islands in our seas
The Princes would not suffer them make
to pass their life in ease:
But weapon straight should conquest
to enlarge their kingdoms hye
If any passage were to them
themselves therein to lie.
What doubts Greece to feign or lie
the mother old of toys?
For doubtless Heaven, Stars, and ayr^
inhabitaunts enioyes.
Who this denies does malice much
the blessed saints on hye,
And eke the eternal state of God
do blaspheme foolishlye
Is it not wicked blasphemy
presumpteously to say?
That Heaven lackes inhabitants
and God does bear no sway,
But here with us and savage beasts
so fond so full of shame,
Nay certainly God could and would
more noble creatures frame,
That lead their life in better place
whereby his praise esteemde
Should be the more and larger power
and world more perfect deemde.
For making sundry sorts and nobler things
the beauty more does shine
Of this same world and more appears
his Majesty divine.
But if these shapes be pure and void
of body coms the dout,
Or whether they consist of parts
as we do round about.
Yes truly reason does declare
all creatures that do dwell
In fire, and air, they bodies have.
if they had not, as well
The air and fire should desert be,
and places void should grow
For none but bodies place possess
as wise men's words do shows.
But whyther shall these bodies dye?
we must confess it so
A long and joyful life they lead
at length with death they go,
For if that air and fire in time
corruption shall deface,
Why should not all such creatures dye
as live in such a place?
For placed things do follow still
the places nature plain.
But some perchance desires to know
what fashion they retain,
We may be sure their beauty is such
that they do far excel
All creatures fleeting in the seas
or all on earth that dwell:
Which neither God permittes nor we
could view with carnal eye,
But they that pass their life in stars,
and in the purest sky,
Doeneuer dye for age nor years
cannot the strength abate,
Of those so gorgeous glistring stars
or harm the heavens state.
And eke we must believe that those
which live in skies so bright
Their bodies are more fair, more fine,
of greater force, and might,
Then all the reast that live between
the earth, and Stars above:
Or in the elements dwell where time
and age can them remove:
But what do they? they do rejoice
with sense and reason right,
Now using one, and now the other
and live in such delight,
As wit of man cannot devise,
nor mortal tongue can tell.
True world, and true est ate is there,
true joys, and treasures dwell:
We only have the shadows here
and counter faytes retain,
Which lasting but a little space
like wax do melt again.
Our world is but a figure plain
of those so princely powers,
And as our world the painted Map,
so it surmounteth ou^es.
Above these Heavens that we name
and creatures all beyond,
A better world vncorporate
that senses does transcende
And with the mind alone is seen
there are that think to be,
And with thassured troth it seems
not much to disagre.
If mind excels far the sense
why should the sense behold
A world alone with perfect things
and creatures many fold.
And mind without his proper world
a Cyphar should remain
And none but dreams and fansyes fine
with shapes and shadows vain.
Thus either nothing is the mind,
or else has nature wrought
A world agreing to the same
wherein containde are thought
Unfeigned, chief; and purest things
which better far away
May of themselves consyst tha^ things
that senses compass may.
This same first framed world does pass
the world that senses see.
As much as mind excels the sense
in perfecter degree:
In which the chiefest light is God
where saints as Stars appear,
And therefore more and stranger things are there
then are perceived here,
Sith it is perfecter by much
for nothing there does dye,
No time, nor motion, there has rule
all fixed continually,
As void of place and safe from harm
they all do seem to be,
There are the causes of each thing,
and springes of all we see.
The world that senses may perceive
from this same world does spring,
And seems here a figure sure,
and shaddowe of that thing:
All things more perfect there
and all things whole appear,
We have but portions of the same
which are increased here
By natures fault and great deffect.
so hearts a number be,
For virtue one above creates
the hearts that here we see
By her the subtle Fox is framde
by her the Lions live,
And so of all the other beasts,
that this our world does give,
Which seem in number diverse sorts
but all are one in kind
That from these powers at first to come
are every one assinde.
None otherwise than Carpenters
in Cities great of name,
Each one applying well his work
do diverse matters frame.
Wherefore this world does stand of parts
the other does consyst
Of al, and living by themselves
of distance as they list
But some have thought yt every Star
a world we well may call,
The earth they count a darkened star
whereas the least of all
The God does rain that underneath
the clouds has placed his chair
That fosters all the creatures here
in seas, in earth and air
A Lord of shadows and the guide
of shapes that lively be
To whom is dealt the charge of things
and rule of all to see.
Which for because they do not last
but pass with time away
Do scarce deserve the name of ought
but shadows that decay.
The same is Pluto as I judge,
of whom the Poets old,
Do often sing, and say that he,
the King dome black does hold.
For underneath the clouds is night,
above are al things clear,
Where light does last for evermore,
and brightness still appear.
To him as to the worst of all,
thalmighty Lord did give
The vtleft reign, the rest more good,
in better stars to live.
But yet is no man sure of this,
for who does know so well,
Gods mysteries? who has been there,
and turnde again to tell.
No state of man is such, our mind
does faint in things so hie:
The Owl cannot behold the Sun,
with pure and perfect eye.
Each one presuming of his wit,
inuenteth matters new,
But Poets specially, to whom
most confidence is dew:
For they may by authority
of any matters write:
With Bacchus rage they moved be,
and with Apolloes sprite.
Though nothing is that does forbid
the mad man truth to say,
Sibylla used to tell the troth,
in madness as she lay.
Let this suffice (my promise kept)
to prove that numbers be
Of creatures far excelling us,
which no man's eyes can see:
Yet do they live and reason use,
and as some wise men say,
Such are our souls departed once,
that never shall decay.
So Plato, so Pythagoras,
and so Plotinus thought,
And so have many Poets erst,
in pleasant verses wrought.
Therefore it seems labor worth
(a thing most mete to tell)
Of this for to entreat at large,
for what does more excel?
Than thoroughly man to know himself:
for children understand
Where of the Body does consyst,
even earth, of flyme, and sand.
But hard it is so plain to know
the nature of the mind,
Wherefore presuming on my Muse
with all the force I find
Bestowing all my wits thereon
I will attempt to know
The perfect nature of the same,
and plain in verses show.
That done forsaking Libra soon
Scorpius, thy crooked sign
I enter will, and destenie
thy fatal force define
If destiny do not deprive
our Port of his will.
And for because in doubtful things
to bring the greater still
The method and the order best
is plainly to begin,
With such as are assured most
so will I do herein,
For if the first beginnings here
shall seem obscure in sight,
The sequel shall uncertain seem
and in the worser plight
If slender the foundation be
in small time and space,
We shall behold the buildings fail
that we thereon do place.
The effects more plain and manifest
than causes seem to be
At them therefore we will begin
and all things open see.
With moving now (for every thing
that life remains in
Does move alone, first sign of life)
therefore we will begin.
For of it self the bodies restes
and members rottes away
The cause (perhaps) that moves is heat
or blood that bears the sway.
But things alive are often still
when as they list to rest
Though heat and blood in them abound,
therefore appears best
That will is cause of moving here
yet sometimes they desire
To move and cannot stir therefore
does moving both require
The one commands, the other works,
for will can nothing do
If power do lack. But how commes it
that men move to and froe?
Because (mind teaching) will sees good
and moving straight does turn
To that it sees, as Fyrre is drawn
by that which makes it burn.
Like as the iron from his place
the Lodestone upward draws,
And as the Aumber lyfteth up
the little slender strawes:
The world in such a wondrous sort
the Almighty Lord did frame,
That many things do well agree
as joined in the same,
And many things do disagree
and keep continual fight,
Whereby some men have surely thought
that strife, and frendeship might
Be justly calde beginnings chief,
by which are all things wrought,
Thus good first moved by which ye mind
to motion quickly brought,
Does move the parts and pricketh forth
the body here and there:
But yet ws think suffiseth not
one good to all things here
Nor one desire to all alyke:
so this some that estemes
And every one retains his joy
as best to nature seems.
The Child we see desires the things
that aged men forsake,
For as the bodies seem to be
so mind and will do take:
Wherefore we sometime covet this,
and sometime long for that,
And that which late we did esteem
we now do seem to hate.
Because our changing body is
disposed diversely,
And draws the nature of the mind
the way that it does wrye.
Hereof comes thyrst, and hunger sharp,
and lust to Ladies lappes.
The body many things do change
as age, or time, or happes,
As also meat, and drink, sometimes
and air does change it quite,
And Stars does alteration make
as learned men do write.
Wherefore nothing in sight alone
but state of body here
Does cause us diverse things to will
and moves, it does appear.
But some by reason rather led,
do walk as she does show,
And only are by virtue drawn:
but such are very few.
For fleshly fond affections here
the mind do over run,
None otherwise than mistes do dark
the clear and shining Sun.
Lo this the cause why body moves.
the moving force of mind,
Whom moved will does still command
obayes as is assinde.
And in the parts that quiet are
if nothing them do let
Is poured out and causes them
now here now there to iet.
But why should labor weary them
whereof should this arise?
As faynting feet in travail, and
the akyng arm often tryes.
The cause hereof, is blood resolved
by force of fervent heat,
(For to much moving it inflames)
decays in fuming sweat.
None otherwise than Fevers fierce
the creature pale consumes.
When blood or other humor hot
thorowout all the members fumes
Does life support and body feeds,
which whylest it quickening makes,
The moving force possessing all
the body quiuering shakes
The heat and heated blood beside
does bread a lively spright:
As waters warmde with beams of Su^ne
do yield a vapor light.
This spirit enclosed within the bowels
Through all the veins does run,
And nere to her does serve the life
in what she will have done.
But those in heavy sleeps that lie
how should they moving make?
As some do in their steepes arise
and weapon up do take,
Some in the stable takes his horse,
some wrytes as many say,
And some has erst been seen a sle^pe
upon the Lute to play.
It must be known that of the thing
the Image does remain
In us, of all that we do see,
or senses can retain.
This makes us think we see the face
that late we gased on,
And that we seem to hear the words
were vtred long agone.
These forms within the secret celles
enclosed in the brain,
A vapor moves, which to ascend
the stomach does constrain
And mind deluded so does move,
the body styres thereby,
If the resemblance be of force
that in the head does lie.
But tail of L ysart, or of Snake
that cut in two does sprawle,
Does will it move? Or force of mind?
that Greeks do fansye call,
As they whom rage of madness moves,
or to much drink arayes,
Or dreadful dreams do cause to shake:
or happens other ways.
Perchance amongst the knotty parts
of this divided tail,
The lively spirit enclosde does search
all means for to prevail,
In breaking out and wynding parts
does wrye as best it may,
And striving long through passage small
does get at length away.
Or that same part of mind that feels
divided does remain
In tail cut of, and causes it
to turn and turn again.
Yet I suppose that every thing
wherein no judgment lies
Can feel no grief, nor nothing else
that we can here devise.
For chiefest force by which we feel
from knowledge ever flows.
who knows and judges most feels most
and most rejoicing knows.
But fools and doltes care less for all,
less harmde, less fearing still,
They feel not cold, nor heat so much
scarce know they good from ill.
Not for because it smartes, therefore
the tail divided shakes,
For naught it feels, because the strength
from which it knowledge takes
Is not in it, but in the head
in better place did lie.
Wherefore the former cause I judge
the troth to go more nigh.
Lo, thus therefore is moving made
by which all creatures go.
Yet in the reasons past before
we put this one thing to,
That sundry times the present good
when it might be achieved
Does nothing move, nor is desired
because it is not perceived
Thus knowledge semes of moving cause
or chiefest as we see:
For who desires, or sekes the thing
he knows not what to ber?
For will her self of proper force,
is altogether blind,
And cannot any thing desire
without the light of mind:
By whom if she be not enformde
she takes she untoward way,
And with the she we of good beguilde
her virtue does decay.
Of moving this shall here suffice,
now let us seek to know
How living things do wax so great,
what causes them to grow,
And why at certain time they cease.
a fiery spirit does rain
Thou give life to every thing,
that carcass does contain.
This heat does lively moisture feed,
as flame of Candell bright
(When soon withdraw himself from us)
the Oil preserues in light.
This in the stomach boyles the meat
whereof the finest spread
Abroad, the synowes, bones, and flesh,
with pyth, and blood are bread.
And all the body does increase
as plants with showers of rain,
And warmth of Su^ne them comforting
does rise and spring amain.
If that this fire be much of force
and moisture equal here
As much as heat shall seem to need
the increase shall great appear.
At length it makes an end and stays
when spent is all the heat.
Which fading body fades, as shows
in them whose years are great,
For wasted they like pyned Ehostes
their aged lymmes do crook
And stouping low with hollowed eye
upon the earth do look.
For fire is gone, and lively heat,
and moisture does decay,
Without the which no life remains:
as Lamps no longer may
Give out their light than oil does serve
but leaves, and darkness brings.
Then let us now the moving show
of mind and whence it springs,
A thing both dark, and hard to find,
but yet we will assay
With all our force to touch the troth
as nere as well we may.
And first of rage, that boldneth men,
and dangers does despise,
Increases strength and gives force,
as much as shall suffice,
Which moving all as desperate
upon our foes we fly,
And bloody battle to begin
with sword in have we hye.
The cause thereof is blood enflamde,
and heart that sendes out fire,
And bitter galle abroad dispersd
for Galle is house to ire,
And choler matter ministers
to rage and fury blind,
Hence comes that creatures lacking gal
are not of wrathful mind,
Embracing peace, refuse to fight,
but they whose blood does burn,
And greater rage of heat retain,
to anger sonest turn.
So youth, and so such dronken mates
whose heads has brink diseased,
Upon a smallest cause do snuff,
the mind therefore displeased
Does blood and choler myngle straight
then hand for weapon calls,
And skirmishe comes, thus cuts are carved,
and wound wide open falls.
For first the mind offended is,
and vexed by miury,
Which troubled, moves ye body straight
by these it semes they lie
That say the mind can never styre,
for if it never move,
The body still to stand and stay
it always does behoue:
For diverse mouings do declare
a diverse mouer plain
The Sun does often change in course
and shadows change again.
What is the cause that Organs give
now one now other voice?
But hand yt, shyftes from diverse kayes
does cause a diverse noise.
The mind affection inward first
does take and close concele,
And makes some part or other serve
when she will it reucle:
Disclosing straight to it whatsoever
within in secret lies,
To the end that plame it may appear
and open to the eyes.
None otherwise than when the king
unto his faithful friend
Declares the secrets of his mind
and after does it send
To be proclaimed in every place
that it may plain appear.
Hence springs love for when the mind
does fansye pleasant gere.
She makes the heart a minister
and so does love declare,
In heart, love, wrath, fear, lust, and hope,
with joy, and also care
As in a tower with mind do dwell
and these as there begone
By means of other parts through all the body forth do run.
But of this same in other place,
more plainly shall we write,
If God therein do favor us,
and Muses grant us sprite.
Suffi^eth now affections first
of al things else to be
Within the mind, the causes sprung,
of things without we see,
And after they by member, blood,
or other humors might,
Are spread abroad in every part,
and so thrust out to light.
For seeing mind and body are ioynde,
the moving needs must be
Common to both, the harms al one,
and change in like degree:
Whatsoever thing the one perceyues,
the other feels it,
They both in nature do agree,
so strongly are they knitte.
But now because we seem to touch,
the typ of Scorpions toe,
Let us, my Muse, of senses speak,
here briefly as we go:
Five senses nature gave to suc^
as perfect creatures be,
But unto some he dealt not all,
which may be worthily
Unperfect namde, as Moles, and worms
and Scallops of the baye,
And Wilks, and Irchin ek^ whom pricks
incompast round array.
Aniong these senses al, the sight
is thought the best to be,
Because it is the chiefest means
wherewith the mind does see,
Declaring plain the wondrous works beasts,
that nature here does frame
such flowers, such fruits, such her us, such
such plants, such stones of name,
Such sundry sorts of mettalles fair,
and showing also plain,
What Fyshes Proteus feeds in seas,
what Monsters there remain,
And more than this the stately rooms
wherein the Gods do lie
The glistering globes of stars above
and Phoebus shining hye:
Besides the things that men do hear
that tongue can not displaye,
This sense therefore does all excel
and fairest far away:
In which the seat and chiefest place
wherein the mind does dwell
Is thought to be, for when we meet^
or talk in presence tell,
Upon the others eyes we gase
as man, and mind, and all
Did there consyst, who so the eyes
the glass of mind does call
Shall say the truth, for pleasant love
in them does first give light:
There hate and ^iercenesse does appear
with mylde and gentle sprite:
There sadness, joy and mischief shows
with zeal and wisdom great,
And follye, pride, and fear and rage,
with fault and wrathful heat.
But whereof does the sight proceed?
the minds let other see
Of learned men, I briefly show
as I think best to be.
One life there must be known to be
of substance eke so fine,
As sight can never comprehend
of force and power d^uine.
Which nature deals and God does give:
this feeds and makes to grow,
Does breed, does move, does hear, and taste
does smell, see, feel, and know:
Which is the chief and greatest power
most nere to saints on hye.
These powers she through ye body spreds
in certain parts to lie,
And by the eyes does light let in,
and sundry colors see,
And judges plain of every shape,
and all things else that be:
Receaueth also by the nose
the smelles of sundry sort,
And by the ears does understand
sound noise and great report.
By tongue descernes each kind of taste,
by feling knowledge brings
Of hot from cold, of hard from soft,
of rough from smothest things.
Companions five these are to life,
and faithful servants sure,
That shows her all, without the which
she nothing could procure.
The eyes therefore as glassye made
and as the Crystal cl^re,
Like as a glass receive the shapes
that we do look on here,
By power whereof are things desernde
if that the eye be sound.
These sorts of things unto the mind
(for as in highest ground
Her stately seat in head the holds)
the eye does plainly show,
Whose image truly shadowed there
she wise does straight ways know,
So wondrously she does perceive
a sundry sort of soundes,
When in the helthy unharmed ears
the air thereof reboundes.
For air of slendrest substance is
and moves by and by,
Which beaten with the noise does shu^ne
and from the stroke does fly,
And pearcyng breaks into the ears,
though close be kept the glass,
And close the door, so fine it is
that inward it will pass.
For even the fyshe when fy^hers hard
with poales the floudes ^^e plashe,
For fear of noise fly fast from thence
and thick in nets do mashe.
For air to depth of seas does pearce
up mountes the waves thereby,
And tempests roares with dreadful noise,
the shipman out does cry,
And vows to offer sacred gifts:
As often therefore as we
Do find two things together knockte,
as often as air we see
Moved vehemently, but chiefly then,
when through these hollowed things
By narrow straightes it passes out,
thence diverse voices springs:
As diverse are the sorts of them,
as place does fashion take:
In which the air does sundry soundes
and sundry voices make.
So soundes the Trumpet otherwise
by far than shalme does blow,
And well we may the Tymbrels tune
from sound of sawtrey know.
For as by stroke of stone in stream
do many cyrcles rise
So moved, the air, with whirling wheel
does spread in largest guise.
And therefore into many ears
one voice does easily pass
As where a number be, one sight
is seen in every glaue.
But how the nose receives smell
let us say something here.
A slender fume from every thing
arisyng does appear,
Which broad in air does spread it self
as Frankconcense we see,
Or Myrrh, if that upon the coals
the powder poured be.
By means of tongue is taste perceiude
and roufe of mouth beside,
For by these twain the taste and smatche,
of every thing is tryde,
Which pearcing straight does touch the sense
thereof is taste begone.
But feeling, blood and sprite procures
which through the body run.
This sense do creatures all possess
and taste they all receive:
But man does better them enjoy
and them more right perceive.
Hereof to man more wisdom does
than to the rest arise:
Some this deny and say the things
foresaid are otherwise,
Alowing not that forms received
in eyes, cause sight to be,
Or that the air we need, as mean
to hear, or for to see.
For the almighty King does give
so many powers to mind
As in the world he framed things,
that vary in their kind.
That she might al things comprehend,
she knows well what to be,
Her proper kind, and more perceyues.
Mind al things plain does see,
And al things ponders prudently
that senses to her brings,
And with celestial trial ways
the true and virtuous things.
To Life therefore is mind the Sun,
the senses Stars do seem:
So some affirm, but we make haste
and leave these things to deem,
To other men, for nigh we come
to end of Libra here,
Because the feet of Scorpion sign
do plainly now appear.
My sayings yet do plainly teach,
the soul Celestial
To be, which void of body lives,
and gives life to all,
Discerning also every thing
as far as God gives leave,
For all things here, of him their force
determinde do receive.
To him eternal power belongs,
al things does he create,
And makes al things that here ar made
through his almighty state.
For if the soul perceaues and knows,
and understands al,
We may not think it substance such,
as we may body call,
Sych bodies move, not earth nor air,
not flood nor fyry flame,
Nor any thing that these have made,
has power as has this same.
we need not doubt but soul proceeds,
and does from Joue descend,
And never dies whom he permits,
the world to comprehend.
What if so be the Ato^^yes
that sundry wise men feign,
The soul is rather thought to be,
than body to maintain,
Al Bodies be of quantity,
and may divided be,
But soul is vndiuidable
and of no gross degree,
And as a Center does she seem,
where many lines do mete,
Which senses do convey to her,
as floudes to seas do flete.
Wherefore I marvel much at such,
as think a like decay,
And judge the soul no more to be
when body fades away.
For if so be it might be proved,
yet should it not be said,
Nor published to the common sort,
nor every where displayed.
For many wicked men and ill
there are, which if they thought
Their souls as nothing shall remain,
when corse to grave is brought,
Nor that it feels, or suffers ought,
when it goes hence away,
And that no punishment remaynes
for prancks that here they play,
A thousand mischiefs would they do,
take fear from them among,
And fall to every villainy
confounding right with wrong.
Besides a number now that think
in blessed state to be,
When death has them destroyed, and hope
the face of God to see,
And evermore with him to joy,
and therefore virtuously
Do seek to pass their present life,
wych Godly modesty:
If they shall see that after death,
do no rewards remain,
Amassed al, their virtuous works,
shall cease and perish plain.
So many stately temples trimmed,
so many altares hie,
With gold and marble garnished
and decked sumptuously,
Beside Religion, Godly zeal,
honor, and worshipping
Of God, shall come to naught, if after
death remain nothing
That men hope for, if that the soul
as wind does pass away.
Of wild, and frantic common sort
Religion must be stay,
And fear of smart. For mischievous,
and full of fraud their brain
Is always seen, nor of themselves
they well do mean or plain.
The common people virtue loath,
and ever more do hate.
Religion is the comeliness,
and glory of our state,
Which makes the Gods to favor us,
which we win Heaven by.
No wise nor good man therefore dare
attempt here openly,
To teach yt soul shall come to naught,
and so corrupt the minds
Of rude unskillful common sort,
that waver like the wyndes.
Now must we prove by reason good
that soul does never dye,
And free from sting or darte of death
does live eternally:
As he that preaches Christ declares,
and Greshop eater Jewe,
That for sins utterly despised:
which God that all things knew
Would not have made if he had thought
it had been nedelesse here:
And nations all with one consent
account it to be clear.
And first the thing resembling most
the mightyest Lord of al,
Of longer lasting time we grant
and perfecter must call.
For that which does not long endure
but shortly does decay,
That it should be vnperfecter
who is that will say nay?
And therefore do celes^iall things
a greater while endure,
Because they are more perfecter,
and more divine and pure:
But things that nerer are to earth
and farthest of from skies,
Unperfect since they are, do fade
and sonest ever dies:
Shall then our soul since it in life
and knowledge does appear,
Most like unto the state divine,
be closed and shut up here
With body for to end? nor shall
it here have longer place
Than fading flesh? or shall it live
more great nor larger space?
Besides the soul can not decay,
this reason witness shall,
Because it is of syngle state,
and void of matter al.
Add this, that when the body fades,
the force of mind does grow,
As weak and aged fathers old,
do more of council kn^w
Than youthful bloods of younger years,
and often lacks he wit
That does excel in strength and force:
For rare does God permit
To any one both strength and wit.
Wherefore if force brought low,
By space, and course of many years,
the mind does stronger grow,
Of Body does it not depend,
but of it self consist
Another thing, and after grave
does live and death resist.
Does not beside when foot does ache
the mind judge thereof plain?
It is no doubt. But how can grief
to tower of mind a^^ayne,
Does it ascend from lowest parts
as smoke does upward fly?
No: for many parts not foot alone,
(if so) should ache thereby,
Nor of the foot, but of the part
that nerest is to mind
The ache should grieve: this shows that soul
is not of bodies kind:
And so is free from death since it
in distance needs no mean.
Add this when we would call to mind
the thing forgotten clean,
Or else devise some worthy fetch,
from mind, the senses al
It then behoues to gather up,
whereby does often fall
That many better for to muse,
do shut and close their eyes,
Or else forsaking company,
some secret place devise.
Or when the night with darksome cloud
the earth does ouerspred,
And creatures all with heavy sleeps,
do take their rest in bed,
They still do watch, and silent al,
upon their beds do rest,
And light put out, in darkness w^et
their mind with body oppres^.
For senses do the mind disturb,
affections it destroys,
Amasing it with dullness great,
and blindness it anoyes:
None otherwise than clouds do hyde
the Sun that clearly shynes.
If therefore, when it does remain
within his own confines,
And flying far from senses al,
and cares that body brings,
It wyser be, then shall it know
and understand al things
In better sort, when it is free,
and from the flesh does fly,
More perfect of it self it is,
and lives continuallye.
Beside when man as mean consystes,
the Saints and beasts betwixt,
Some part with each he common holds
with beasts his body mixed,
And with the saints his mind agrees:
one of these parts does dye,
Of the other Death can have no power,
but lives continuallye.
Death therefore takes not al away,
for why? his deadly darts,
Does never harm the soul a wh^^
when it from body parts.
And more than this I have to say,
if nothing do remain
Of us, when carcass lies in tomb,
God shall be called plain
Unjust, and one that favor shows
to such as naughtly live:
For such for term of all their life,
no sorrows them do grieve,
No riches lack nor pleasures great,
but happily rejoice,
Exalted with promotions hye,
and with the Commons voice.
On the other side the virtuous men
a thousand griefs molest,
Now sore diseased, now plagued wc need
in fine always oppres^.
Therefore the soul lives after grave,
and feels deserved pains,
And if it have done justly here
a Crown of glory gains.
By these and many other ways
I could declare no doubt,
That soul of man does never dye,
and body lives without.
But this enough: time biddes me end
nor ignorant am I,
That soul of many (although unapt)
is termde a melodye.
And as of sundry voices moved
an harmony proceeds,
Of sundry compoundes medeyne made
which force of healyng brcedes:
So of the joined elaments
by certain mean and way
Created, of the heavens eke
the soul to be some say:
A part whereof in body dwells
and part abroad does lie:
As sight does spring of outward light
and virtue of the eye.
For Heaven is the chiefest cause
from which all things do spring,
without whose aid ye earth could not,
nor seas breed any thing.
But this opinion is not true,
for if it should be so,
The soul with flesh should never strive,
nor once against it go,
But evermore in one agree.
As every power does show,
That wonted are of my^ed things
by sprite divine to grow.
As in the kind of herbs apperes,
and in the precious stone.
Some think the soul does not remain
when flesh is from it gone,
Because that heavy, sluggishe sleep
the nerest thing that may
Resemble death, does seem to take
both sense and mind away:
Or for because they see the mind
with sycknesse diversely
So vexed, and harmde, that it can not
the place it has supply,
And with the body to increase
with which it eke decays.
As well apperes in children young
and men of elder days:
Fond is the child, the man discrete.
the old man doteth still
For weak unwieldy wythered age
does mind and body spyll.
And more say they if that the soul
of substance be divine,
And seured from these fleshly lyms
may lead a life more fine,
Then why should it in wretched flesh
so seek it self to place?
By whose defect so many yls
and mischief it deface.
But fond she is therefore if that
she do this willingly,
And if perforce she be compelde
in carcass caued to lie
who does co^straine? Does God himself?
then her he naught esteems:
Nay which in prison vile he puts
to hate he rather seems.
More of it self (except it learn,)
since it does nothing know,
And oftentimes forgetfulness
the mind does overthrow.
Therefore they judge it nothing is
when body here does dye,
For learn it cannot, senses dead,
which it knows all things by.
Some other say that soul there is
in all the world but one,
Which gives life to every thing,
as Sun but one alone
There is, that makes all eyes to see
eternal, think they this
Though bodies dye as eyes put out
the Sun eternal is.
These trifles fond it is not hard
with reason to disprove:
But here I longer am I fear
than it does me behoue.
There shall not want that such demand
shall answer once at full,
And all the doubts therein assoyle
and knots asunder pull.
O man of sharp and pregnant wit,
thy praise shall live with mine,
Our labors (doubt not) shall commend
the men of later time:
They famous work attempt, and seeds
of Heaven on earth go sow.
This one thing will I more put to,
that every man may know
The soul immortal for to be,
and sprung of heavenly grace,
If senses and affections all
he will restrain a space.
If that dispisyng worldly joys,
and earthly thoughts resynde
with daily labor he attempt
to God to lift his mind:
Then perfect wisdom shall he have,
and things to come foretell
Awake, or else in heuye sleeps
perceive the same as well.
In this sort did the Prophets old
the things to come declare.
The sober mind therefore does come
more nere to heavenly fare,
The farther from the flesh it flies,
and from the earthly care.
But like to beasts the greatest sort
do live as sense does will,
And think none other good to be
but flesh to have his fill.
Hereof (...) comes that many think
the soul with body dies,
Because they see not things divine
with weak and fleshly eyes.
But of the soul this shall suffice:
let us return again
To him that made the world, whom we
conclude for to remain
Of body void: and thousands more
that body line without,
As thick as in the woods the leaves
do cluster trees about:
And if they bodies have at all
so purely are they find,
That sense of ours cannot perceive
but only seen of mind.
But thou my Muse be silent here,
and when his will shall be
And pleasure eke, who moves my lips,
then shall thou search with me
The cause of things, that vnderueath
the cyrcle of the Moon
We see to pass, if they by chance,
or fatal force be done.
And whylst while as the Sun ye back
of Lion flaming fryes,
And doubling often her creaking voice
the Greshop chyrping cries,
Encompast with the shadowing grass
let us find out in shade
Of Laurel, or sweet Myrtle tree,
where hushing noise is made
Of streams, that flows from Parnas springs
a quiet resting place,
For rest does well refreshe the mind,
and calls again the grace.
And straight when as with quietness
our strength is come again,
I will (if thou will favor me
and me with grace maintain)
Attempt to touch the stately tunes:
and if the almighty King
with countenance sweet do grant me aid,
my labor long pitying,
And poverty drive far from me,
and bitter cares expel:
Al wholly will I live with thee,
and always with thee dwell.
This only shall be my delight,
my self then shall I fill
With pleasant Aganippaes streams,
and sing on Cirph^s hill.
Scorpius, the eight Book.
THe cause why mortal state does pas
such crooked contrary ways,
Some sort in honor, happily
do spend their joyful days:
And other some in myserie,
oppressed continually,
With daily moyling vexed sore,
in fame obscure do lie.
Fair Muse declare: for unto thee
it lawful is to know,
The councels of the Gods above,
and secrets for to show.
Some men by blind disordred chance.
think all things done to be,
Nor world by reason to be ruled,
because they most things see
With undeserved goods adourned,
and most things plagued again
Uniustly vexed with noisome ils,
and difference none to rain:
The just and virtuous men oppressed,
and Rake helles hiely placed,
And vice than virtue more esteemed,
and Churches al defaced,
With fyry flame of thunder cracks,
and most men for to gain,
By sinful usage of themselves,
and craft of subtyle brain:
Such when they see to come to pass,
the greatest part surmyse,
Either no Gods at al to be,
or else that they despise,
The base affairs of mortal men,
And only heavens mind: therefore
they rash and blindely say,
Uncertayne chance in every thing
does bear the chiefest sway.
But Fortune some to thee do give
the governance over al,
And thee Lady chief of every
thing on earth do call,
And that thou holdst the scepters here
with brows that sowrely frown,
And with thy false unstable wheel
turnst al things vpsyde down:
To thee the old deceived age
did buyld their altares hye,
And often times before thy face,
their sacrifice did lie.
Some are besides that do impute
each thing to destenye,
And judge that force of fatal laws,
the world is ordered by,
And that with one continual course
(as pageants shows to mind)
Al things do move, and every man
has here his part assinde,
That he must play, till al be done:
a question to be sought
Right profitable fair and hard,
not to be left untaught.
Now first therefore let us declare,
that nothing here can be
Without a cause, and that the cause
must of necessity,
Much differ from the effect, since that
nothing it self does breed,
No thing can of it self be cause,
nor of it self proceed.
Then infinite shall causes grow?
not so: but yet there ought
Some first to be, from which the rest
of causes must be brought,
Which from the hiest must descend,
unto the basest state.
This order then of causes we
call Destenie or Fate:
Which God as once predestining
that all things should be so,
Determinde has by his decree
for evermore to go.
But as each cause does nerest come
unto the causer first,
So all the rest it does excel,
and moves, and rules the worst.
The first beginning is a cause
and no effect the same,
The lowest state is but effect,
no cause we can it name:
The means that are between these two
may names of both retain.
For if of causes were no knot,
nor order still to rain,
If the one of the other should not hang,
(as if from heavens hye
A Chain to deepest part of Hell
should hang and lincked lie:
Which is to vile to be rehearsed)
beginnings more than one
Shall seem to be: and causes first
must many spring thereon.
Then shall they strive amongst themselves
and often fiercely fight,
So many heads, for one alone
does rule require of right:
So neither world should here be one,
nor beautiful should seem:
For order is the beauty chief,
that we in things esteem.
But some perchance will say from one
beginning first of all,
Together many causes seue*
red downward often fall.
As sundry sort of glistering beams
the Sun does from him send,
With certain difference severed,
of which does not depend
The one of the others force, but each
from self same head do fall:
So needs no strife, nor let, because
one way they walk not all.
This order is not very ill,
nor much mislyketh me,
This sentence may be fortune true:
but let us thoroughly see,
All blindness from our mind expelde,
for mind of man cannot
Attain to light of troth so sone,
nor in such easy sort,
But oftentimes does use to err,
and hereof does arise
Such sects, and such contrary sawes,
he proves, and he denies:
As reason proper is to Gods,
opinion is to us,
No certainty has mortal man
the troth for to discuss.
Therefore if many causes be
that from the first do flow:
If each of them in perfectness
be like, I seek to know:
No order there shall then appear,
for where no chief does guide
No difference, nor diversity seen,
no order can be spyde.
In every thing thou may perceive
a first, a mydst, and last,
No kind of thing is here that is
without an order cast.
But if they al do not alike
this perfectness auowe,
God has some thing imperfect made:
this can not I allow.
Wherefore one perfect good effect
allow the causer first,
The rest have more vnperfecter,
as they themselves are worst.
For commonly most store of fruit,
the naughtiest tree does bring
But worst, as ill than good, and sour
than sweet does ryfer spring.
For as each cause is more of power
and of estate more hye,
So more of life and reason has
this purest substance nigh.
The cause again of weaker force,
and of a baser kind,
Less life, and reason does possess,
and substance less does find.
As well upon the earth appears,
where al things do endure
But little space, where reason is scarce,
where no estate is pure:
But all of many things consistes,
al things on earth that been,
Compounded are, and myxt, so that
no substance can be seen:
Nor here she is esteemde a whit,
the honor does remain,
To such as her do here enjoy,
and such as her retain.
In dark some caves she hidden lies,
and hereby do we find,
That fortunes goods are more estemde
than virtues of the mind.
For substance virtue may be calde,
but in this world exilde
This substance lives, her country fair
her seat and mansion mild,
The heavens are, where as she has
her faithful friends of trust,
Goodness, and truth. By this means tho
the world is framed just,
Of causes as before is said
preieruing every thing
with during bond, this chain (but God)
may none in pieces bring,
Nor force, nor space of time it break.
Of causes such is sponne,
What is to come, what present is,
and what has erst been done,
To all the which their force, and strength,
thalmighty king above
with certain bounds, and time appointes
by certain means to move.
And needful is it to be known
how, many causes run
To gather often when any thing
by force of them is done.
Nor rashely is this meeting made,
and causes mixed so,
But by appointed destenyes,
all things do pass, and go
Thalmighty work man of the world
has all things vndercast
Assured laws, and measure dealt
to all the things he past.
Therefore it is not true that some
affirm, and dare defend,
That nothing certain can be found,
that chance does all things send:
And God regards not mortal state.
But they themselves deceive,
And are beguiled much, to whom
this sentence here does cleave.
For truly chance is nothing else
but vain opinion blind,
Not diffring much from shapes, and syghtes
that in our sleeps we find.
Whatsoever Aristotel says,
or any of them all,
I pass not for, since from the truth
they many times do fall.
Often prudent, grave, and famous men,
in errors chance to slide,
And many wits with them deceive
when they themselves go wide:
Examples only serve, so much
must errors followed be.
Let no man judge me arrogant,
for reason rules me,
She faithful guide of wysemen is:
let him that seeks to find
The troth, love her, and follow her
with all his might, and mind.
And that there is no chance at all
this reason strong and stayde,
Makes me believe: for if that all
(as erst before is said)
By causes fixed in certain guise,
and certain time do move
As God commaundes, for perfectness,
and for the worlds behoue,
Least hurtful error should destroy
so fair a work as it,
what kind of place shall chance possess,
or seat find out to sit?
In doubtfulnesse, and altering state
surmounting far away
Both Protheus, and Vertumnus to,
in changing their array,
As void, so nature chance denies.
Uncertain naught does lie
Within this world, but certain all:
as nature, God, and sky,
And elaments, and what of them
so ever framde we see,
Or has in time before been wrought,
or evermore shall be.
But if that ought uncertain were,
then should the mind divine,
Not all things here know certainly,
but from the troth decline?
Which were to great absurdity,
for he does all things spy
That each thing makes, nor ought from him
can hyd in secret lie.
Though some do say that if so be
that heavenly mind should know
The base estate of mortal kind,
it should less worthy grow.
But they are much deceived, for none
is ill because that he
Does ill things know, nor vile yt knows
the things that vilest be.
Nor any man is changed white
that white can well define,
Nor worser is the Sun as often
as it on knaves does shine,
Nor if with beams it hap to blase
in place be durtyed much
It foul does seem, nor light defylde
that filthy things does touch.
So if the mind perceive the thing
that vylest may be thought,
It is not worse, to know ill, than good,
but ill to do is naught.
Thus God of nothing ignorant,
all things that are does know,
What has been done in alder times,
and what shall after grow.
Which if they be not surely ^ixt
confess we must them needs
Not to be known, for knowledge still
of things assurde proceeds.
The Prophets also when they speak
of things that happen shall,
The certain days do plainly appoint,
and proper names of all:
Which would not be, but that al things
are fyxed certain so
That are to come, or present be,
or passed long ago.
Yet many things do seem by chance
amongst us for to light:
As when a tyle by tempest torn
from house a man does smite:
Or when a man in deluing deep
does store of treasure find:
Such things by chance to hap, does synk
in common peoples mind.
But this my mind does not allow:
for though unlooked for
Such things do hap, shall we therein
admit a chance therefore?
Our knowledge, nor our ignorance,
to alter things has might:
For fire has not his flaming heat,
nor Snow therefore is white,
Nor Su^ne does yield his glistering beams
because we know the thing:
For of the matters that consyst
our knowledge here does spring.
Therefore we know it thus to be
because the thing is so,
And mind may often seem to err
the thing can not so do.
Now of the thing I speak and ask
if chance therein do lie,
For whether we do know thereof
or no, regard not I.
The chance therefore in us does lie,
not in the things that be,
Such things we think to fall by chau^c^
whereof no cause we see,
As known alone unto the Gods:
all things are certain tho.
For with one sort of moving round
the heavens always go,
Like seed, like fruit, and elaments
in ancient order rain,
And keep their kind, and wonted course
the year does still retain.
For after spring, the somer hot
himself has strayghtwayes placde,
And after him with Apples thyck
and Grapes does harvest have,
Next after that his nipping frosres
the winter brings in,
And with his Isye northern blastes
all things to droupe begin.
No herb does ever change his force,
all creatures do retain
Their old accustomed shape, and in
their wonted guise remain.
Ne must we think that monsters here
of chance or errors grow,
When cause of them assertaynde is
ill tidings to foreshowe:
And thereof first did take their name
wherefore their wonders hight,
Which nature willingly does make,
who often does delight
To bread some ^ond ylfauo^red things.
As paynter often does joy
(Though he have cunning great beside)
to paint some testing toy:
As pycture crooked, or saddelbackd,
with nose of largest syse,
And blabber lypt, a worthy sight
and fit for clownishe eyes.
Since all things thus in order good,
and measure like do fall,
Unstable chance within the world
shall bear no swing at all:
whom chiefest providence of God,
and wisdom great does draw,
That he may easily understand
with what a wondrous law
The world with everlasting course
is framed here and gracde:
How every creature has his lymmes,
and members aptly placde,
well serving to their uses all
agreing fair the same,
How God or nature never thing
in vain did make or frame.
who ponders this shall think not chance,
but reason bears the sway,
And al things done as God commau^ds,
will deem, and plainly say.
But whether fortune guides all
as many do persuade,
A thing both meet, and worthy is
in knowledge to be had.
Let us bend all our wyts to this,
but first we must well know
What kind of thing this fortune is,
and whence her grace does grow.
In ancient time they worshipped her,
and Goddess her did call,
And thought she bare no little sway
in Heaven and earth, and all:
And alters unto her they built,
and offered sacrifyce:
But I think her not God to be,
nor any saint in skies,
Is either male, or female sure,
in kind they not delight,
No birth they have, nor dying day
as some of old do write,
Who think the Gods like us to be.
O fond, and foolish minds,
O heads for to be healed with juice
of greatest purging kinds.
Judge you the Gods, of our estate,
that with their Ladies fair
Embracing many times they lie,
their kind for to repair?
Let rather us therefore account
a certain God to be,
Whose nature differs far from Gods
a Ghost of low degree,
And therefore guides the kingdoms vile
of earth and waters round,
Whereas so many heinous factes,
such griefs and plagues are found,
Where as no kind of thing is safe,
where no estate is free,
where crafts and wyles do swarm so thick,
where such deceiuings be.
The Prince of all the world, this God
is named of Christ, and Paul:
Whom Pluto, and sir Dites black,
the Poets use to call:
who favors fools, and wicked men,
and virtuous men molest.
This house, this seat, this court does seem,
for such a tyrant best,
whom commonly we fortune call:
for each ill thing does rain
Beneath the Moon: as darksome night
and storms, and tempest main,
With cold and heat, and teasty age,
dame need of beggars hall,
And labor, grief, and wretchedness,
and death that ends all.
Above the Moon continual light,
with peace and joy remain,
No time, nor error, death nor age,
nor any thing is vain.
O blessed, and double blessed again,
that in so pleasant place,
So fair, so beautiful, to live
of God obtayneth grace.
Some think the world to be fulfylde
with other Gods beside,
Whereof the most do lead their life
in ayry places wide,
whom Greeks call sprytes, and more to the^
the chiefest rule they give
Of creatures al, that on the earth,
or on the sea do live.
Affirming that both good and evil
as most their minds does please
They send, as honors, joys, and wealth,
and contraries to these.
wherefore it very needeful is
to please them often times,
which may be done by serving them,
by charms, or by divines
As many think, and like wise say
that they will straight appear
To us, (if they be ryghtly calde)
and help us praying here:
And that no better thing can be
here in this life to man,
Than for to have their company,
and see them now and than:
which I believe but few obtain
but just men that despise
The fond and fading wanton ioies,
and food of fleshly eyes:
That quietly do live, and cares
do banish far away,
And heavenly things alone do mind,
and never seek to stray
From that, which right and virtuous is.
Although that some do say,
Ill sprites amongst these good there be,
constrained to obey
To naughty men, by Coniuring,
whereby much ill is done:
I can not stay, nor now is place.
the sign where as the sun
Does yield his yearly compast course,
where scaled brethren shine
Shall tell the rest, where as I will
the state of Gods define,
If God himself do me permit
who does my verses gene.
Let us therefore pass over this.
I scarely can believe,
That any God can evil be.
Wisdom byds never sin:
But contrary, by folly does
fault, stray, and crime come in.
No man is evil wyllingly
as far as I beleaue:
For every will does covet good,
if judgment not deceive.
But Devil wisdom has, (if that
this name to him agree.)
But whether Fortune govern al,
or howsoever it be,
Or Devils guide the state of men:
but yet without destenie
Does nothing pass, But al things ruled
by mind of God on hie,
Without whose power nothing is done:
but of this saying here
A doubt does rise, and knot so hard
and sure does eke appear,
Such one as Hercules, or else
the Macedonian King
Would scarce undo, which douht and stay
to many minds does bring.
If destenie commands al,
if al things so must move,
Not will to us remains free,
nor to the Gods above,
Free will is taken clean away,
and virtue no reward,
Nor vice does punnishment deserne,
which is not to be heard.
No place is now of Gods to speak,
but of such things as be
In our estate, is subject here,
which eyes of men may see.
I say therefore that in the things
that under fortune be,
No kind of thing can here be found,
exempt from destenie:
As riches, pleasures, joyful mind,
with rule and honors hy^,
Come from above: not will of ours
is that we get them by.
For who would (...) such things enjoy?
but will auayles not thoe,
It rather hurts if destenies
against a man do go.
How many strive to rise aloft
against their destenie,
But faster more and more they fall
and down they deeper lie.
On the other side they unto whom
the stars more gracious be,
Unlooked for do often live
in chief prosperity:
Whose nets while they themselves do sleep,
Rhamnusia full does fill,
With fish, and brings unto them
al things that they can will.
Lo, some of great and noble house,
we see to come to light,
And to (...) from childehode first
all things with joyful spright,
And to attain to honor hye,
though they unworthy be,
And bli^ded often their eyes to rule
that scarcely well can see,
And live in all licenciousnesse.
And some of kindred base
For to be borne, with grief and tears
themselves for to deface,
with labor long and vain, to toil,
and yet cannot expel
The prick of hunger that they feel
but still in beggrye dwell.
who will deny these ylies to come,
through cruel destnies might?
A number fair and active are
and of courageous sprite:
And many foul, and syckly still,
of courage faint we see:
whereof co^mes this? of our deserts?
or our infirmity?
Or shall we say, our will does al?
By Fates assuredly
Each thing does chance to mortal men
the rule has Desrenie:
Of our affairs and our estate,
the hour and kind of death
It only guides: a halter him,
him sword depriues of breath,
He drownde in floudes he kilde with cold
him strangleth fyry smoke,
Some other hunger does destroy,
and some does surfets choke,
By grief or sycknesse many dye,
some, chance away does send,
And many age bereues of life:
a certain day of end,
To al men is, and every age,
nor longer can we go
Than threede of life permits, that ru^nes
the spiteful spyndle fro.
So kylde a rysh the prayser of
A chilles lusty lore:
So Aeschilus, while as he walkde
abroad on Sicill shore,
With mighty fall of house deceassed:
Anacreon so did kill
A reasons seed. Alas what ways,
what means has death to spyl?
When fardest of thou think him,
then nerest stands he:
Nothing than death more certain can
nor more uncertain be.
Yet some that know the force of starr^s,
and secrets of the sky,
Soothsaying Po^ts that can tell,
how things to come do lie:
I know not with what sprite inspired,
are often wont to tell,
The kind, and day, of death to come:
for of the things as well
To come is nature sure, as of
the present things and past,
Sure in the first and second cause
that from the first to the last
With largest lynke extended are.
But goods or illes of mind,
Do they proceed from desteny
or from the fatal kind?
Learning and wit seem thence to flow,
may any learning get
Except he wisdom do obtain
and nature force permit
If fortune let or sycknesse stay?
An Dratour some one,
An other a Philosopher,
some always look upon
The sacred secrets of the Gods,
and secke the starry sky,
And some there are yt drink the streams
in wretched pouertye
That from Castalian well do flow,
whom pleases pleasant fame
As nerest kin to hunger sharp
from whence comes all these same?
From desteny the chief of all,
each Art from hence does flow,
Thence offices derived all
that mortal men do know.
In sundry servants nature joys,
that diverse things thence may
Proceed, to deck the world, and letts
not all to pass one way,
But them commands several course
and several pains to take,
With sundry sort of works the world
more beautyfull to make.
But whether our conditions here
are dealt by desteny,
Or whether of our will they spring
it seems good to try:
Nor labor small it does appear
the troth herem to find.
Of our free will what portion does
remain within our mind?
In wretched case we live if us
byreft is liberty,
If that the chief and greatest force
of fatal desteny,
Constrain us ill to be, and that
by force we in be brought
To wickedness, and if to strive
therewith avails naught.
Wherefore it seems labor worth
our wits to this to bend,
And for to syft the troth as much
as God shall knowledge send.
First it behooves us to tell
what this free will should be,
An ample power received of God,
and largest liberty
Delivered man, that as he list,
the right, or ways unjust
He follow should: not (virtue left)
that thereby sin he must:
But contrary the vices thunde
to apply the virtuous ways:
For evil deeds do harm the soul
and good deserves praise.
Besides it further must be sought
if this free will does rain
In all a like or if it does
in every time remain?
No sure it seems not to be
in Children, nor in such
As vehement anguishe of the mind
or body greueth much,
Or they whose eyes the heavy sleeps
have shut and closed sure:
For sleep is counted plain of death,
the lively portrature.
Wherefore if thou shall search the truth
with well advised mind,
Thou shall a smallest sort among
so many thousand find,
That with free will do guide themselves
and liberty do use.
The fault of age I ouerpasse,
and childrens years excuse,
And unto those that sleeping lie
I license also give,
Or them whom fevers rage does roast
or sycknesse sharp does grieve.
Of which a number great there be,
but greater far away,
And worser eke, whose fylthy mind
does vices foul array,
And fond affections makes to faint,
wythdrawing it with strife
From reason far, and from the path
of right, and virtuous life.
May these be counted for to have
free will and liberty?
A doubtful thing it surely is,
and many it deny.
Wherefore thou well must understand
that he alone is free
Whom reason rules, and that with pain
will never conquered be,
Nor when the stormy tempests rage
to rocks is ever thrall,
But stoutly sticking to the stern
does with the haven fall.
So truly erst have certain said
but wisemen none we find,
Whom reason ruling can correct
the affections of the mind.
The other sort can not do so:
why? has not God them dealt
Free will? which ever may be found
where reason may be felt,
For these are always coupled still.
So beasts of nature wild
Sith reason they are thought to lack
are iudgde from will exylde.
But all men reason do receive,
and therefore have free will:
For reason is the guide of mind
that choseth good from ill,
Descerning eke the naughty facts,
from such as honest be,
And called is the sight, and eye,
wherewith the mind does se.
Such eye perhaps as Poliphaem
the Poets gave to thee,
Wherwyth the lymmes of thy beloved
in seas thou often did see,
But naught (alas) and all to naught
(who, such, to shun has might)
Ulysses with a fiery post
has it bereft of sight,
And face, the face that first was fair,
of beauty spoiled quite:
Or such an eye as Lynceus had,
that saw in darkest night.
This eye therefore to every man
Prometheus wisdom dealt,
But few it use, a very few
that grace of love have felt.
Hereof the spring of errors does,
and wickedness arise.
For if the steps of reason, all
should tread in nerest wise,
Then peace on earth should always (dwell,
and Mars his bloody hand
Such slaughters nor such cries should cause,
and towns and walls should stand,
And weapons framed first in hell
by fiendyshe furyes wrought,
Should tille ye field, with good exchange
to share and cultre brought.
Then Bees, and Cattle swarming thick
and riches of the field,
Unto the happy husbandman
a great increase should yield.
The golden world should then return,
and eke one place contain
Both man, and God, who would vouchsafe
before our eyes to rain.
The cause why few do reason use,
and ways forbidden know,
And void of freewill live like beasts
I will assay to show.
A certain part divine, in us
that mind and reason hight,
There is, which nature in the head
has placed a loft in sight,
And servants unto it appoints
the senses, that there be,
By means whereof the Skies and Earth
and al things it may see.
An other fading force there is
within the breast enclosde,
By means whereof we move, and grow
with help of heat disposde:
(Thus has it pleased God) this straynes
molests and grieves the mind,
And to this part a number great
of servant, is assinde,
As fond delight. wrath, grief, and fear,
with great desire to gain,
Ambition hauty harmfull thing,
with fumes that vex the brain.
With these his lusty soldiers he
gives battle to the mind.
These mates attempted Joue to vex
of fiercest giants kind,
As Giges strong, Iapetus, and
Tiphoeus monstrous sprite
Enceladus ill worker, and
Briareus dredful wight.
With worldly thoughts hie heapt they vex,
the part divine above,
Except that grace from heaven hye
like lightning them remove:
As when the raynes are once let lose,
the Chariot headlong dryues,
And swiftly runs, to stay the course
in vain the Carter stryues.
The first beginnings must be stopped,
while spark but kindling lies,
When fire has rought the lofty parts
and flames approach the skies,
Especially when Boreas blastes
from Northern Pole does fall,
And rages fierce, in vain alas
for water then they call.
As when from top of hawty rock,
some wayghty stone down trowles,
What force can it of course restrain?
al things with it, it rowles,
Asunder crackes the mighty trees
that on the mountain springs
Which at the first might well be stayed
with force of smallest things.
Even so the affections of the mind
if that with all their sway
The mind oppressed they do invade,
them scarce, can reason stay,
And helm and al forsaken quite,
with stream dame Reason drives,
In raging winds, and yeldes to foe
a captive kept in gyues.
Therefore while vices yet be young,
let them oppressed be,
And void the cause ere they wax strong
then mind and will is free:
Then conqueror thou shall be crowned
with Palm of Idumay.
But if the assault be now begone,
and siege the foe does lay,
And shakes with battrey great ye walls
except (believe me well,)
Some God with better grace defend,
Reason does bid farewell,
And cannot bide so sore a brunt.
May we not plainly see
What harms the mind does there sustain
where Bacchus blessings be,
What madness often does spring when wine
to much in stomach raynes?
Tell where freewyl kepes residence
when drink does vex the brains?
The sober and the fasting man
of freewil is possessed,
And does what so ever Reason byds:
Again the dronken gest,
The thing that he ne would, ne knows
he always does the same,
Which deeds he sobre does repent,
and sorroweth eke with shame.
So with affections mind is drunk,
and in none otherwise,
Than wine that topsey turns the brayn
when it does upward rise
It troubled is and darkd in mystes.
Thus he (and none besides)
Has freedom, and his mind at will,
whom reason only guides:
Who all affections ouercommes,
and wholly does restrain,
He that from youth does virtue use,
may well to this attain:
Such force has use, nothing more strong.
The other sort are wayde
In manner like to brutish beasts,
as true the Poet said,
Each man his own delight does draw,
Freewyll in many oppressed
And hindered is, wherefore who list
Freewyl for to possess,
Let him resyst while young they be,
thaffections of the mind,
And them to reason subject make,
and brydie use in kind:
For flesh against the sprite rebels,
and with continual wars,
Does it molest: The soul most pure,
does covet still thestarres:
But lumpish flesh does shun the skies,
and earthly things desires,
For earth it only is, and into
earth at length expyres.
Thus two so far contrary things
has God compact in one.
Admit thou art wise, and only ruled
by reasons force alone,
And freewyll perfectly enioyest,
shall destnie then bear sway?
Yea more to Fates thou subject art,
and more shall it obey,
For destny is the will of God
where with the prudent wight
Agrees, and does as it commaundes.
The fond and naughty sprite
On the other part abhorres his laws,
and shunnes the Lords decrees.
But thou wylt say: then is he free,
not ruled by destenies.
No: but two worser lords he serves,
and such as vilest be,
As wickedness, and folishnesse
his sister in degree.
Though this the will of God does cause
but that which does permit,
And not the will that does command,
for of two sorts is it.
whereby appears that al things are
subject to desteny,
whether they be of good estate,
or of a vile degree:
For mischief desteny permits
and good by force does send,
And God him self co^mau^ds, from whom,
does desteny descend.
with reasous like persuaded some
to this effect do say:
O mortal men live joyfully
while that you have a day,
And doleful cares from heart expel,
ne trouble once your thought
with things that present here you see,
or after shall be wrought:
By fyxed law shall all things fall,
and pass by order sure,
Wherefore should grief or foolish fear
to sadness you procure?
Each man has here his lot assinde
which written secretly,
Within his breast he always bears,
yet nothing knows thereby,
But proof thereof does come to light
upon the fatal day:
When as experience does reveal
that erst in secret lay.
what needs sobs or wayling tears?
for back can never run
Celestial sawes, nor nothing change
that God has wrought or done.
For order best, and perfect course:
if it should altered be
It should be worse (which may not chance)
or better in degree.
But nothing of more perfect state
than perfect can be found.
A doubt both great and marvelous
does spring upon this ground,
For if al things (as late I said)
are under Destenie,
Why frowneth God on some, and looks
on others graciously?
why is not fortune like to al?
why sees some happier days
Than other do? and nature why
seems she to some always
A stepdame sharp, and unto some
again a mother dear?
This knot it seems good that we
should break asunder here.
By fault and by desert of us,
a number think that this
Does chance, and by decree of God
such as have done amysse
For to be plagued, and virtuous men
good Fortune to receue.
But this by no means can be true,
nor I do it belene,
For what have brutish beasts deserved,
what fault in trees can be?
Yet fortune unto every beast
does show diversity:
The thief does some convey, some dye
upon the Butchars knyfe,
Some wolves, or sycknesse, frost or flud,
some age depriues of life,
Some lead their life more pleasantly,
and some with greater pain.
And unto every kind of tree
his fortune does remain,
The east wind cracks a sonder this
and roots does upward turn,
Some sort are cut for diverse things,
and some in fires burn,
And lyghtning spoils an other sort.
To every fish, and beast,
A certain fortune is assynde
by destenies beheast:
Yet neither tree, nor beast can sin.
And oftentimes beside
Misfortunes great the good man, does
and virtuous man abide:
On the other part to naughty men
does fortune favor show,
And graunts them eke in worldly wealth
and honors hye to flow.
Thus destnye looks not on deserts:
therefore some other way,
Or cause, we must attempt to find.
Perhaps some man will say
The will of God is cause of all
and seeks none other where:
This does not yet suffice, we must
go syft the truth more nere:
For God since he is wise, and best,
will not the thing permit
That reason lackes, but chiefest things
commands as seems most fyt.
Wherefore we must say otherwise:
each cause of causes all
As from the first it farther is,
so more unlike does fall.
Sith God therefore is always pure,
and ever one shall be,
The last of causes that from him
is farthest in degree
Shall double be, and diverse seem,
and work shall always frame
In sundry sorts, and altring state
and this is even the same
That rules the earth, and every thing
that earth does here contain
Therefore nothing on earth is seen
that certain is or plain.
Sith fortune her vnsted fast wheel
does turn in sundry sort:
And mortal men with diverse chance
to guide has chiefest sport.
But yet why smyles she so on some,
and frowns on other sort?
Why gives she some a life with cares,
and some a princely port?
The cause of this is hard to know
as if we should require,
To know the cause of raging heat
we feel in flaming fire:
Or wherefore worwood bitter is,
why snow does show so white,
wherefore some herbs have force to hurt,
and others healing might,
And why some trees bear sundry branch
why in such shape they grow,
Or why some beasts have subtle sense,
and some are dull and slow,
Wherefore ye strawes does Amber draw,
why Loadstone lyfteth hye
The iron piece, why it can not
do so the Diamonde nigh.
Such things has God in secret shut,
and unto mortal brain.
Appointed bounds, the which to pass
man's wit does strive in vain.
As if the potter do divide
in sundry parts his clay,
And it departed thus abroad,
to sundry purpose lay,
Why rather he of this than that
a pot or dishe does bake:
Or basin broad? Of this a Crock,
of that a pytcher make?
Does reason move hint thus to do?
or reason none at all
But only will? as he thinks best
so frames he great and small.
Tys hard to know ye workmans mind:
Even so, who seeks to know
Why fortune some exalts hye,
and brings others low:
A thing to hye he reaches at,
for God has given power
Of earth to her, and of the world
has made her governor,
That what she list she may perform
the force of desteny
Excepted still, for every thing
is governed thereby.
why should not she do what she list?
what law should her restrain?
Ought servants laws for to appoint
their Lords for to constrain?
we all her servants truly are
while we enjoy this light,
And must in every thing obey
the pleasure of the spright,
Yet of our souls she has no power
whose root in heaven stands,
This only God exempted has
from out this tyrants hands.
All other things in earth or seas,
as she shall best devise
God suffers freely to be done,
both good and ill likewise.
But some will say: God then is cause
of every evil act,
And so unjust may well be calde,
for he that does the fact,
And he that suffers it to pass,
do both one fault commit,
And both like punnishement to have
the law adiudgeth fit.
Wherefore if God such illes on earth
does suffer for to rain,
And when he well may them forbydde,
yet does not them restrain:
He shall be thought the cause of ill,
and mischief to embrace:
This part I also answer shall
if God do grant me grace.
First therefore with attentive mind
it must be noted well,
That causes some be base, and small,
and some again excel
In worthiness before the rest:
as in a battle main
Lieuetenants are, and Captains stout,
the rest of common train.
These causes chief above the rest
in wondrous sort assigns
Thalmighty Lord, that guides above
the Stars, the starry signs,
Who lives in everlasting light
above the Heavens hye,
That at his beck does cause to turn
the motions of the sky:
To every cause assigning force,
and whereto they shall tend,
With certain bounds encloseth them
the which may none transcende.
And since he wisely all things made,
of force it follow must,
That every thing continuallye
keep course and order just.
For things that once are rightly framed
and fault do none receive,
Ought not in tract of any times
their wonted course to leave.
The order thus of every thing
can never altered be,
Because thalmighty Lord has made
all things in just degree.
If then the sprite that guides the earth
be naught, or work amiss,
It is because the basest cause
and farthest of is this
From causer first, and light removed
a large and ample space,
And therefore unto darkness blind,
the nerer has his place,
And only shadow shows of truth:
which God does so permit
Because the state of all the world
and order asks it.
For as the day determinde is
by darkness of the night,
And things contrary ended are
by force of others might:
So sort and course of causes good
as reason does require
In vile and wicked cause must end
and finally expyre:
which wicked kingdoms govern shall,
and mischiefs vile shall guide,
Hence discord evermore proceeds
with brawles, and mind to chide,
Strong battles, frayes, and false diseyt
with fyres, and slaughters great,
Theftes, wyles, with need and robberies,
and plagues, with raging heat,
Great earthquakes, storms, and tempests great,
of sycknesses such store,
So great a sort of perilles vile,
and dangers evermore,
And finally what harms to hap
in any place we know
From this so wretched cause and Prince
of all the earth does flow.
Full truly erst (alas) did say
the famous Hermes wise
This world a heap of harms does seem
where every mischief lies.
Because the devil that on earth
the chiefest stroke does smite
Is mischievous, and evermore
in cruelty does delight.
For as the first of causes is
the spring of all good things,
So is the last the fountain chief
from whence all mischief springs.
Wherefore if lecherours on earth
bear all the rule and sway,
If Asses sxt in seat as Kings,
in pomp of proud array,
If charge of sheep committed is
to wolves of ravening kind,
If Har^ots in the Churches dwell
and men of monstrous mind,
If that the holy rytes of Christ
the hands vnpure does fyle,
If Heaven and purging place Sir John
does sell with greedy guile,
More, if vnpunnished such crimes
are still before our eyes,
The fault not in thalmighty Lord
but in this Devil lies:
Whom fortune commonly we name,
and Pluto often we call,
But unto him an apter name
Sarcotheus fyt does fall:
For unto him the power of flesh
and guiding is assinde,
Him serves all such as love them selves,
^o much with fleshly mind:
Of him the bodies are, therefore
in sin they always drive,
And to the souls as enemies
contrary still do strive.
For of the heavens commes the soul,
and from the starry Skies,
But earthly are the bodies here
and heavens do despise.
This same Sarcotheus thoe that guydes
the lowest parts of all,
Such holy men as do despise
the ^oyes ^errestr^all,
To virtue bent, and Godly life,
he hates and still pursues:
And vexes, grieueth, and them molests:
as commonly does use
The naughty Prince, and cruel King,
always for to oppress
The wysest men, and such as do
ercell in vertuousnesse.
For virtue of the wicked men
is evermore envied.
Al things their enemies hate and fear
and shun from them aside.
Therefore the Devil many harms
prou^deth for the meek,
And them whose minds do mount aloft,
and hearts do heaven seek.
Ne would he have his malice seen,
for if he should be known,
Al men would him detest, as head
from whom al ylles have flowne,
And bloody butcher of our kind,
him al should justly hate,
And cursing call him cruel beast
deceyuer of our state.
Therefore he craftily lies hid,
and from the wise man flies,
Least he be known, ne fears he Moles
but leapes from Linceus eyes.
So thieves do use, and wicked men
always the light to fly,
And in the darkest time rejoice
that none their mischief spy.
Hereof it commes as often as
men feel adversity,
Al ignorant with blindness, and
of mind oppressed be,
(For ignorance is causer chief
of errors all that fall)
Thinking with anger and complaynt,
the guide of goodness al
Does vex the^, so they straightway curse
his h^e and holy name.
The wicked Devil daunceth then,
and grinneth at the same,
And joys to see himself unknown,
and mischief close to lie,
And that he thus has power to hurt
and no man could it spy.
A foe unto ^halmighty God
he is, and ennimy,
By whom from heaven tumbled down
in chains he here does lie,
Enclosde between the earth and Moan
and there he holds his rain.
Wherefore O wretched mortal men
at length apply your brain,
To know the cause of al your griefs,
from whence such ylles do flow,
And heavy harmful things do hay,
your butcher learn to know:
For this Sarcotheus this is he
that plagues you in such sort,
That of your harms and grievous grefes
does make his chiefest sport:
None otherwise than Mars his child
(great realms in thraldom brought)
With death of wret^hed men or beasts
a plea^ant pastyme sought.
The Noble men the Gentlemen,
the commons all sit still,
In diverse rooms assigned them,
as Otha^s laws does will:
Then enters in before them all
the cutters for to fight,
Or else some other yeldes his lymmes
to beasts thereon to byte:
The Lion, or the Tiger stout,
or else some fier^^r kind,
Should at this play present himself
to please the peoples mind:
With death and mangled much with wound
from whence the blood does flow,
Often unto some of others smart
a great delight does grow.
Wherefore they do most wickedly,
that railing thus do brawle,
And dare blaspheme thalmighty Lord,
the cause of goodness all:
From whom as from himself, no ill
can any time proceed,
Except contingently as Sun
does darcknesse ever breed
As often as under earth it slydes,
and absent fire we see
Increases cold: yet cloud in Sun,
nor cold in Fire can be.
Wherefore I marvel much that some
whose Learning is not small,
Do say that he offended is,
or wrathful him do call,
And that he plagueth us as often
as we do him offend,
That mild, and Lord of mercies is,
that goodness al does send:
And that from him does wars begin,
with plague and famine sore.
If that our deeds could him offend.
what thing vnhappier more
Than he, in all the world were found*
for every day and hour
We crimes commit, and blasphemies
out of our mouths we pour:
Then surely should he never joy,
nor rest in quietness,
Nor God should happy be, if that
as often as we tra^^gresse
He should be wroth* and moved with deeds
of such as synfu^^be.
But God can not be vex or harmd
if we the truth will se:
For of such might and perfectness,
of God the nature is,
And distant even so far is it
from our iniquities,
That we from him do differ more
and farther are by much,
Than is from us the Ass, the Fly,
the Flea, or worse than such.
How then can we such wretches vile
offend a Lord so great?
Or by what means may we him harm
and force him thus so freat?
Is not this God of passions void,
and free from grief or pain:
And thereby lives in blessed state
and always does remain?
Does it become a Prince to fume
when foles do fondly prate:
Or rather them for to contemn,
seems it a giants state,
With little children for to fight?
since he knows al things well
And does the things to come foresee,
I thee beseech to tell,
Ought he such things for to create,
as should his pleasure spot,
Whereby he should be after grieved?
or rather ought he not
That helps the world, to help himself?
or tell if thus diseased
He wills it so, if he will so
he is no whit dyspleased,
But rather joys. If he would not
why does he it permit?
Or is he not omnipotent?
he is, we al grant it.
Then ought he not to suffer it
but yet he does we see,
Whereby no kind of grief he feels,
as reason teaches me:
But leads his life in quietness.
Here thou perchance wylt say
If that our sins him not displease,
with all the force we may
Let us run headlong into vice
and never sin forbear,
Not so: but to these words of mine
give thou attentive ear,
And unto thee of truth strayghtwayes
the gates I shall disclose.
When any man does sin, then forth
away he stinging goes
From this same spring of good, and leaves
both right, and light, and peace:
Whereby the sinner evermore
his harms does still increase.
Such is the state of contraryes
that how much thou do fly,
From one, unto the other straight
thou do approach more nigh.
So he that synning flies from God,
runs to Sarcotheus next:
Whose yoke when he has once put on
with griefs he sore is vexed:
And as the tyrant does command
is plagued in sundry wise.
Thus no man sins but punnishment
for him prepared lies,
Yet God is never cause of ill
as I have said before
As of himself and properly:
But he that sins therefore,
does with his own consent,
Unto the hangman give himself:
to have his punnishment
But hereof springs two crabbed doubts,
for if that sin be cause
Of al our mischief and our ylles,
and our unhappy sawes,
Why often does the wicked man
his life in pleasure train
And dies well, the virtuous man
does many griefs sustain,
And ends at length in misery?
Besides before is taught,
That by no fault nor our deserts,
things good do chance, or naught:
But rather seems it from the power
of certain sprite to flow,
Who guides the Seas, and all the earth,
and air possesses low.
How speak I thus in contraries?
my words do disagree,
But (reader) well thou shall discern
the troth and verity,
And darkness from thy mind thou shall
behold far of to fly:
If these my words thou will vouchsafe
to hear attentively.
Know therefore double good to be,
one as the Commons will,
The other as the wisemen judge.
So of two sorts is ill,
The opinion of the common sort
is worser evermore:
For gross, and do^^she is their brain
of judgment lacking store:
wherefore the goods of body here
and such as fortune gave
These only they do wonder at
and these they seek to have:
But now the goods that in the mind
are found for to remain
They either know not what they mean
or else they count them vain.
The wise man on the other side
the only goods of mind
Does seek to have, and does despise
the rest and other kind.
Thus followed we before the mind
of rude and common men,
And as such people use to speak
so was my talk as then.
But from the rude and common sort,
my mind does differ now:
As wise men judge of good and ill
at this tune I allow.
And in such sort I say no good
unto the wicked man
May chance, and to the virtuous sort
no evil happen can:
Which plainly will I now declare
and clearly shall appear.
First this it needful is to know,
what vice or crime is here,
Is of the mind a sickness sore:
nor men are only syck
In body here, but mind aye feels
her wound and grievous prick
No less in force, than body does.
Thus every evil wight
Is syck, because his will is syck,
and judgment is not right.
Whereby the wretch ye harmeful things
more worth than good esteems,
And sweter aye the filthyest factes
to him than honest semes,
Which if his mind and will were sound
could never wicked be:
But just and virtuous should be found:
in this they disagree.
And as the body all is ill
when any of these twain
Diseased is with malady,
the heart, or else the brain:
So, so, alas the whole estate
of soul is ever ill,
When as these two with vice are harmde
the mind and eke the will.
As pleasant meat to stomach syck
does seem unpleasant aye
And protytes nothing unto him
that sycknesse does assay:
So (sick the soul) no good thing can
the wicked man come by,
Nor nothing profytes him at all,
which true I thus will try.
Some men in laws expert we see,
but full of subtlety,
And covetous, unjust, and one
that ways not honesty
What profits him his learning here,
what good gains he therefore?
Alas he wretches does beguile,
and spoils his Clyents poor
And many other does he hurt.
Learning unto the naught
Is like a sword unto the man
that mad has it up caught.
For all things does the wicked man
abuse, and make vnpure,
To others harm, shame to himself,
and hatred does procure,
And in his feet the thorns he set
with anguishe often goes
Or else he fears them, with hurt
whom he has made his foes.
Shall then his learning good be calde
which does so many blame,
And hurt like stinging snake, ne spares
the owner of the same?
And so of other faculties
that ill men occupy.
Esteemed them to be as good
like reason does dente.
But now the wicked man is rich
with Gold and Jewels store,
Are not these riches good? not so,
tell me the cause wherefore.
Lo here I tell, because he does
abuse them filthily,
He keeps hores, and surfetteth,
and baudes therewith does by,
With money gredy boys corrupts,
and with great gifts assayes
The chastity of maidens poor
that happen in his ways,
And so that he may bring to pass
what lust does him persuade
Regardes no whit what laws of men
or Gods precepts do trade:
Who if he once be covetous
what crime dare he not do?
This wolf wc bloody mouth does rag^
each fold to come unto,
And runs headlong into vice
his misch efe to contriue,
And every where he follows hard
as vile desire does drive.
Nothing may worse be suffered
than fools in welthy state,
Than rich men to be covetous
than ill men fortunate.
Thus ryther like to beasts he does
with fleshely pleasures go,
Unto himself an ennimye
and to his purse a foe:
Or else an other Tantalus
his goods to much does spare,
And heaps up all, ne knows for whom
these heaps he does prepare.
And as the swine to his own bs^,
himself he does not feed
But many mo, who fruits of toil
do snatche away with speed.
Whereby appears no goods to be
the riches of the ill,
But if he stout and sturdy be
and stomach have at will
What does he the^? he stratght will braul,
and with his mighty yowre
Now one, now others shall he harm,
and mischief every hour:
Most commonly a wartare goes,
or else becomes a chief,
That Tygarlyke by others blood
he may receive relief:
Both wars and weapons fierce he loves
for mischief not for praise,
whereby he to his country gettes
both loss and shame always.
Stout personage void of virtuous mind
puts many men to pain,
Lastes little time, and seldom does
to aged years attain.
But what needs many words herei^
sith these exampies may
Suffice the troth thereof to show,
and clearly to display.
Now meet it is with good advise
to search if ought can be
That harms the just and holy men,
as many judge we se:
Sure hard it is, yet boldly will
I thereto trudge apace
Presuming of Apolloes help,
and of my Muses grace.
First every good man needs must be
of soul and mind both sound,
Though sycknesse in his body rage
or ache in limbs be found:
Least will, and judgment tyght in him
do lack or not agree,
For void of judgment, right, and will,
no virtuous man may be:
These two are the foundations
whereon does virtue sit.
Such men whatsoever they possess
do justly order it:
And therefore is their learning good,
their substance and their strength,
And finally whatsoever they
possess, and have at length.
For in the greacest sort of things
the use of them we se
Is it that chi^fly causes them
both good, and ill to be.
And if so be thimmortall Gods
of men have any care,
They chiefly ought such to defend
as sust and virtuous are:
Which if they should not do they semde
all void of reason clear,
Unworthy cke of odor sweet,
of Church or service here.
Wherefore I do not se what thing
can harm the virtuous man,
Ne yet what ill in body, or
in mind, he suffer can:
Sith God him kepes and norisheth,
and with his mighty arm
Does for him fight, and sets him safe
from every kind of harm.
For who helps not, or who does not
defend his friend at need,
whenever he can, if that he do
bear him good will in deed?
But yet sometimes the good man semes
to live in misery,
To suffer need, and sicknesses,
and great adversity:
When as in deed he is not good,
but plays the Hipocrite:
Whereof a number shall thou find
that under simple plight,
Do secret hide their poisoned hearts
and woluish natures plain,
And foolish men do often beguile,
while they do virtue feign:
And therefore god who knows ye hearts
and secrets of the mind,
Preserues him not, nor loves him.
But we with judgment blind,
And doltish head, deceived with sign
and shadow of the right,
Think then the just man suffers hurt,
and lives in woeful plight.
Alas how often false and fond,
are found the judgments blind
Of men, and eke how ignorant
of truth is mortal mind:
Al please themselves, and every man
in his conceyt seems wise:
By this we cause the Gods to laugh,
hence errors most do rise.
But here admit the just man feels
both grief and sicknesses,
And leads his life in poverty,
and aye in great distress,
Exiled from his country far,
or pent in prison vile,
Or vexed with other casualties,
does he take harm this while?
No: for in suffering of such things
more clearly shine he shall:
Al to the best to Godly men
as God commaundes does fall.
And as Physicians use to give
the byttrest medcines often
Unto the sick to bring them health,
and raise them up aloft:
So oftentimes God tries the just,
to stir them up thereby,
That so he may them more compel
their virtue to apply.
As pleasure makes men foles, and naught
so pain does call to mind,
And chaseth vice, a bytte to sin,
a spur to vertnes kind.
See thou not gold in fyry flame
more precious to be made?
And ground more ferule for to be
by edge of churlish spade?
And standing waters to corrupt?
On iron cast thine eye
Is fayrer made by occupyings,
and rusts if it do lie.
Thus diverse things there are that vexed,
receive a clearer state,
As chiefly virtue, that when as
her blackest mischiefs mate
Appears most bright, as in the dark
the fire more fayrer shows.
wherefore no kind of grief at al,
the good man ever knows:
Or if he suffers ought his pa*
cience gets him greater gain,
And medcine though it bitter be,
does cause relcase of pain:
And least some man should think that I
do tryfies feign in mind:
The thing that wholesome others feel
is poison to some kind.
So unto some wines hurtful are,
and flesh a harmfull meat,
So wormwood unto many health
does give, and pleasure great.
So heat does Snow, and wax, and Ise
consume and melt away:
which heat does harder make again
the earth or potters clay.
So many such in sundry states,
do work in diverse kind.
How eft the same words some delight
that vex another mind?
Al things to al sorts are not like:
the wines that best we deem,
If they in musty calke be kept
both tart and naught do seem.
Unto the sound are al things sound,
but such as sycknesse have,
Them wholesome meats do sometime harm,
and almost bring to grave.
So (to my matter to return)
the ylles of body than,
Or stings of fortune hurtful be
unto the evil man:
But good and also necessary
for such as virtuous be,
By which although they hurtful seem,
they gain more hye degree.
These words for this time shall suffice,
for now this book to end
My Muse commaundes, and Chiron does
upon my Pen attend,
Who coueteth of state of man
to write, and fashtons rife,
And open to disclose abroad
the vestry here of life.
Now therefore nedeful is for me
my Muses tunes to cease,
And silent in the sacred woods
to rest my self in peace,
And on the roof of learnings lodge
on hye to hang my harp:
Till that these times be ouerpast
and doubtful seasons sharp,
Times much to be bewaylde: wherein
the discord that does broyle
Among the states, all Italy
with wars does seek to spoil,
Whereby does Rome lament her cafe,
her housholdes laid on ground,
Ticinum, Narnia, Melphis eke
this fall have felt and found.
And Naples that with Mermaydes tomb
so famous lately ioyed
Beholding now her orchards fair
with French men's hands destroyed.
Alas does heavy mourn by streams,
of Sebethes so clear.
What should I tell the wo^drous flames
that in the skies appear,
More bright than days and locusts grim,
like clouds the Sun to hide,
And tender corue with gredy jaws,
to spoil on every side?
How many cities woeful plague,
and piteous famine sore,
Has quite deprived of Citizens?
how many places more,
With floods are almost perished?
Alas now instly now does God
plague us in sundry case?
What mischief do we not commyt,
what justice is in place,
What love or service here of God?
Religion now is made
An occupation for the purse,
a Merchandise and trade.
The sacred rytes are aye defiled,
with hands of bandy mates.
Yet look thereon and let it pass,
the Kings and Princely states,
And honor due to Christ above
they not esteem nor way.
Thus over us pore misers here,
such blocks do bear the sway,
Therefore I will go hence a while,
and in Parnasus hill
Until my Muse does call me forth,
lie close and secret still.
Sagittarius, the ninth Book.
IT waxes light now Muse enough
within Castalian lake,
We rested have, the wrest therefore
and Harp in hand go take:
Set strings in tune, and with thy grace
accustomed to thy kind,
Sing Goddess ancient melody:
good verses fyl thy mind
That erst Apollo wonted was
in Bay tree woods to tell:
While he by river stood that runs
from out Permessus Well.
Us calls behold another ioyle
wherein some praise ooth lie,
Let us from hautye place and top,
of Parnas hills so bye
Behold the sundry minds of men,
and eke their living mark.
Now past the midst of surging seas
had run my sailing bark,
And now the tops of lofty trees
with frosty ryndes were white:
When as a certain God unknown
by me stood up in sight,
And shining with his beams divine
expellde the blackishe night.
A certain rock I then beheld
whose top did reach so hye,
That passing clouds above it might
discover plain the sky:
Hard seemed it first to enter up,
for ragged stones there was
Placed round about, which made ye way
both straight, and ill to pass,
The bottom all beset with briars:
the mydst more mylde again,
And nerer as it comes to skies
the path appears more plain,
And easyer to be travailed,
Theorea eke it hight
Hereto me straightwayes did conduct
my Ghost and guiding spright.
To top whereof when as we came
I might behold and see,
Each place with wo^drous syghts fulfild
and furnished to be,
Which if my tongue would here declare
the Sun should sooner slide
To lowest parts, and night the earth
with misty cloak should hyde.
While as I stay, and gase upon
the large and joyful syghtes:
Lo falling from the skies aloft
a voice these words recytes:
Stellatus bow thy knees, and here
thy humble prayers make
Unto the Almighty king, without
whose grace thou can not take
The pleasant pleasures of this meunt.
Therefore in humble wise
Kneel thou to God, for favor all
does fall to earth from skies:
For nothing is whereof to man
can greater profit flow,
Than heavenly help with holy prayers
to get, and God to know.
When this I heard, upon the earth
my face, and hand upright,
I bowed my knees, and poured out
these words in hearty plight.
O Father great of saints, chief power
that in the world may be,
Than whom may never thing be found,
nor thought of more degree,
Removed far from body here,
yet framing fashyons all,
Both such as never fade, and such
as times at length lettes fall:
The first, and of beginning void,
the fountain whence does spring
All kind of good, of nature eke
the auctor* guide, and king:
That all things here do comprehend,
comprended thou of none,
The hye Almighty Majesty,
and chiefest good alone,
Life, wisdom, order, praise, and end,
mind, truth, way, light, and grace,
No where thy self inhabiting,
and dwelling in each place,
Unmoueable, and moving give
to all and every thing,
From whom, in whom, and eke by whom
all kind of things do spring:
In one estate remaining still,
and changing in no time,
The chiefest cause that rolling aye
the Globe where stars do shine,
Do guide by fixed law thappointed
force of destenye:
Of Lords the greatest Lord of all,
and King of Kings most hye,
Before whose face a thousand beasts
of Angels glystering bright,
Do minister with joyful hymns,
in presence of thy sight,
Amidst the ample fields of light
above the world so hye
Where aptest place and seat there is
for things of certaintye.
I worship thee, I honor thee,
and prostrate here on face
I lift mine eyes desyring thee
with mylde and cherefull grace,
Upon me sinful man to look,
and hear my earnest cry,
Pour down into my earthly breast
thy beams of light from hye,
Drive darkness from my mind oppressed
alas in doleful wise,
While in consuming carcass here
and fading flesh it lies.
Grant me the perfect path to find
least harmefull errors sting
with fansy fond, and judgment blind,
in sin me headlong fling.
For without thee, the wit of man,
and force of mortal kind,
while it intendes to mount a loft
receives a greater fall:
As Icarus whose wyngs him faylde
when he flewe highest of all.
Grant therefore O most mighty king
to me thy creature low,
Thy will to learn, and thee to please,
and then that I may know
Mine own estate, from whence I came,
and whereto I was made,
And whether I at length shall pass
when that from hence I fade:
what here in life I should perform,
and what I should not do:
That when dame Lachesis my threde
of life has snapt in two,
And that the farthest day is come
that long with privy stelth
Procurde my grave death bring my rest
and part of saving health.
These words thus said, an other voice
again did pearce my ears,
Thalmighty Lord thou pleased have
thy prayer full well he hears:
Pluck up Stellatus now thy heart
to thee for to remain
Here on this mount it granted is
and sacred fruits to gain.
This said forthwith the voice did cease,
nor word it uttered more:
Then in my mind a greater force
I felt, than erst before,
And sharper sight: then looked I forth
all things descerning well
And for my eyes, they might presume
old Linceus to excel.
With that I felt a subtle wind
to lift me up on hye,
which softly causde me to ascend
to top of starry sky:
Much like the bird that bears ye darts
that ^ulcans forge did frame,
That when we sin, ye thunder thomps
do fling and flashe often ^^ame.
And now approcht I nere the Moon
whose ga^es I had in iyght,
Whereof, part glistred all with gold,
and part with silver white.
I enter in beholding al,
when straight with me does meet
Timalphes young, of virtues great,
and eke of favor sweet:
(Whom of Arete Jove began
in ancient times of old.)
He knew me straight, for often he had
his mothers hestes me told,
And when each other greted was
he much things asked of me:
And after brought me to a town
of hugest quantity,
The loftye walls of Diamonde strong
were raised hye and framde,
The bulwarks built of Carbuncle,
that all as fiery flamde.
O Lord what gorgeous houses there,
and goodly syghtes I saw,
As Temples fair, and Theaters,
and streets, and seares of law:
Al framed of silver, gold and stone,
and more of goodly kind
I there beheld, but cannot now
bear al away in mind:
And though I could remember al
yet God does not allow,
That common peoples heads should know
the state of all, and how.
I wondered at the number great
that through the city so
Al clad in white by thousands thick
amyd the streates to go,
Their heads beset with garlands fair
in hand the Lillies white,
They joyful bear Menarchus guide
of Cynthyus kingdom bright:
Remembering often with Himnes they sing,
and sweet agreing lays,
Menarchus name they often rehearse,
Menarch with Psalm they praise:
Menarchus name did Echo loud
resounding often send out,
He vanquished in happy field
the Arcadian giants stout:
As then Timalphes told to me
with words that were not vain.
Once was (quoth he) Arcadia void
of hills, and al lay plain,
There dreadful giants kingdom held,
as Maenalos the hye,
And Pholoe, and Lyceus great
that ioyed in woods to lie:
And Erymanth whose shoulders bare
the backs of savage swine,
Cyllenes eke that boylde with spyte,
against the powers divine:
Who first before the rest presuming
al of force and might,
Durst give ill language to the Moon
with words of canckred spite,
That they before her long were borne,
and of more noble race,
And so that they deserve the names
of Gods, and higher place.
Besides in rage a tower they built
amyd the skies to look:
O Nemroth larger far than thine,
and with an iron hook,
Attempted thrice from place to pluck
this Goddess where she stands,
Blood red for fear to see her self
so nere to wretches hands:
Menarchus gave them thrice repulse
with valiant force and might,
And thrice the juice out pressed from gras
of old Saturnus spright:
Among them ^ast the poison runs
straight ways through al their bones
With chy^ling cold, consumed with pain
they leave their lives at once:
And vggly souls they clean forsake,
which hell below receaues,
Where as with pains they plagued are
that never after leaves.
But now their bodies quite destroyde
by force of venom late,
Their carcass turnde to lofty hills
kepes name with changed state.
Whereby this deed and triumph great
in mind the Moon men hear,
And celebrate with solemn pomp
this feast from year to year,
And to their king they worship make
with great and joyful cheer.
Thus passing forth, we found a tower
that all of Gold did shine,
Al wrought, and set with precious stones
of sundry colors fine:
Here quoth my guide, no mortal man
may ever set his feet:
We stayde therefore, and by the space
of large and ample street,
On every side we might behold
approaching souls at hand,
And there before the seat and place
of judgment for to stand:
Which placed was against the tower,
and wrought right cunningly,
Three sons of Jove and faith begot
sit there in sea^es full hye,
To judge the souls, regarding well
of al their sins the store,
And virtuous deeds that every man
has done in earth before.
Telescopus and Dorophon
Philorthus friend always
To justice, these, deserts and faults
in perfect balance way:
And by their judgments very few
to heaven did ascend:
But thousands of the same again
to earth did down descend,
And many also in the Moon
they did command to stay.
Astonished long with gasyng sight
at length I began to say:
Declare to me good guide quoth I,
if Hell beneath does lie
In deepest dongeon of the earth,
and to the Center nigh,
And souls thereto conueyde they say
the corse clapped under hearce,
Old Aeacus and Minos there
and Radamanthus fearce
Do ever judge, and give rewards
or else deserved pain,
How chances it I here behold
the like thing done again?
Man's mind (quoth he) in prison dark
of carcass shut does lie:
And forced by fault and ignorance,
is led by ways awry.
By this is man to dreams and toys
of nature prone and bent,
And from the truth he wanders far,
if grace do not prevent.
No marvel thoe, if many things
your Poets false have song:
Because to tread the steps of truth
lies not in every tongue.
But thou, have always well in mind
these mysteries I tell:
All things are good and never fade
above the Moon that dwell,
Nor grief can vex those sacred states:
But all that nature framed beneath
the Moon, is naught, and ill,
And law severe of death does feel,
and force of time to spyll.
These places does the middle sphere
of Moon in twain divide,
Placde equally betwixt the world
does bounds to heaven bide.
Thus when that life is fled, all souls
are brought unto this place,
And here plead gilty or unguilty
before the judges face:
By whose awarde, to certain rooms,
according to their deeds
They straight are sent, receiving there
for their deserts their meedes.
And every one the henyer they
with heaps of vice are made,
The deeper they descend the pyt
of dark infernal shade.
Again the better that they be
and farther of from crime,
So much they higher mounting up,
more nigh the heavens clime.
But they whose ylles do counterpease
the virtues of their mind,
For to remain about the Moon^,
are many years assinde:
Till either falling fresh to vice,
when many years are spent,
They turn to earth, or purged well,
are into heaven sent.
Lo thus he said. But then again
what is the cause quoth I,
That souls so few the stars approach
and gain the heavens hie?
Why run they hedlong so to vice,
and (Misers) virtue fly,
Why more esteem they dark than light
and rather sin to apply
Than virtue pure? where of to them
does so great madness rise?
What will so fond does them beguile,
what fansy bleares their eyes?
Then answered thus Aretes son:
both I do it desire,
And mete it is, that I disclose
the things thou do require,
And many other things beside,
which thou thy self shall say,
Are worthy to be learned here
and to be borne away,
Since here without the power of God
I know thou can not come,
Who list such things to thee to show:
before the gates of whom
No man alive may once approach,
except by him assinde,
Then now give ear, and what I say,
bear well away in mind.
But nedeful first it is for us
a little hence to walk.
We went, and in a lofty tower
we both sit down to talk,
From whence both seas and land full plain
we might behold and see.
Then thus from sacred breast, this voice
he vttred out to me:
As of them selves the souls can not
be ill, nor bent to sin,
Since yt their kind does come from skies
and spring from God begin:
Nor of their own and proper will,
their natures can be naught,
Since God them made who never thing
of evil state has wrought.
But many other causes be
that into dongeon vile
Of hell do downwards thrust these souls
and them with vice defile.
And chief of them the body is,
wherein the soul lies bound
As in a prison strong, whose bonds
does judgment quite confound:
No otherwise than fire is hid
within an earthen pot,
And misty clouds do dark the sight
of flaming Phoebus hot.
Then all things does the soul forget,
And Lethes streams does taste,
And like apperes to papers blankt,
wherein no word is placde.
Thus captive closed in fading flesh,
a thousand mischiefs ill,
A thousand Monsters her assault,
and always seek to spill,
Like as the Goldefinch while in cage,
her doleful desteny
with sundry fortes of pleasant tune
does seek to pacify:
To whom all close and covertly
the crafty Cat comes near,
And drives molesting sore the wretch
on every side to fear.
The Cat a bane to simple birds,
of Myce the finder out,
She fearing sore the spoylers pawe,
does slutter round about
The Cage, and saues her self by flight:
when present does appear
An other foe with furye like
the selly wretch to fear,
Who thrusting in her Tallons sharp,
does take her clean away,
And feeds thereon with wonted noise
as on accustomed pray.
So (...)* and thore with diverse foes
the unhappy soul is tossed,
And flying far the ginnes of some
is in the others lost:
White inclo^de in carcass here it li(...)
It knows not what to do,
(...) danger here for to beware,
or what to cleave unto.
And with the show of good deceived,
much like the dronken wight
It stackring stands. Whereby, if that
by some that teach aryght,
Or by their aid that warning give,
it be not led or brought
From darkness blind unto the light,
it runs still to naught,
And better things does aye refuse.
of soul the chiefest stay:
Contagion first, and chiefest ill,
that through the flesh does rain,
Is ignorance of truth and good,
from whence out springs than,
False judgment as the greatest plague
that happens unto man.
Whereof two monsters are begot,
folly, and wickedness,
From these two every (...) proceeds
that man can here express.
For all men sin, either because
the goods here counterfeat
^hey most esteem as folly leads,
or else that mischief great
^oth prick them forth to wicked de(...).
Wherefore, we justly may
Count him a fool, or wicked man,
that does from reason stray.
But in that part of soul that lusts,
there syttes dame follyes grace,
And there she pytched has her tents,
and chose her dwelling place:
In the other part all bent to wrath,
there mischief has his hold,
With force, and Craft, and poison strong
most dreadful to be told.
These two (for truth) are mighty kings,
and armies great behind
They lead, and both destroy
the state of mortal kind.
They both are ygnorant of truth,
and framed false judgment by,
(As erst was told) the souls that in
the careasse buried lie
Unmindefull of their own estate,
and void of light withal,
Into three lakes of Hell, and death,
they lead, and down let fall.
Of which the first Limosum hight,
therein does pleasure rain,
Spinosum is the other calde,
where vile desire to gain,
And covetousness, does rule: the third
Fulmosum has to name,
Where pride bears sway, yt thristeth still
for honors hye and fame.
In these three lakes the greatest part
do perish every day:
Of all the souls within the world
this is the chief decay.
For such as slide into these pooles.
them evermore distroyes
The lust of flesh, and gredy mind,
of fond and fading joys.
Ne of themselves they knowledge have
nor of the heavens bright,
Nor other life they think to be
than this in present sight.
O fylthy, fond, and doltishe minds
from heaven turned quite,
Not minding hye or worthy things
but still in brutishe plite,
Respecting only here the earth.
Besides are causes mo,
whereby the souls infected are,
and often plaged so.
For where the clouds are thronged thick
and showers of rain proceed,
And winds with dreadful meeting sound
do flashe of lightnings breed,
There is the place of vglye sprites,
by whom do plagues arise,
With battles fierce and raging storms,
through seas, and land that flies.
By craft and by the tempting force
of them, and their deceit,
The simple sort of men do fall
to every mischief great:
Hereby both right and honesty,
they quite cast from their mind.
But now, because these temptours here,
and fiendes of deuilishe kind,
Few can obtain with eyes to se,
therefore but few believe
That any such things do remain,
nor credit will they gene:
Nay rather many do account
it but an idle fame,
And as at dreams of folks diseased,
so laugh they at the same.
But thou drive from thy mind away
this foolish heresy,
And give good credit to my words
of greatest certainty.
And for because thou shall perceive
I teach not trifles vain,
I will procure that thou shall see
all things before thee plain.
But first it needful is with prayers
Dame Rainebowe for to try,
Who wonted was to bear the hestes
of Juno through the sky:
That she with wind disperse ye clouds,
and make the skies look fair,
Least that thy sight be hyndered,
by dymnesse of the air.
Then humbly in this wise I praide:
O thou Thaumatis hye,
Of sundry color to behold
a beauty to the sky,
That stretchest forth in misty clouds,
thy great and mighty bow,
And Phoebus shining bright his beams
in thee do bear and show,
And floods up sucked unto the clouds
do bring and carry far,
O Rainebowe wondrous sight to men
and Iunoes Messanger:
And truly got of Thaumas old,
the daughter passing fair,
Grant I thee pray all darkness fled
a clear and Crystal air.
Shut up in caves of Eolus,
the south winds cause of rain,
And send abroad the northern blastes,
to make fair days again.
Immediately upon these words,
from out the northern side
Did Boreas blow, and with his blast
clearde all both round and wide,
Then sprinkling in mine eyes a juice,
my guide, behold quoth he,
Now shall the secrets of the world,
reveled be to thee.
Now open wide your springs, and plain
your caves abroad displaye,
You Systers of Parnasus hill,
beset about with baye,
And unto me (for need it is)
a hundred tongues in verse
Send out, that I these ayrie kings
and people may rehearse,
Deceivers great of men and guides
of vice, which all that live
Do still molest: and by their craft
man's soul to hell do give.
Here first whereas in chariot red
Aurora fair does rise,
And bright from out the Occean seas,
appears to mortal eyes,
And chaseth hence the Hellish night,
with blushing beauty fair,
A mighty King I might discern,
placde hie in lofty chair,
His hair with fyry garland dockt,
puffed up in fiendish wise,
With brows full broad, and threatening look,
and fyry flaming eyes.
Two monstrous horns and large he had,
and nostrils wide in sight,
Al black himself, for bodies black
to every evil spright
And vggly shape, has nature dealt,
yet white his teeth did show,
And white his grenning tuskes stood,
large wings on him did grow,
Framde like the wings of Flindermics
his feet of largest sise,
In fashion as the wild Duck bears,
or Goose that creaking cries:
His tail such one as Lions have
Al naked sat he there
But bodies covered round about
with loathsome shagged hair,
A number great about him stood,
a wondrous forte of men,
A greater company I think
than Xerxes trained, when
By force of arms (unhappy man)
the Greckes he did invade:
And scarce in safety could return
with all the flight they made,
Each one of them in hand a hook
did hold, and Belbowes bear,
With bellows for to fill their heads,
with wind, whom Fortune here,
Had either lent great store of gold:
or whom they saw full well,
In learning, beauty, state or strength,
their fellows to excel.
With hook such as with wanto^ wind
were puffed sufficiently,
Amyd the smoky lakes to cast,
with Snakes and Toades to lie.
And other monsters there that dwelt.
This lusty foresaid King,
Tiphurgus had to name: as said
my guide that told each thing.
Then where the Su^ne does downward fall,
amyd the western streams:
From whence among the Spaniards,
he throws his latest beams,
I cast mine eyes, and like the first low
another King in sight
I had, that sat in seat aloft,
his name Aplesto hight:
A number great of sprites he ruled,
such as amyd the west
Are bred, and such as in those parts
do dwell and have their rest.
Each one of them a Serpent holds,
a flesh hook also has.
Then spoke Timalphes in this sort:
see thou quoth he, to wrath
How every man their Serpents move?
and pinching often do touch,
That sharper may they set their teeth,
and poison more by much
Destil in hearts of earthly men,
for they on whom does hitte,
The force of those such poisoned teeth,
do forth with lose their wit,
And he auenly things do clean despise:
and with such thirst they broyle,
That licoure none can them suffice
with drink in vain they toil.
And while thus evermore in vain
they drink and still are dry,
Unmindful of their death, their lot,
themselves, and heavens hye:
Then straight at hand these devils come
with hooks as here you see,
And catches them, and strykes the throtes
that yet full thirsty be
To fling in floods of thorney lake:
where as with wondrous pains
They punnisht are with Monsters vile
that secret there remaynes:
Blond specially with bloudsuckers
that thick about them lies:
And hyting still, both day and night,
them plages in piteous wise.
At length they yield again the blood,
that whilst they here did live
They sucked from men, nor ease of smart
no space of years can give.
This King both makes and plages such men
as covetous he made.
This said, I turnde my eyes to stars
that glide in coldest glade,
Whereas our Pole does plain behold,
and view the double bear,
And where Boots drives his waine,
in ever rolling sphere.
And there an other king I see,
and thousand spirits ill
That dwell about those northern parts
whose hands great hooks do fill.
Then said my guide: this king yt raigns
in parts of Boreas cold
Of Lechery, and Gloconye,
does Crown and Scepter hold.
Philocreus eke to name he has,
in fraud full like the rest:
O Lord with how great harms does he
poor mortal men molest?
For on these hooks that here thou see
the baytes that taste full well,
He tyeth fast where poison lurkes
of filthy floods of hell.
And with these baytes he does command
the doltishe fools to take,
And caught in puddles to be cast
of muddy miery lake.
Who straight transformed into shape
of vgglye beasts, appears
Both Swine and Asses, Bulls and Fox,
and wolves, and loathsome Bears:
And others Monsters void of mind.
Nor this does yet suffyse,
with Harnets, waspes, and Betels blind
that round about there flies,
Continually they vexed are.
Lo thus Philocreus men are plagued
in piteous painful wise,
That covet only carnal joys,
and virtue here despise.
Thus says my guide, but I my eyes
about the southern pole
Do cast, from whence ye clouds are causde
in every place to roll.
with steadfast sight I note, what sort
of sprites I there can see,
And flocks of fendes with wings full black
that swiftly flying be.
Amongst them all a mighty king
there stood with Crown of pride
with lowering brows, and dogged loo(...)
and in his mouth full wide
A monstrous tongue he hissyng shocke,
and like the loathsome Snake
He castes abroad from out his throat
a fylthy poison black,
Such as the adder (while he burns
with love of Lamprey long,
Much fearing for to harm his joy
with deadly venom strong)
Casts up among the ragged rocks,
and hydes it secretly,
And springing straight with lusty leap
into the seas does fly,
And calling often with hyssing sound
does seek his lovers dear,
Who runs to meet her mate in have,
whose voice she weldoth hear,
And both with much embracing join.
But when their pleasant play
Is fully past, and finished,
the Snake with joy away
Does swim to land, and on the rock
whereas his poison lay,
He searches for his own defense.
which if he find away,
Or spylt, or trodden under foot,
such grief he then sustaynes,
That mourning, weary of his life
he dasheth often his brains,
Against the sharp and ragged stones
till that his breath at last
With al his wretched pains and grief,
by death be ouerpast.
Such was this King, and such did seem
his subjects for to be:
Often times the Prince a pattern is
unto the commontie.
with Fawchon great in right hand held
each one of them he goes,
Al black, both face, and teeth, and lips
al full of fylthy froth.
This King was Lord of envy great
Timalphes cold me there,
And that Miastor was his name,
by whose awarde seucre,
His servants fill the hearts of men
with froth of canckred spyte.
Then runs the plague through every vein,
and every where does light,
But most of al does vex the eyes,
that they (...) suffer may
To see their fellows live in wealth,
but thereat pyne away.
At last they thrust the^ through with darts
and souls full sick expel,
Whereon with triple throat does chaw
the fiendish hound of Hell:
And chawed, to poiso^ strong does turn,
and of their bodies spring
Fowl Scorpions, which although they fawn
with tail do deadly sting.
But now behold the middle parts,
that in the air does lie,
And there Sarcotheus see, above
the rest a King most hie.
And of them al most mischievous.
The other Kings that be,
Do fear and also worship him,
the power and rule has he
Of all the devils in the world
from whom the mischiefs al
Do flow as from a point: and as
the beams from Phoebus fall.
I then beheld this vggly fiend,
placde under cloth of state,
That in his hand the scepter held,
of mischief pride and have.
From him does spring f^l bloody co^bs*
and seven horns in bight,
The number like of lofty towers
in show resembling right.
His ears his nostrilles and his eyes
all fyerie filthy glowe,
And from his dampishe throat he does
the smoky flames out throw,
Alas, how far the number great
of his companions spread,
What armies armed all with darts
and gunnes, this fiende does lead:
As if he would the heavens burst,
and saints from thence expel.
Then quoth my guide: this devil once
in beauty did excel,
And most with God in favor stood:
but mind disposed ill,
And pride to prosperous state alied,
this Miser quite did spyll.
For like to God he needs would be,
and honors equal have,
And thus from thence was banished
the proud presumptuous slave.
Whom Michaell as he was assynde,
in grisley cloud has tide,
And there appointed him his place
where he should still abide.
But often, of his old estate,
and joys of passed ^yme
Remembering well, in vain he strives
and thinks the skies to clime.
Hereof does come the thunder crackes,
and fearful flames of light,
And ghastly syghtes of fire do flashe,
from clouds as dark as night:
The beasts for fear amassed stand,
and hearts of men do quake.
But vexed in vain, and to no end
his trauayles does he take,
Nor nerer can he come to skies.
And he that guide of light
was once, and called Lucifer,
loves now to walk by night,
And darkness best of all estemes,
and leads with him his sprightes,
And bugges, and goblins grimme or hell
and such deformed syghtes:
Sometimes by day when as he joined
a troop of armed knaves,
And strawes with bloody Corses ye fields,
or drowneth ships in wanes,
Or when such mischief great he works:
Then comes he forth by light
But close, and sendes abroad his men
in secret privy plight,
Which moves the hearts of wicked m^
and them with fury ^illes,
And secretly with sylent voice
persuades their mind yo ylles.
But then quoth I: I thee beseech my guide
let us now leave
These monstrous Devils to behold,
and state of man perceive:
For from this mount we easily may
both land and seas discrye,
Nor profit small I thee assure
in this prospect does lie.
Then gased we both upon the earth:
and first I wondered most,
To see such diverse colors strange
in men of sundry cost.
For those that nerest lead their life
unto the middle line,
Are black, with blaberlips, and hair
both curlde and crisped fine,
And naked clean, or couerde else
with skin of Kiddes full ill.
But such as dwell about the North,
where Gold is quaking still,
In whytenesse seem to pass the snow,
and scarce they can expel
With garments long and many clothes
the clode that there does dwell.
Between these people all that be,
with black and white are died,
But more and less as far and nere
they from the Sun abide.
While thus I fondly wondered at
the things that there I see,
Why do ye (quoth my guide) regard
the things that vaynest be?
why viewest thou thus the colors vain
in flesh of mortal man:
Far better shall it be for thee
their manners well to scan,
And diverse fashyons of their minds,
and works of them to see,
whereby thou shall behold the life
of man, I showing thee,
And what confusyon is therein.
First, feign thou here a hand,
whose thombe directly upward rise
and fingers open stand:
And on the thombe place thou the men
of best disposed mind,
That worldly things do here despise,
and things of heavenly hind
Do only seek, and most esteem
dame wysedomes sacred grace,
Delyghting nature to behold,
and hye Celestyall place,
Unharmefull, gentle, loving best
the virtuous things and right,
Whom neither riches can corrupt,
nor fleshely fond delight,
Nor glass of pompous state alure:
men of a heavenly kind,
And Gods incarnate here on earth,
but rare and scant to find.
For all such things that perfect are
are scarce and selde to see,
O that the mighty Lord would cause
thee such a one to be.
Next stands to this the forefinger,
whereto thou shall assyne
Discretest men, the second sort,
and good we them defyne,
Yet lean they some thing to the world,
as fyt to bear the sway
In cities and in common wealths,
and banners to display,
And faith and justice eke they love,
and virtuous seek to be:
Yet from the pleasures of the world
they are not fully free.
To whom if God at any time
the rule and empire give,
Then comes the golden times again,
and virtue here to live,
And justice to the earth returns,
and peace does bear the sway,
And vice with punnishement severe
is forced for to stay.
The middle finger follows then,
of estimation small,
Whereon thou must apoint a place
unto those Minions all,
Whose minds are ready to conceive,
and wits for to invent,
Whose tongs do flow with eloquence,
to utter their intent:
But wicked, and unjust they are
and full of vyllanyes,
And bending always to the earth
do not behold the skies,
A subtle sort, that foxes hearts
within their guilfull breast,
Do always bear, and simple souls
with fraud do still molest.
And when as most they virtue hate,
yet list they for to seem,
Both good, and Godly men, and such,
as virtue most esteem,
And other wise than they do mean
their tongue does talk always:
And all they do is done for gain,
or else for hope of praise,
Nor life but this they none esteem
nor look for to enjoy.
And these are they that evermore
do wise men most anoy,
And armde with fraud, on favor staide
(which either they obtain,
With slauishe service done to them,
or else with gifts do gain)
The Godly purposes they let,
and truth with craft they hyde:
And if their cunning there do fail
then force in time is tryde,
Then use they swords, or flames of fire,
or strength of poison try:
And if they cannot closely hurt
then work they openly.
With these such iolye seruitours
in every time, and place,
The Dieul does his Kingdom keep,
and eke his own good grace.
This staff he chiefly leans on,
with this great help and stay,
He conquest makes upon the earth,
and brings them to obey.
More crafty Knaves than wiseme^ live,
and stronger aye they be,
That win the Palm, and triumph still,
with spoil of honesty.
Which when they scepter hold in hand,
or rule in cities bear,
Then co^mes the iron world again,
and Mars approaches near,
Then fury conquers laws and right,
then lawful is it found
For vice to live vnpunnished,
then virtue lies a ground.
No men more mischievous than these
among the mortal state
Do live, nor none there are that more
the Gods above do hate.
Now next in place the Fools do sit,
who presently must stand
Upon the finger fourth in place,
of this thy feigned hand.
Of Fools the greatest number is:
who does not plainly know?
Dame nature joys in making Fools,
as she does often to sow
Both Nettles, Docks, and filthy Weeds
dull wit, and doltysh brain
These Idiotes have, they seek not for
the joys of soul to gain:
And only of their life, and panch,
like beasts their God they make.
These doltysh Fools by thousand wyles
the crafty sort do take,
And many false and wicked things
to do, they them persuade,
And with their language as they list
do train them to their trade.
For Fools do quickly credit give,
as children also will,
But sonest to vice: opinions worst
in them appears still,
To whom is also worser mind:
here of it does arise
That Foles believe these crafty Knaves
before the Godly wise:
For council naught these Foxes give,
and teach from truth to slide,
And underneath a painted cote,
the fylthy vice they hyde.
But though by many means they do*
these foresaid doltes beguyle,
Of superstition yet there is
a plain and easy wyle,
Well known to all the worlds of old:
the which this subtle kind
Does chiefly use, for to the church
of God themselves they bind,
And holy rytes they minister.
Then cause they sore to fear
The blockish hearts of Idiotes,
and them they threaten there,
Except with gifts they please ye saints
except they do appease
With Gold the wrath of God for syn,
and purchase their release,
Which straight these Prelates chaste receive,
wherewith they fat and feed
The Harlots and their Curtisans,
and Mules to serve at need.
For who does not the life of Priests
both note and well behold?
And how they do poor Fools deceive?
yet escape they vncontrolde:
Such is the suffrance now of Kings,
that only do apply
Their minds to pastyme, belly cheer,
and filthy lechery.
These things the Gods do aye permit
that little seem to wey
What hands do deal their sacraments
what hearts do them obey,
What honors here on earth they have
or else what blasphemy.
But now to Fools I come again,
whom when in seat on hie
Has Fortune placde for her delight,
O Lord what number great
Of Follies shall thou then behold?
to long it were to treat.
Then virtue made a jesting stock,
and placde aloft is vice,
Then daunces fond, and bankettings,
and plays are had in price:
Then flock of Parasites and whores,
in every place are seen:
Then filthy fond delight alone
does guide the soil as Queen.
For as the Prince is commonly
so do the subjects live,
And to the like behauiours aye
themselves they always give.
Not only pleasure unto Fools
of kindred we do find,
But anger oftentimes does match
her self with Folish mind:
For Fools are easily moved to wrath,
and desprate enterprise,
As often as fury slames within
and choler up does rise:
Then wicked love of weapon springs,
and bloody broils thereby,
That many corses give to death
full cold in grave to lie:
A naughty kind of men are these
and much to be avoided.
The last the little finger is
wherwyth the ears are scratched,
And therefore calde the earefynger
where mad men placed sit,
That lack the use of reason right,
and that have lost their wit:
Whose fury if it never cease,
more fyt for them to dye
It were, and from so great disease
by means of death to fly.
Of good men thus two only kinds
there are, and never more:
The rest are always naught and ill,
avoid them well therefore,
Or if thou can not them avoid,
beware yet at the least
Thou mouest them not, ye common sort,
a fierce and cruel beast
Do always rage, and hurtful be.
When thus Timalph had taught,
May not (quoth I) these Foles and wolves
to good estate be brought?
May vice by no means be expeld?
or if there be a way
Disclose to me. Then on this sort
Timalphes began to say:
As nature in man's body does
diseases diverse breed,
So many Sicknesses to the mind
from her do like proceed:
And travail like to both has dealt.
Lo, how she man does love:
Yet many succors has she set
for mortal man's behoue,
Which if she had not done, to sore
and cruel had she been.
Therefore ye same that helped has har(...),
and as to harm she is seen,
So had she skyl to heal again:
that justly you may doubt
A natural Mother her to call,
or else a stepdame stout.
But now let us the bodies griefs,
and medcins for the same
Pass over quite, in many books
declarde of ancient fame:
And of the mind as much as need
shall presently require,
Let us here speak to teach more plain
the thing thou did desire.
And first, as nature so disposing it
the rude and country field,
^^le Nettels, weeds and brembels sharp
continually does yield,
Except it oftentimes be tilde,
and eke with labor sore,
The hurtful wedes with plough and rakes
be causde to grow no more,
Nor this enough, it needeful is
good seeds therein to cast,
And daily for to husband it
till danger all be past.
Even so the mind whilst it is bound
within the body here,
Is ouergrowen with Briars sharp,
and wild it does appear:
Except it aided be with help
of one that tilleth well,
And aptly virtues therein plants,
and vices does expel.
But what is husbandry of mind
perhaps thou sekest to know:
Its wisdom, wisdom that I mean,
that manners good does show,
That makes men virtuous for to be,
and plain does teach the way
To mortal men, of living right,
and leaving for to stray,
Persuading them to lead their lives
in perfect Godly state,
And right ousnesse to exercise,
and sins to shun and hate.
This only is the wisdom true,
and not that other kind,
Whereto Physicians and vain clerks
do still apply their mind:
Attempting causes hid of things
to bring abroad to light,
And for to search the secret celles
of nature, day and night:
Materiam primam, and Vacuum,
and thousand monsters more
with blustering countna^ce belching out,
that they might seem therefore
Well learnde, and stuffed full
their purse with coin may strain.
O goodly wisedo^e, whose learned youth
do either gape for gain,
Or swell with vain ambition:
but none amongst them thoe
Does vertuouser, from thence
or better manerde go,
No teacher of the mind is this,
nor wisdom her we call:
But rather knowledge has to name,
if that she do not fall,
From doubtful paths of men deceiude.
who this has learned than
No wit but knowledge gains by it,
and of a cunning man
Perchance he bears the name, but not
of wyss and prudent wight.
These two do differ far in state,
and works in diverse plight,
From wisdom springes ye fruit of life,
from knowledge the flower does rise,
The one does profit, aid, and help,
the other beautifies:
The one respects the inward things,
the other outward shine,
The one makes virtuous men, and good,
the other learned, and fine.
Thus wisdom only decks the mind
which manners God does show
As I have said, destroys vice,
and virtue there does sow,
And waters it with heavenly showers.
O light of mankind here,
O per^ite way of saving health,
defense, and comfort clear,
Both entry door, and guide of life
O peace, and salve of mind,
O blessed worthy san^tuary,
O wisdom swetest kind,
That Nectar do excel in taste,
to whom art thou now dear?
who follows thee? what place have thou
on earth, what honors there?
In Temples wast thou wont to rain,
in schools, and proches low,
In Councelles, and in courts of kings,
now no man does thee know:
But Poets dreams and tryfles fond
for thee in place do rain.
what ^earnes (...) scholar now in schools,
what knowledge does he gain?
But ^ansyes vain, or baudy tales:
be hold in seat full hye
The Master sy^tes, which book before
that open wide does lie,
And spitting often he well does view
his great assembled crowde,
And when he sees them bent to hear,
with lofty voice and loud,
He then expoundes some dreadful ghost
of doleful tragedy.
Or else some harlots tricks declares
in wanton Comedy,
Or doting lones of ancient time,
or else to light does bring
Some monstrous, or some cruel fact,
or lamentable thing.
O brain deserving to be p^rged,
do thou these ways instruct?
The tender minds and ignorant
bring up with such a frui^t?
Is this the salt where of the age
so young is made to say?
Is it not shame with ^ryfles such
to pass the time away?
By this so many naughty knaves,
and villains do appear:
By this the grove of vices thick
up springs every where:
When as no virtuous bringing up
of Children can be found.
O you that youth do not correct,
but rather them confound,
Learn first your selves to live upright,
and then to others show
A virtuous trade, least like to beasts
you live, and nothing know.
But thou Stellatus harken well,
to thee I will express
which way thou shall apply thy mind
to perfect vertuousnesse.
First, often in mind remember well
one God alone to be,
E^ernall best, omnipotent,
and of most hye degree,
Who heaven, and the golden Stars
that shine throughout all the sky,
The rest of things that may be seen,
or not be seen with eye,
Of nothing, with his beck alone
before all times has made,
And framde the^ kepes, and gouernes here
with everlasting trade.
Him worship, honor, fear and praise,
and often to him pray,
Both nights, and days, when Su^ne does rise
and Sun does fall away,
And when from both in equal space
his Globe does distant glowe:
For virtue chief and wisdom chief,
it is, the king to know.
Of saints above, and father of men
to love with heart entire
To praise him always and to dread,
and humbly him desire.
Without this same all virtues else,
think nothing worth to be,
For almost this, and nothing else
sufficient is for thee.
Therefore have always God in heart,
and often in thy mind
And call to him, nothing than this
more vertnous can thou find:
This is to all the virtues else
the open door, and plain,
For without grace, and aid of God,
no man can them obtain,
Nor able be to fly from vice.
Besides the sayn^ts above that dwell,
and hosts of messangers,
And servants of the chiefest Lord,
and holy Ministers,
Fulfilling the commandment of
his Majesty divine,
That always stand before his face
in skies full clear that shine:
With holy mind remember often
in humble sort to pray,
That they may help thee in thy need,
and dangers drive away,
And thee unto the Lord commend:
for truly Angels can,
And often use to profit much
the earnest praying man.
Nor, be not thou (beware thereof)
amongst such sort a mate,
That think that nature never made
a thing of higher state
Than man: mad men, yt when they see
so plain before their eye,
Both seas and land of Creatures full,
do think that in the sky,
And in the Stars no dwellers be,
and indge the ample space
Of blessed heaven for to be
a void, and desert place.
O crabde, and crookde untoward souls,
O minds in darkness drounde.
Man's sense can not all things perceive,
for many things are found
That often times deceive the eyes,
which yet the mind does see:
Therefore what reason moves in mind
must rather followed be:
Which teaches that there is a God,
and dwellers in the sky:
Wherefore ye Stars are either Gods,
Or Temples where they lie.
These ground works laid, with all thy heart,
embrace thou righteousness,
And let no injury of thine
be any man's distress,
By words or deeds no man can hurt,
nor deal thou so with men
As thou would not be dealt withal,
but always do to them
As thou would they should do to thee:
thus nature does decree.
Which if thou straightly do not keeps
give credit unto me:
Thou never can be favored of
that majesty divine,
Nor after death unhappy man
thou shall the heavens clime.
An others honor, fame, or state,
harm not in any case,
When vile desire does move, or wrath
or envy comes in place:
But rather help such as thou know
to be of virtuous mind,
With all thy force, and pleasure do
to men of wicked kind
Sometimes, that so they hurt thee not,
or seldomer thee harm:
And let not brybes, nor love, nor hate,
thy mind from justice charm,
For these are three especial things
that dasell sore the sight
Of mind, and drive men ever more
from doing well and right:
But still have God in memory,
and death to come in mind,
Then f^ye the enticements of the flesh
and byts of sharpest kind
On pleasure put: For nothing does
to man more mischief bring
Than ill delight, to virtue sure
a most contrary thing:
For virtue labors evermore
the heavens hye to clyme,
But pleasure ennimy to the skies
does downward still decline,
And groueling gaseth on the earth,
as beasts do commonly,
Destroying strength of body here
and force of mind: whereby
It breeds a dull and slouthful sense,
and sharp dyseases makes.
This is that Circes, that Siren
and hook of Stygian lakes,
With this same snare a number great
of souls, the Devil takes,
And suffers not them after death
their country Skies to see,
But wyly wrappeth them in mystes
of Hell his mates to be.
These bayts therefore, this poison sweet
of fylthy fiendish foe,
With al thy might avoid them well,
and warely from them go:
Lest that when greater years do come,
in vain thou do repent
Thy self, thy substance, fame, and wit,
so lost and fondly spent.
Then shall thou say as many do,
O goodly times in mind,
How vilely have I you abused?
where now should I you find?
Unhappy man: If God would grant
again my former time,
And once again the Samian branch
I might assay to clyme,
Thereto I would where as the earth
his horn forth does stretch,
Though that the way be strayt, and steep
the top there of to retch.
No kind of thing does virtue pass,
which always does remain,
Which honor gives, and hie estate,
and glory great does gain,
Preserues the life, and does augment
the goods that here you have,
And does remain, when death has cast
the fading corse in grave.
But me unhappy wretch alas
did pleasure sweet de^eaue,
And fled away does me in briars
and many mischienes leave:
For whilst that I in youthful years
the ^^ewes do often frequent,
And while to feeding, sleep, and play,
my dol^^sh mind was bent,
Naught would I learn, and hating books,
did study much despise,
And learning scorn, but now alas
I see before my eyes,
My self vnlearnde, of ill report,
in beggarly array,
My strength decade, my mind appald,
my senses worn away:
All this time have I lived as he
that lies a sleep in dreams,
Does think him self awake to be
deceived by such means.
Like words to these does utter of^
the s^outhfull s^uggish man,
When age the neighbor next to death,
does count to late as than
His life led ill in youthful years.
The greatest sort do shut the door
when Steed is stolen away:
And wise they are when as to late
their wits they do assay,
And for Physicians fa^^ they seek,
when hope of health is gone.
O wretches whilst you here have time,
look well this time upon:
For fast away the hour ^^yes,
and fled can not re^ou^ne,
No tears can help the corse in grave,
nor sobbes for him to mourn:
That medcine only is of force
which is in time applied,
Therefore must virtue be embracde,
when youth is first in pride:
And then it nedeful is to to tread
the perfect path of life,
And virtuous works to take in hand,
then reason must be ryfe,
And mind with council must be ruled
while yet but young it is:
Least that with fond delight deceyude,
it he adlong run amysse.
Who so is wise let him in time
with wisdom well provide,
For after wits are evermore
to folly next alied:
And out of time it brings grief
be wayling al in vain,
A hurt or loss that never can
be brought or got again.
Beside, the wicked thirst of wealth,
and vile desire of gold
Must thou eschew, for where a place
this covetousness does hold
There rain almost each other vice:
as shameful periuries,
Ungoolinesse, theft, and disceyt,
with open robberies,
Guyles, treasons, and conspyracies,
with frayes and murders vile,
What needs it for to show them all?
nothing beside more vile,
Nor worse than is the covetous man,
that drownde in earth below,
Does like the Mole no kind of thing
desire, love, or know
Save only riches of the earth
for which he does not fear
Each ill to work, nor other God
he does acknowledge here,
But purse and pens his chief delight:
nor sees the unhappy best
How short the life of man is here,
how frail, how sone deceast,
And how that from his bending bow
death evermore does cast
His deadly shaftes, that pearceth hearts
of mortal men so fast,
And neither spares the young nor lernd,
nor yet the wealthy wight:
But every man without respect
with bloody blow does smite:
And oftentimes is nearest then,
when furthest of he shows,
And sudden tumults then does cause
when no man of him knows,
But thou regard not riches here,
nor goods that subject be
To blinded chance nor let no care
of such things tro(...) thee:
For proper unto no man are
the things, which as she lykes
Does fortune give, and takes away
when she unconstant strykes:
Or passing does with life away
to diverse men descend.
Nay, other riches shall thou seek
that never shall have end,
On which no chance nor kind of death,
shall ever power obtain:
These riches labor thou to get
both days and nights with pain,
For that thou shall be truly rich,
and truly blessed by that.
The others that the common sort
like fools do wonder at,
And wish to have, if thou enioyest,
as money, house and land,
Them use and occupy at will,
who does against it stand?
But justly yet, and modestly,
and when thou may or can,
Have pity on the poverty,
despise no needy man.
By this means shall ye wyn thee praise
and health for ever more,
And for this earthly baggage here
the Skies above shall gain.
No man is he, but sure a wolf
that does not mercy show,
That is not moved to see the state
of others overthrow.
But if of poor estate thou art,
then bear it patiently,
And in good part sustain the lotte
of this thy poverty:
For greater overthrows has he,
and greater grief and care,
Whom Fortune most enriched has,
and given the greater share:
And so much ouerlayd he is,
with wayght of substance great,
That by no means he can behold
the hie celestial seat.
For light, and void of earthly dregs
it him behoues to be,
That will with mind ascend the place
where as the heavens be.
For more a man seeks earthly state,
more falls he from the Sky,
And from the ever lasting light
he farther of does fly:
And eke in place where as a man
his treasure up does hyde,
There lies his heart, and there his mind
does evermore abide.
Thus prouertie helps many men
vnburdning them thereby
That so with swifter wyngs they may
unto the heavens fly.
In like sort pride thou must avoid
the spring of strife, and hate,
That with discention many times
destroys a common state.
with this disease in ancient time
was Rome nere overthrown,
Oppressed with rage of fury fierce,
that civil wars had blown.
Fly thou this fiende of hell, if thou
desyrest for to be
A friend of Gods, and after death
the Heavens elere to see:
No proud man loves the Gods above,
nor is beloved of them:
For God estemes the humble sort
and lowly minded men,
And well he lykes the gentle minds
where no ambition lies,
Thrustes down ye proud, and suffers not
to dwell with him in skies.
wherefore you proud disdainful swarm
what does your pride you gain?
What helps your great renoumed names
and princely titles vain?
which death in shortest time does spoil,
and in the stream has dronde
Of Lethes floods, where synking low
they never can be found.
You seek to please the common sort,
and of them praysde to he,
Tell, what distretion has that state
the truth of things to see.
They count you here as Gods to be,
and what does follow then?
When Asses here in deed you are
with outward sign of men,
Th unskillful sort you do deceive,
but not the Gods above:
But rather them to laughter often,
and often to wrath you move:
For all your pretty prankes they mark,
and privy deeds they see,
But you O blinded Asses think
no Gods at all to be,
Nor yet believe the Corse in grave,
the soul shall rise to dome,
And therefore seek these present joys,
and scorn the life to come.
A number great of beasts alive
in shape of men do straye,
Hence springs up your error great
and cause of your decay,
That with your gross capacity,
no other thing you see
but bodies gross, nor true things know
but such as shadows be.
The greatest sort delight in smoke,
and full with smoke they flow,
O fools what lighter thing tha^ smoke,
what thing does vayner show?
Or what may more be laughed at?
than honor to pursue
All undeserved, and to despise
the cause of honor true,
We see ill men, unlearned and fond,
in place aloft to stay,
And guide such as do them excel,
whom they should rather obey.
For spiteful fortune st^ll does sport
(...) mortal man's estate,
And out of order all confoundes,
as she does like, or hate:
Often times exaiting to the stars
the stouthfull servile kind,
Deserving fetters for to wear,
or in the mill to grind.
But if she were of good estate,
she would the world commit
Of wise men to be guided here,
as meet it is and fyt:
Then all things should in order pass,
and laws in strength should stand,
And holy Sacraments be dealt
by Godly Prelates hand:
And God would then contented be
to she we himself in sight.
But harebrainde Fortune always does
in counter faites delight:
Yet this thalmighty Lord permittes.
Who could it well correct,
And why should not we suffer it?
For unto what effect
Is it, the truth with reason strong
to maintain, and defend
Preuayling not but get thereby
displeasure in the end?
For wisdom is co^temnde, and harmde,
with which no force does rain,
Whom no authority supportes,
nor honor does maintain,
Therefore it is better not to speak:
despise thou in thy mind
The foolish common peoples praise,
and gifts of Fortune blind,
Apply thy self to please the Lord,
with deeds of virtuous kind,
And after death true honor thou,
and true renoume shall find:
That for the just and Godly men,
prepared is in skies,
Whereas the mild and lowly hearts,
do joy in joyful wise.
But proud men woefully do wayle
in smothring fiery smokes.
Now last of all restrain thy wrath,
for anger rage prouokes,
And rage does cause unseemly words,
of naughty words does spring
Both brawles and frayes, of frayes comes wounds,
and wounds do slaughter bring.
Anger does so confound the mind,
that drunk when blood does frye
It knows not what to do, and void
of judgment runs awrye:
Sraight grief and shame ensues ye deeds
done unadvisedly,
Shun this, guide mind, and win thy self
with bearing manfully.
A goodly virtue patience is,
which who so is without
Must needs of force lack honesty,
with cruel mind and stout,
Still vsyng for to braule and ^^ght.
Frayes fittest are for beasts,
And quiet peace is far more meet
to dwell in mortal breasts,
The wise, and virtuous man, sekes peace
all other things before,
And suffers things of smaller weight,
for fear of mischief more,
And well takes heed, least that the cole
that yet but kindling lies,
With fiery force of flashing flame
aloft at length arise.
Who naught can bear, let him absent
himself from company,
And lead his life alone in woods,
or else on mountains hye.
And he that dwelles in company,
let him learn much to bear,
And to restrain with bridle sharp
the wrath that him do steare,
Dissembling closely with himself
his anger that does spring,
And never break the bonds of peace
for every tristing thing,
Forgiving stull the faults of those
that him offended have,
That he may so forgiveness get,
as he to others gave.
Thus much of trayning of the mind
I thought it good to touch,
Which does suffyse: to these I could
have added more by much,
But he that does observe these few
shall never want the rest,
But easily all them obtain
that are not here expressed:
They all contained privily,
and closde in these doelye.
But yet it needful is the while
the wysemens books to apply,
And causes for to search of things,
and to adorn the mind
With diverse ar^es: for void thereof
it is both dull, and blind.
And thus, as has been said before,
those ^ooles, and foxes, well
May virtuous be, and frame themselves
in seat of bliss to dwell.
These thigs while as my guide declarde
in presens Mercury,
The post of Gods, and Atlas Son,
sent down from Jove stood by:
And willde T^malphes in have
the heavens to ascend,
For all the saints (quoth he) are willds
on Jove for to attend,
And Momus there appointed has
of wayghty affairs to treat.
If certain Monks (that placed are
upon the hauty seat,
That hard beside the city stands,
where passing by the walls
To Venize goolfe the fyshie streams
of Ariminum fall)
Oflyuing shall deprived be,
or else those parts forsake
That country women use to cut
when they their Capons make:
Since that they are to coltishe waxt,
and bear their heddes to hye.
Despisyng men, and filthy factes
commit licenciously.
Example taking of their Prior,
fie, fie, to great a shame.
And can the Church abide to see
such Porkettes as these same?
That only live to serve their paunch,
their lust, and sleepy sense,
Which heard, in have Aretes son
departing straight from thence,
Did me commyt to Mercury,
who going down to Hell,
The special message of his Lord
unto the fiende to tell:
Me fast embracing in his arms
did through the clouds convey
To ground, what time as Clement Pope
in camp with Caesar lay
Within the walls of Bononye,
and Florenze City fair
With mighty force did long besiege.
Thus cutting swift the air
With wyngs, at length came Mercury
to rocks that ragged lie,
Of S. Marinus hauty hills,
that seem to touch the Sky:
From thence in small descent he set
me in thy fields so gay
Verruculus, and then to Hell
in haste he takes his way.
Capricornus, the tenth Book.
AL hail to thee good Mercury,
from Stygian lake so soon things
Art thou returnde? declare what
in Plutoes court are done:
Great brawles, and raging mad vprodes,
what is the cause or why?
I will thee tell, although in haffe
I must to heaven fly.
So great a sort of Turks and Jews,
and Christians there remain,
That place therein suffiseth not,
the number to contain:
No empty rome there is, but all
full thwact as they may he,
The Porches full, and full the Hall,
and full the courts I see,
The Temples, houses and the Streates
the Walls, and Market row,
And all the City fields, and hills
and woody valleys low,
So full that crowding thick they thrust,
and shoue with devilish might:
With fyst and heel, and tuske, and tooth,
in cruel sort they fight,
For of no weapon have they skill,
nor sprites can ever dye:
Scarce could I pass the place unto
whereas the fiend does lie,
But through ye mydst of swarming souls,
with force I make my way,
And with this rod to get me room
amongst them fast I lay:
At length the privy chaumber of
the black and vggly sprite
I come unto, whom there I find
in sad and doleful plight.
And when to him I had declarde
my fathers full decree,
Commanding him that Antechrist
should straight unloosed be
From out the pyt, and sent abroad
to every place and land:
That working wonders strange and false
and teaching that at hand
The dreadful day of judgment is,
and cude of all the rest,
May al thing out of order bring,
both Gods, and man, and beast,
As fixed state of destiny
commands to be had:
God Pluto then tell me quoth I
why sy^ste thou here so sad?
So sad quoth he: do thou not think,
to great a wrong I bide,
When you possess so great a space
of heaven large and wide?
When as but few you are, and when
scarce three (when all is done,)
Or little more, in greatest space
and tract of time do come:
And I to be enclosde within
a kingdom here so small,
Where out of number mortal men
continually do fall:
The Jews and all the Turkish brood,
not all the Christian bend
(I grant) but sure the greatest part,
do here, do here descend,
And hither to my parkes they run:
why come they more to me?
Or why does not my brother there
that Skies does ouersee
These Friars, Priests, and Monks at lest
take up to heaven hye,
And them in blessed place with him
preserve continually?
Is is not shame, these men that in
the Church so swetely sing,
And day by day, in sacred towers
the restless bells do ring,
That spend such store of Franconcense,
and many Hores relieve,
That pardon others, and can not
their own mysdeedes forgive,
That play the parts of paryshe Clerk,
the Corse to bring to grave,
And beautify the Church of God,
with Tombs and Pictures brave,
Is it not shame these men to send
to Hell, with pains therefore,
As thirsty Appulia never bred
of Flies a greater store?
Nor once the chiefest Bishops he
does dread, or more forbear,
But rather wylls that they do feel
extremest torments here:
Thus in the deepest pyt of Hell
enclosde they lie in chains
And plaged are above the rest
with grievous kind of pains.
Wherefore Cyllenius when thou comste
the Stars above unto,
I pray thee show my brother there
that al things I will do
With willing mind as he co^maundes:
But yet in any wise
Let him respect my poor estate,
and kingdom not despise,
And either take some souls from hence
or else make Hell more wide:
This said, I will (quoth I) and then
from thence in haste I hied.
And now to Heaven I return
nor longer can I stay:
Forget not me thy client poor
go blessed saint away.
Thou Muse remember well to thewe
to me thy verses fine,
For paper low at hand, and pen,
and leisure good and time:
Begin and teach me in what sort
a wise man should be wrought.
First underneath a happy star
he must to light be brought,
That after shall be wise or blessed:
for greatly matter makes
Under what sign or what aspect,
a man his byrthday takes:
As they affirm that know the names,
and force, and motions hye
Of Stars, and cast natiuities,
and tell the destiny.
O Lord how great and wondrous
does heavens force appear,
Without whose help the earth nor seas,
could ever creature bear.
The Sky the Occean representes
the father here of all,
And stars the sister Nimphs by name
full aptly may we call,
From whence procedes al good on earth.
therefore can no man live
As wise and blessed, who^ stars in birth,
an ill aspect do give.
Beside of great effect does seem
their parents state, and kind,
Of whom the infant nourced is,
and who does guide the mind.
For as the child in tender years
himself at first does train,
Such custom shall in gra^er age
within his heart remain:
Long time that nature does endure,
and long in mind does lie,
That in our childish age at first,
our senses did apply.
Therefore the master needs must be
both wise and learned well,
That guides the child, and also must
to virtue him compel.
And like the horsman good, now here,
now there must wind and wreste
The untamed head, and now with by^^e
and now with spur molest:
Nor only him with words persuade,
but with examples teach:
For what if life be contrary
avails it to preach?
And first be dilligent to keep
him from the vicious kind,
Ill company does often corrupt
a good and virtuous mind:
This poison many has destroyed,
would th^n be glad to tell
The nature just of any man,
then mark his fellows well,
For like to like do ever go,
and always shall thou find
That conu^rsant are such as be
of one disposed mind.
Wherefore let both the schoolmaster,
and parents well beware,
Least him whom they do thus instruct
the naughty youth do s^are,
And them with filthy crimes infect:
alas full sone we all
Enclyned are unto the worse,
and sone to vice we fall.
Besides this child that here we ^ayne
a wise man for to make,
Let him in Greek, and latin books,
his daily travail take,
And give good will and diligence
in learning to proceed,
Refusyng al dishonest books
let him good au^thors read:
For s^ldome is the unlearned good,
for ignorance does blind,
And darkes with errors commonly
the rude unskillful mind.
But yet from to much study and toil
let him his mind refrain,
Least he prove mad, in searching thus
this wisdom to attain:
Or fall into some great disease
and so himself destroy:
To much of every thing does harm
and long does not enjoy.
His sprites sometime to recreate,
and to refreshe his mind,
Let him absent him self and play:
for rest in every kind
Does quickness bring, and play in time
does former force repatre.
But though each kinds of learning is
both needful good and fair.
Yet chief among the rest are those,
and highest place obtain,
That teaches well ye Stars to know,
and nature opens plain,
Let these our wise men well apply
with all his force and might,
In grauer age, and in these arts
let him spend his delight:
And therwithall (as has been said)
the nurture of the mind
Well put in ure, both just and good
shall be and so shall wind
About his head two Laurel twistes.
How goodly a thing is it
A man both learned and good to be,
to know, and to have wit?
A learned fool is to be fearde,
like as the ^urious brain.
With sword in hand, so is the learnde
in whom does vice remain.
But yet suffyseth not alone:
the mind for to regard,
And with good manners, and good arts
to have it thus preparde:
When as the state of body here
we must not lightly way,
For if the body be diseased
it never can obey
The hes^es of mind, you does command
both worthy things and great.
Wherefore we must our selves apply
to feed on wholesome meat,
That may engender purest blood:
for hurtful humor springs
Of ou^ll meats most commonly,
and such unwholesome things.
All drunkenness must be eschewed,
and surfets must be fled,
For these the stomach ouercharge,
and much anoye the head,
And round with fumes beset the brain,
by this does always come
The dull appalled sense and spryt^,
and sleeps of afternoon.
To exercise the body well
in due convenient time,
Is great commodity to health,
and makes the force more fine:
By to much s^outh does strength de^ay,
and by to long a rest.
The synowes faint, and all the lymmes
by this are quite oppressed.
Beside must cold extreme be shunde,
and heat that raging broils,
And all corrupt and filthy airs,
and fennishe moory soyles:
Especially in summer time,
when dog with fyerie ^eene
Does cleave the fields, and Grashopper^*
sing under branches green.
In fine our selves we must apply
with all our force and might,
To bodies health, that so it may
obey the mind aright,
Which scarce can well be brought about
if pouertye deny:
Needs must we money have by chance
or gift of some that dye,
Or else by trade of occupying
in any facultye,
For evermore the nedy man
does suffer miserye:
Nor without riches, possible
a happy life to lead,
Alas how often virtue poor
does mourn with heavy head?
How much despised she still does lie
if money be away?
Him truly and in proper kind
a rich man call we may
That flows with wit, and eloquence,
with wisdom and with art,
And wheresoever he becomes
can gain an honest part,
And portion for himself to live,
and though he journey makes
To diverse places far from home,
his substance with him takes,
And never wants needful things
a joyful life to lead,
Nor fear the thieves, nor does ye sword*
or cruel robbers dread,
And quickly does himself repair
though he be spoiled quite:
For virtue true gives never place
to Fortunes frowning spite.
For every dwelling in the world
does native soil appear
Unto the virtuous man, and well
he lives every where.
But he that virtue lackes, although
he great possessions hold,
And purses stuffed full with coin,
and Coffers full of gold,
Yet can he not go where he list,
nor travail every place,
To see the countries strange abroad,
and men of sundry grace,
And every were to live: for house,
and ground, and Castles strong,
He can not bear about with him
in all his journeys long,
Least yt perchance with thieves he meet,
or perish on the shore,
And then for Gods sake ask his meat
at every other door.
At home therefore he always dwells,
and in his country lives
Where as his ground a great increase
of Corn and wine him gives,
And as a banished man he fears
beyond the bounds to go,
That slothfulness of mind, and chance
to him assigned so:
Whereby the goodly syghtes abroad
he can not view nor mark,
While still at home he hidden lies
as pent in dongeon dark.
Therefore the old Philosophers
by fine invention found,
A certain stone, that where they went
or travailed any ground,
Provided them of needeful things,
and never would decay,
By aid whereof, full many lands
and countries far away
They might hehold, and always learn
of many sundry arts.
And thus of old the Gods above
besought with humble hearts,
The sacrifyce on altar slain
before as was the trade
To Mercury, the Sun, and Moon,
Lo thus their prayers made.
O Titan, beauty of the world,
O fairest God in sight,
O thou Latonia dryuing hence
the shadows of the night,
O swyftly fleecing restless Impe
of Jove and Maia borne,
That able art to change thy self
to shapes of sundry form:
Be present here, and bow your ears
to our complaints and cry,
Behold a few, whose minds and wits
are in degree full hye,
That wisdom most of all esteem,
while cause of every thing,
And secret state of nature hyd
to light we seek to bring,
And meat with mind the mighty sky:
us need does ouertread,
And many great missehappes we feel,
of hunger almost dead:
While as the doltishe common sort
do all things rake and snatche,
And all the money heaping up
into their coffers catch,
Nor any of them does pity us,
and if we ask a myte,
Then poynting at us straight they jest,
and make of us but light:
Whereby we are constraynde to delue,
or else attendance give
On toyling beasts, or carry doung,
scarce know we how to live:
And Idiotes are we made to serve.
Wherefore you Gods above
Have pyty yet at length of us,
if good men's state you move,
And show an easy way by which
we may live honestly,
And for to search the secret dens
where truth does hydden lie.
These prayers heard, the Gods anon
thus calde came forth in place,
And first did Phoebus answer make:
O noble worthy race
Of half Gods, Skies deserving well
and favor eke from hye,
Now hearken well, and in your minds
let these my sayings lie
Take here this young Archadian blood,
and swyft untrusty swayne
And plunged deep in Stygian streates,
let him forthwyth be slain:
In bosom thrust of Hyales
him let the Gods receive,
Whom Lemnian country worshippeth
and hye aloft him heave:
Then bury him in warmed womb,
and corrupted him undo,
Whose dropping joints a sprite shall pearce
that falls our bodies fro,
And wondrously shall call again,
deceasde and quenched quite
Him from the dark new clad in cloak,
of gold, and shining bright
With silver show, then him again
amyd the fire cast:
An other straight shall spring thereof,
as Phaenix changing fast,
And perfect leave the bodies all
that it shall feale or touch,
The bonds and laws of nature here,
surmounting aye by much,
Shall change the kinds and drive away,
this needy poverty.
Here Phoebus ceasde, and Mercury,
and Dian did agree
To all that he declared had,
forthwith away they fly,
Ascending to the lofty place
and compasde beauens hye.
Then men of hauty sense they blind,
and answer all to dark,
Long pondring in their doubtful mind
do muse thereon and mark,
And scarce in longest race of time
with proves of sundry kind,
And not with little charges did
this art at first out find,
Than which no art more worthy is,
the heavenly stone to frame,
Which wicked people never know,
nor can obtain the same.
And this whosoever does enjoy
may dwell in any land,
Both free from fear of fortunes wheel,
and force of robbers hand:
But unto felwe the Gods vouchsaue
so great a gift to give.
Some will demand if it be meet
for wise men here that live,
To linck themselves in wedlocks bond,
and so the time to spend.
In procreation here of youth.
Though some do this commend,
Yet this in mine opinion is
for holly men not meet,
For care of wife does often let,
and love of children sweet,
The wits divine of wysest men,
that do their minds apply
About such hye and hauty things,
as secrets of the Sky.
Let him that only seeks the world
rejoice in wife and child,
And often to himself procure
the Gods of Marriage mild:
But let the wiseman always joy
in chaste and single plight,
And euerwore live vndefilde
in body and in spright.
For he that does with slender fare
and small himself content,
And does abstain from carnal use,
and prayer still frequent,
And lifting mind above the stars
beholdes the chief degree,
Shall often enjoy the speech of God,
and oftentimes him see,
In happy state, shall tell before
the things that after spring.
A sacred Gemme is chastity,
to God most thankful thing.
Unto the chaste he often appears,
and secrets often does tell:
Again the filthy lecherye
and pastimes meet for hell,
He hates and shunnes and always does
such wanton mates detest.
But no man can a Uirgin be
but he whom God has blessed,
And does assyst: This gracious gift
does from the sky descend,
Of higher state than man can get,
or man can comprehend:
No perfect wyseman can be had
except in this degree.
It seems also good to know
if it convenient be
For wysemen dreadful weapons fieret
of raging Mars to try,
And for to bathe their hands in blood,
of mortal enemy,
And to themselves by fight to get
an everlasting name:
For many judge no greater virtue,
glory, praise, or fame
Can be, than gotten is by wars.
O wretched beasts, O blind,
Why think you wars more worth than peace,
or of a better kind?
For nothing is more vile than this,
nor nothing can be found,
That farther from man's reason seems,
to differ or to sound:
For if that laws and reason should
in every place bear sway,
Then peace should rain in proper force
and wars should quite away:
In time of battle laws do cease,
and overthrown do lie,
Then fury raynes, and vice does rage,
abroad at liberty,
Then wicked men hold up the head,
and shake their weapons than,
And scotfree thence they kyl and stryke,
and take from every man,
And fearing no decree of judge,
defile each thing they find
More mete is peace for mortal man,
and wars for brutish kind.
To toss the blades mad men love,
and he desires to fight,
That pore and lazy labor hates,
and has a great delight
To live a lusty vicious state,
though purse do not agree:
And therefore sells his life for gain,
and runs in ieopardie,
Then conqueror he triumph may
with that that others got.
And carry thence the spoil and pray
unto his native plot.
But he that substance has at home,
and can sufficiently
Him self and his defend and keep
with any faculty,
Does peace above the rest esteem,
and from the sword abstain:
Except he be of frantic mind,
and fond disposed brain.
But thou wylt say great Kings and dukes
in deeds of arms delight,
And train themselves to follow Mars,
with al their fo^^e and might:
What then, are no^ great Kings and dukes
often times in dotage brought,
And flow with vice? by whose fond minds
great cities come to naught.
And though they great reuene we have,
and Kingdoms many one,
Yet more they always seek to have,
and more they heap thereon.
The covetous man though he possess,
as much of golden Mine
As Tagus has, yet pore he is
and lives in need and pyne.
And thus therefore with this mad mind
are Dukes and Princes great
Compelde to join the bloody camps,
with rage of Martial heat,
Enlarging their dominions much
with heaps of Misers slain.
But though that wars be naught, and vile
to be abhorred plain,
Yet bring they some commodity,
for false and crafty men,
Expert in fraud and usury,
do heap up al thing then
When peace does rain, but when ye wars
do rage, the Soldier strong,
The evil gotten goods does spoil
that he has raked long.
Then justly does the rage of Wolves
on Foxes vengeance take,
And due rewards the mighty sort
unto the subtle make.
And like for like they show. Thus time
does all things alter so,
Besides, the kings with thousand crafts,
and thousand powlings mo,
In time of peace their subjects fleese,
and coin in Coffers pour,
Whereby both Gold and Silver all
the Checker would devour,
If battle should not bring abroad
that hydden lay in peace
Distributing to many men
one private man's increase.
Now last of all, in number not
a few, there is a kind
Both void of learning, wealth, and Art,
of lasey stouthfull mind,
To mischief given, prone to vice,
and stout, and full of crime:
Such men, or rather shadows vain
at one appointed time
Does God a warfare send, with death
of cruel kind to dye.
And thus he purges mortal state,
whereby live merrily
Long time the rest that do remain,
this mischief overthrown,
Till that again such wicked weeds
anewe be sprung and grown,
That must be rooted out with wars,
and cut with weapon grimme.
Then Jupiter begins again
his pottes unclean to skimme,
And sending forth the furyes vile,
does sweep the filth away,
This is the order of the world
that never shall decay:
This course the destinies themselves
decreede long time agone,
When as Promotheus stale the fire
the hawtie heavens from,
And when Deucalion with his wife
dame Pyrrha, made to spring
So many thousand persons with
the stones that they did fling.
Wherefore a wyseman it becomes
to follow reasons grace,
And chiefly peace to love, and peace
with all his mind to embrace.
Except perchance sometime co^strainde
he for his country fight,
And for defense of him and his,
then is the quarrel right:
Then fights he void of any blame,
for laws of every srate
Do suffer force with force to dawnt,
and guile with guile to mate,
As due deseries to recompense
convenient is and meet.
Now farther must we search if that
it be for wisemen feet
To exercise some faculty,
wherewith al times he may
Relieve himself if that miss happes
do bring him to decay,
If froward Fortune any time
send needy poverty,
Depriving him of all his goods
and substance violently,
Least that he beg and suffer often
both cold, and hunger to.
There are for truth some kind of thing,
that wisemen well may do,
Whereby himself he succor may
if poverty constrayne,
Let him a good Physician be:
this gets sufficient gain,
And drives away diseases quite.
Old Phoebus used this same,
And Phoebus son, by this they both
deserude a famous name.
And this Sir Chirons pupil learnde
though of the stock he was
Of ancient Aeacus and Thetis sprung,
by this did Paeon pas,
Machaon and Hippocrates
by this gat honor great.
What should I call to memory
al such as by this feate,
Got long ago both pens and praise,
and fame when they were dead.
A good e^pert Physician
shall never beg his bread,
Add more to this, it full besides
of privy knowledge flows,
And both of flower, herb, and stone,
does secrets plain disclose:
And whatsoever earth does here
within her bowels hide,
Does well perceive, and natures force
to open does provide:
Each part within the body of man
it does consider well,
And turns again a number that
were almost gone to hell.
What thing than this more requisite,
for wise men can we find?
That not alone the wiseman may
with counsel heal the mind,
But also get the body health,
and so both parts redress:
Thus may a wyseman all preserve
in perfect quietness.
But now when as dame Lachesis
the latest year does spinne,
And hoary whiteness does defyle
both head and bearded chinne,
Then meet it is for him to rest,
and then himself to stay,
And longer not to roue about
in countries far away:
But find some certain dwelling place,
and search for his avail
Such things as needful are for life,
least food in age do fail:
And in the mean while to depart,
and shun the common sort,
Contenting him with fellows few,
and with a slender port,
And solitary oftentimes:
to God both night and day,
The mind well purgde of naughty thou ghtes,
in fervent sprite to pray:
And wholly to addict himself
the heavenly state to find,
And all the cares that flesh does give,
to banishe from his mind.
Then shall the Gods appear, though he
in valley low do lie,
Or on the hills, or shadowy woods,
or on the mountains hye,
In cottage small do place himself.
it is not safe nor well
With many for to live, or in the
towns of fools to dwell,
And in the company of thieves,
of slaves, and covetous
And cuthrote brawling swering mates,
or men ambitious.
But let the wyseman fly the croude
of rude and common sort,
For of the common people is
envied the wysemans port,
Because of their contrary deeds:
contraries evermore
Do one the other strive against
and let, and hinder sore.
Here of have many wisemen dyed,
because they would not spare
When any naughty thing they saw,
the truth for to declare,
And to rebuke the minds of Fools,
which since it could not bear,
Nor suffer such abuse of Fools,
they slain and punnisht were.
Wherefore, least that the wiseman see
such store of synful sight,
And least he fall in danger by
defending truth and right,
Let him wythdraw himself forthwith
from common company:
And secret live with two or three
that good and learned be,
Though seldom shall he be without
the Gods that guide the sky,
For Gods do often pleasure take
in wisemens company:
Often does the wiseman hear them speak
and sees them often with eyes,
They fill his heart with comfort great
in wondrous sort and wise:
The wiseman blessed is on earth,
and blessed above in Skies:
Go then O blinded mortal men,
go heap up money than,
And fill your caskets full of Gold
by all the means you can,
Beset with rings your fyngers thick,
and let the Jewels round
In gorgeous linekes of gold about
your graceless necks be wound,
Now ruffie in your sylkes abroad,
and brag it through the street,
Go, go I say you blinded fools,
both Crowns and Scepter sweet,
And all that Fortune rash can give
to you with all your power
Go seek: yet all these goodly things
shall vanish in an hour,
Al these things are but dreams and toys
and have but little stay,
Which quickly chance does from you take
or death does snatch away,
Which sone do vanish hence like smoke
and never turn again.
Go, go O wretches seek to get
these mystes, and shadows vain.
But when the dying day shall come,
and latest hour shall fall,
Then, then when all your follies past
in vain to mind you call,
You shall perceive that you did dote,
and stepped from truth awry,
And mourn to late. Alas in time
your error learn to spy.
O mischievous untoward souls,
O hearts of canckred kind,
Why gaze you still upon he earth
like beasts of brutish mind?
Why cast you not your eyes aloft
unto the starry Skies?
There, there ye truest world does stand
there life most perfect lies,
For such as fear aad worship God:
there neither chance has place,
Nor churlish death can there the state
with deadly darte deface:
There is the assured treasure found,
there lies the chief delight,
That God almighty has preparde
for them that serve him right:
Which never curse of fretting time
has power to overthrow,
To this apply your minds while states
permit, and life below.
Behold you not of fading life
the slender hold and stay?
Do not you see how all things here
in shortest time decay?
And like to smoke in subtle air
does vanish quite away.
Where find you now the stately kings
in pomp of proud array
That heretofore have been? or where,
do you esteem to be
The Prelates chief that thought themselves
Gods fellows in degree?
Their rotten bones entombed close
in fylthy caves do dwell,
And for their souls perhaps they do
keep Christmasse now in Hell:
Far banishde from the happy place
whereto the good are brought,
And there they suffer pain, for pride,
and mischief that they wrought.
O Lord how gladly would they now
if in their power it lay,
(...) Enclose themselves in flesh again,
and take their old array,
That not esteming riches here,
and kingdoms leaving clean,
They might live Godly here on earth,
in pore estate, and mean,
And by their righteous life make him
their friend that guides the Sky,
And after death possess a place
above the heavens hie.
But he that shows his wit to late,
his wisdom shows in vain.
Let every man seek God to please,
and worldly wealth disdain,
And travail, for the heavenly state
of him example take,
Which of this worldly fading joys
a small account does make,
But only hopes in time to come
the perfect joys to feale,
Which well he knows, for God to him
such things does often reveal.
And such a wiseman late there lived
since I remember may,
That with a few upon the top
of hye Soractis lay,
Full lean he was, and bearded well,
his house was small and neat,
All clad he was in russet robes,
a man of learning great.
And comely countnance to be hold.
he had his dwelling place
In wilderness, where round about
the woods did him embrace:
Whose heavenly mind, when as he list
of things to come could tell,
And aunswers gave, such as for truth
did Delphis not excel.
I moved and provoked thus
with fame that of him ran,
By paynfull iourneys long unto
this sacred hill I came,
And found the old man sitting there
in warm and Sunny cave.
Who (after that I had receiude
the like God Deane I gave)
He wyllde me there to take my rest
so down by him I sit.
And therewithal I askde him thus:
what is the cause of it
(Quoth I) that here you choose to live
upon this mountain steep,
Where almost every thing does lack,
that life of man should keep.
Then aunswering me this holy man
on this sort there began:
My great delight was heretofore
to live in cities, when
Both young, and ignorant, I thought
naught else to be requirde
But riches here, and such delight
as life of man desirde,
Following ye example and the fault
of rude and common sort:
Then ioyed I for to lead my life
with great and much resort,
And with the rest for company
I fell into the flood
Of vain delights, with color false,
deceyude of troth and good.
But when that greater age began
with fading years to show,
And wisdom more in tract of time
within my head to grow,
I then began to note and mark
the parts that men do play,
And sundry sort of lives they lead.
(as God gave grace) to way.
Then many fylthy things I saw
there done, and full of shame,
And nothing else of justice left
but vain and idle name.
Th'vngilty to be punnished,
the gylty scaping free,
The virtue hid in vice, and vice
in virtue hid to be,
The poor in every place oppressed,
and favor more to get
Than just deserts, ye law a brybing craft
for gold a fyshing net:
Each kind of handy craft corrupt
by guile of workmens will,
The thief to fee the Inkeper
his gests thereby to kill.
Besides I many might behold
enricht by theft and guyle
Though naughty beasts, more meeter far,
to wear a rope a while,
Yet praysde to be and worshipped,
and feared very much:
The unworthy placde in regal seat,
and honors dealt to such
As have but only shape of men.
Beside religion fled
By conetousnesse, and Priests bent al
to food, and Harlots bed:
And under cloak of holiness
seek privily to gain,
And pick the common peoples purse
by means of wyly train:
While as they open heaven wide,
and bar the hellish way,
And while they bost that they can souls
where as they list convey,
And with their Portas force the saints
to do as they are bent.
By this occasion left I al,
and from the towns I wene,
Accoumpting it more safe for me
to live in desert place,
And in this hill to run the rest
of al my ranging race.
This hill whereas the altar stands
of Syluester the saint,
Where as the Shrine, and monuments
of him his praises paynt:
Which place though it seem rough and rude,
not mere to dwell upon
Yet fit it is for saints, and such
as live in peace alone,
And wholly do apply their minds
the Lord to fear and love,
And always seek to join themselves
with saints in Skies above:
But hard perchance it seems to thee,
and strange it does appear,
That I can live in desert such,
and stony places here,
Where seldom any man does come,
where wanting seems to be
Most things that should sustain the life
of man at liberty.
Yet is it not so hard in deed,
nor strange it seems than,
If that the holy Ghost enspire
the heart of any man,
Descending down from heavens hye:
of God the sacred sprighte
That purifies the heart from sin,
and rayseth souls to light
That ouerwhelmde in flesh do lie:
as Mercury sublimde
By force of fire is, and takes
a color white full find.
This holy sprite adournes the mind,
and heart does upward move
This cutts away the worldly cares,
and breadeth heavenly love:
Wherewith the mind inflamed once
all things does easy seem,
Though never so sore: for he that loves
does labor light esteem,
Especially if any hope
there be reward to hold:
For hope, and love, are two strong pricks,
that makes us always bold,
And not to care for any toil,
wherefore continually
Our daily prayers must we make,
to him that guides the sky,
That so this holy sprite vouchsafe
into our hearts to fall,
That he may plant a Godly hope,
and Godly love withal:
Wherewith ye mind inspirde may mount
above the starry sky,
Despising much the world, and joys
that vain do please the eye,
And strive to join it self to God,
with all the force and might.
No marvel then it is all,
if aided of this sprite
I here can dwell, and lead a life
full hard so patiently,
Upon this stiepe and desert rock,
and stony mountain hye.
Yet never lackt I meat, nor clothes
upon this loftye spyre,
As much as nature does content,
not wanton fond desire.
A little thing does nature serve,
a small thing does content,
Such one as loves none overplus,
a man to virtue bent,
That rather seeks celestial life,
than fleshly fading days.
For life (least thou be ignorant)
is double, in her ways:
One, wherwithall the body lives,
still followed and pursude
Is this, of all the route of fools,
and common people rude.
The people fond that nothing know
of any worthiness,
But stouthful beasts do make their God
of filthy fond excess.
This life is proper unto beasts
of wild and savage kind,
The other unto God above,
and men of godly mind,
That for their great and worthy deeds
do well deserve the name
Of perfect men, and holly saints
of everlasting fame.
But such hye minded virtuous Impes
the earth does seldom brood,
The earth a mother to the naught,
and stepdame to the good.
Agui se falta un Renglon por ligereza.
But now because I see thee bent
to give attent^u^ ear,
Some things of this celestial life
I will declare thee here,
Which ought well understood, to please
the mind of any wight.
First, man consystes not only of flesh,
but also of the spright:
This gives life to them that line,
by this we feel and move,
This gives us mind, ye worthyest thing
by which men wondrous prove.
But many doubt if that the soul
do live the body dead,
Or whether it do finishe ^o
when as the life is stedde:
Assaredly the worser sort
that to the flesh do cleave,
And bent to vice, despising God,
do wish and eke believe,
The soul to have a dying day:
^icause (alas) they fear
The cruel forments for the sins
that they committed here:
And therefore will allow no hell,
nor Devils for to be,
And so they do persuade themselves
to escape with mischief free.
An other better sort of men
that sinful life do hate,
Provoked with the Godly love
of virtues goodly ^iate,
Do think the soul does always live,
and not to dye with grave,
Because they hope a glorious Crown
for their good works to have,
And make account of perfect bliss
when death has shot his dart,
And of a better promisde life
for to enjoy their part.
Of these two sorts who judges best*
who is but the just?
For evermore in doubtful things
the opinion must we trust
That pleases best the better sort,
and that which follow most
Such men as virtuous be, and such
as have the holy Ghost.
More safe it is to cleave unto
the virtuous, and the just,
Than fansyes of the wicked men
to credit or to trust.
Ne must we note their number great
that any thing have said,
But in what sort they lead their life
must well of us ^e wayde.
Wherefore it better is with few
of virtuous sort to say,
That souls do live continually
and have no dying day,
Than with a number of the lewd
against it to replye,
Contending that there are no spri^^s,
and that the soul does dye.
But more because thou shall believe,
I will declare to thee
By reason good, the state of soul
immortal for to be.
For if that God in better things
does cunning still express,
As wisdom tells, and as the good
and virtuous must confess:
Then doubtless must we judge he gau^
the souls no time to dye,
Since better far it is for them
to live continuallye,
Than with the flesh to be extinct,
and feel a full decay:
Which thus I prove, if death do take
from us the soul away,
If that we have no other life,
but in this body here,
Then God may be accounted ill,
and shall unjust appear,
For thousands every day we se^
that florishe prosproustye,
In richesse, substance and renoume,
in reigns and Empyres hye,
Yet idle lubbers, vnlearnde, and naugh^,
that sin at liber^ye,
And run the race of all their life
in great prosperitye.
On the other side we may behold
the just oppressed to be
With spiteful chance, a wretched life
and py^ious prouertye.
Thus either God unrighteous is
that does these things permit,
Or after death has every man
as he deserves it:
Or else he does disoaine the deeds
of mortal men to know.
Besides, what gracious mind apperes in God
what goodness does he show*
If this be all that he does give,
a life so short, and vain,
That swyftly runs to an end,
and does no time remain:
The half where of is spent in sleep,
the rest in grief, and ^oyle,
And dangers great as fast does fleet,
as rivers swyft in soil.
Therefore go to, O wretched men,
build Gorgeous Churches hye,
And let with costly offerings great
your altars pestred lie,
Set up your joyful branche of bays,
your sacred doors about,
with pomp of proud processyon pass,
let Hi^^^es be ratled out,
Spend frankconsen^e, and let the nose
of God be stretched wide
With pleasant smoke: do this, and add^
more honor much beside,
That he preserve your goodly life,
wherein does you torment,
Sometime great cold, and sometime hea^,
^ow plague, now famishement
Now bloody wars, now sickness great
or chance to sorrow at,
Sometime the busye biting fly,
sometime the stynging ^nat,
The Chyn^h and Flea. Keioyce I say
that here you lead your life
With thousand painful labors great,
in travail, toil, and strife:
And after in a little space
in pain you drop away,
And lompishe lie in loathsome vawlt,
to worms a grateful pray.
O worthy life, O goodly gift of God:
man in this world is bredde
Among the brutishe beasts, and fools
and ^^aues his life is led,
Where storms, and flakey snowes and yse
and dirt and dust, and night,
And harmful air, and clouds and mistes
and winds, with hellish sight,
And grief and wailing raynes, where death
beside does work his feate.
Is this our goodly country here,
is this our happy seat,
For which we owe such service here,
unto the Gods above?
For which it seems mete with vows
the heavenly sayn^ts to move?
And if none other life we have
than this of body vain,
So frail and full of fylthinesse,
when death has carcass stayne:
I see not why such praises should
of God resound in air,
Nor why we should such honor give
to him in temples fair,
That has us wretches framed here
in this so wretched soil,
That shall for evermore decay
after so great a toil.
Wherefore least God shall seem unjust,
and full of cruelnesse
Shall well deserving counted be:
we must of force confess,
That death does not destroy the soul,
but that it always is:
None otherwise than sprite in air,
and saint in heaven lives,
Both void of body, sleep, and meat.
And more we must confess
That after death they live in pains,
or perfect blessedness.
But let this reason thee suffice,
for if thou this do show
Unto the wicked kind, they laugh,
no light the blind does know.
But thou, believe for evermore
and know assuredly,
(For ground of saving health it is,)
that soul does never dye,
Exempted from the Sisters power
and fatal destiny.
These things foretold made evident
let us begin to tell
The perfect life, that makes us like
to saints above that dwell:
By which the heavens we desire.
But sith does best appear
Contrary things, when they be seen,
and joined something near.
Wherefore it is convenient first
the bodies life to show,
That draws us down from heaven hie,
to mind the earth below,
And makes us like to brutish beasts,
contrary to the soul.
This life he lives (though naught) yt does
for stately honors prowle,
And seeks with all his force the fruicte
of praise and glory vain,
Desiring only men to please
with fond vain glorious brain:
And he that wholly does apply
himself a wealth to get
By right or wrong, and has his heart
upon his riches set:
A two leggde Mole, that always does
in earth en^ombed lie,
Not casting once his eyes aloft
unto the heavens hye.
And be that drownde in lechery,
and surfe^s ever lies,
Regarding only fleshly joys,
does shamefastness despise,
Runs headlong into whoredom vile,
and fattes himself with meat,
A foolish man, that so the worms
may have more food to eat.
Al these same vile and fylthy kinds
that I have reckned here,
May well be called fleshly men,
for love to flesh they bear:
Whose life does differ small from beasts.
But now on the other side:
He that does praise of men depise,
and pomp of worldly pride,
Does live with chaste and Godly mind,
is calde a spiritual man:
Because his sprite the body ruled,
and lust subdued than,
Does freely guide and has his place
in hiest part of brain.
Therefore the Godly life, is first
with bridle to restrain
Fond pleasure, Gluttony, and lust,
to conquer flesh with sprite,
For to neglect al worldly things,
and only set delight
On heaven, heaven most to wysh,
and chie^ly to regard:
There is the soil for souls and seat
for virtuous men preparde:
There to the body laid in grave
the righteous souls do clime,
Most glorious souls that brightly do
with glorious virtue shine,
And feel in ever lasting light
an everlasting joy.
But chiefly let the virtuous man
his time and toil employ
In learning, using still to read
such books as do entreat
Of God, of soul, and wretched state,
of this our dwelling seat,
Of death, or other honest things,
and let him night and day,
Of these both often read, and talk,
and well in mind them way.
But wanton works, and wanton words,
let him with head eschew,
Alas how sore do such affairs
a virtuous mind subdew:
For reading is the food of mind,
which if it virtuous be
Does profyt much, if it be ill
does hurt excedinglye:
None otherwise than evil meat
does hurt the man that chawes.
These things though they must all be kept.
yet nothing more withdrawes
A man from love of filthy flesh,
nor leads to God more nigh,
Than oftentimes to ponder well
of life the misery:
Which since it is so short, and full
of such calamity,
Seems rather death than life to me,
yea, worse than death to be.
For who is it that does not see,
who does not plain perceive?
That yrksome gall, and bytternesse
to every part do cleave.
If every thing thou well do sift,
naught perfect shall thou find:
For nature poisoned has the parts
of all and every kind.
Most things have double face: full black
within, and outward white,
And with their color, do deceive
the judgment of the sight.
If ought there be here in this life
both fair and good beside,
Like smoke and mist it flies away,
and does no time abide.
Time suffers nothing long on earth,
death makes al things vain,
And turns and tumbles under foot,
of man the proud disdain.
Alas how all this worldly pomp
does quickly pass away,
How wavering is renoume of man,
how sone does it decay:
Much like the bubble swelling great
amyd the waters clear
Is sone destroyed, and with a puff
of wind does not appear.
For in a moment all the joys
of man are fetched away,
Then only does the talk remain,
wherein they thus do say,
Lo, here he was, lo, this did he,
he fought, and triumph wan,
He loved, he reigned, he conquered realms,
subdued many a man,
A goodly sor^e of books he wrote,
but now where shall we find
These things? no where. Himself where now?
both out of sight and mind.
What is he now? Nothing. Or whether
did he himself convey?
Lo, fled from hence with winds he is,
and vanished quite away.
Alas, alas, but trifles fond,
and fancies mere they be,
Whatsoever goodly thing on earth,
or wonderful we see.
What tell you me of Was, or Did,
one Is more worth coumpt I,
Than Was a thousand times. But fast
this Is away does fly,
And al our pomp with him he bears.
These things who well does way,
And uses to consider often,
shall quickly cast away
This worldly love, and hating earth
shall seek the Skies to find:
Especially if therewithal
he use to bear in mind
How fylthy and how miserable,
man's body does appear,
Of fading flesh, and brittle bones,
with skin encompast here:
Al flowing full with dregs unclean,
and blood corrupt, and vile,
Still durty, soul, and filthy looks,
except it every while
Be washed, and kept with daily care,
and so made fair and white.
O doleful hospital of mind,
and vessel of the sprite,
By which such sycknesse great we feel,
by which such need we have.
O heavy garment, prison strong,
O quick, and lively grave:
That chokest here both mind, and sense,
and them in darkness hyde:
Whereby so great an ignorance
in breast of man does bide.
O earth to earth returning soon,
that in a smallest while
In tomb, shall freshly feed ye worms,
with food, of carcass vile.
In what a wretched case lives he,
that led away with love
Of thee, does leave the perfect life,
and gift of God above,
While more than meat esteming thee,
thy pleasures here preparde,
He only seeks: and good, and right
(...) smally does regard:
And thinks there is no other life
than this, that here we hold.
A foolish Ass, forgetful of
himself, and country old,
From whence into this darksome dale,
and doleful place he went,
That so a wretch he should become,
in wretched carcass pent.
For every soul that is enclosde
with flesh and members here,
Has wretched life, till losed from thence
it fly to heavens clear:
Except the heavy weight of sin
do bar him of his way,
And cause it in the lowest air,
or on the earth to stay.
For purest heaven never can
a thing unclean abide,
Nor wicked men, nor doltishe fools,
may come where God does guide.
These words while as the holy man
in teaching me had spent,
The Sun almost had ended day
with Waine that weary went:
And night was nere at hand, that thoe
began abroad to cast
Her dreadful darksome shade, upon
the world approaching fast.
I thence depart, and toward Rome
my way in have I take.
And while with speed I pass the pathe
that journey new does make:
Lo Cynthia shining compass full,
did call the lightlesse night,
With silver beams, that dew she cast
to appear both fair and bright.
Thus went I all alone, and with
my self in mind I wayde,
The Godly words that late to me
the ancient Father said.
But lo, three men in company
therewith I might behold,
whom meeting thus by chance, I askde
which way they travail would:
To Rome they said: and one of them
lookde full vyon me thoe,
And naming me, from whence quoth he,
what country comste thou froe?
I aunswerde him, from that wise man,
which in the part most hye
Of fair Apolloes stately hill,
in lofty place does lie.
Wherewith he smylde, and said, O fool
synkes it into thy mind,
That possible on earth it is
a wise man here to find?
He seems wise that is least fool
the other sort among,
Although a dolt for wisdom does
to Gods alone belong:
Of number which we here are three,
for I am calde by name
Sarracilus, and Sathiell he,
Iaxa is this same.
which though we walk in humain shape,
thus seeming men in face,
Yet Gods we be, and nere the Moon
we have our dwelling place.
Whereas a number great of Gods
of meanest sort do lie,
That have the guiding of the earth,
and Seas that rise so hye.
This when I heard, amasde I was,
and sore to dread began:
Yet seming bold and void of fear,
full like a pretye man*
I askde wherefore they went to Rome,
then aunswerde me the same:
A fellow there of ours we have
that Ammon has to name,
whom bound to serve by Magike Art
a young man there kepes straight,
Of Narni soil, that does in court
of Vrsin prelate wayght.
O what great power is granted man,
the sprites he guides by line.
By this you well may understand
your souls to be divine,
And void of death. For if no part,
of you should after rain,
If that your soul should dye, as body
here by death is slain:
What power should have such foolish beasts,
and trifling pyctures vain,
Upon the sprites above? And if
no sacred thing remain
In you, how should such Ghostes as we
the force of man so way,
Or unto man of fading state
in such a sort obaye?
Yea I my self was once Constrainde
to serve a German wight,
Enclosde within a compast stone
of Crystal clear and height*
But at the length a bearded sire
vnlosde me of these bands,
And prison broken thence I fled,
in have from out his hands.
To Rome therefore we go with mind,
if that we may t'vntye
From service straight, a mate of ours
that there does captive lie.
And so that down, to Hell we may
conuaye this present night,
A sort of Romish prelates proud,
that live in great delight.
These words while as he spoke, a wind
forthwith did pittling blow:
Quoth Sathiell then, O friends, from Rome
Remisses comes I know:
This wind that comes before declares,
nor herein did he lie,
For therwithall a fair young man
Remisses stood them bye.
They at his coming all reioist,
and bid him welcome there,
And ask what great affairs in Rome,
what news do there appear.
There all quoth he are bent to lust,
and Glotony do mind,
With theft, and guile, all ours they be,
both man, and womankinde.
But Clement there the Pope prepares
an army great in have,
And seeks to have the present state
of Luther clean defacde,
And Spanishe ensynes therefore kepes:
nor will he now dispute,
And him with scriptures overthrow,
but with the sword confute.
Away with counsel now, and hence
with Luthers works again,
For Bishops now are battles meet,
all other ways are vain,
Ne care they what the Apostles taught,
ne for the words of Christ,
But boast themselves as Lords of all,
that may do what they list.
They that have power do fear no law,
law is with force oppressed.
But we (my mates) do hope thereby
of gain to be possessed,
And of the spoil of such a sort
some souls to bear away
Unto the dreadful dongeon dark.
These words he thus did say:
The^ whispring something wc themselves,
from thence they do depart:
And me they leave remaining there
alone, with heavy heart.
For when Sarracilus had said
that none on earth was wise,
Immediately a doleful thought
within my heart did rise:
And thus unto my self I said,
is wisdom evermore
In vain of us desyrde, and praisde,
and vainly looked for.
And only dealt to saints above?
Then of necessity
Here in this wretched mortal life,
all men must foolish be,
And laughing stocks, and pageants fond,
unto the Gods in sky.
O state in most unhappy kind
of man in misery,
O rash unbridled wantonness
of such as parents be,
O filthy lust that does beget
the Children that we see,
What do you now? you do beget
hoth fools, and wretches here,
A boy is borne, be merry syrs,
rejoice, and make good chere,
Fill in your cups, and daynty dish
upon the table place.
But sone the child shall prove a fool,
or live in wretched case,
Or dying sone, he shall depart
unto the Ghost below.
O blinded minds, that of the things
to come do never know.
We mortal men in wretched things
have often a great delight.
These words I muttred in my mind,
and wrapped in woeful plight
I went unto my lodging straight,
for sleep oppressed my eyes,
And made me reele. Of wisemans state
these words shall here suffice.
Now meet it is thy weried harp
my Muse at rest to lay,
And for to spare the iarring strings,
let us this time go pray
The Lord and maker of the world,
that grace he may us send,
The other signs that do remain,
with pleasant song to end,
For greater things I must declare
than yet from me did flow:
And sore my simple mind does fear,
such Mysteries great to show.
My watery sign shall search the parts
of nature perfectly,
And last of al my labor shall
set open wide the Sky.
Aquarius, the eleventh Book.
THe Love of nature parent chief
and great desire of mind,
The secret causes of al things
for to reveal and find
Persuades me now again, my self
with Aeon streams to fyl,
And once again to rest on tops
of hye Parnasus hill.
My Muse draw near, and bring thy Harp,
now need thy wit to show
It is, and of a learned voice,
and verse at full to flow.
No small things here we must declare
I purpose now in mind,
Dame natures face for to disclose,
about the world to wind.
And first what has been here before,
what is, and what shall be,
Is called Eus: this name contaynes
al things of each degree,
But of the sorts that God has framde
by power and wisdom hye,
Some lead their life of body void,
some either liuelesse lie,
Or else do live in body here.
Of former state of twain
This B^ke speaks not, ye next shall show
in time that does remain:
Now (Muse) let us the other show.
The far^hest parts most high
Of all the world, with ample space
encompast is of Sky,
That whirling round with daily course
does al things here enclose.
Five Zones divide it into parts,
but every part of those
Replenisht with his dwellers is,
nothing forbids the same.
For cold can neue^ hurt the Gods,
nor heat^ can them inflame.
Such things do best agree with earth,
the sacred Skies are free
From cold congeled, quiuering yse,
and fires that flaming be.
Which though it roll continually.
yet kepes it still one place,
And from the part where first it stood,
does never shift his pace.
For placde between two fixed Poles,
it steadfastly does stand,
And is sustaynde between them two
by Gods almighty hand.
Whereof the one does plain appear
to us continually,
And does behold the Bears above
that keep their course so hye:
The other under earth is placde
against it fixed well,
And in the night is seen to them.
that under us do dwell.
This compast globe of all the Sky,
from East to West deuides
As many Spheres in compass round,
as there are Zones besides.
That which is next unto the Bear
the Articke has to name:
And next to him the Circle stands
wherein does Cancer flame,
Which does constrain the Su^ne to fall,
and backward to retire,
And farther of for to withdraw
his beams of flaming fire.
Then next in order does ensewe,
the Equinoctial line,
Which does declare the days, and nights,
of equal length and time.
Not far from thence by Capricorn,
another line does run,
Which cannot pass, but does return
from hence to us the Sun.
The circle next that placed is
unto the South so nere
The Autarticke circle has to name,
contrary to our Sphere.
Beside these lines a circle crookt
there stands in Skies so clear,
By which ye Su^ne in months twice syx,
does pass a perfect year.
An other circle white there is,
whose course by knees does train
Of Gemini, by Scorpius tail,
and by the Tropicks twain,
And through the crooked path of Sun
by midst of Archers string,
And passes by the Centaurs legs,
and by the Egles wing,
And both the Carter and the Swanne,
and Perseus does it touch.
And Paralels there are, this name
give Greeks to Circles such,
And day by day the Sun does pass
a circle of this kind,
When as he falls amyd the West,
and leaves the East behind.
Two Colures eke besides there are,
the one where Sun does stay
By Cancer, Capricorn, and both
the Poles does cut his way:
The other by the Balance runs,
and by the Wethers face:
This shows the times when night and day
are both of equal space.
Besides a number great there is
of sundry circles framde,
That pass by both the foresaid Poles,
Meridians rightly namde,
That over us directly runs,
a Circle more does lie
The Horizon calde, the world in mydst
divided is thereby,
And where our sight does cease it stands
thence term the Greeks it so.
Besides the Heavens parted are
with many Circles more.
And nine there be, whereof the highest
that mouer first we call,
Does rolling from the farthest Indes,
with Moors and Spaniards fall:
Within a day he runs his race,
and fiercely does he twine
About with him the other Spheres,
in whom no Star does shine:
But clean contrary to the same
move all the Spheres beside,
And toward ye streams of Ganges great
from Cales in course they slide.
Whereof the greatst does shine with stars
that void of number be,
And scarcely in an hundred years
does move but one degree.
And next to this does Saturn stand
above the other Spheres,
Who finisheth his course at full
inspace of thirty years.
And next to him stands Jupiter,
that end of course does gain
In years twice syx. Him Mars ensewes
that turns in tweluemonths twain.
Next stands the Sun that (as they say)
his journey does contriue
Beside sir hours in space of days
three hundred, sixty, five.
Then next in place does Venus roll
her whyrling whele about,
And sooner than the Sun her course
by seuentene days falls out.
Then moves in Circle Mercury,
which if report be right,
Does nine days sooner end his course
than Venus planet bright.
The Circle of the Moon is lowest,
and passes through the l^^e
Of all her course in hours cyght,
and twenty days and nine.
Seven planets thus there are, yt greeks
as wandering stars do call:
The highest of which Saturnus has,
to him for house and hall.
The Got and seruitour of Jove,
and Jupiter does hold:
To houses dark amidde the sky
the fish and Archer bold.
The Scorpion and the Phyrygean Ram,
to foolish Mars pertayne:
And in the flaming Lion fierce,
the Sun does East remain.
But in the Bull and Balance does
the tender Venus rest:
Mercurius does in twins rejoice,
and in the Virgins breast.
A goodly Rome the Crabbe does make,
wherein the Moon does dwell.
But of the fair Celestial signs,
let us begin to tell.
Within the Zodiake, where the Sun
a year by course does try:
Twelve Signs there be, and syx of them,
are named Northerlye.
The other six are Southern signs,
from beast that gilded shines:
Unto the pleasant Uirgins foot,
they are calde the Northern signs.
But from the foremost of the waytes,
unto the cattayle twain
Of Neptunes drove, whatsoever are
unto the South pertain.
The names of these celestial signs
I will disclose in verse.
These are the Ram, the Bull, the Twins
the Crabbe, the Lion fierce,
The Maid, the Scales, the Scorpion,
the Shooter, and the Got,
The Waterpourer, and in skies,
the Fishes two that flote.
Each seventh stand contrarily,
for when the one does rise
The other syttes, when as the Ram
apperes before our eyes,
Then down therewith descendes ye Scales
so stands contrary full:
And risyng each when other falls
the Scorpion, and the Bull.
From head of Crabbe, to Shooters foot
directly do they lie:
And from the Got unto the Twinnts
they are said to hang awry.
Thrice ten degrees in length, and twelve
in breadth has every sign:
And earthly named are, the Got,
the Bull, and Virgin fine.
But airy are these three, the Scales,
the Waterman, the Twins:
And waterishe are the Scorpion, and
the Crabbe, and fishy finnes.
The three that rest are fiery
the Lion, Shooter, Ram:
And Masculin be these with three,
that Ayrie signs we name.
And Fortunate they called be,
the rest are Faeminine:
And are unfortunate, they say
that state of Stars define.
These moving are, the Ram, the Crabbe,
the Scales, and Capricorn:
And fast the Lion, Scorpion, Bull.
and Boy with Egle borne.
The Twins, the Shooter, Maid, and Fish,
are common every sign.
More, three and thyrtie Images
in sacred skies do shine,
Whereof are twenty placed fast,
amidde the Northern Rain:
And storming South does challenge all
the rest that do remain.
These are the stars that in the North
do give their blasing light:
Two Bears, of which does H^lice
shine forth with Stars more bright.
The lesser Cynosura is,
Ph^niceans faithful guide:
Between them both the Serpent fierce,
does creep with crawling pride,
There Cepheus shines, and Cassiopey,
and Candian glistring Crown:
And next unto the milk white Swanne
is placde the Kneeler down,
And harkneth to the pleasant Harp.
The Berwarde there does show
His glistring stars, and Perseus stands
in this celestial row:
That bears in hand Medusaes face,
and in this part is seen,
The Carter, he that Serpent holds,
and eke his Serpent keen,
And by the Serpent stands the Shaft,
and there the Egle nigh,
And Dolphin that in ayrie seas
above does swiftly fly.
Here shines the noble Pegasus,
a Horse of ancient fame:
And thereby stands Andromeda,
and Delta, last of name.
Now thirtene signs the South in part
contrary does retain:
The Whale, that scarce is yet at length
with sword of Perseus slain.
Orion armde thou shall behold
in this same part of skies.
There Nilus runs wc Channels store:
and Hare that swiftly flies,
Whom nere a brace of Dogs pursue,
the greater and the small.
Among these Stars does Argos sail
a goodly Ship, and tall.
Here may thou both the Altar, and
the mighty Cup behold.
And Phaebut Crow, that glisters all
with Stars of flaming gold.
The Centaure fierce, and Dragon slain,
with strong Alcides sweat,
The stinking plague of Lernaes lake
a griesly monster great.
And in this part a certain Fish,
may well perceined be.
Lo here the shapes that move above
my verse has told to thee.
Now will I show how many Stars
in every sign appear:
In Elice do seven shine,
by name the greater Bear,
Because it gives the greater light
but Cynosura hight:
The lesser bear because she does
appear with smaller light,
Though one and twenty Stars in her
do evermore abide:
Fyftene the waking Serpent has
that does the Bears divide:
And Cepheus. xix. stars contains:
Cassiepey does shine
with thirtene lights: ye gorgeous crown
has never more than nine:
And three the Swanne, twice five and nine
the Kneeler bright does wear:
And fourtene Stars describes the man
that drives about the Bear,
Of which the star does brightest shine
that in his gyrdle lies:
Full seuentene brondes does Perseus hold
that glisters in the skies:
The Carter seven: but that clear Star
that on his shoulder stands
Is calde the Got, the other twain
are Kiddes he has in hands:
A dreadful sight to shypmen often.
The man that holds the Snake
Has seue^tene stars: his Serpents shape
does two and twenty make.
Nine lyghtes do shine in Orpheus Harp:
four frames the Shaft a hye:
Four fyres do flame in him that lift
the Trotan to the sky:
Ten sparks do make the Dolphin clear:
with eightene Stars of night
Shines Paegasus: and twenty gives
Andromeda her light:
But three alone does Delta bear.
Now will I take in hand
To tell in verse how many stars
in sign of Zodiake stand.
The Ram is first, that. xviij. lights
does in his body bear,
The Bull has one and twenty stars
but seven shining clear,
Behind his back Vergiliae are calde
and eke Athlantides,
As many in his head he has,
of showers calde Hyades:
Eightene betwixt them have ye Twins,
one. x. the other eight:
And eightene has the Crabbe above,
two stands behind him straight
That Asses, and the Stall are namde,
but next that clearly shine,
The Lion glisters there with stars
in number ten and nine:
The Virgin holding ears of Corn
with eyghtene lights is clear:
In Balance four, and. xv. in
the Scorpion does appear:
And. xv. in the Shooter shines,
before whose feet does lie
A certain Crown where seven lights
do glister to the eye.
The Got has two and twenty stars,
the Trojan Boy fourtene:
In the one Fish viij. and. ix. appears:
in the other. xij. are seen.
Now will I show what stars there be
in signs of Southern side,
Though far from us they be, and scant
can of our sight be spyde:
The monstrous Fyshe has. xxx. lights:
like sort in Nilus flows,
Six has the Hare, and. xvij.
in great Orion shows,
With. xix. flames the Syrian Dog,
the little Dog has three,
The sides of Arcos bravely decked
with three and twenty be,
One star does Chiron more relay,
the sacrifice in hands
He holds eleven has, and decked with. iiij.
the goodly Altar stands,
With six and twenty Hydra shynes,
three signs that lies in length
And mates the Crab, the Virgin fair
and Lion great of strength.
The Raven shynes with seven stars,
the Cup has eight in sight,
The Southern Fish with. xij. does cast
abroad his starry light,
The rising and the setting of
the Signs let us display.
Three sorts of ways ye stars do rise,
three sorts they fall away,
That rising called Cosmike is,
the setting termde likewise,
When early in the East the sign,
with Sun is known to rise:
But when soever any sign
does rise, or downward fall,
And Sun in setting, lets them shine,
this term we Cronicall.
And Heliake is the rising namde,
when as the Sun full nere
The sign lies hyd, and passing thence,
forth with does bright appear:
The Heliake setting that we call
when as in any sign
The Sun does walk, and with his light
permit it not to shine,
But now the rising of the Signs
and how they down descend
I will declare, if Muses aid
and Phoebus be my friend.
When Ram does rise then mounteth up
left part of Andromaed
Unto the half, and ioynde therewith
Sir Perseus flaming head:
Then backward commes the Bull aloft,
who while he upward hyes,
Al Perseus springs, and greatest part
of Carter then does rise,
And Thurlpoles tail, and fading quite
the altar down does fall:
Then hydes himself in flashing floudes,
the Berward first of all.
With Twins does all the Whale arise,
and former parts of Po,
And with this same Orion great
all armed up does go:
Then he that holds the Snake with both
his feet, the water tries:
The Crab arising up takes half
the Crown away from eyes,
The tail of Whale, the Southern Fyshe
and head of Kneeler low,
And half his Hanch: from knees to back
of him that Snake does show,
And all his Snake except the neck,
the Bearward almost quite.
But now again from girdle up
Orion commes to sight,
With all the course of Nilus great.
These Signs beside do rise
With Lion fierce: the Egle, Hare,
and Dog of lesser syse,
The former legs of greater Dog,
and head of Hydra springs:
But these against the Bearward hot,
and he that Serpent wrings,
With head and neck of Snake in hand,
and part that did remain
Of glistring Crown, and Kneeler eke,
(excepted yet again
His left foot and his knee beside)
in Western waves do fall,
With Virgin rises whole the Dog,
and Serpent up does crall,
Unto the Cups, and then appears
the Ship of Thessaly,
As much as Mast and sail may show,
Contrary hid do lie
These stars, the Dolphin, all the Swan,
his tail except, the Darte,
The Scorpions cley, and of the floude
of Nile the former part:
But Pegasus hides head and neck,
the rest appears bright,
Al Argo with the Scales does rise,
and Bearward clear in sight.
Save tippe of tail, al Hydra seen,
the right knee and the shinne
Of Kneeler down, and Centaures tail
to shine does then begin:
Then may yt half the Crown perceive
the rest of Horse that flies,
And parts that hindermost do stand
of Swanne then hidden lies:
And al save head the Whale does set,
her head in Seas does hyde:
Andromaeda then shall thou see,
old Cepheus down to slide,
The Father of Andromeda,
and down in floods to fall
With hands, his shoulders, and his head.
These shapes and fygures all
With Scorpion rise: the Dragons tail,
and Chirons horse appear,
And rest of Crown and Sacrifice
that he in hands does bear,
Also the Serpents head does rise,
and eke her holders head,
Then syts the part that does remain
of corse of Andromed,
And Cepheus syts from head to waste,
and double winding way
Of Padus streams, and downward then
does fall dame Cassiepey,
Then first the Dog himself does hyde,
and down Orion flings.
When as the Shooter up does rise,
the Serpent holder springs,
With Serpent whole, the left hand and
the head of Kneeler down,
And all the Harp, the breast and head
of him that ware the Crown
Of Aethyops land King Cepheus called.
Then hidden quite does lie
Orion, Hare, and greater Dog
and Carter of the Sky,
Excepting only Head and Feet
then Perseus down does fall,
His right foot and his thigh except
the Ship (save stern) syts al.
When as the Got ascends up,
the Swanne, and Shaft thereby
The Altar and the Egle fair.
begin to appear in sky.
But stern of Argo then descendes,
and lesser Dog does hyde
His stars in Sea, and under ground
therewyth does Perseus slide.
When as of Ganimedes fair
the goodly stars do rise,
Then first the limbs of Pegasus
do clime into the Skies:
Contrarywyse the neck and head
of Dragon down does slide,
And Chiron does his hinder part
beneath the waters hyde.
When as the Fyshes twain are brought
to rise aloft in Sky,
The right side of Andromeda
appears to the eye.
And he that Southern Fish is calde:
then both the bodies quite
Of Dragon and of Centaure great,
are taken from our sight.
Thus much of rising of the Signs
and setting shall suffice,
Now let us touch the rest that does
remain, in speedy wise.
But first we must Urania call
my verses here unto,
That she may aid and succor send
such secrets to undo.
Urania, thou that know the things
aloft that hydden lie,
That walk often by seats of Gods,
and starry temples hye:
Urania beautiful draw nere,
and open unto me,
The secret seats of Gods above,
and things that hidden be,
And help thy Poet, that in song
thy Scepters seeks to show,
And grant the whirling Skies above
in mind that I may know.
And first good Lady show to me
if that the Skies above
Consist of matter hard and thick,
or soft and apt to move:
None otherwise than is the air,
which well we may divide:
This told thou shall declare to me
strange matters more beside.
Two springs of nature chief there be
Materia and Forma namde:
Of these same twain al kind of things,
that here we see, are framde,
Of these the earth, the Seas, the air,
and flaming fire springs.
Wherefore they lie, that matter none
admit in Heavenly things:
For contraries should then in them
be found, thus they do say,
And by this means corrupted quite
they should in time decay.
But as me seems, this reason here
does from the truth decline,
For neither matter is in fault,
if that in tract of time
The bodies fade: nor contraries
themselves will thus undo
If that their forces equal be,
and stronger none of two:
For when the strength and power is like,
then equal is the fight,
And victory on neither part,
and neither side does light.
Therefore God seking in his mind
the heavens hye to make,
The chief and purest fined parts,
of matters, first did take,
And tempred them in such a sort
that harm in them should cease,
And that the things contrary thus,
should still remain in peace:
So lastes the sky continually
and never does decay.
But for because the harder things
last longer far away,
And take less hurt: therefore the sky
of all the hardest seems
More than the Diamonde, that form
and fire it light estemes,
And every force save only Gods,
of whom it first took ground.
An other reason proves this same,
for first that moves round,
The Spheres beneath him turns about
and West ward them does drive,
And rolls them daily moving round
though they contrary strive:
Which could not be if that they were
not hard assuredly.
Lake there withal that part of Moon,
the likest is to sky,
Which Sun does not behold, nor tuchd
with beams of brothers eyes.
So Stars at noone are thought to be
in color like to Skies,
Which Moon and Stars the^ selves be hard,
and dark they also be:
The experience of the Eclipse does this
declare apparently,
For Moon betwixt does hide ye beams
that from the Sun do flow,
And suffers not the shining light
upon the earth to show.
Why should not this same hardness here
unto the Skies agree?
For never should it else hold fast
the Stars that fixed be,
But wander far abroad they would,
nor one place them should hold.
Yet dark is not the firmament,
as of the Stars we told,
For placed here upon the earth
the highest Stars we see:
And well our sight descernes the signs
that farthest from us be.
Sith hardest are celestial shapes,
and purest eke are such,
Perchance they give a sound besides,
and sith they roll and touch,
They make some he auenly melody,
as some that long ago
Both learnde and sobre written have,
my Muse this doubt undo.
Though hard and many be the kinds
of Heavenly bodies hie,
And though they subject are to sight
of earthly human eye,
Yet noise for troth they none do make,
for nothing them does beat:
Nor beaten would they more resound
that are most thick and great.
And sith no air is there, without
the which no sound is made,
And therefore void of noise run
they round in rolling trade.
Beside, the inferior Circles eight
gaynward the mornings seat
Are turnde about one self same way,
nor on themselves they beat
With meeting course, but pass one way,
with easy rolling round,
As dance in order compassing
about do softely drive:
The Mouer first against them all
in course does only strive,
Yet noise does it never make,
ne sounds it at all,
For air there lackes and outward parts
of Spheres are smoth always:
Whereby they swiftly pass about,
no roughness them does stay,
And easly thus with gentle touch
their neighbors next are kyst,
Wherefore there motion they do make
all silently and whyst.
Therefore the Fathers old did earl,
that earnestly believed
Spheres moving to make Harmony,
but not to be perceived,
Because it passde the ears of man,
as is not heard at all
The rush of Nilus streams, where from
the mountains they do fall,
But farther of the sound does roar.
They trifle thus to teach,
And fond and vain the reason is,
that herein they do preach.
For if such things were never heard,
why should they then devise
A sound amyd the Skies to be,
it is naught to enterprise
Of things to talk, that never can
be shewde or proved plain,
That justly may denied be:
no new things must we feign,
Except a troth in them be proved,
where reason is away,
No faith nor credit must we give
to words that men do say.
But is the Heaven round my Muse,
as fame of old has spyde,
For compassed form see mes perfecter
than all the rest beside,
Because it has beginning none
nor end in it does lie,
Because it aye contains most,
more fine and fair to the eye
And apter is it to be moved.
chiefly the myddest about:
As Heaven turned about the earth,
that has her standing stout
In mydst of all the world. This form
so worthy does agree
To Heaven, to the Sun and Moon,
and all the Stars we see:
Though folly fond of Paynters does
them other wise desc^ ye.
But are the Stars as some do say
the thicker part of Sky?
Not so: for every one of them
unlike to Heaven be,
Among themselves they differ eke,
as Elm from Seruise tree,
As Pear from Cherry differs
in fashion and in fruit:
Their diverse virtue this declares,
and eke their sundry suite.
A power alone has every Star,
and nature eke at hand.
The Heaven therefore is but seat
and place where Stars do stand,
No substance thoe, or matter of them.
What virtue has the Sky?
All force and virtues in the Stars
and glistering planets lie.
The stars do guide the co^passd world,
and every change does bring,
The Stars create all things on earth
and govern every thing:
Thus teach th'Astronomers, and thus
the common fame does fly.
Ne must we think in thick and thin
the substance of the Sky
To differ from the Stars, but eke
their natures diverse be.
And sundry is their shape and force, and
fashion that we see.
The bygnesse of the Stars, and if
their turning never stay,
And in what place they fixed be,
(as Plato once did say)
And if they void of dwellers be,
or any there does dwell,
My Muse I would be glad to know,
wherefore I pray thee tell.
All stars are not of bygnesse like,
for many less there be,
And in such sort, as comprehend
no man may them we see:
Some are again of larger syse,
in number few and fine,
That in clear nights amyd the skies
with gorgeous light do shine:
Of which th'Astronomers have framde
fair shapes and fygures bright,
And pictured have the Heavens brave
with signs of sundry sight.
Thus of these greater sort of Stars,
(as learnd in Stars do tell,
And as the Suns eclipse does show,
wherein appears well
How great the Moon in body is
while under him she glydes,
And darkning all with shadows black,
her brothers beams she hydes,)
Some do in compass far excede
both seas, and earth, and all,
And bygger are their shining globes
though they do seem so small:
Because so far from us they be.
For every thing beside,
The farther it is from our eyes,
the less in sight is spyed,
And does deceive the lookers on.
The stars that fixed be
As Plato greatest clarke does say)
are each in their degree
About their Centers rolled round,
and turnde continually,
And by this reason are they thought
to twinckle in the eye:
And not as certain feigned have,
because far of they be,
Therefore they yield a trembling light
to such as them do see:
This reason surely is but vain,
and childishe for to write,
For nothing seems to twinckle tho,
because it is far from sight:
But dimmer then and less it seems,
nor twinkling can they be
Without a motion sure. Wherefore
the Stars that fixed we see,
Do move together with the Sun,
as we declared late,
But Saturn, Jupiter and Mars,
do move in no such rate,
No more does Moon, nor Mercury.
nor Venus pleasant Star:
But move in little Circles that
to them annexed are.
Why sparckles not Saturn, and Jove,
and Mars, as does the Sun?
Sith farther far from us in Spheres
aloft more hye they run:
Nor differ they in difference great
from fixed Stars above?
Because they do not as the Sun
about their Centers move.
But in these Epicycles roll
their bodies round about.
Some man perchaunte if so the Sun
does sparckle, stands in doubt.
But if he shall the same behold
when first it does appear,
Or when in Winter time it falls,
and settes in waters clear,
When as his eye may best endure
his sight thereon to cast,
He shall perceive it plain to turn,
and eke to sparkle fast.
Let no man think this thing to be
so great and strange to mind,
If all the gorgeous Stars do move
in such a sort and kind:
Seems it not far more wonderful
that Heavens compass wide
With such a motion swift about
the world does always glyde,
That Birds and winds, and lightnings flash,
in swiftness it does pass?
Thus now the almighty Lord, by whom
the world created was,
All things he made, divided in
these two, moving and rest.
But in the Center rest upon
the earth her place possessed:
In all the others motion dwelles.
The streams do swiftly fly,
The air and fyry flames on earth
do move continually.
But chiefly in the firmament
has moving greatest spright,
And every Sphere the higher it is
does move with greater might,
And swiftlier runs about the world.
Wherefore that Heaven hie,
That called is the mouer first,
with motion most does fly.
But that the greatest motion is,
that in the time most small,
Does soonest run his course about
the greatest space of all.
Thus would it run about the world
in twinkling of an eye,
But that the other Spheres do let
that under him do lie,
Restrayning it of course so swifte,
least that in turning round,
The Seas with it, it should convey,
and all the earthy ground:
For then no kind of creature could
lead here his life in them.
O matter to be wondered at,
who is not mazed when
He wayeth with himself in mind
so great a quantity,
So far to pass in so short time,
and back again to fly,
And never for to cease this course,
and labor none to feel?
Hereby do some believe that Gods
the world about do wheel.
Of them to every Circle is
a mouer strong assignde,
Who like as they that are condemned
in bakehouse for to grind,
May never cease from turning round
the Skies both day and night,
Nor though he would can once have (time
to rest his weary spright.
Now surely happy is that God
that serves in the same.
But these are toys, and fancies fond
of such as seek for fame.
What store of fond Foolosophers,
and such as hunte for praise,
The earth brings forth, it is not good
to credit all he says,
Though great his estimation be
in mouths of many men,
Though many Keames of Paper he
has scribled with his pen.
For famous men do oftentimes
make great and famous lies,
And often men do mysse the truth
though they be never so wise.
Therefore must reason first be sought,
for in such doubtful things,
More credit reason ought to have,
than men's ymaginings:
For such are often proved false.
What thing does reason say?
That Skies or Stars are moved of Gods
or of their proper i way?
What honor great, what kind of joy,
what pleasure can there be,
Unto these Gods that turn about
the Skies continually?
That they for life of foolish man
may needful things provide,
And that the Birds and savage beasts
and Fyshes they may guide.
Becoms it Lords in such a sort
their servants here to serve?
And Gods for ever to be thrall,
that they may beasts preserve,
That they may foster Foles and Knaves:
is it not rather meet
For Gods to enjoy their liberty,
and pleasant freedom sweet?
That they may where they list go walk,
least as in fetters tied,
They can not pass from place to place,
but still at home abide?
Or as the potters plying still
the wheel and lump of clay,
Can have no time of quiet rest,
nor step from place away.
Seems it so sweet asporte to them
the compass round to move,
Or can this labor never grieve
the Gods that sit above?
O sentence worthy to be markde
of grave and witty men,
But reason bars them this, and cries
contrary quite to them.
For nothing is eternal here
but only God alone,
And after him continual be
the Natures euerychone.
Of things that he of nothing made.
But yet by sure decree,
That otherwise they cannot show
than they appointed be,
By him when first he framd the world,
so still continual shall
The waters soft, the ster hot,
the earth a sted fast ball.
So shall the air for ever move,
so of necessity
The circles of the Heanens round
shall turn continually,
So force and fashion every herb
deliured does retain,
And every tree, and every beast
that never time can stayne.
As long as vnremouing state
of nature does endure,
As long as changes not the will
of GOD divine and pure.
Wherefore if thus continual be
the course of Heavens bright,
It must be natural as shows
in wayghty things and light.
For what of nature propre is
does never feel decay,
But if another move the same
in time it falls away.
For no such state of violence
does last continually.
Have heavy things and light more force
than state of Stars and Sky,
That they can move of propre strength
and these can not do so
Except of Gods they caused be
about in course to go?
Then is the earth and fire far
more noble than the Sky
At least for this because they need
no help of mouer by.
But of themselves from Center they
or can to Center fly.
Wherefore we must believe that these
celestial states above
Of proper force and of their forms,
as fire and earth do move.
For nature is of greater might
than mouer any one.
This nature only God excelles
and him except alone,
No better thing than nature is
nor in the world more hie.
I nature call the fixed law
of him that guides the Sky,
Which from the worlds foundation first
to all things he assured,
And wyllde that it should stand in force
while age of world endured,
For this same law has God unto
the forms of things assignde
That when from thence do things proceed
forms well fulfill Gods mind,
He can they once this order break,
for of their forms do spring
Such things as he commanded has,
who framde each formed thing.
This true and proper nature is
of higher state again
Then matter or form as some have (taught
for certainly these twain
Are rather springs of eury thing
or causes first above
Or framers first, not nature sure
if truest names we love,
Except we have a better will
false names to give such things.
But of this same enough we have,
now strike we other strings,
And whither that the stately roonies
of Heaven empty be,
Or whither any dwellers there
have place and souraintie.
The present time does me persuade
in wonted verse to sing.
Sith Heaven is so vast and wide
and such a gorgeous thing,
All garnisht round with glistring Stars
so bright and fair to th'eys
Shall only void and empty it
and vnreplemsht lie?
And earth and seas such dwellers have?
or is the seas or ground
A place more pleasant, fair and good
or more in compass found
Than all the Sky by which they more
than Skies deserve to hold,
Such store of creatures fair and shapes,
and fashions sundry fold?
Is it a part of prudent Prince
to build a palace wide
With gold and Marble beautified
throughout on eury side
And not (save stable) to permit
there any man to lie
And furnish out such goodly rooms
and sumpteous buildings hie?
For Earth is stable to all the world
wherein all filth does bide
Dust, dyrt, dung, bones and carton,
and loathsome things beside.
Who can at any time rehearse
the heaps of things unclean
That on the seas and earth appear
and ever shall be seen?
Who knows not the showrs ye mists,
the clouds and flakes of snow,
The force of winds and rage of storms,
that on the seas do blow,
That shakes the earth and moves ye air?
Yet plainly may we see
The Seas and Earth with sundry sorts
of creatures full to be.
Shall then ye heavens clear be thought
as void and empty made?
O rather void and empty minds
that thus your selves persuade.
For creatures does the Skies contain
and eury Star beside
Be heavenly towns and seats of saints
where Kings and Commons bide
But perfect Kings and people eke,
all things are perfect there,
Not shapes and shadows vain of things
as we have present here,
Which death sone takes and time destroys,
defiles, and drives away.
There wise and happy folks, and such
as never do decay
Do live, here misers dwell and men
that certain are to dye
And doltish fools. There peace and light
and pleasure chief does lie:
Here daily wars and darkness blind
and eury kind of pain.
Go now, and praise this world and take
delight in life so vain,
Presume thou fool than Heavens fair
the earth to set more by.
But some may doubt if that more strong
than Diamond be the Sky,
And empty place is none therein,
how Gods there dwelling be
And moving there? this seems sure
with reason not t'agree.
Besides since that the Heavens bright
can not with plowe be torn,
Nor digd with spade, how there shall vines
and needful grain be borne?
These are but toys and laughing stocks,
for though the Skies be hard,
Yet passage have the dwellers there,
nothing their course has barde.
For unto these celestial states
the Majesty divine
Appointed slendrest bodies has
of substance light and fine,
So that no need of doors they have,
nor yet of windows wide,
For through the thickest walls they run
and through the Marbels slide,
So pure and fine their nature is,
and of so strong a might.
Who, (if so be they never had
been subject to his sight)
Would think that fish in floods should be
and frogs in slime to breed,
And Salamander live by fire,
of air Chamelions feed
And Greshops nourished with deawe?
yet true this same we see,
And we confess them wonderful,
for many things there be
Which though we think can not be do^e
yet can and often are done,
Why could not God then creatures make
that through ye earth should run
And of no meat nor drink have need?
if he so could he did,
Fond were it such a space to build
and leave unfurnished.
But Heaueners have no need with plow
and spade for food to strive
Since that their bodies are not such
as food does keep alive,
Nor Gods do ever suffer thyrst
nor Saints an hungered be
In fine they never grieved are
with lack or poverty.
Because beyond the Moon there dwelles
no kind of doleful case
For eury kind of mischefe, God
upon the earth did place
And in the miost did them enclose
forbydding them the Sky:
O happy such as lead their lives
thus in those places hie,
That Nectar drink, still fed with food
of sweet Ambrosia green
Whereof in those Celestaill meades
abundance great is seen.
More happy and better is the life
of such as dwell above,
The hier they in Heaven have
their place to rest and move,
For places such as in the Skies
are hier in degree,
More blessed are, and better far,
than those that lower be.
What are the blackish spotes that in
the Moon we may behold?
For of these same men diversely
their fancies often have told.
Naught of it self does shine in Skies
save only Phoebus clear,
Of him the Moon receaues her light
and Stars that glister there,
Who for bicau^e she is the last
of all the Stars on hie,
And lowest part of Heaven keeps
unto the earth most nie,
She needs must darkest be of all
whereby since eury side
She has not white, nor thick, nor pure
nor me e where light may bide,
For whitest parts and thick and light
sunbeames at night receive,
The other parts that are not apt
the same does lightlesse leave.
Thus in the night the Moon does shine
but when the day gives light
Much like in show to spotted cloud,
in Sky she waxes white.
So Gloewormes in the night do shine,
but when the day returns
By light they lose their light again
that in the evening burns,
And then their propre color show
all fraud and guile away,
^he night is meetest for deceytes
true things appear by day.
Now if the world eternal be
or if in time begone
It does abide a final end
when many years are done,
Is worthy to be understood.
For of this question hie
Have diverse wisemen written books
he says he does deny,
And authors fancies differing
the thing does doubtful try
And that the troth in secret plighte
all dark does hydden lie.
Some think that it beginning had
and that the world did spring,
Of matter that for ever lastes
and force of mightiest king,
When as before it had no state:
and say that these same twain
Continued always have, and shall
for evermore remain,
Matter, and the almighty Lord,
from whence all things do floe.
Some think the world of nothing made
and those deny also
That any matter was before,
but by the word and will
(Of God) all made. But others say
so moude by reasons skyll,
That never it beginning had
nor never shall have end.
Of these whose sentence truest is?
sure I should condescend
(But that Religion me forbids,
and Christians that defend
The doctrine old of Moses books)
to credit none beside,
But that the world has always been,
and always shall abide.
For why might not this world have been
for ever here to fore?
Because he could not do it till time,
had taught him knowledge more,
And then at length he finished it?
Or could he always it have done
but would not utter more?
What is the cause? why rather would
he after than before?
Or else what reason alterd thus
his mind to other trade?
If naught it were this world to make:
why was it ever made?
But if it meet and profitable
were this world to frame,
What is the cause that God so late
created has the same?
Wherefore has it so short an age?
For, if we boldly may
Deuines believe, eight thousand years
are not full past away,
Since Adam old created was.
Beside whence does proceed
The cause why God should make ye world?
for that he this did need?
If so: he should at first it made
least he should grieved be
The lack of such a goodly thing
so long a time to see.
If not: why made he it? in vain*
ought he for to devise
The thing that to no purpose is?
of fools this is the guise.
Thereof the^ was some cause, but what?
of troth assuredly,
His goodness great and mighty power,
least that in vain should lie
These two shut up in secret close,
but rather open be
To eury man, for mighty and good
in vain is coumpted he
By whom no great nor godly thing
has never yet been wrought.
If God therefore was ever good,
and ever mighty thought,
Why would he not have always builte
this goodly world we see?
Why let he such a thing till now
of late deferred be?
No reason truly can be found
except some subtle brain
Make more account of ^oyes than truth
and foolish fancies feign.
Wherefore, if we to reason stick
then must we surely say
That this same world has ever been
and never shall decay.
But if that GOD said otherwise
long since, and then did give
To Moses knowledge of his works,
we Moses must believe:
Let reason always yield to faith,
and there as prisoner leave,
For GOD can not deceived be,
nor never does deceive,
If any time he do vouchsafe
by words with men to deal,
If that appearing unto man
his secrets he reveal.
But they that first this Chaos and
continual matter taught,
Do trifle much. For why should God
leave it so long unwrought
If he forthwith could make the world
and at the first create
All kind of things? In vain it is
for to deliberate
That presently may well be done.
But some have surely thought
Eternal state the world to have
of no man made or wrought,
But of it self as now it is,
before all ages past,
And of it self as now it is
for evermore shall last.
Which sure is false: for reason does
her self this same deny,
For two most perfect things can not
in order ever lie:
But would fall out between themselves
and strife thereby maintain.
Well, grant that in a faithful league
they always do ^emayne,
In vain two heads allowed are,
for one shall well suffice,
Because at least dame nature ought
before the rest to rise.
And if before the rest she be,
then is she cause of all,
For foremost cause does always frame
the things that after fall.
Wherefore doubtless the almighty lord
this world himself did make
Of nothing, and eternal to.
But how? the reason take.
Eternal goodness has the Lord,
eternal power has he,
May not likewise his will to make
the world eternal be?
Which if it were, as reason shows:
naught letes but world may be
Continual built by workman hie,
in such a fair degree.
As who soever grauntes the Sun
continual to have been,
Must needs confess, the light thereof
continually was seen:
Yet is ^he light the Suns effect,
and Sun the cause we call.
But let us search the Elaments
and from the Heavens fall,
And not unworthy things of them
let us now v^^er plain.
Some men have said that underneath
the Skies a fire does rain
Near to the Moon, but void of light:
and kindling hastily,
And wondrous hot, which to be true
does perfect reason try.
For in the night we may behold
the fire in Skies to fly,
And f^ashing flames throughout ye air
and Stars to shoot from hie.
Which does proceed of damps that in
the air do rise more hye,
And burned is by force of fire
that there al^ft does lie.
For of two sor^es is vapoure, one
light, dry, and soon begoonne
To fire, whereby the flaming sigh^es
in Skies are causde to run,
The other more cold, more weighty and gross,
engendered of this same
Are showrs and clouds and snowes and mystes
and winds with flashing flame,
And thunder, haylestones, deaw and rayn,
if fire were none above,
No vapor there could kindled be,
in eueninges dark to move.
Moreover, since in lightness thus
the fire does air excel,
No remedy, but needs it must
have hier place to dwell.
His seat therefore is under Skies,
and next to Moon does lie.
Beneath this fire has air his place
which in his parts most hye
A fervent heat of fire does take.
The myddle parts most cold,
Does thu^der, clouds, and lightnings bred^
and tempests sundry fold.
The lowest part is warm and moist
for vapor that does rise
From floudes continually it moys^es
ascending toward the Skies,
And warmd it is by beams of Sun
that back from earth rebound,
Here ^^sts and showrs and pleasant deaw^
and snowes and frostes are found,
Which sundry sorts of winds do breed
for no small power is dealt
Unto these winds, and oftentimes
their force in air is fealt,
These can in time of Summer cause
the nipping coldes to come
And in the winter season send
abroad the warming Sun,
These can both give and take away
from us our corn and grain,
These can both breed and bear away
great sicknesses and pain.
From out the East does Eurus blow.
and from the Libian coast
Does Auster come, and Zephyrus
from western parts does post,
But Boreas blastes in Scythian hills
and Northern parts does rise.
More winds there are, all rule
the air that lower lies,
And with the air both land and sea.
Of winds the clouds do breed,
And from the clouds do flakes of snow
and showers of rain proceed:
Dewes, lightning, hayle and early frosts:
but with diuersty of times,
And eke by sundry ways and means
and blastes of sundry winds.
Whereof such as from South do blow,
breeds clouds and showers, and heaty,
But those that from the Scythian parts
do come, cause coldenesse great.
From these coms yse and snowes and frostes
when winter dwells here:
But in the Summer time they serve
to make the weather clear.
The western wind breeds flowers, and grosid
with green does new array,
And gives the birds a cause to sing,
and filles the woods with May.
Often times the Eastern wind is good
yet now and then does raise
Such tempests great, that seas and land
by force thereof it frayes.
These winds the ayry sprites above
or Stars abroad do send,
And often when as the Coniurer
for treasure does intend
In earth to delue, or consecrate
his book in Magike wise
Some sprite to bind, then have I heard
that winds which then did rise
And suddayne storm has laid ye corn,
and grapes did downward fling.
The matter making winds is mistes
that from the floods do spring,
The cause that moves them are sprites
that in the air do dwell,
But this will not the common sort
allow, nor credit well.
What the^? cast not such precious pearls
to Dogs or filthy swine:
Believe it you that learned are,
whose minds are more divine,
That not alone in Skies but in
the air, there thousands be
Of sprites that move the raging winds
and tempests that you see
And thunder down wc lightning throw.
Yet do I not deny
But other causes are that blastes
of winds are moved by,
As Sun and Moon and Stars, but chief,
the seven which they name,
The wandering stars that of these mists
effects do diverse frame.
I saw while as at Rome (P. Leo
the tenth there raygning than)
I was, a piece of potters work
and picture of a man
That from his mouth of straightest sise,
a mighty wind did blow,
For all his breast being hollow made
with water full did flow
Which being with heat of fire resolud,
out of his mouth it went
In mighty wind, and far from it
the force thereof was sent.
This proves yt wind proceeds of floods
that thus resolved be
While vapor mounting up is forede
by means of heat to fly,
For contraries do evermore
each other drive away.
In this same lowest part of air
as we before did say,
The blasing stars do often appear
that fall of Prince does show
And there with diverse colors died
appears the stormy bow.
This same ye beams of Sun does cause
that on the clouds we see,
The other made by some one star
of them that mouers be,
Which while the vapor underneath
does shape thereof receive,
Appears a tail, and in the clouds
his flaming light does leave
Like as the Circled mist that does
encompasse round the Moon
The circled mist (as men do say)
a sign of wind to come.
As when three su^nes are thought to shine
and yet they are not three
But shaps of su^ne that framd in clouds
as in a glass we see.
But underneath this air so gross
and low, the Seas have place:
The Occean Seas that all the earth
in circuit do embrace,
Which passing through ye narrow stratghts
where Hercles pillars shows
It spreds it self, and thus abroad
both far and wide it flows.
And this is namde by sundry names
Aegian floods it makes
Ionian, Tuscan, Adriatike
Red Seas and Persean lakes.
This Sea does search the secret caves
that low in earth does lie,
And evermore does ebb and flow
and tastes diversely,
As diverse is the earth, by which
he does his passage make,
And of the brimstone sulphured veins
does smell of brimstone take.
This is the cause that fluds their course
maintain continually,
For to their springs they often return,
and often to seas they fly,
And roll and pass from place to place
and round in compass drive:
And do preserve the earth as blood.
preserues the corse alive.
The self same fluds does make ye lakes
and fennes of filthy air,
And clear and Cristall running springs
and wells for ever fair.
In fine from Occean seas proceeds
all course of waters here,
That round about the world retaynes.
This made the waters clear
That part beneath the earth do lie,
and part above do run,
And such besides as from the clouds
of Hellish dye do come.
But wherefore is the Seas so salt?
does it of nature spring?
I think not so. For every taste
that seas with them do bring,
Does fetch his cause from out the earth
for in the earth are found
Great hills of salt that underneath
the waters deep are dround,
Seas sucks this salt and does resolve
it into water clear.
Thus Salt not Sun, is cause that saltness
does in Seas appear.
For why does not the Sun likewise
of Ponds salt water make?
For all such parts of earth as were
not meet for man to take
Because they were to full of salt
has nature vnderlayde,
The Occean seas more fruitful parts
to us she has displayed,
Wherein are mountains, hills and cliues
rocks, fields and valleys low,
Straights, countries, woods and pondes
lakes, springs and streams that flow,
Small towns, great cities, broughes and holds
with ^^ones and metalls pure
Such things whereby the life of man
the better does endure.
The rule of all this earth and goods
to man the Lord did give,
And made him King of eury kind
in seas or land that live:
And wit and reason to him dealt
by which he might excel
And guide the world, and serving God
him love and worship well.
Amyd this earth a Center lies,
whereby it is sustaynde,
For thither falls each weighty thing,
as God at first ordaynde,
That never of their propre force
can from this Center fly,
And therefore fixed stands the earth
and in the mydst does lie
Sustained with her heavy weight,
that fast on eury side
To Center runs and frames a ball
both dark and thick, and wide:
About the which with Crimsin horse
the Sun is always lead
And on the part contrary still
the darkesome night is spread.
For nothing else but shade it is
of earth and waters great,
Which shadow if in night it chance
upon the Moon to beat
Does cause Eclipse, and filles with fear
the woeful gazers heart,
Supposing that oppressed she is
with charm of Magike art.
This shadow makes the longest nights
when farthest from us burns,
The flaming Sun, and shortest when
to Northern signs he turns.
The cause thereof is swelling earth
and stately mountains hie,
Which subtle nature has devised
in place between to lie,
That with their tops in change of time
the nights they alter may.
For look when nearer unto South
the same does keep his way,
Then farther forth their shadows dark
these hills abroad do fling
Such shades as hide the light and cause
the day more late to spring,
And force the day in shorter time
and space his course to end.
Then frosty winter unto us
his quaking cold does send,
Then so^mer makes the Indians black
with raging heat to frye.
But when the Sun returns back
to top of Cancer hie,
Then shorter are the nights with us
and heat begins again,
Then winter vexes those with cold
that under us do rain.
Thus does the Su^ne with diverse course
both alter times and tides,
And in four equal parts the space
of all the year deuides:
And rolling round about the earth,
both nations serves well,
Both them that under us do live,
and them aloft that dwell.
For men live also under earth,
not only woods and streams,
Nor nature willde that Sun and day
in vain should cast their beams
And only serve for brutish beasts
and sorts of swimming kind,
For all the earth is dwelt upon
no place therein we find,
Nor any clime there is, but that
there mortal men may dwell
And find out places fit for them
and seats that serve them well:
Though cold extreme, or to much hear
rain there continually:
Where nature mischiefs does permit
there plants she pleasure by
And wise she mixeth sour with sweet,
and where diseases raynes
There has she poynted remedies
that can release the pains.
Therefore wheresoever to much heat
anoyes the inhabitant
No mountains cold nor cooling blastes
no shaddowing trees do want
Nor pleasant streams with store of springes
whose coldenesse may defeat
The harms that happen unto man
by force of raging heat.
Besides the night has equal length
there all times with the day
Which with an even cooling force
does heat of Sun alay.
whereby we judge the myddle Zone
not void nor empty ^^es
But peopled well, by nature safe
and means that they devise.
So th'vtter Zones where as they say
no kind of people dwell,
with snowes and yse all couerde still
men may inhabit well,
As reason good does us persuade.
for there great store of wood
Does always grow, and garments there
are made both great and good,
with furs of sundry sorts of beasts,
and stoues are many there
where with men well may warm themselves
and winter nothing fear,
And bitter cold by many means
they well may drive away.
Nor food convenient do they want
but Cates at home they may
(Or brought from other countries) have
and daynty kind of fare,
wherefore it is not true that some
brought up in Greece declare,
That nature only has assignde
one Zone of smallest sise
For man to dwell, and all the rest
that void and desert lies
Alone to serve, for beast and fish
this world unworthy seem,
That nature granting greater place
to beasts them best esteem.
Wherefore if he may be believed
that troth does plainly tell
No place there is upon the earth
but men may safely dwell.
Dame natures aid in nothing does
sustain or feel decay,
And wit of man the hardest things
does break and bear away.
Now last because unto the end
with haste apace we hie,
And time does will us to attempt
the fishes of the Sky:
Therefore I briefly will declare
the cause why earth does quake
What force does drive it for to move
what might does make it shake.
And thus we may be bold to think
that in the earth below
Are many caves and mighty vawtes
where boystrous winds do blow.
Which whilst with force they rage and strive,
upon the earth they beat
And in this rage do ouerturne
the walls and Cities great,
Till breaking out at some one place
with force abroad they fly
And blow about in puffing air
not long in rest they lie.
These winds are bred within the earth
of damps, which fiery heat
Does draw from moisture near about
for many fires great
The earth within does nourish still,
a wondrous thing I tell
But yet no feigned thing I show,
he can bear witness well
Who so has Aetna ever seen
or bathes of waters hot,
Or who so knows the wonders of
Veseuus viney plotte.
These winds the wicked sprits do move
that in the lowest Hell
Possess their place, and in the depth
of dongeons dark do dwell.
For trifies surely are they not,
nor words of vanity
That of the Stygian lakes, and of
Auernus spoken be.
No place does void or emptyly
but dwelt in every wheare,
Both under earth and on the earth,
in air and fiery sphere,
In Skies and eke above the Skies
where Heaven shines bright,
where as the glistring pallayce stands
of Prince of greatest might
That owner is of all the world.
My Muse adieu farewell:
And finally prepare thy self
thy ending tale to tell.
Pisces, the tvvelueth Book:
MOst glorious GOD almighty King
thou Parent chief of name
Whose wisdom great this wo^drous world
of nothing first did frame,
And gouerns it and evermore
preseruees it day by day,
The spring and end of all that be
to whom all things obey,
Than whom more great, more good, or fair,
is nothing, nor more hie,
That blessed live for evermore
above the starry Sky,
My mind desiring now to thee
to clime does nothing need
Apollo, Muse, Parnasus hill
or springs that wont to feed
The prattling Poets, fancies vain
when as they list to write
Disguised tales that frantike heads
of country Clownes delight.
For, other aid, and other grace
it needful is to have,
And streams of other fountayns sweet
I thyrsty now do crave.
I thee beseech and humbly pray,
on thee alone I call,
That this my work of late begoonne
and labor last of all
Thou favor wilt, and grant me grace,
to touch the appointed end,
O Lord thy holy sprite vouchsafe
into my heart to send,
wherewith inspirde I may behold
the secrets of thy rain
And others teach, and with my verse
immortal honor gain.
A sort there are that do suppose
the ends of every thing
Above the heavens to consist,
and farther not to spring,
So that beyond them nothing is
and that above the Skies
Has nature never power to clime,
but there amazed lies.
Which unto me appears false
as reason does me teach.
For if the end of all be there
where Skies no farther reach
Why has not God created more?
because he had not skill
How more to make, his cunning stayed
and broken of his will?
Or was it because he had not power?
but troth both these denies,
For power of God has never end
nor bounds his knowledge ties.
No kind of thing may God conclude
nor limits him assign,
Nor propre force does once restrain
the Majesty divine.
Great things I tell, and reason great
shall also this defend,
If any thing the power of God
may end or comprehend
Then is yt thing more strong than God.
For what thing can be found,
That if it have not greater force
another thing can bound?
But nothing passes God in power
nor stronger is than he,
Therefore he neither can nor will
with limits compast be,
For who would have his force restraynd
when that he may be free
And walk abroad where as he list
with power at liberty?
No man there is that does desire
himself for to abase,
But rather all men arrogate
to them a higher place,
And always seek for to enhaunce
the state that here they lead,
And though their wings be large and wide
yet farther them to spread.
will GOD then while he may be greatest
of power omnipotent
His propre force himself restrain
and live in limits pent?
This surely does not well agree
nor ought to be believed
That God has bounds, if that of none
he ever them received
Nor has assigned to himself
as we before did prove.
These things foretold, we thus conclude
the works of God above
Unbounded for to be, least that
his power and majesty,
And knowledge should be counted vayn.
For if above the Sky
He could and might have framed more
and goodlier things by much
But would not: then in vain is all
his power and knowledge such.
For if that any man have skyll
and cunning in an art,
And never will in practice put
the knowledge of his heart:
In vain he should unto himself
procure a workmans name,
In vain with words he should commit
his faculty to fame,
Which should be rather folly calde
and not a faculty.
But in the state divine of God
and glorious majesty,
We must believe is nothing vain
since Godliest is the same.
Thus God what so ever he could do
assurely did frame
Least that his virtue were in vain,
and ever should lie hyd,
But since he could make endless things
it must be thought he did
And all his power there in employed,
so that there did remain
In him no kind of power or force
that idle were or vain.
But learned Aristotle says
there can no body be
But that it must of bounds consist:
to this do I agree,
Because above the Skies no kind
of body we do place,
But light most pure, of body void
such light as does deface
And far excel our shining Sun,
such light as comprehend
Our eyes can not, and endless light
that God does from him send,
Wherein together with their King
the sprites that are more hie
Do dwell, the meaner sort beneath
in Skies do always lie.
Therefore the raygne and portion of
the world consists in three
Celestial, Subcelestiall: which
with limits compast be,
The rest no bounds may comprehend
which bright above the Sky
Does shine with light most wonderful.
But here will some reply
That without body is no light,
and so by this deny
That light can never thoe be found
above the heavens hie.
But at us vaynly does he bark,
in vain he does contend,
For reason does my words approve
and verity defend.
I pray thee show what is the cause
that here the Sun does shine?
Because his matter gives him light
or rather form divine
That does so great a globe contain?
for form and fashion gay
To all things state of being gives,
as Naturesearchers say:
With whom we also do agree.
this same does plainly show
That Form, not Matter makes ye su^
to shine. From Form does flow
All kind of force and comeliness.
And if so great a light
Assigned be to bodyly Forms,
why should we in this plight
Deny that incorporeall states
may any light contain?
Since that more pure and fine they are
and fayrer far again.
Wherefore the sprites and ghosts above
do shine with wondrous light
Although it can not be discernde
of our corrupted sight:
So that among these Saints the more
their state and power is hie
With brighter beauty much they show
and greater majesty.
No gold, no pearls nor precious stones
nor pomp of purple gown
Does them as it does us set out
but light is their renown.
And as the Sun amongst the stars
does shine with goodliest light,
So shines among the Saints above
the LORD of greatest might
And never darkneth them a whit,
but makes them all to shine,
Such is the goodness of his grace
and majesty divine.
But here perchance he will object
that in the air does lie
No ground of light, and since no air
there is above the Sky
He will deny that there is light.
But now he lies again,
For air is not the ground of light,
nor as some fondly feign
Is light in air, but contrary
the air in light does dwell,
If reason what, not Aristotle
does say he marketh well.
For if without the doors fast shut
a candle burns bright,
Or by some clift the fire shine
in house all void of light,
And some there with the air about
the beam with striking shakes
The air is forced to pass the light
but light no moving makes.
And if the air were ground of light
then with one motion so
Both air and light should moved be
and both together go.
Beside, if that in time of night
a man with Torch in hand
Should pass, yt light does places change
but air does quiet stand.
Which if to light it subject were
it should continually
Go wander place by place with light
and still keep company.
But now this same is nothing so
but does contrary prove,
For light does pass when air does stay
and still with torch does move.
Whereby it appears that light does not
the air as subject need,
But well may stand and well wy(...)
the use of air proceed.
Especially the light of God
whereof a part does pass
Into our sun and there is kep^
contaynde as in a Glass.
For as within his propre sphere
that under Moon does lie
No fire can discerned be
by force of any eye,
But if that any matter chance
to kindle with the same,
Then Stars do fall and fiery streams
in Summer nights do flame
And other sights that fear the minds
of men in dreadful wise.
So as it is the light of God
can not be seen with eyes,
But fixed in the Sun it shines
because the matter clear
Whereof the Sun is made is fit
and apt for light t'appeare,
For God has framde it in such sort,
as there his light may bide
And shine, creating day and life
and goodly things beside.
That light does also shine in shapes
of sundry sacred sprites
Though not alike to all as Stars
shine not with equal lights
But some more bright than others be
as they are set before.
And as a candle can give light
to many candels more
And yet does neither lose nor less
his beauty burning bright,
So light of God decreasing not
to other Saints gives light.
But some perchance will here demand
and doubtful question find
If that besides this light that I
declarde of endless kind
Does any other thing consist
without the world so great
Though this be neither meet nor fit
for mortal men t'entreat
Yet will I prove to pass the path
wherein no Poet yet
That has been hither to before
might ever set his feet,
And will attempt to bring to light
the treasures hie in place
Of God if he be pleased and help
with his accustomed grace.
First must we grant that God is spring
and Father ^ke of all
Who made all things and best and chief
him may we truly call.
Therefore where so ever GOD abides
his glory there is found,
And every good and gorgeous sight
does in that place abound.
And thus what so ever good the earth
the seas or air contaynes,
All this is seen in place whereas
the LORD almighty raygnes.
And though no matter be in such,
yet judge not thou therefore
They being lack, for perfecter
and fayrer they be more
than things that are of matter made.
For form that can it self sustain
without this matters hand,
Is perfecter than that which void
of matter cannot stand.
Therefore all void of matter there
things perfect are and pure
And in despite of fretting age
and force of fate endure.
And store of goodly things are there
that in this worldly light
GOD has not made, from which proceeds
great joys and Saints delight,
Such joys as tongue of mortal man
can never full define,
Such joys as never can decay
with space of any time.
These incorporeal forms were known
to mind of Plato hie,
Although the envious sort do scorn
his books full bytterly.
But eury man does not aspire
these mysteries to know,
A few them find to whom the LORD
above does favor show,
And gives to them his light that they
these things may plain behold.
In fine, there sprites and Angels are
as many thousand fold
As all the woods contain in leaves
or all the shores in sand,
Or all the Fishes in the seas
or s^arres in Sky that stand,
Yea, number none can them contain,
for since that GOD could frame
Them numberless, he sure so did
the more to spread his name,
Especially since that the world
does void of li(...)s lie,
As is before declared plain
and reason strong does try.
But since they void of body be
and Matter all away
Therefore they never change in time
nor age does them decay,
No greese they feel, nor sleeps nor food
at any time they crave
Nor labor know but joyful youth
continually they have
And freedom chief, no bondage there
no servants in degree
Nor none there are that there compels,
nor none compelled be,
One only Lord they do confess
the King and spring of all
Him worship they and him they love
and serve in general,
They willingly do him obey
and serve in every thing
Rejoicing all his laud and praise
and wondrous acts they sing
Each one does there apply himself
to please with goodly grace,
No fighting there, no cancred spite
nor envy can have place,
Continual peace there florisheth
great love and concord great
Among them is suspicion none
no craft nor false deceat.
In fine the goodliest part it is
of all the world beside,
And far more worthy are the sprites
that in this place abide,
Than those that in the Skies do dwell
and in the Stars do lie,
For look as lower every sphere
does come to earth more nigh,
The meaner sprites it does con^ayne,
and meaner goods does give,
And so much baser is the same.
whereby such things as live
Above the Sky, as they most fair
and good, and blessed show,
So those that in the bowels dark
of earth do dwell below,
Are most ylfauoured, vile, and ill,
and there not all in vain
The stinking lakes and soyels of Hell
to be did Poets feign:
Of Hell where men do after death
their pains for michiefe take
And vainly seek for rest and peace
in ever darkened lake.
But wherefore waste I words in wind
and striving all in vain
Do seek unto such Buzzards blind
the trothe to open plain?
So sore the state of mankind dotes
that it will never know
That either Gods in Heaven be
or sprites in Hell below.
But most men laugh if any man
do tell them credibly
That after death the souls do live
and never more do dye.
Hence springs it that night and day
they richesse seek to gain
This is their greatest carke and care
their greatest toil and pain
That they in Gold and Jewels may
their neighbors far excel,
Gold is the thing that all men seek
in gold their hope does dwell.
For this, runs into raging wars
the Captain stout of mind
For this, his Children wife and house
and country left behind
The Merchant cutting foming seas
in ship with sails set out
Assayes the blewe and dreadful gulfes
and coasts the world about.
Each man does practice craft and theft
this gold to keep in sight
Gold every man desires and loves
gold pleases every wight.
Ne fear they any kind of pains
that after death is due
O altogether earthly men else
that only in the view
From beasts are known. Ca^ you naught
than gold to knowledge call?
By which a wise man from a fool
does differ naught at all
Wherewith fond fortune ill men often
habundantly does feed
Learn you that many things there are
that gold do far exceed
Which unto fools and wicked men,
of God not given be
These are the virtues: Godliness
justice and prudencye
And wisdom passing far the rest.
These goods who does retain
A mortal God is and the same
immortal man again
That after death shall happy be,
but he that has them not
And stains himself with filthy sins
(when death his shaft has shot)
shall headlong into Hell be cast.
These are not trifles, tales or dreams
but true and sure they be,
Yea most assurde, believe it well,
you blind, believe you me,
Woe be to you if that you will
not me herein believe
For life shall quickly you forsake,
and then you shall perceive
That I said true even then when as
your souls in Hell shall lie,
You laugh: but this your joy shall change
to tears and grievous cry.
The time shall come when many men
that now in welthy pride
Do bear the sway and scornefully
both God and man deride
All naked, bare, in misery
and wretched case shall lie
And shall of others aid require
with pyteous woeful cry.
Wherefore O you that have delight
in good and Godly things
Endewed with a better soul
whose roots from heaven springs.
These earthly Gods that as the clouds
away do swifely fly
Which fortune unto fools and knaves
does give most commonly,
And which a few years ended once
does death take clean away
Regard not much, nor in such things
your heap or treasure lay.
Seek you no more than that, which is
for life sufficient
A small thing certes will suffice
with little live content.
But let your chief delight be in
the sacred seats on hye
Seek heavenly things with all your force
to this your minds apply:
In Heaven are the perfect goods
that evermore remain
Which never foolish dolt shall have
nor wicked man obtain.
In earth whatsoever does delight
are trifles all and toys
Which fools and beastly people seek
and count as chiefest joys
For which a thousand hazardes great
they rashely undertake
And offering up their foolish breasts
to death, they skirmishe make
Of this they bost the Bytle does
in dong rejoice to lie
Things filthy, filthy folks do love
and villains villainy.
Leave earthly things to earthly minds
let swine in dirt delight
And let your only travail be
to gain the heavens bright.
The goodlyest things do best become
the men of best degree
And valiant things most meetest are
for them that valiant be.
The earth is but a Chery fair
God has to you assynde
The heavens for your country sweet
your country seek to find.
That when from bonds of body thou
escaped art and gone
And left your flesh for dogs to feed
or worms to gnawe upon
You there may always happy live
from flesh unclean exempt
And lame and often weary limbs
wherein whylest you were pent
Remaining in the vale of tears
and in the mortal rain
Both many harms and sicknesses
and griefs you did sustain
For so the earth may called be
which is the stable sure
Of all the world, the mother and
the nurse of vice vnpure
Whereas the raging Devil dwells
the king of sinful kind
Wherefore it needful is that you
have often death in mind
And with your selves consider well
how nere the door he stands
Still threatening with his deadly darte,
in pale and dreadful hands
How suddenly he strikes therewith
how often he does destroy
The lusty youth and takes away
our fair and flowring joy.
O fading life that subject art
to thousand casualtyes
O to to short and doubtful state
that smoke like from us flies
Now this now that man drops away
and thou this present day
To morrow I, thus at the last
we all do pass away
None otherwise than simple sheep
that Butcher has preparde
In fold to kill, now these now those
with knife he strikes hard.
To morrow other the next day more
thus all in time they dye
Till that by this his slaughters great
the fold does emptye lie.
This fading life therefore despise
which first beginning takes
with tears his midst is toil and grief
and death conclusion makes.
Who will delyght in such a life
except a foolish brain?
Seek you an other life to have
an other life to gain
Whereas no mourning grief or pain
whereas no death is found
Thus happy state you shall receive
when carcass comes to ground
You that have hated sin, and God
have worshipped holylie
And have not put your confidence
in things that worldly be
But chaste, vnhurtful, mild and true
have liude in pure degree.
But some perchance yt think how gods
do dwell in Heavens clear
would also learn some ways or means
(if any such there were)
By which they might with them have talk
and see them face to face
O what a goodly thing were this
and what a wondrous grace
Than which no greater thing on earth
I think can man obtain
But few deserve so great a state
and honor for to gain
For many I grant with devils talk
which easily they entice
By humble prayers made to them
or means of sacrifice
Since far they be not from the earth
but in the air do lie
And oftentimes behold and keep
the people company:
Yea unto many they appear
and serve them willingly
And with the beauty great of youth
enamoured often they be.
But Gods that in the heaven dwell
the things that mortal be
Disdain to know and wicked factes
of men abhor to see
As they that well do understand
how foolish and how vile
Man's nature is how false and bold
and eke how full of guile
Despiser and blasphemer of
the chiefest majesty
Wherefore to have the speech of them
and see them presently
Is labor great and seldom had
because their ears they close
To voice of men and turn away
their eyes from gifts of those
Which after that they be enrichde
with seeds that others sow
A portion small of others goods
upon the Church bestow,
Thinking that Heaven may be sold
O two legged Asses blind
Think you that God is covetous?
and precious stones does mind?
Or has delight in glittering gold?
or needs your help to have?
Do you suppose that he is such
as does your favor crave:
Think you that brybes can him corrupt
as many men they do?
No sure he is not got with gold
nor gifts he looks to:
When that he lives in happyest state
and blessed on every side,
When his are all that earth contaynes
or seas or heavens wide
How can you give to God the things
that his already be?
Does not he rather give to you
the things that here you see?
Therefore since neither they with gifts
nor vows will moved be
A matter very hard it is
them presently to see.
Although the matter be so hard
yet will we pass the way
And what our force in this can do
by proof we will assaye.
First needs we must the means find out
that God does best content
Who is not moude with noble blood
nor unto riches bent
No king nor Ceysar he respectts
nor triumphs does esteem
Ne cares he for such as are
most strong and fairest seem.
But these does utterly despise
nor for the love of them
^ouchsafes the prayers to behold
or present sight of men
Thus must we seek an other way
by which we may obtain
Their speech and presence for to have
perchance my verses plain
This way and means shall bring to light
if that the Gods above
So fair attempts do aid and help
and with their sprite approve.
The first thing is the clenlinesse
of body and of mind
By which, man well esteemde of God
does love and favor find
For all uncleanness does he hate
and does abhor to see,
So fair and blessed is his state
and of so hye degree.
Wherefore we must at first take heed
that we be perfectly
Well purged and pure from filthinee
and all iniquity
Unclothed of our garments black
and clad in comely whites
Which color best with God agrees
and black with fiendishe sprites.
A hard thing is this same I grant
for who does here remain
That leads his life without a fault
and free from blot or stain?
To every man has nature dealt
some crime or vicious kind
And nothing is on earth so fair
but fault therein we find.
Yet are there certain sins so small
and to such trifling end
That in a manner naught at all
the eyes of God offend
Wherewith he is not grieved much
no sores are these nor staynes
But as the little freckels that
in body fair remains
Which easily the Lord forgiues
since well perce^ueth ^ee
How weak and frail the nature is
of such as mortal be.
But great and heinous crimes do much
offend the mighty state
And wicked men he always does
abhor, despise and hate
Nor will he once their prayers hear
except they cleanse before
And wash away their sins with ^eares
and white for black restore
Requiring pardon for their faults
with voice of mourning mind
Obtaining once again the paths
of virtue for to find
And casting of his canckred skin
as in the pleasant spring
The Serpent uses all his skin
of old away to ^^ing.
who thus renewed departes and leaves
his slough in stones behind
And casting up his head alo^t
with proud and stately mind
His breadfull hyssing doubleth often
with tongue of triple kind.
Thus Gods are pleased, and thus when as
we rightly on them call
They show themselves and thus to us
their prophecies let fall.
Yet must there one thing more be had
unto this perfect whight
A Crymsin color must be ioynde,
the beauty then is bright
When as a purple red with white
well entermedled lies
What means this ruddy color here:
sure, love it signifies.
For love resembled is to fire
which fire has reddishe flame
And both a color and an heat
proceeds from the same.
Therefore it needful is beside
that we the Gods above
Do heartily love for he that loves
deserves to have love.
For whosoever loves the Gods
and lives Christianly
Can not be odious unto them
but shall rewarded be
And shall in happy state obtain
whatsoever he does require
But who is he that loves the Lord?
the man that does desire
In filthy entisements of the flesh
and pleasures for to sleep?
Or he that has a great delight
the ravening hawk to keep,
And (mad) in feeding dogs and horse
his living does decay:
Or he that seeks for hye estate
that quickly fades away:
An Owl that in the roufe does fit
a mate of Fortunes play?
Or is it he that upon God
has heart and fancy set
And which he worships as a God
by all means seeks to get?
Believe me: they that earthly things
do covet to obtain
The things that in the heavens are
regard not for to gain.
No man can well two masters serve
for who so joys in white
It follow must that he detestes
the black and grisley sight.
Who so delights in light of Sun
him darkness heavy makes
And he that sweetness loves in bitter
things no pleasure takes
Who so approaches to the earth
must needs the heavens fly
And where as love of earth remains
no man can love the sky
But few (alas) and all to few
these earthly things despise
And able are with wings of mind
to mount unto the skies.
Wherefore? because it is so hard,
to this do I agree:
But great rewards makes greatest pains
both easy and light to be.
what greater thing can be obtaynde
than here with Gods to walk?
And to behold them with our eyes
and thus with them to talk?
This is chiefest Jewel sure
for which we ought to bear
Each kind of travail toil and grief
with good and pleasant cheer.
The Cat would gladly milk receive
but feet she will not wet
The way to virtue sure is hard
yet shall th'vnslouthfull get
Both virtue and honor virtues price
the soldier good ob^aynes
A due reward whereas no praise
the slothful cowarde gaynes.
Therefore we must apply our selves
with all our force and might
That these so glorious states above
in us may have delight
Then every thing we shall be sure
here prosperously to have
Both whilst we live upon the earth
and when we are laid in grave.
why do we thus esteem the earth
that sone we shall forsake
O blinded fools of fading joys
we more account do make
Than of the goods that always lastes
what madness is this same?
Now last remaynes that prayers o^^
with humble mind he frame
That seeks the sight of Gods to have
which once for to require
Suffiseth not but oftentimes
we must and much desire
Till at the length in space of time
we get the victory
And as our mind desires most
obtain the Gods to see.
One stroke does not cut down ye Oak
of old and ancient years,
Nor yet the stone by falling of
one drop of water wears
Nor Rome was builded in a day
each creature, grain and tree
In time spring up, and in great space
of years increased be.
And think thou such a wo^drons thing
and of estate so hie
Can with so little pains be done
and wrought immediately?
So easly can we not the sight
of earthly Kings obtain
Nor come to tell our tales to them
and hear them talk again.
Think thou that Gods (...) better are
than Kings that here we see
Wherefore then should they come except
they often desired be,
Except we them as we do Lords
in humble sort desire
Wherefore we must on every day
them oftentimes require.
That they vouchsafe themselves sometime
to show to us in sight
And with their talk the secret things
to bring abroad to light
This if we do (believe me well)
at length they will appear
And with their presence will us bless
in wretched carcass here
And shortly bring us to the skies
an end of all our strife
whereas the perfectest pleasure is
and eke the happyest life
Then shall we pass and come before
the maker great of skies
And have the Prince of all the world
in view of these our eyes
Than which no better state can be
nor more renouned thing
who is of goodness and bewtye all
the fountain hedde and spring.
But many think it can not be
that unto any here
On earth the sacred sprites above
should talk or thus appear
And think that I but trifles tell.
to these I pardone give.
For nature has not dealt like wit
to all that here do live.
Some still do ponder in their mind
the Heavenly joys above
And always think of hauty things
some, mean things only love
And have no pleasure much to raise
themselves from earthly place
And thousands on the ground do lie
nor thence will rise an ase.
But earthly joy do only mind.
sure in none other wise
Than certain birds that in the air
alo^t most hylye fly
Where many keep the midst thereof
and mount not very hye
The reast frequent the lowest parts
and nere the earth do fly.
Wherefore it is no wonder great
if what I here declare
The common people not believe
whose minds most brutishe are.
Yet true it is that I have told
for how should any one
Live on the mountains cold and dwell
in wilderness alone
And willing lead so hard a life?
sure perish should he staight,
Except some God him comforting
should ease him of this weight.
Believe me he that lives alone
avoiding company
Is either mad, or more than man
does talk with Gods on hye.
In this sort lived the Prophets old
as it apperes by fame,
And many after Christ whom men
did holy Fathers name
And in this present age of ours
full many may we find
That lead their life and spend their years
in this same sort and kind.
These men when they do wisely speak
and reason fair and well
And wonders great do bring to pass
and things to come foretell
Will thou esteem as mad or fond
or to be wayed light?
Or rather will thou judge they be
inspirde with holy sprite?
Bestdes the holy Church affyrmes
that erst have many been
That sacred shapes of blessed ghostes
full oftentimes have seen
Why should not I believe since that
the Church does tell it me?
Therefore it is no fable fond
but does with truth agree,
That men may come to speak with God
and them in presence see
Which I suppose the chiefest good
and final end to be
Of all good things that unto man
may any ways arise
While as of this his present life
the troublous seas he tryes.
And when escaped from mortal chain
the soul has passage straight
Conueying with her self these three
that always on her wait
The mind the sense and moving force
unto the heavens hye
Shall joyful go and there remain
in bliss perpetuallye:
And dwelling there with Gods a God
shall it created be.
O Heaven great O house of Gods
of fairest dignity
How pure art thou how wonderful
with Majesty divine
How garnishte round about with stars
do thou most brightly shine?
Thou palayce well replenished
with every sweet delight.
For if the earth habounds with things
so fair and good to sight
The earth a place for man and beasts
the vylest part of all
what should we think of thee where dwells
the Gods celestial
The Lords and happy kings of all?
O would to God that when
My doleful threeds the Systers three
had fully finished, then
It thither were my hap to come
my Carcass cast in grave:
And evermore such wondrous joys
before my eyes to have.
And now by grace of God I have
of Zodtake finished here
Twelve starry s^gnes which number does
in these my books appear:
A labor great with study long
and tedious travail pende
Yet finished now and closed up
with last and final end.
What thanks shall I thee give O Lord
and Prince of every land
That have me willde so fair and great
attemptes to take in hand
And given me mind and might thereto?
the praise is only thine,
If any fair or goodly thing
in these my books does shine,
For every fair and goodly thing
from thee does first descend
Thou were the first beginning of
this work and final end:
My mind and hand were gouernde by
thy Majesty divine,
To thee I only give the thanks
the honor all is thine.
But yet if any due desert
on these my pains attend
I thee beseech O Lord that when
my life is at an end
This life that night by night I spend
in dreams of vanity
And when the day retornes still vexed
with grief and myserie
Thou wylt vouchsafe in wyping out
my sins to pardone me
Whatsoever I have done (alas)
with mist of mind oppressed
And suffer this my soul with thee
in Heavens hye to rest.
And thou my book in this mean while
through* andry cities run,
Assured under cankred claws
of envy great to come,
For Carpers and Correctors thou
shall find in every place,
Whose mouths with teeth enuenomed
shall tearing thee deface.
Nor some shall surelywatin ng be
which when they nothing can
Do worthy praise will yet rejoice
to rail at every man:
And finding fault at others works
will purchase foolyshe fame.
Shun you such enui^us whelps as these
and mouths that thus defame
And search for good and learned men
which though but few they be
Yet happy may thou dwell with few,
for few of best degree
Has God created here on earth
to such go reverently
And all that we have done lay thou
before the virtuous eye
which if they like it does suffice
and what the rest does say
Regard not thou, but clownishe words
with laughter pass away.
The judgment of the common sort
is gross and eke their mind
Is wondrous weak and foolish things
delights the foolish kind:
All men the meat do most desire
that them does best delight
Each pleasure is not acceptable
to every kind of sprite
But good and learned men the things
of good and godly sense
Give ear unto and read and mark
the same with diligence
This is the food that them does feed
and comfort of their mind
And if foresh^wing do not lie
unto this virtuous kind
Thou shall be heartyly welcomed
and with a smiling look
Of them thou shall perused be.
Go therefore blessed book
Abide along and happy time,
and when the ghastly grave
Encompast round about with earth
my carcass cold shall have,
Through every country (thou alive)
and realms of sundry fame
Go pass, and seek in every place
to blase abroad my name
FINIS.
Non nobis Domine sed nomini tuo.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham, for Rafe Newberye dwelling in Fleet
streate.


