O Lord my God how excellent is thy name in all the world.


Protestants


Papists




half


CHRISTIANOGRAPHIE, OR The Description of the multitude and sundry sorts of
Christians in the World not subject to the Pope.

With their Unity, and how they agree with us in the principal points of
Difference between us and the Church of Rome.

Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Mat. 28.19. And they went forth, and preached every where: The Lord working
with them.

Mark 16.20. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood
before the throne and before the Lamb.

Rev. 7.9. LONDON, Printed by T. P. and W. J. for Matthew Costerden, Stationer.
1635.

REcensui Librum hunc cui titulus Christianographie, etc. una cum Epistola
Dedicatoria ad R. in Christo Patrem, Franciscum Eliensem, Episcopum: qui quidem
liber continet folia 88. in quo nihil reperio, quo minus cum publica utilitate
Jmprimatur, modo intra sex menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Ex aedi. Londin. Octobris 30. Samuel Baker.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD Francis Lord Bishop of Elie, my very good
Lord.
IT was an observation of our late Sovereign Lord, King James: that VVheras
the Romanists cannot confirm their Faith, either by sacred Scripture, or
ancient Traditions; Their manner is to cry up the Visibilitie of the Church,
and Authority of the same: And thereby they delude many of the ignorant and
unlearned, bearing them in hand, that there was no such thing in the world as a
Protestant, before Luther: And that before his time, all the world believed as
they do: And that their Church has not only been visible in all ages, and
all times, but eminently conspicuous, and illustrious. And to this purpose one
of that Sect lately delivered to a person of quality, this writing following,
viz. It is plain in holy Scripture, and confessed by the Protestants, that the
Church of God should be always visible, and it was agreed by D. White, and D.
Featly, to Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Sweet, to prove a visible succession in the
Protestant Church, that they both could and would in all ages, from Christ to
Luther by name, out of good Authors produce Doctors and Pastors professing the
Religion, which the Church of England, and Protestants profess. This was
promised, This is now required, without shifts, and idle delays, etc.

Whereas in this writing, an absolute promise is pretended to be made by your
Lordship, and D. Featley, to Master Fisher, and Master Sweet: I find in the
relation of the conference (testified and subscribed by Honorable personages,
and others,) The said promise to be made but upon condition only: Conference.
page 7.
That the forenamed Jesuits would show visible professors of the entire
Doctrine of the Romish Church, (as yet it is comprised in the Council of
Trent) in all ages, and name them out of good Authors, especially for the first
600. years.

And in particular your Lordship required them to prove, by Christ and his
Apostles, Conference. page 22.
or by any of the Fathers for the first 600. years, these six Tenets of the
Roman Church, viz.

1. That all power of Order, and Jurisdiction, in respect of the Churches, is
to be derived from the Church of Rome. 2. That no Scripture sense, or
Translation thereof, is Authentical, unless the same were received from the
Church of Rome. 3. That the Roman Church only was, and is the Authentical
Custos of unwritten Traditions. 4. That all general Councels were called by
the sole Authority of the Pope, and that he might ratify and disanull
whatsoever pleased him in them. 5. That the Pope has power to Canonize Saints.
6. That the Pope had or has power to depose Princes.
Likewise, Conference. page 7.
Doctor Featley required of them, to produce out of good Authors, not any
Empire or Kingdom, but so much as any City, Parish or Hamlet, within 500.
years after Christ, in which there was any Visible assembly of Christians to
be named, maintaining and defending either their Trent Creed in general, or
these points of Popery in special, Conference. page. 9.
to wit:

1. That there is a treasury of Saints merits, and super abundant
Satisfactions, at the Popes disposing. 2. That the Laiety are not commanded by
Christ's institution, to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both
Kinds. 3. That the public service of God in the Church, ought, or may be
celebrated in an unknown tongue. 4. That private Masses wherein the Priest
says (edite and bibite ex hoc omnes) and yet eats and drinks himself
only, are according to Christ's institution. 5. That the Popes pardons are
requisite, or useful to release souls out of Purgatory. 6. That the effect of
the Sacrament depends upon the intention of the Minister. 7. That extreme
unction is a Sacrament properly so called. 8. That we may worship God by an
Image. 9. That the sacred Host ought to be elevated, or carried in solemn
procession. 10. That Infidels, and Impious persons, yea Rats and Mice; may eat
the body of Christ. 11. That all Ecclesiastical power depends on the Pope.
12. That he cannot err in matter of Faith. 13. That he has power to
cannonize Saints. 14. To institute Religious orders. 15. To depose Kings, etc.
He also urged Master Fisher, and Master Sweet, to name but one Father or one
writer of note, who held the particulars above named, for 500. years after
Christ: which they would not, nor could do.

Whereby any man may see, that they who call for a Succession in our Church,
cannot show it in their own.

Moreover, it is not a succession of persons, or catalogue of names, that
makes a true Apostolic Church; But the true primitive Faith once given to
the Saints, set down in holy Scripture.

Our Lord himself tells us, that he that is baptized, and believes, shall
be saved: Mark 16.16.
now to persuade such a one that is baptized, and believes, that he is no
member of Christ's Church, except he can also set down a catalogue of the names
of his spiritual parents, since Christ, is all one, as to persuade such a one
that he is no man, because he cannot reckon up his natural parents, and fetch
his pedigree from Noah or Adam.

Lastly, whereas they clamor for a catalogue of names (as in this writing)
without all shifts and idle delays, they have catalogues plenty, written both
by strangers, as by Jllyricus, by Simon de Voyons, Mounsier Plessis, and
others, and by our countrymen, as by B. Jewel for the first 500. years, by
the Primate of Armagh for the next 500. years; and by the late Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury, for the last 500. years, with diverse others, to which they have
returned no answer, as I can hear of, but they lie upon their hands: also of
late, Mr. Birckbeck has written a catalogue, who acknowledges Doctor Featlies
great furtherance in it, (as I also do) but most especially, I acknowledge my
self bound unto your Lordship, for your help and encouragement, which
imboldened me both to write, and publish this Treatise.

Now although the contents of the former writing have been sufficiently
answered, again, and again, and need nothing of mine, being one of the
meanest of all my brethren: Yet I showed them that brought it me, that in stead
of a Catalogue of Names, I would show them a Catalogue of Churches, in which
there now are, and have been many millions of Christians, who have generally
borne witness, and now do, to the truth professed by us, and our Religion, in
the principal points in controversy between the Roman Church and us, as the
Greek Church, which has four great Patriarchs.

The first of Constantinople, whose succession I have set down from Saint
Andrew to Cyrill, the now Patriarch: which succession, The Cophti have also a
Patriarch of Alexandria: Alexandria was inhabited with Greeks, and also many
other great Cities and Provinces, both Africa and Asia, have at this day many
Greeks in them.
has not been so interrupted with so many Schisms, as the Romish succession
has been.

The second of Alexandria.

The third of Antioch.

The fourth of Jerusalem: which Greek Church, is much bigger then the Romish
Church in Europe, and more ancient; The Romish Church having received
Christianity from them.

Again, the Moscovite or Russe Christians, who inhabit many countries not
only in Europe, but also in Asia, as the great Kingdoms of Casan, and
Astracan, and other great Provinces, all which together are of greater extent
then all Europe besides; As also the Christians under the Patriarch of Musall
in Asia, which Christians Vitriacus the Cardinal reports to live in
several, Vt de his qui seorsum habitant quorum infinitus est numerus,
taceamus, inter Saracenos non pauciores, ut dicitur, sunt Christiani
infidelibus. Vitria. histo. orient. cap. 77.
in infinite numbers with their King, and also where they live mingled with
Saracens, they are not fewer then they: and howsoever some say that these
Christians are decayed since Vitriacus time, yet Postell reports, idem page
76. de Iacobitis.
that they are yet more then the Latin Church. Postel. Compend. Cosmog. page
69. Dico pauci, comparatione priorum temporum, ^on in se, namsunt nobis latinis
multo plures.
As also the Jacobites dispersed in forty Kingdoms. The Armenian Christians
in Europe, Asia, and Africa, who have a thousand Bishops, as Cardinal Baronius
reports, out of Otho Frisigensis; and also the Abissin Christians in
Aethiopia, under their Emperor, who has many great Kingdoms of Christians
under him. All these, and many more hereafter set down; as they do agree with
us in the maine points of Religion, being all baptized in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc. so also,

1. They deny the Popes Supremacy, some of them excommunicating him yearly
for an Heretic, or Schismaticke, accounting him, and his Church heretical.
2. They receive the Communion in both kinds. 3. They have no private Mass. 4.
They hold no Transubstantiation. 5. They offer no sacrifice for the quick, and
the dead, in their Liturgies. 6. Married Priests do administer amongst them.
7. They know no Purgatory, nor use any Prayers, nor sell any Pardons to
release souls from thence. 8. Most of them have their Service in their own
tongues.
Now howsoever the Romanists account no more of the testimonies of these
Christians, then of the testimonies of Jews and Turks, and esteem them
damned persons, as they do us; yet let them know, that these Christians are
baptized, and believe in Christ; and also live devoutly to God, obediently to
Princes, and sincerely to men: yea many of them, suffer very much for Jesus
Christ's sake, which they might free themselves of, if they would renounce their
Religion, and obtain great honor, and estate; for the Turks Janisaries, and
Basha's, are most of them renegado Christians, but these poor Christians
account their Savior more dear to them, then all the honors, and riches of
the world.

Therefore far be it from any Christian Soul to account these men damned,
as the Romanists do, only for not being subject to the Bishop of Rome, Bonif.
8. in extrar. de major. and obedi. cap. unam sanctam, etc.
according to their Tenet: That every Soul must of necessity of Salvation be
subject to the Bishop of Rome.

As for the Dedication, in regard I have received many kindnesses from your
Lordship, both when you were my neighbor, and since: I am bold to present this
Treatise to your Lordship, desiring your patronage and protection; and also
most humbly entreating Almighty God to multiply his blessings upon you, to your
own Comfort, and good of his Church.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted, EPHRAIM PAGITT: Parson of the Church of
St. Edmonds the King in Lombardstreet London.

To the Reader.
THat which J intend in this treatise, is, to show that there are many
Christian Churches as well in Europe, as in the other parts of the world, that
do not adhere to the Roman Church, nor acknowledge the Pope for their head.
Invaine therefore, and to no purpose, do many of that party run up and down
the world, and cry up the Church of Rome, for that one, holy, catholic
Church, which is so assisted by the holy Ghost that it cannot err, when she is
indeed but a member (and no sound one neither) of that body; as being miserably
infested at this day (which also the learned and sober men amongst themselves
cannot deny) with many new and fond opinions, and with superstitious practices
not a few.

The Greek Church may, for ought I know, by the same reason say, that she is
that one infalible, Catholic Church, that all are Schismatickes that
communicate not with her, and that out of that church there is no salvation to
be had. One thing Iadde by way of caution: J have cited many of the opinions
and practices of those Christians, that live in the Eastern, and other remote
parts of the world, but J do not undertake to justify them in every
particular; J would not be so understood: it suffices for my present purpose,
to show, that many Millions of Christians in the world, differ from the
Papists, J, and that in the most of those things, wherein they, and we do
disagree, and which is the maine of all, that few, or none of all these do
acknowledge the Church of Rome for their Mother, or have any dependence on her.

The God of peace make peace in Christendom, and grant that all they that
confess his holy name may agree in the truth of his holy word, and live in
unity and godly love. Amen. So prays

Thine in our common Savior:

The Contents of the first Chapter.
THe several sorts of Christians in the World not subject to the Pope, or
differing in Religion from him.

First in EVROPE, Protestants, Greeks, and Muscovites.

Secondly, in ASIA, The Christians under the Patriarch of Jerusalem. Antioch.
The Armenians. The Georgians The Mengrellians. The Cinassians. The Christians
in Asia the less. Muscovite Christians in Asia. Christians under the Patriarch
of Musall. The Jacobites. Christians of St. Thome. The Maronites.


Besides the Curdi, Morduites, Drusi, and the Christians of Taprobana.

Thirdly, in AFRICA.

The Cophti under the Patriarch of Alexandria.

The Abassines, or Ethiopian Christians.

The contents of the second Chapter.
The several habitations of these Christians, in Europe, Asia, and Africa.

The contents of the third Chapter.
The Unity, and how these Churches agree with us in the principal points
wherein we differ from the Church of Rome. Jn this chapter is set down; 1 The
principal differences between the Church of Rome and us. 2 The points in
which these Churches agree with us, with some of their Liturgies. 3 That I
find these Churches are not heretical, but orthodox in the maine. 4 Of the
harmony of the Protestants among themselves. 5 Of the differences, and want of
Unity, amongst the Romanists. 6 Our Unity with the ancient East, West, and
South Churches; and especially with Gregory, who is pretended to be the founder
of the Romish Religion amongst us. 7 Our agreement with the ancient Britans,
our forefathers. 8 The lives and conversations of those Churches comparatively.


The Contents of the fourth Chap.
Of the Antiquity of these Churches.

1 Some of them are more ancient then the Romish Church. 2 The old Church of
Rome, and the now church, are not one, but different. 3 The now church of Rome
as it is a new church, so likewise it has new Articles of Faith, etc.
The Contents of the fifth Chapter.
A Succession of Bishops in Jerusalem. Antioch Alexandria. Rome, for 600.
years. In Constantinople for some years. The Metropolites and Bishoprics of
Constantinople. Antioch. Jerusalem. Africa. The Bishops of Constantinople,
from Stachys to this day.
That the Roman Bishops since Gregory, differ in Title, Jurisdiction, Life, and
Doctrine from the former.

A Succession of the Emperors of Constantinople, and of Aethiopia.

The Contents of the sixth Chapter.
By what means the Papal Monarchy has been raised, and how it has been,
and is upheld; in which is set down.

1. The primitive estate of the Roman Bishops. 2. How they got the title of
head of all other Churches: and how they increased their Jurisdiction. 3 The
Popes Temporalties. 4 How the Pope got Superiority above the Emperors. 5 Of
their inventions to get money. 6 Of the Popes state and magnificence. 7 Of the
Popes munificence and gifts. 8 Guicchardines relation of the Popes rising. 9
How the Popes keep that they have.
Jn giving of Kingdoms to Princes.

In dispensing with marriages, and oaths.

Their Corrupting the Fathers.

Suppressing the reading of holy Scriptures. Their inventing scandalous lies
and Books etc.

The Conclusion.
A letter sent from the Patriarch of Alexandria, to the late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and his Answer to the same.

CHRISTIANOGRAPHIE, or the description of the sundry sorts of Christians in
the world, not subject to the Pope.
AMongst the usual and false pretenses, wherewith our Adversaries of Rome have
long gone about to deceive the simple and ignorant. One of the principal, is
the Paucitie of the Professors of the Reformed Religion, and the Multitude and
Amplitude of them, and their Religion, as if all the Christian Kings,
Emperouns, and Bishops, before King Henry the Eight, and Archbishop Cranmer,
and also the whole Church of God had been subject to the Bishop of Rome: but
only a few Protestants, shut up in an obscure corner of Europe: To discover
the falsehood of these, their vain and glorious boasting. I purpose to set
down.

1 The Churches of Christians in the world, not subject to the Pope, or
differing in Religio from him. 2 The places of their Dwellings, and large
Habitations. 3 Their UNITY, and how they do agree with us in the principal
points in Controversy between the Church of Rome and its. 4 The ANTIQVITY of
these Churches, some of them being more ancient then the Church of Rome. 5 A
SVCCESSION of Bishops in some of their Patriarchall Churches, and other
Episcopal Sees. 6 How the Church of Rome has been advanced above other
Churches, and how it has been since supported and held up.
The several sorts of Christians In the world, not subject to the Pope, or
differing in Religion from him
CAP. I.
CHristianity is not confined to one Country or Nation, but it is dispersed
over the face of the whole Earth. Our Lord and Savior being ready to ascend
into Heaven, commanded his Apostles, Mat. 28 19
saying, Go ye and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And this his commandment the
holy Apostles put in execution. Mar. 16.20.
They went forth and preached every where, the Lord working with them. In the
Ecclesiastical histories, the contries and Nations are named, in which and to
whom they preached.

Peter preached in Judea, Pererius ad Roman: cap. 30 sect. 27.
ANTIOCH, Galatia, Cappadocia, Pontus, in Asia, Bithinia, and Rome.

James The son of Zebedee, in Judea and Spain.

John, in Iudaea and Asia the less. ex Origene. Dorotheo, En sebio Hierony mo,
Isidore aliisque.


Andrew in Scythia, Europea, in Epirus, Thratia and Achaia.

James the brother of our Lord in Jerusalem.

Philip in Scythia and Phrygia.

Bartholmew in the farther India, and Armenia the great.

Matthew in Ethiopia.

Thomas to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Brachmans, Hircanians, Bactrians and
Jndians.

Simon in Mesopotamia, Judas in Egypt, and both after in Persia.

Matthias in the higher Ethiopia,

Also Paul and Barnabas, in many countries of Europe and Asia.

All these published the same faith for substance, Per Dei voluntatem in
scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum et columna^ fidei nostrae futuram, Co
len. 1625. Irenaeus advers. haeres: lib. 3. cap. 1 Mat. 28.20.
which we at this day profess in the Church of England, for they taught those
things that Christ commanded them, which are set down by the will of God, in
holy Scripture, to be the pillar and foundation of our faith, as Irenaeus
writeh. And although men are generally persuaded, that these Churches are
perished, or become Heretics, yet according to Gods promise of assistance, not
only to themselves, (viz) Lo, I am with you always, but also to their
Successors, preaching after them, even to the latter end of the world,
Christianity remains in many of these Regions to this day; maugre the cruelty
of the Tyrants, and malice of the devil, as will appear afterward by the
testimony of Historiographers, and other unreproveable Authors.

Some make but six sorts of Christians in the world.

First the East Church, which challenges to her self the first place, in
regard of her prerogatives and privileges, as having almost all the
Apostolic Sees, The greatest number of Patriarcks, the Majesty of the Empire
of Constantinople, for above 1000 years, which has withstood Paganism and
Mahometisme, and of the Empire of Trebizonde and Mosco, for some 100 of years:
the authority of Seven General Counsels held amongst them: the Syrian
language, in which the Son of God delivered his holy Oracles, and the Hebrew
and Greek tongues, in which they were registered, and which has had not only
all the holy Apostles and Disciples, but Christ himself when he was in his
flesh, preaching amongst them; Of the communion of this Church, are the
Grecians, the Muscovites, the Georgians, the Mengrellians, the Circassians, the
Syrians, or Melchites and others.

The second, They make the Church of Rome in the west: whose Bishops were for
some 100, of years, many of them holy men and Martyrs.

Now their chief is the Pope, who pretends himself to be Christ's alone
Vicar, and Head of the Church, and to have all power, not only spiritual,
above Counsels and the whole Church of God, but also Temporal above all
Princes, Kings, and Emperors, and that he alone has the Keys of Heaven,
Hell, and Purgatory, and he has in his Treasury the good deeds or works of
Supererogation and Superabundant satis factions of all Saints and Martyrs, to
bestow them upon whom he list, and that he in cathedra cannot err, and that
none can besaved, but those that are under his Jurisdiction

Of this Church, Italy, Spain, and many other Regions are members, as
afterward more largely is set down.

The third is the South or Meridional Church in Egypt under the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and the Abassins in Ethiopia under their Abunna.

The fourth, are Christians falsely called Nestorians under the Patriarch of
Musall, in diverse parts of Asia, who are accused to hold the Heresy of
Nestorius which they have revoked.

The fifth are the Armenians in Armenia; and dispersed in Europe, Asia, and
Africa.

The sixth, are the Protestants of the Reformed Churches who inhabit a great
part of Europe.

But that you may the better take notice of these several sorts of Christians,
not subject to the Pope, I purpose to set them down according to their
habitations in the several parts of the world.

The whole world may be divided into two parts; the Old and the New, The one is
called the Old, because it was inhabited many years before the New was heard
of amongst us: either of these, may again be subdivided into three parts. The
old in to Europe, Asia, and Africa, The new, into America, and the North, and
the South, unknown continents.

Europe the first part of the old world, EVROPE. Travelors breviat.
(as I read) has in longitude from the farther part of Ireland west, unto the
River Tanais East, both places having 52 degrees for latitude 2166 miles And in
latitude, from Morea in Graecia South, in the degree 35 to 72 North, 2220 or
thereabouts. This is the least part of the world, but the best, being best
inhabited, and the inhabitants thereof, excelling in Arts and Sciences; And
moreover, Christian Religion flourishes in Europe, more then any part of the
world else.

There are four sorts of Christians in EVROPE.

1 The PROTESTANTS or Reformed Churches, under their several METROPOLITANS or
Superintendents.

The Papists, under the Pope of Rome.

3 The Grecians, under the Patriarch of Constantinople.

4 The Muscovites, under their Patriarch of Mosco.

Asin the second part of the old world, measuring it with a right line from the
River Tanais, ASIA.
to the promontory Tamos, both places having 50 degrees of latitude, it has in
longitnde 4284 miles, and measuring it with a right line, from the 150 degree
of Eoplin octiall unto The promontory Tabin, it has in North latitude 76
degrees, which being multiplied by 60 makes 4560 miles, allowing 60 miles for
each degree. This part of the world is famous, in regard of the great
Monarchies, as of Persians, Medes, Assyrians, and Babylonians, but indeed most
celebrated in holy writ for the CREATION of man in it, for the giving of the
law; for the Invention af Acts and Sciences. It being the place also, in which
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was borne, lived, wrought his Miracles and
offered himself a sacrifice for our sins.

In Asia are these several sorts of Christians following.

1 The Christians in PALESTINE under the Patriarch of Jerusalem. 2 The Syrians
or MALCHITES, under the Patriarch of Antioch. 3 The ARMENIANS, under their two
Catholic Patriarchs. 4 The GEORGIANS, under their Metropolitan. 5 The
MENGRELLIANS. under the Patriarch of Constantinople. 6 The CIRCASSIANS. under
the Patriarch of Constantinople. 7 The CHRISTIANS of Asia the lesser. under the
Patriarch of Constantinople. 8 Some Christians in Asia under the Patriarch of
Mosco. 9 The Christians under the Patriarch of MVSALL. 10 The Iacobites under
their Patriarch. 11 The Christians of St. Thomas. 12 The Maronites under their
Patriarch.
Also to these Christians, I might add diverse others in Asia, as the Curdi, the
Morduits, and the Christians inhabiting the great Isle of Traprobana, with the
Islands nere thereunto. Theinhabitants of the which Isles never acknowledged, nor
their fathers the Popes of Rome, Cos; lib. 10. cap. 15
as Thomas a Jesus reports

Africa the third part of the old world, AFRICA.
is all compassed with the Seasaving in one place, where it is by an istmos
divided from Asia, measuring it from Gambra on the West; to Cape Gardafu, on
the East, (both places having ten degrees North latitude) has in longitude
4155 miles, and in latitude, from the Cape of good Hope, to the Mediterranean
Sea, about 4020 miles, containing 67 degrees or thereabouts.

In Africa are these Christians following.

1 The Egyptians or Cophti, under the Patriarch of Alexandria. 2 The Abassins
or Ethiopian Christians, Quandoquidem hodie multi sunt, qui cum nihil sciant,
scire omnia velint, asscrentes nullos (in his max imis regionibus usque ad
Indiam) inveniri Christianos. Id quod veru^ non est, sed ubique Christus in
mundo suoshabet cultores Id quidem verum est omnes Christia nos transmarinos
^usa Armenos,
under their Abunna or Patriarch of Ethiopia.
Thus you shall find it to be true, that Brochardus the Monk writes of the
eastern countries, although there are many now adaves, who knowing nothing,
would seem to know all things, affirming that there are no Christians to be
found in these great Regions, evon 10 ^^lia, which is not true, for Christ has
his worship ^^ in all places but it is true that all the Christ is b^^^ yond
the feas viz, the Armenians, Cappadocians, Greeks, Chaldeans, Medes, Parthians,
Indians, Nubeans, Iabeans, Asians, Georgians.



EVROPA


and other Oriental people are thought to be Saracens, Cappadoces Gracos,
Chald^os, Medos, Parthos, Indos, Nubeanos, labeanos, Asianos, Georgianos, et
reliquos orientales, populos Savacenorum esse putentur at que perfidiae illrum
subiacere quum tamen ibi fere omnes sint Christiani, id quod ego expertus sum
in Cilicia et Armenia minori quae parent Tartaroru^ principi tamen sunt meri
Christiani qui eas inhabi tant regiones Praeterea eos quos nes damnatos esse
Iudicamus haereticos ut sunt Nestorian^ Iacobitae, Maronitae Georgiani, et
similes ego plerumque inveni bonos et simplices esse homi nes sincer equeergae
Deum et homines viventes. Brochard: Monac: Terra sancta descriptio page 325.
and to be subject to their miscreant impieties, when yet they are almost all
Christians. That which I found (says he) by experience in Ctlicia, and Armenia
the less, although subject to the Tartarian Prince, yet they were mere
Christians that inhabit those countries. Moreover those whom we judge to be
damned heretics, as the Nestorians, Iacobites, Maronites, Georgians, and such
like, I found them to be for the most part, honest and simple men living
uprightly toward God and man.

All these several sorts of Christians before named in Europe, Asia, and
Africa, are not subject to the papal jurisdiction, or differ from the Pope in
religion, except the Papists, and some of the Indians and Maronites, who also
differ in some things from the Papists.

The several habitations of the Christians before named, and first in Europe.
CAP. II.
The Protestants.
THE Protestants inhabit the Kingdoms of England, England, Scotland, Ireland.
Scotland, and Ireland, which being two Islands, the first of them, to wit great
Britain contains in compass 1836 miles, Cambdeni Britannia page 2.
and Jreland 400 miles in length, and about 200 in breadth. The Monarch of
great Britain has in actual possession, 19 ancient Kingdoms and
principalities. England anciently contained seven, Scotland three, Wales has
had 3 principalities.
Ireland five, Wales three, and the Jle of Man one: The inhabitants speak nine
several languages, as English, Scottish, Welsh, Cornish, Jrish, Monish, Gotish,
in the Orcade Isles (which are 32) French, in Iarsy, and Garnsy, and Dutch, in
several places where many Netherlanders dwell, having Churches and their
service in their own tongue.

The Kingdom of England, Imperiorum mundi Catalogus Authore Ioanne Boter. Rex.
Angliae page 17.
is divided into 52 sheeres. In one only whereof called Yorkshire, it is
thought that 70 thousand men may be levied. The chief City is London, in
which and the Subburbs 2 miles about, there are esteemed to be about 600000
souls. In the last plague there was buried in one year about 63000 persons.
The whole I Will of great Britain may be reputed for one impregnable fortres, the
sea coasts being generally cliffie and in accessible. The shipping thereof are
of great force, and doubled (as I hear) since the beginning of the Reign of
our late Sovereign Lord King James. In Auglia Cantu ariensis Patriarcha
nominatur Glossa d. 21. verb. Archiepiscopus apud Miraeum notit Episcop. lib. 1
Cap: 14 page 34.
In these two Islands before named, are the sees of 8 Archbishops. The
Archbishop of Canterbury has head the title of a Patriarch. England has about
25 Bishoprics, Scotland has many, and Ireland has had above 40. Again,
Iread that there are not so many statly and bewtiful Churches, in so much
circuit of ground in all the world as are in England And last of all, the glory
of great Britain is our religious and pious King Charles, for whose prosperity
and long life I most humbly supplicate Almighty God.

Also the kingdom of Denmark, which contains under it, Denmark and Norway.
Boter. rel univers: par. 2 Rex Daniae Norvegtacoe si stende spatio di piu di
mill e trecento miglia: Mirae lib. 4 cap. 23 notit Episcop.
the Cimbricke Chersonesse, the Balticke Island, and others, and the Kingdom of
Norway, which alone contains in length, about 1300 miles, and in breadth
half so much; there are rekoned, in Denmark and Norwaty; two Archbishops and
14 Bishops, the Archbishop of Lunden is primate of Denmark, and the Archbishop
of Nidrosia, is Primate of Norway. To this kingdom belong some great Islands in
the Ocean.

The kingdom of Sweden with Scricfinnia, Sweden, astim^tur haec terrarum pars:
Italia et Francia mayor. Im per: munds. Catat: Rex Sueciae.
Biarmia, and other provinces thereunto belonging, is bigger than France and
Italy, but not so peopled.

The Swedes possess in Livonia, Revalia, and Narue, and other pieces of good
estimation: It is divided (besides Livonia) into three several kingdoms,
(viz) Cothland, Sweueland, and Vandalia; in Sweveland, Vpsalia is their chief
City and an Archbishopricke, Stockholme is the Kings seat. There is mainreined
in Sweveland and Gothland about 32 Companies of foot, every troop consisting
of five or six hundred harquebussiers, and thirteen companies of horse: The
late King, was thought to have eight thousand pieces of great Ordnance, and
most of brass; There are in Sweden one Archbishop, and six Bishops.

Part of the Netherlands, (videl.) three parts of the Duchy of Guelders, Part
of the Netherlands. Relation of the most famous King domes etcpag. 200
the Earledomes of Holland Zeland, Zutphen, The Lordships of Freezland, Vtrech,
Overissell, and Groaning, and some part of Brabant and Flanders, and these
countries where the Protestants religion is publicly professed, although they
are not so great as the other possessed by the Papists, yet they are more
populous and richer: they keep about 30000. men in continual garrison.

In Switzerland of the thirteen Cantons, the Protestants in strength,
Switzers. Grizons. Sr. Edwins Sands relation, sect. 45.
and amplenesse of Territory much exceed the Papists. I read that two thirds
of the Switzers and Grizous, were Protestants.

For the Protestants in Germany, Germany. preface to Mr. Brerewoods enquiries.
In the preface to Mr. Brerewoods inquire I find, the whole Empire excluding
Bohemia and Austria: (where of the one, is rather an Arbi^er, in the election
of the Emperor, then an Elector, and the Archduke of the other, has only a
kind of extraordinary place in the diet, amongst the ecclesiastical Princes),
consists of three orders or S^ats, the Princes Ecclesiastical, the Princes
temporal, and the free Cities. Of the last of these to wit the cities some of
them termed the hanse towns, are seated in the Northern parts of Germany
between Dantisck Eastward, and Hamburge Westward. Many of these Cities as
Hamburge Stoad and Lubeck (in times past a Dukedom) have been able to put to
sea every one of them 150 ships.

These Sea towns with the rest of the Inland free Cities, Pretestantium parts
sequunt^^ libere ^ivitates omnes: soculares Principes fere omnes Catholicoruns
a secularibus principes pauci ut Bavarus Clevensis, These: Polity. a potelesma
6. Sle^d Comment: lib. 24. page 302.
do in a manner either in whole or a part profess the reformed religion,
except three in lower Swe via, which adhere wholly to the Roman Church (called
Gmond whirlingen, and Dickels puhell.) Of the strength and wealth of these
inland free Cities we may guess by a particular loss: Which was in Anno 1554
Albert Marquess of Brandenburge, whose sword was in a manner a law, and his
revenue, besieged the City of Norinberg, he burnt 100 of the villages belonging
to it; 70 Manors and farms appertaining to the Citizens, and 3000 acres of
wood, and yet after all this spoil he compounded with them for 200000 Crowns
and six pieces of Ordnance.

All the Princes temporal of the Empire were firmly Protestants, Preface
before named, anno 162^.
none of note excepted besides the Duke of Bavaria and Cleve. Now what the
multitudes of subjects there are professing the same Faith with these Princes
we may guess by the amplenesse of the Dominions under the Government of such
only who for their Commands are chief^ and most ominent among them: As of the
Prince Elector Pilatine; the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg the
Duke of Mirtemburg, Landgrave of Hesse Manquesse of Buden, Prince of Anhault,
Dukes of Brunswi^ke, Holst, Luneburg, Mec^lenburg, Pomexane, Sweyburg: Amongst
whom the Marquess of Brandenburg, has for his dominion not only the
Marchisate it self containing an circuit about 520 miles, and furnished with
50 Cities, and aborit 60 other walled Towns: but likewise part of Prus ^^ for
which he is feudatary unto the King of Poladd: The Region of Prignitz, The
Dukedom of Crossen; the signiories of Sternberg and Coibus. The County of
Rapin, and lately the three Dukedomes of Cleve, Gulick, and Berg: of which the
two former of them have either of them in circuit 130 miles.

There was an old estimate made of Germany by such as favored the Papacy: Sr.
Ed. Sands loco citato, supposes the Pupasts to be sixth part.
that in the beginning of Ferdinand the Emperor, there was not past on twelfth
part of i^^ remaiding. Catholickle. There can no exact relation be made of we
Protestants there at this day, by reason of the daily alteratiomoaused by the
wanes^^^ Hungary preface to Brerw: enquir.


In Hungary the Protestants dwell in great multitudes and some thinkle they
maked agr^^ter part; especially being compared only with such as are there
addicted to the Romish superstition.

And in Transylvania in a manner the whole body of the inhabitants were
protestants by the favor of Gabniell Batthorius; Transylvania Preface to Mr.
Brer. inquir.
late their Prince, who did expel all such as were of the Iesuitical faction.

For the Archduke of Austria's and the Archduke of Gratzs Countries, Austria
Nobiles fere omnes qui in subditos and clientes Iudicia exercent, exnumque
nonnulli vitae and necis habent potestatem, movarum opinionum veneno infecti
sunt, These Polit. apot. 6. Bohemia.
A great part of the people, and especially of the Nobility, are that way
affected: In Austria freedom of Religion was granted by the Emperors
Maxinullian and Matthias.

And in the Kingdom of Bohemia, and some places thereto adjoining, in which
have been 32000 parishes or towns although the Ministers have been lately
expulsed and the King, dome conquered, yet the Protestants dwell in great
numbers.

In the Kingdom of Polonia having under its dominion, Polonia Preface to
Brerwood before.
Polonia, Lituania, Livonia, Podolia, Rus^ia, the lesle Volhinia, Massovia,
Prussia which united as it were within one roundish enclosure, are in circuit
about 2600 miles: and of no less space, then Spain, and France laid together.

In this so large and ample Kingdom. The Protestants in great numbers are
diffused through all quarters thereof; having in every Province their public
Churches, and Congregations, orderly severed, and bounded with Diocesses: from
whence are sent some of the chiefest and most principal men of worth, unto
their general Synods: Of which within these few years, they have held five
with great celebrity, as at Sendomire, Ann. 1570 Cracoria 1573. Petricove 1578.
Woodislane 1583. and at Torune 1595.

In Poland there are also 8 Russe or Greek Bishoprics. Mira: de notit.
opiscop. lib. 4. cap. 19. page 213.
The Archbishop of Kiow is their Metropolitan. They have also many Armenians,
who have a Bishop of their own resident at Leopolis.

For the kingdom of France and the state of the Protestants there. France.
Preface before named.
In the year 1622. I find this written viz. In this mighty Kingdom, those, as
they usually style them, (of the Religion) besides the Castles and Forts, that
belong in a property to the Duke of Bullen, the Duke of Rhoan, the Count of
Lavall, the Duke of Trimovile, Mounsier Chastillion, the Marshall of Diguers,
the Duke Sally, and others, they are seized of above 70 towns, having
Garrisons of Soldiers, governed by Nobles and Gentlemen of the Religion, They
have 800 Ministers retaining pensions out of the public Finances, and are so
dispersed through the chief Provinces of the kingdom, That in the
Principality of Orange and Poictou, almost all the inhabitants. Of Gascony
half. In Languedoe, Normandy, and other Western Provinces, a strong party
profess the Religion. Now howsoever the King has taken Rochell, and most of
their Forts into his hands; yet they still enjoy their Churches and free
liberty; And have now many Churches or congregations at this day: For the
assurance of those of the reformed Religion, see the Edict of Nantes, enacted
by Henry the Third, confirmed by Henry the 4, and restablished by Lewis the
thirteenth, printed in London, 1623.

In Piemont Luooa and some other parts of Italy there are some Protestants:
Piemont, etc.
and also in the Venetian territories.

And thus much of the countries inhabited by the Procestants.

The Papists inhabit.
Spain containing the kingdoms of Castile, Spain.
Navarre, Portugale, Arragon, Granda and some other, Maginus.
which are all in compass as Maginus writes about 1893 common miles being
somewhat more in compass then the I Will of great Britain but not so well
peopled. Damiae a Goes Hispania, p. 6.7.8.
Damianus a Goes reckons in Spain ten Archbishoprickes, and 48
Bishoprics. Their revenues are very great as the Archbishop of Toledo has
150000 ducats yearly and about 100000 ducats more yearly to bestow: The
Archbishop of Sevil 24000, etc. Boterus reports that the Clergies revenue is
inestimable. The inhabitants of Spain are detained in superstition, by the
vigilance, of the Inquisition, and their own ignorance, The Laity being
debarred from reading the sacred Scriptures in the vulgar, without special
license whereby they might come to the knowledge of the truth: This country is
much exhausted of people by reason or peopling the West Indies and their daily
wars. And in Spain are a sort of people caled Maurani who are said to have
exceeded the true Christians in number, S. E. Sands Relat. sect. 44.
in some of the South parts. Of these many thousands have been lately banished.

France also is inhabited by Papists mingled with Protestants as before,
France. Alotharingia extendit Caletum us q^spatio quasi 200 leucarum francica
rum eiusque latitudo paulo minor est. Imperiorum mundi Catalogus. Rex Frauci^.
it is a country in a manner 200, French leagues square as Boterus writes,
within which they reckon the Dukedomes of Burgondie, Savoy, Lorraine, The
signory of Geneva, and Avignion the Pones country: which do not acknowledge
the French command. At this present France is divided into eight Provinces who
are under eight Courts of Parliament. The first is the Province of the I Will of
France, wherein the City of Paris is situated, in which City the first court
of Parliament resideth.

The second parliament is of Languadec residing in the city of Tholouze. The
third of Guien in the City of Bordeaux The fourth is of Normandy in the City
of Roan. Boter relat numbers: par. 1. lib. 1. Francia qua itor de chi
Arehivescovati pin di cento vescovati Page 19.
The fist of Burgundy in the city of Diieon. The sixth of Daulphene in Grenoble
The 7 of Province in Aix: the eight of Britannie in Remes, under these eight
provinces all France is contained.

In France there are 14 Archbishoprickes and above a 100 Bishoprics.

Italy, Italy
The length of this region is about 1020 miles In breadth in some places 410
miles and in other places. 126 miles. It contains the Dukedomes of Millane,
Florence, the territory of the Church of Rome, the kingdom of Naples.

The common wealth of Genoway. and part of the Venetian territories, The
Dukedom of Vrbin the State Luca and others.

The Pope has in Jtalie the city of Rome, The Pope.
Campania, part of the Marem^na, part of Tuscan, the Duchy of Spolet, Marca,
Ancona, part of Romagnia, the city of Bononia, in Naples Benevent: and in
France Avignion containing 4 cities and 80 walled towns. Mirae lib. 2. page
67. de notit: Eprscop.


For his clergy under him Miraeus reckons 28 Cardinals Priests 18 Cadinall
deacons 6 Cardinal Bishops beside many Metropolitans and Bishops and to make
his Jurisdiction seem greater then it is; he gives titles to his followers of
the Patriarchships and Bishoprics with which he nor they have nothing to do
withal, of which I will speak of afterward.

The Venetian signiorie is but part of it in Italy as in Lombardie, The
Venetians Relat: of the most famous kingdoms page 342.
Marca, Trevisana, Frivili, in which are beside Venice the Cities of Brescia,
Verona, Padoa, Bergamo. And others Dominions they have also out of Italy, as
Istria, Slavonia, Dalmatia, Albania, or at least some parts of them. Mirae:
page 178. lib. citat.
And also the Islands of Corfu, Cephalonia, Zante, Candie and some others. In
this signiorie are two Patriarchs, five Archbishops, and above forty Bishops.

The Papists inhabit these countries, but mingled with Protestants and Greeks.

Part of the Netherlands, Part of the Netherlands.
as the Dukedomes of Limburg, Brabant; the Marquisate of the holy Empire, The
Earledomes of Flaunders, Artoys, Hainault and Namurce, and the Barony of
Macklyn; excepting as before excepted as part of Brabant, and Flaunders in
which the reformed Religion is publicly professed.

Part of Switzerland, Part of Switzerland.
as Lucerne, Urania, Vnderwaldt, Soluze, Switts, Zugh, and Friburg: in some of
these Cantons they are some Protestants mingled with the Papists. Germany


In Germany the Papists inhabit the Dukedom of Bavaria and part of Cleve and
other places of less note, and also they live mingled with Protestants.
Maginus fol. 79.
There are in Germa^dy seven Archbishops and above 40 Bishoprics many of
which are also in the Protestants hands.

The Archdukes of Austrias country and Grats his, the kingdoms of Hungaria,
Bohemia, Austria.
and others; are Papists mingled with Protestants as before.

In Polonia a great part are subject to the Pope and in this country there are
2 Archbishops, Polonia. Magin. fol. 151.
and 16 Bishops: beside the 8 Greek Bishops and the Armenian Bishop before
named.

The Papists have also other places in Europe of less note in the continent,
and also some Islands, and so also have the Protestants.

And thus much of the Protestants and Papists in Europe and their habitations.

Whereas it may be objected that there are many Papists in England, and other
Protestant kingdoms in secret: I confess it to be true. And so also there are
many Protestants even in Spain it self; against whom although all laws and
wits are strongly bent yet notwitstanding there were thought to have been a
great number in Civil it self who were in heart that way affected, Sr. Ed.
Sands lib. cit. sect. 44.
whom the Inquisitors for numbers sake were commanded to forbear.

The Grecian Christians.
THE Grecian Christians (some of them,) acknowledge obedience to the Patriarch
of Constantinople, Brer. Enquir. page 125. Bot. rel. univ. part 3. li. 1. la
jurisdiction di questo Patriarch e grandissi ma.
whose jurisdiction is very great, having under him in Europe, the Christians
of Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Thrace, Bulgaria, Rascia, Servia, Bosnia, Walachia,
Moldavia, and Podolia, together with the Islands of Aegean Sea, and others about
Greece, as far as Corfu, besides a good part of the kingdom of Polonia, and
those parts of Dalmatia, Croatia, and Hungaria: that are subject to the Turkish
dominion, besides most of Asia the less: Boter. rel: par. 2 grand Turco:
In these places, the Christians make more then two third parts at least of the
Inhabitants: for the Turk, Brer. page 68 his inquir.
so that Christians pay him his yearly tribute, which is one fourth part of
their Increase; and a sultany for every Poll, and speak nothing against the
Religion, and sect of Mahomet,) permitted them the liberty of their religion,
there are in Constantinople, the very feate of the Turkish Empire, about 20
Churches of Christians; and in the City of Salonica; or Thessalonica, about 30
Churches, Chytrae: page 9 de stat. eccle.
whereas in the latter, the Mahometants, have but three Temples, or meskites.

In the Calcedon Council: Council: Calced. can. 28. Mirae notit episcop lib. 1,
cap. 10.
28 Provinces were assigned or confirmed, to the Primitive Authority of this
Patriarch.

In the Emperor Leos time, Anno 1386. The Patriarch of Constantinople had 81
Metropolitans subject to him, and about 38 Archbishops.

The Patriarchs of Constantinople. As of dignity, so they have been, before
the Turkish conquest, men of great estate, as Alexander the Patriarch died
worth 800000. Crowns in the year 1043. and Theophilack kept 2000 horse, Anno
956.

The Patriarch is now elected by his Metropolitans and Archbishops, Chytrae:
page 158. de statu eccles. Idem page 159.
according to the Ecclesiastical Cannons.

Being elected, he is confirmed by the Vizier Basse.

For his authority with the Grand Signiors, he is admitted the Emperors
presence, and has the same freedom, as the Ambassadors of Christian Princes
have, bringing presents to him.

For Metropolitans, he has now under him 74 who have under them, diverse
Bishops. Christop^: Ang^^^^^ ^e instituti^ Grae^or^^, cap. 44. Chyt: page 4 ^9,
lib. ^it^^.


As Thessalonica has ten Bishops under him.

Athens has 6 Bishops under him.

Corinth has 4 Bishops, etc.

The Patriarch has a Senate or College of 12 noble and learned men, Chyt:
page 9. li^c^e, Page 45.
with whose advice he governs and rules the Church under him; for his
mainteinance he has above 20000. dollers yearly.

The Greeks have Monks, Christoph: Ange^^ lib: citat.
but only of the order of St. Basil, the great, they be not Idle beggars, nor
belligods, but live on their labor: except only the Priests, who apply their
Spiritual function.

The Moscovite.
MOscovite Christians inhabit Moscovia or Russia the whole country is of great
length and breadth, Muscovia. The Russe common wealth Do Fletcher Cap 1. Do
Fletcher.
from the furthest part westward one the Narve side, to Siberia Eastward is
4400. verst or there abouts, (a verst is less by one quarter then an English
mile) from East to west about 3300 english miles and from the North to the
south from Cola to Astracan; about 4260 verst and the Emperor has more
territories northwards far beyond Cola, Muscouia lies part in Europe and
part in Asia

The Provinces of Moscovia are Volodomer, Mosco, Nisnovograd, Plesko, Smolenso,
Novograd, Velica, Rostove etc. And the two kingdoms of Cazan, and Astracan all
which are reduced into four Iurisdictons which they call Chetfyrds that is,
Tetrarchies or fourth parts.

The chief Cities are Mosco, Cap. 4.
Novograd, Rostoue, Volodomer, Plesko, Smolensko, Cazan, Astracan, etc.

The City of Mosco is reported to be bigger then London twice as big as
Pragnes. Math. a Micheu de sarmat lib. 2 cap 52 bis mayor quam Praga Fletcher
cap. 16.


The Emperors title is Theodore Iuanowich by the grace of God great Lord and
Emperor of all Russia great duke of Volodemer Mosco and Novograd: King of
Cazan, King of Astracan, Lord of Plesko and great duke of Smolensko; of
Twerrig, Ioughoria, Permia, Vadska, Bulghoria, and others: Lord great duke
Novograd of the low country of Chernigo, Rezan, Polotskoi, Rostoue,
Yaruflaveley, Bealozera, Liefland, Oudoria, Obdoria and Condenfa, and
commander of all Siberia and of the North parts and lord of many others
countries. Ioann. Faber page 170 de Theolog: Moscovit:


For their Ecclesiastical government they were subject to the Patriarch of
Constantinople but since the time that the said Patriarch has bin under the
Mohammedan tyranny they have a Patriarch of their own at Mosco to who^ are
subject two Metropolitans one of Novogrod, Fletcher cap. 21 some say 4
metropolites.
the other of Rostove Four Archbishops towit of Smolensco, Cazan, Vobsko, and
vologda, and their Bishops are six, whom they call Vladikey, their Priests they
call Papaes.

The late Patriarch Theodore was father to Michael the now Emperor of Moscovia

The Bishops live upon tithes as God has commanded and they use lordships
given to them and also possess farms and castles; Joan. Faber page 172 Decimis
que^ admodum a Deo decretum est q^oque vivunt Episcop^.
Their Renes and revenues to maintain their dignities are some what large, The
Patriarchs yearly rents out of his lands besides other fees is about 3000:
Rubbells or Marks.

The Metropolites and Archbishops have about 2500.

The Bishops have some 1000. some 800 some less.

The matters perteining to their jurisdiction are the same in manner, that are
used by the Clergy in other parts in Christendom, for beside their authority
over the Clergy, and matters mere ecclesiastical, their Jurisdiction
extends to all testamentarie causes, matters of marriage, and devorcements,
and some pleas of injuries etc.

This Country contains two Kingdoms 15 Dukedomes, Imperior mund: catalog.
page 51 Bot: relat univer. par. 3: lib. Moscovia.
and 16 Provinces.

They have in so great reverence the holy Scriptures that they touch them not
without many bowings of their heads and making the sign of the Cross; and the
like reverence they show to the four first general Counsels

The Russians in Polonia finding that they could not have recourse to the
Patriarch of Constantinople as was fit, being subject to the tyranny of the
Turk in the year 1591 fell from his jurisdiction, but yet retain the Greek
religion.



Churchces in Asia.
Jerusalem.
THe Christians subject to the Patriarch of Jerusalem Inhabit (mingled with
Turks) and others Palestine, Microcosme page 380.
The Patriarch does keep his residence in Jerusalem, In which there are now
remaining about 10 Churches of Christians; Chytr. destatu (...) clesiarum page
24.
The Patriarcall Church is the Church of St. Sepulcher in Jerusalem and his
house is near unto it: Tyrius histor: bellisacri lib. 14. cap. 12.
There did belong to this Patriarch the three Palestines. Tyrius adds more
two Provinces (to wit) Rubensis and Beritensis: He also relates five
Metropolitans to have belonged to this Sea, and about 101 Bishops. This
Country of Palestine, is called the holy land, because the holy One dwelt,
and was borne there, who bears up all things by the power of his word.

Antioch.
The Christians under the Patriarch of Antioch are called Syrians, Niceph,
histor: eccles: lib. 18. cap. 52.
of the place of their chief habitation; And Melchites because their Bishops
have always followed in faith and in the counsels the example and authority
of the Emperors of Constantinople, Boterus relat: univers: par 3. lib. 1. de
melchiti per che questi nella feed e ne concilii hanno sempre seguito
l'essempio el autorita de gl. Imperatori Constan ^in ^olitani Idem Ib^^em e ^i
tima che questa sia^la piu numerosa na time Christiana di^evante Tyrius in
Histor: Bells sacri lib. 14 cap. 12 page 247.
Their Patriarch is the Patriarch of Antioch, who now keeps his residence at
Damascus. They inhabit (mingled with Mahometants) part of Syria, Beritus,
Tripolis, Alepo, and other places in Asia these are one of the greatest sort
Christians in the Orient: This Patriarch had fifteens Provinces allotted to
him, and Tyrius reckons Metropolitans Archhishops and Bishops belonging to
Antioch 142 The Syrians do boast themselves to be the first Christians of the
world: because St. Peter had his seat 7 year in Antioch before he went to Rome
which is the reason that the Syrians would never submit themselves to the
Church of Rome.

The Georgians.
THe Georgians, Chytreus de stat. ecclesiarum. page ^1.
inhabit the Country that was anciently named Iberia, betwixt the Euxine and
the Caspian seas. They have on the North, Cancasus, on the West, the
Mengrellians, on the East, and on the South the Armenians. All their Bishops
being 18, profess absolute obedience to their Metrapolitan, without any other
higher dependence; these christians live severally by themselves, without any
mixture of Mahumetans, or pagans under their own King, or Prince They are a
very warlike people, valian in Bataile, of great strength and might, with an
innumerable multitude of Soulders, very terrible to the parazens: As often as
they come to visit the Lords Sepulcher they enter into the holy City, with
their Standards, exected not paying any tribute. As it is reported by Vitriacus
the Cardinal. And in their standerds they bear St G^orge In the year 1614.
Teimurazes being Prince of the Georgians the Persian army entered into Georgia
and spoiled diverse Cities, and carried away many prisoners, and amongst others
Cetaba the Princes mother was taken in the City Cremen, and carried into
Persia; which Cetaba refusing to be come a Mahumetan, and to leave Christianty,
was put to death and martyred by the Tyrant, and her body cast out into the
feilds unburied: But Moacla who had been a servant of the Queens and then
slave to a Persian got leave of her Master, to bring home the body in the
night, telling her master what profit he might receive by it (her son
ransoming it) The body she imbalmed and put into a Coffin.

There were at that time certain Jesuits in Persia who seeking the body and
finding it not, being persuaded that it was devoured by wild beasts, got
another dead man's head and imbalming it and wrapping it in lynnen traveled
toward Georgia: and drawing near, sent a Messenger to the Prince to tell him
that there were certain Roman Christians come out of Persia, who had brought
with them the head of the holy Martyr Cetaba his Mother, which had delivered
them out of many great dangers: The Prince hearing this went a days journey
with a great troop of his Nobility and Clergy, and brought the holy relic
to Cachete, And with great honor and celebrity placed it in the Church of holy
and great Martyr St. George of Alberdall. And used the Jesuits with all honor
and respect and sent them great gifts, which they refused saying, that they had
vowed poverty; They also made a show of great holiness, using much fasting
and prayer. Also they petitioned the Prince that they might live in some
Monastery, and have the custody of the holy relic which he granted them:
Now infinite miracles were wrought daily, and great gifts and offerings they had
out of all Iberia, the sick and infirm resorted to them. Those that were past
cure they told them that their sins were very great, and needed long time of
repentance and expiation, and so they should return to them again for help,
in which time they often died, to others of whom they had hope of recoverie,
they used means, and attributed their health to the holy Relick, and to the
Bishop of Rome whom the most loving Jesus Christ had left his Vicar here on
earth. By this means they enticed many to the Romish religion; and of the
Nobility and had great hopes of the Prince himself who was much taken with
their miracles, the fame of which filled all Iberia; But in the midst of all
this, letters came from Moacla his mothers maid, that she had the body of his
Mother which he might ransom, whereupon the Prince Teimurazes, sent Ambassadors
to the Persian, and coming to an agreement with him had home his Mothers body,
with Moacla her maid and many Captives, which they manifestly knew to be her
body by diverse tokens and marks.

Whereupon the Prince being angry, commanded the Jesuits to prison but they
were delivered at the entreaty of some of the Nobility; a few days after came
two muleters out of Persia, who reported that they travailed in the said
Jesuits company, when they cut of the dead man's head which they thought to be a
theife and carried home to their Inn, and saw them anoint it with oil, and
odors, and this they declared to the Prince Teimurazes, who commanded the head
to be cast out, and his mothers body to be buried. This history is written in
Greek by Gregorius Hieromonachus the Patriarcall exarch from Trapezunt. 1626.
and by this means the Jesuits had almost perverted the prince and Country of
Georgia.

The Mengrellians.
THE Mengrellians inhabit Colohis which lies near the Euxine Sea, Brerw enq.
page 135.
the people thereof received the faith by the preaching of Saint Mathias. The
chief Cities thereof are 1 Alvati, 1 Phasis, 3 Diosourias. In which are many
languages spoken, by reason of the resort of abundance of Merchants of sundry
kingdoms, and many Interpreters to mediate between the people and the
Governor. They are under the obedience of the Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Circassians.
THE Circassians, Idemibidem.
or Zychi. as they were anciently caled are Christians of the Greek Communion,
and besides of the Patriarch of Constantinople his obedience. These also live
by themselves, as before under their own Kings or Princes. The Circassian
Country extends it self on Meotis 500 miles, and within land 200 miles, the
chief Cities are Laeoppa and Cromuco.

The Russe
CHristians which dwell in Asia are under the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of
Mosco.

To wit the Christians in the kingdoms of Casan, Astracan: and in other places
in Asia subject to the Emperor of Muscovia.

The Christians of Asia the less.
Do inhabit Phrygia, Galatia, Bithynia, Pontus, Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia,
Licia, Magnesia, and all the Provinces in Asia the less mingled with Turks,
(except Cilicia, and Isauria) which are, or have been under the Jurisdiction
of the Patriarch of Constantinople.

The Armenians.
THe Armenian Christians, are found in multitudes, Brere. enq: pa. 170
in most Cities of great Trade, But yet the native Regions of the Armenians,
and where they still are found, in greatest number, and their Religion is most
supported, is in Armenia the greater (named since the Turks first possession of
it Turcomania) beyond Euphrates and Cilicia now termed Carmania.

Touching their Ecclesiastical government, Mirae not: Epis. li. 1. ca. 17. pa.
41. Bot:rel:vniv: par. 3. lib. 2.
they acknowledge obedience without any further or higher dependence to two
Patriarcks of their own whom they term Catholics, namely of the greater
Armenia who at this present keeps his residence in the Monastery of Ecmeazin
by the City of E van in Persia, conv: am^: gent: lib. 7. pa. 1. cap. 14.
being translated thither, by occasion of the late wars between the Persians
and the Turks: But his ancient seat was Sebastia: the Metropolis of Armenia
the greater, The other Patriarch of Armenia the less, anciently kept at
Mitilene the Metropolis of that Province, but now is resident in the City of
Sis not far from Tarsus in Cilicia.

Cardinal Baronius writes of 1000 Armenian Bishops: Annatom 12. page 319.
Sands relat. p. 123
another of 300. The same Author relates, that he coming on a Sunday into one
of their Congregations, in the afternoon he found on sitting in the midst of
them in habit not differing from the rest, reading on a Bible in the Chaldean
tongue, anon the Bishop entered in a vest of black with a staff in his hand,
to whom they attributed much holiness, First he prayed, and then he saying
certain Psalms, assisted by two or three, after all sung jointly, at interims
praying to themselves, resembling the Turks in the posture of their bodies, and
often prostrations, the Bishop excepted, who erecting his hands, stood all the
while with his face to the Altar, The service ended, one after another did
kiss his hands and bestow their Alms, he laying the other hand on their heads
and blessing them: Lastly, he prescribed succeeding fasts and festivals Upon
the mountains of Arrarat in Armenia, Noah's Arc rested, and from this country
was the world repeopled. Tradition Cathol: page 2. Maiorem partem Asiae, and
totius tractus orientalis inhabitabant, Quidam inter Saraceno alij autem
proprias absque infidelium consortio occuparunt regiones: scilicet Nubiam and
magnam, Aethiopiae partem and omnes regiones usque in Indiam, plusquam
quadraginta regna, (...) asserunt continentes: Omnes autem sunt Christiani a
Beato Mattheo Aposto^o and aliis a postolicis viris adfidem Christi conversi:
Iac: Vitriac: Cardinal; histor orient, cap. 76. Boter relat: universe. li. 2.
part. 3. de Giacobiti ecclesia Patriarchalis huius nationis in Mesopotamia
extra civitatem moradim, etc. Thom. a Ie^u de


The Iacobites or Dioscorians.
THese Christians are called Iacobites: some say from Jacob the Patriarch of
whose lineage they pretend to be: others write that they were so called of
Iacobus Syrus who was also called Zanzalus: They are also called Dioscorians of
Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria.

These Christians (as Cardinal Vitriacus says) inhabited the greater part of
Asia: some of them lived amongst the Saracens, others had their own proper
countries, as in Africa, Nubia, and a great part of Aethiopia, and all the
regions unto India, containing as they report more then 40 kingdoms. These
Christians were converted by St. Matthew and other Apostolic men to the faith
of Christ.

The Jacobites now are dispersed in the cities of Mesopotamia, Babylonia and
Syria, and of other places: for their Ecclesiastical government, they are
subject to a Patriarch of their own, whose patriarchall Church is in the
monastery of Saphran: near to the City Merdin in the North parts of
Mesopotamia: but he keeps residence in Caramite the ancient Metropolis of
Mesopot amia. Eutichae errores uno cum suo authore condemnant qui duas naturas
in ^n^m confundebat at ipsi contr^ ha^c opinionem asserunt duas in Christo
naturas esse unitas unamque factam natur^m personatam: de duab us nature is non
personatis, sine mixtione tamen aut confusione apud Tho a Jesus de conuer lib: 7
par, 1. cap. 14.


These Iacobites (as Leonard Bishop of Sidon visiter to Pope Greg the 13th. in
the East regions) do condemn Eutiches and his error, who confounded the two
natures of Christ. And they affirm two naturs to be united in Christ: and one
personated nature to be made of the two natures not personated, without mixtion
or confusion. They renounce Eutiches and honor Dioscorus.

The Maronites.
THE Maronites are found in Alepo, Damascus Tripoli of Syria and Cyprus, Mirae
not. Episco. lib, 1 cap. 19.
but their maine habitation is in the Mountain of Lebanus, which contains in
circuit above 700 miles, and is possessed only by the Maronits, who for that
privileidge, namely, Tho. a Jesus lib. 7. p^^. 1. cap. 22. de convers: omni g^nt.
to keep themselves free from the mixture of the Mahometans pay the Turk
large Tribute. The Patriarch of the Maronites has under his jurisdiction 8 or
9 Bishops, and keeps residence for the most part in Lebanus, keeping ever the
name of Peter: Their Patriarch has lately communion with the Pope as before,
Boter: rel. pa. 3. lib. 2 de maronitis sonoda minima natione Christina
d^orie^te.
but with some reservation. Boterus writes, that the are the least Cristian
Nation of the East, whether Maronites inhabiting Damascus, Alepo, Cyprus and
other places, have also Communion with the Pope or no I do not find.

Christians under the Patriarch of Musall falsely called Nestorians.
THese Christians inhabit mingled with Mahometans and Pagans a great part of
the Orient for besides the countries of Babjlon Assyria and Mesopotamia Parthia
and Media wherein very many of them are found; Brerwood page 139 enquir.
These Christians are scattered far and wide in the East both Northerly in
Cataya and Southerly to India. Boter. relat: par. 3 lib. 2. de Nestor^
So that in Marcus, Paulus Venetus his history of the East Regions and others,
we find mentioned of them and of no sort of Christians but them in very many
parts and provinces of Tartaria as namely in Cassar, Samarchan Carcham
Chinchitalas, Tangut, Cariam, Mangi, Tenduc etc. In so much that beyond the
River Tigris Eastward there is not any other sort of Christians to be found for
ought I have read, except the Portugales and the Convents made by them in Ind^a
and the late Migration of the Armenians into Perfia, Vitriac. histor? Orient
cap. 77. page 149. hi nestoriam cum Iacobinis long plures esse dieuntur quam
latini vel graeci.
the Cardinal Vitriacus a man well experienced in some parts of the orient,
has left registered that these Christians with the Iacobites exceeded in
multitude the Christians of the Greek or Latin Churches About 400 years
ago. Bote: loco citat.
The King of Tenduc a Christian ruled far and wide in the Northeast part of
Asia as having under his dominion besides Tenduc, which was his own native and
peculiar kingdom: All the neighboring Provinces which were at that time for a
great part Christians, but after that his Empire was brought to ruin, and he
subdued by Chinges a rebel of his own Dominion (and the first founder of the
Tartarian Empire) which happened about the year. Marcus Paulus Venetus lib. 1.
cap. 64 mayor pars provintiae observat fidem Christianam et by Christiani
primas tenent in hac provincia.
1190 the state of Christian religion became in short time altered in those
parts: for I find in Marcus Paulus who lived within 50 years after Vitriacus,
and was a man of more experience in those parts then he, as having spent 17
years together in Tartaria, and partly in the Emperors Court, and partly in
traveling over those regions about the Emperors affairs, that except the
Province of Tenduc 20 whereof Marcus Paulus confesses the greater part to have
professed, the Christian religion at his being in Tartaria, the rest of the
Inhabitants being partly Mahometans, and partly Idolators and Christians but a
few. Dico pauci comparatione priorum temporum, non in se, nam sunt nobis
latinis multo plures: compend cosmograp page 69
Postell writes that they are but a few in comparison of former times, not of
themselves they being many more then the Latins are.

Borchardus who lived since Paulus Venetus has left record that in some of
those parts there were more Christians then Mahometans: And he speaks of his
own experience that in Cilicia and Armenia subject to the Tartars that he
found in a manner at the Inhabitants mere Christians William de Rubriquis also
reports that these Christians inhabit fifteen Cities in Cathay and that they
have a Bishop in the City Segin, Gulielm us de Rubriquis lib. 27. cited by
Parchas.
and that they have also a Patriarch in Balduc, Thom. a Jesus lib. 7 par, 1.
cap. 4. pa. 358. de conv: omn. gent.
in Persia Thomas a Jesus also writes that under one of these Patriarchs there
are many Nations two and twenty Bishoprics. six hundred Territories and more
etc. Their chief Patriarch is the Patriarch of Musall, Mirae: notitia epis:
lib. 1, cap, 16.
in which City is recorded the Nestorians to retain fifteen Temples and the
Iacobites three which City was in times past Seleucia. To the Bishop whereof
was assigned the next Place of session in council after the Bishop of
Jerusalem which name and authority in those parts the Bishops of Musall now
has.

There is one Church of these Christians in the great City of Quinsay in
China. Paul: Venet: de regi orient. lib. 2. cap. 64.


Haiton King of Armenia was himself in Tartaria and has wrtten a book
thereof and of the aid he had from the great Came who was a Christian and of the
taking of Mesopotamia Babylon and Syria by the Tartars from the Sasens.

In former time the heresy of Nestorius prevailed much in these parts of the
world, who held that Christ had two persons as well as two natures; and they
would not yield that Mary was the Mother of God: The Christians now called
Nestorians acknowledge Christ to be perfect God and perfect man from the first
moment of his conception, and that Mary might be rightly said to be the mother
of the Son of God, Although they have revoked Nestorius heresy, yet they are
still called by his odious name: The Pope has a titular Patriarch of Musall.

The Christians of St. Thomas.
THe Christians of St. Thomas are vulgarly so called, Brere: enq: pa. 144
because by his preaching they are supposed to have been converted to
Christian religion, and his body as it is thought remains buried in the City
of Matiapar on the Coast of Coromondall: some of these Christians inhabit on
the near point of India, namely in that great Promontory, Boter relat. page 3.
lib 2. della vecchia Christianita dell' India.
whose base lying between the outletts of the River Indus and Ganger
stretches out the sides far toward the South well nigh 1000 miles, till
meeting in the point of Comari, in the more Southerly part of the great
Promontory near to Cape Comori about the Cities of Coulan and Cranganar on the
westside and about Maliapar and Negapatan on the East side, and their
habitation is thickest about Angamale, 15 miles from the City Cochin Northward
where their Archbishop keeps residence Now as touching the Ecclesiastical
government of these Indians their Archbishop till 20 years since or litmore
acknowledged obedience to the Patriarch of Musall, Mirae denotit: Episcop, lib.
1. page 57. cap. 21.
but since it is reported that he he has submitted himself to the Pope. read
miraeus de notitia Episcopatuum.

But it is very likely that these Indian Christians were forced to submit to
the Pope, for Osorius writes that the Portugalls took Cranganor by force and
also they have Maliapar and other places in which these Christians do dwell.
Lib. 3. page 107. de rebus Emanuclis Lusitaniae regis


Vesputius writes that there were many godly Bishops in East India, Americus
Vesputius noted by Bishop Iuel page 35 defense of the Apolog.
and also sundry whole Countries converted and christened long before the
Portugalls came thither who never heard of the Pope of Rome.

Josephus Indus borne in Cranganor in East India reports that there are many
Kings in India who know Christ, Iosep. Ind: navigtiones inter relationes novi
orbis. page 145,


And also that there are Christians from the river Indus where Jndia begins
to the Isles Ormus Westward: near the Persian gulf;

He also reports that these Christians have over them a Prelate to whom 12
Cardinals are subject beside two Patriarchs, Hi populi habent magnum
Antistitem cui adstant duodecim Cardina les patriarchae duo Archiepiscopi and
episcopi complures. lib. 2. epistol. 3. cited by Bishop Morton Apol. Cath. p.
345. Historia Aethiop: traduzido en Castellano per el Padre Fray Thomas de
Padilla.
and many Archbishops and Bishops.

The great I Will of Socotorie is also inhabited by those Christians of St. Thome.

St. Thomas also preached in the Kingdom Sinas and converted a great company
to Christianity there as Xaverus the Jesuit writes.

Also the Portugalls found an infinite number of Christians in China.

The Christians in Africa under the Patriarch of Alexandria.
THE Christians called Cophti, are no other then the Christians of Aegipt, who
have been called Aegophti or (...) Touching their Ecclesiastical government
they are subject to the Patriarch of Alexandria whose Patriarchall seat is at
this present translated, Cbyt. de stat Eccles: page 26. Scalig. de emendat
tempor: lib. 7. page 679.
and so has long been, to the City of Caire. In times past all Africa, from
the mouth of Nile, to the Gaditane streits, and from the Tirrhen sea North, to
the Equinoctial line south, Was planted with Churches and Cities of Christians
belonging to the said Patriarch: Christianity so flourished in Africa; Council.
Carthag 4. Council: Carthag 6. Vict. lib. 1. de persecutione Vandalec:
that we read of Synods of 200 Bishops to have been gathered there, and of
some hundred of Catholic Bishops to have been their expelled by Gensericus
King of the Vandalls and in one Province alone zengitana by name, (which is
that where Carthage stood) to have been 164. Bishops under one Metropolitan, In
this North, part of Africa, Christianity is in a manner decayed for want of
teachers. To this Batriarchs Jurisdiction are now belonging not only the
Christians of Aegipt, Brer. page 161.
but also, the Christians that are found about the bay of Arabia. And in mount
Sinai Eastward and also in Africa as far as the syrtes westward Likewise the
Christians of Aethiopia have acknowledged obedience to this Patriarch. (...).
Chyt: de stat: eccles: page 84.
Cyrill the now Patriarch of Constantinople was Patriarch of Alexandria: The
title of this Patriarch is Cyrill by the grace of God, Pope and Patriarch of
the great city of Alexandria: and Judge of the world: he is said to wear two
Crounes. St. Morke was the first Bishop of Alexandria.

The Abassin Christians.
THE Abassin Christians inhabit the Ahassin Empire in Aethiopia, Quadus in
Compend univers: lib. cap. 20. Postel. compend. Cosmog. page 63.
Matthias Quadus. boundeth the Abassin Empire on the North with Nubia et Bugia,
on the East with the red sea, and Barbarick Gulf, to the Kingdoms of Aiana
and Dangali, on the south, to the mountains Lunae; on the west with Manicongo,
the flood Niger, the kingdom of Nubia and Nilus Some report this Emperors
dominion to be as great as Europe. But Mr. Brerewood makes it equal in
dimension with Germany, France, Spain, and Italy. For the Emperor he is
called Commonly Presbiter John or Negus but of the Abassins Ioaanes Belul. Zaga
Zabo apud damian: a Goes page 241.
precious John or high John, he is the most potent Prince of Africa.

The title of this great Emperor runs after this manner David supreme of
his kingdoms, and beloved of God, the pillar of faith, sprung from the stock
of Judah, the son of David the son of Solomon, the son of the pillar of
Sion, the son of the seed of Jacob, the son of the hand of Mary, the Son
Nahu after the flesh, the son of Saint Peter and St. Paul by grace, Emperor
of the higher and lesser Aethiopia, and of the most large Kingdoms, Dominions,
and Countries of Goa, Caffares, Fatigar, Angola, Barn, Baliguazae, Adea,
Vangne, Goyam, where are the fountains of Nile, Amara, Baguamodri, Ambea,
Vanguci, Trigremaon, Sabaim, the birth place of the Queen of Saba,
Barnagassum, and the Lord of all the Regions unto the confines of Egypt.

They conceive themselves to be deseended from Solomon and the Queen of Suba
Maqueda.

The Arms of the Kingdom are reputed to be the same with those of the tribe
of Judah, the Lion Rampant in the field Or, and their motto is, The Lion of the
tribe of Judah shall overcome.

It is written, the Emperor to have set before him at his mea^e, Godignus cap.
6, page, 25, de Abass rebus.
a vessel full of Ashes, to put him in mind of his Mortality.

The Abassins reckon a succession of Christian Emperors from Abraham, called
the Saint, Who was Emperor Anno 470. Alvares cap. 13. in Purchase.
The Prets or Emperors dwell in a movable city of tents, on festival days he
uses red tents. About 50000 Mules attend the Prets camp to remove his
carriages.

They call themselves as we do (...) Ithiopia wian In Arabike are called (...)
Elhabaschi vulgarly the Abassines (...) presbiter signifies Apostolic in
Arabike. Scaliger de Emen de temporum page 680.


For their Ecclesiastical government: Ecclesiastical government. Myrae: de
notitia episcop. lib. 1 cap. 21 page 56.
They are subject to a Patriarch of their own whom they call Abunna.

Their Abunna, when Alvares, was in Aethiopia, was called Mark, Aluares cap.
14.
a Reverend old man aged about 110: a man very gracious in his speech never
speaking without blessing God, and giving thanks: his apparel was white; his
upper garment like a Cardinals cloak buttoned before. When he goes out of
his tent he rides upon a Mule well attended having a Cross in his hand and
three crosses carried on staves about him.

Some do report that there are in Ethiopia 127 Archbishops. Godig: de Abassin.
rebus. lib. 1. cap. 32. page 195.


Aluares reports in Macham Celacem which is the Church of the holy Trinity,
Alvares cap. 14.
he saw 200 mitred priests together, and 64 Canopies carried over them.

Their Churches are builded round and very rich with hangings of cloth of gold,
Velvet and plate

They have many goodly Monasteries: to the Monastery of the vision of Jesus
belongs about 3000 Monks. Alva, cap, 2.


In Europe there was little knowledge of these Abassine Christians until the
Portugalls had footing in the East Indies, Damia Goes de Aethiopum moribus.
Idem pa. 161.
about the year 1486. John King of Portugal sent Alphonsus a Pavia and Petrus
a Covilham to Prester John. They saild to Caire like merchants and agreed one
of them to go into India, and the other into Aethiopia: Peter having seen Goa
and Calecut and other places in India returns to Caire to meet Alphonso
where he heard of his death, and received also letters from the King of
Portugal, that they should not return without seeing Prester John; Peter
writing back what he had seen in India, traveleth into Ethiopiae to the
Emperor, and delivers King John's letters to him, but could never get leave
of the said Emperor to return, but lived richly there.

Afterward the King of Portugal sent diverse men, Idem page 169.
and amongst others Francis Alvares his Chapline who remained in Ethiopia 6
years, and has written a book of the religion and and customs of the
Ethiopians. This Aluares returning, brought letters from the Emperor of
Ethiopia to the Pope, which were delivered to him in Bonnonia in the presence
of the Emperor Charles the 5. An 1533. Damia Goes page 171.
Upon the receipt of which letters there was great Joy; and a report of a great
Country of Christians in Africa as bigg as all Europe that had submitted
themselves to the Pope: and especially in that time when diverse Princes in
Germany, Tum primum lusitanos adijsse Aethi opidni cum fidem ca tholic^m
Lutherus deser^^t Godig. de Abass rebus lib. 1, page 145: cap 23. Dam. a Goes
pa. 203. de Aethiopu^ moribus.
and King Henry the eight, had with drawn themselves from the Roman Church,
David Emperor of Aethiopia sent a learned Bishop called Zabazago into Porgall,
a man of admirable faith, learning and Eloquence, whose confession of Faith is
set down by Damianus a Goes.

The Pope sends a Patriarch (with others into Aethiopia) one Johannes
Berniudes a Spanish Friar, there went with him 400 shot and some pioners out of
the Portugal Jndies; their commander was Don Christopher a Gama, who arrived
in Aethiopia, anno 1538, and was suffered their to remain, until Precious
John had vanquished the King of Adell, by the help of the said Portugalls. But
the said Patriarch was compelled to return being accused of Sacrilege, for
stealing a vessel of gold out of a Church, and with this message that the
Emperor would not submit himself to the Bishop of Rome.

Afterward, their were 13 Jesuits chosen by Ignatius Eoiola, Godig. de abass:
reb. lib. 2. cap. 15
and others to be sent into Ethiopia, of which one of them had the title of
Patriarch, to wit Joannes Nonius, Barrtius and two of Bishops, the Patriarch
dyed and never saw Aethiopia, to whom one of the Bishops Androas Orviedo
succeeded in his Patriarch all title, be failing with the Portugal ships to
Goa in the East Indies, the viceroy sent a Messenger first into Aethiopia, to
know whether the Emperor would receive some learned men Portugals, sent to him
from the Pope, and the King of Portugal, which he refused not.

Where upon the Viceroy sent the said Patriarch Andreas with some Jesuits, and
twenty attendants according to the dignity of his person, who landed at a
Port in the Red Sea, near to the City of Arquick, in the year 1557. From
whence he went to a City called Baroa, where an Ethiopian King called
Barnagasses, received the Patriach with great honor, from thence the Patriach
was 50 days going to the Emperor Claudius, who receiving his letters, told
him that he would never yield obedience to the Bishop of Rome, he gave him
leave to teach the Portugals, but forbad him to speak on word to his
Abassines, and that he would not suffer the Roman yoke to be laid on him or
his, Claudius the Emperor dying, Adamas succeeded, who banished the
said-Patriarch Andreas.

All these Christians before named, are not subject to the Pope, except before
excepted.

In Europe the Papists inhabit somewhat above a fourth part. The Protestants,
Muscovits, and Greek, Christians inhabit, the rest of it with some Turks, who
are mingled with the Greeks, and make one third part with them, some say much
less: Bellonius writes the Greek Rites, Asserlmus Graecauica Ecclesia ritus
latius patere qua^ latina. lib. 1 cap. 35.
to extend farther then the Latin: which may be true of the Latins in Europe
only.

In Asia, the second part of the old world, and Africa the third part, the last
(whereof is three times bigger than Europe) and Asia bigger then the other
both) The Pope has very little. Possevine the Jesuit writes, In apparatu de
Maronitis. Maronitae Libani Montis in Syria incolae, sub little Patriarcha,
pietatem et fidem erga Romanu^ ponti ficem et sedem Apostolicam uni ex omnibus
Orientis populis sat integra^ a tempore Innocencii 3. retinuerunt.
that the Maronites of mount Lybanus only of the East, kept faith to the Church
of Rome.

And this may serve to confute them that would empale the Church of God, within
the limmits of the Roman Church, and pretend that all the Christians of the
world, are subject to the Pope, but only a few Protestants in Europe, for here
you may see, that the Church of God is not tied to Rome only, but that it is
Catholic, and universal, dispersed upon the face of the whole earth; and as
God has been merciful to us, and caused his face to shine upon us, so his
ways are known upon earth; and his saving health amongst all Nations,
therefore let the earth praise thee O God, yea, let all nations praise thee.

To this relation of the habitations of the Christians not subject to the Pope,
I think good to give the Reader this Caveat, towit, The Pope to make his
Jurisdiction to show greater then it is, gives many titles to his followers of
those Churches which he has not to do with all. As to one he gives the title
of the Patriarch of Constantinople, to another of Aethiopia, Bermudes was
called Patriarch of Aethiope Smith of Calcedon Fleming Archbishop of Dublin etc.
so also he gives the title of other Bishoprics in Greece, England and Ireland
etc. So also their writers in some of their books, Write false stories and
tales, to make his Jurisdiction and Church seem greater then it is, as for
example, In a book printed at Coloin entitled Relationes historicae duae
duaru^ illustrium legaticuum etc.
Cardinal Baronius writes a book, and therein publishes to the world, the
submission of the Patriarch of Alexandria, and of the Aegiptians, and
Aethiopians, which never was; which Treatise is entitled, A relation of the
Legates of the Church of Alexandria, to the Apostolic See. The Cardinal in the
beginning of the said book, sets down, the great providence of God in
governing his Church, for whereas a few frantic people had forsaken the Roman
See; now the Patriarch of Alexandria and all the Provinces of Aegipt, and
Aethiopia; had submitted themselves to the Roman Church, and he sets down
the submission of the Patriarch in these words: In the name of the Father,
Son and holy spirit, of one God. In the name of God most compassionate, and
merciful; Everlasting, glory be to God, salvation is from the Lord: O God
give us thy Salvation.

Humble Gabriell by the grace of God servant of the Sea of Saint Mark, in the
City of Alexandria in Aegipt, and in all other places thereunto adjoining in
the south Maritime and in Ethiopia the 97 of the Patriachs successor to S.
Mark the Evangelist, wishes health, and offers the spiritual kiss, to the
Father Lord, Father of Fathers, Prince of Patriarchs, being the 13 of the
Apostles of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ. And of the Evangelist, the fifth,
Successor to St. Peter the Apostle. He after sets down his submission at
large in this Treatise, which is published by it self and also set down in
the latter end of his sixth Tome of his Annalls, Thom: a Jesus: de conv: omn:
gent: lib. 7. pa. 1. cap. 6. page 363. Tempore Clementis 8 legatio ficta
Alexandrinae ecclesiae ad Romanum pontificem de lataest quae Marcus Patriarcha
et cu^ ^o omnes Aegipti provintiae, aliaeque sibi coniunctae, ipsum (ut par
est) summum ecclesiae caput universasemque agnoscebant Pastore^ ut late in
fine: 6 Tom. Annal. Cardinalis. Baronius scripsit Re tamen postea diligentius
examinata cuiusdam Bartouis impostoris fuisse mendatium ac figmentum apparuit
which history is mere false and feigned as Thomas the Jesuit says.

In the time of Pope Cement the 8. a feigned embassage was brought from the
Church of Alexandria to the Roman Bishop, in which the Patriarch and all the
provinces of Aegipt and others adjoining, did acknowledge him (as it was
fitting) the chief and universal Pastor of the Church, as Cardinal Baronius
has writton in the end of his 6 to me, but the matter being more dilligently
examined, appeared to be a mere lie and a fiction of a certain Imposture
Bartouis.

This same Card in at Barontus in the 12 Tome of his annalls writes, that the
legates of the Armeman Bishops and Metropolitan, whom they call Catholic, that
is universal for the infinite number of Bishops under him, to wit more then
1000 almost from the furthest part of the In Africa are The Cophtie Under the
Patriarch of Alexandria And the Abassin christians in Aethiope Under their
Abunna or Patriarch
East brought the submission of that Church to Eugenius the 3, which story may
be doubted as well as the former: he cites for this Otho Frisingensis. And
thus much of the habitations of the Christians not subject to the Pope,

America and the Christians therein
AMerica was discovered about 142 year ago, discovered Anno 1492.
in which the King of Spain has four regions with some Islands, the Regions
are new Spain, Castilla del Oro, Peru, and part of Brasile: which are supposed
to be a sixth part of America. In the first 40 year after the discovery
thereof, these regions with the Islands, were almost depopulated, the Natives
being either slain: consumed in the mines, Nos autem pro certo affirmare a^
demus iis quadraginta annis quibus Iberi cruentam suam tyr annidem (...)
ercuerunt ultra d^odecim milliones hominum fato sunctos esse. in narratione
reru^ indicarum page 7.
or carred into captivity; Bishop Casaus in his book to Philip Prince of
Spain writes of the consumption of 12 millions of men; and that in
Hispaniola, there were not 300 natives left, and of a very small remain in the
other Islands, and in New Spain it self. Complaint being made to the noble
Emperor Charles the fifth, he by his proclamation, freed these Indians from
slaverie, and gave them the state of free men.

For the conversion of these Christians, it seems to be coact, Oviedo histor
Indiae occidental's lib. 1 cap 4
Oviedo reports that in Cuba there was scarce any one, or but vey few that
became Christians willingly. And what manner of Christians these were you may
judge by Benzos report of New Spain, Benzo histor: novi orbis lib. 2: cap. 19
apud Brer.
(viz) that they had nothing almost belonging to Christianity, but only the
bare name of Christians: I hope it is better now.

This Church is Governed by four Archbishops, and four and twenty inferior
Bishops.

In America there be diverse plantations of the English, Dutch, and French, and
there are now more English in Virginea only then were left of the Natives in
New-Spaine after the depopulation before named, I read of about eight thousand
Natives remaining there then.

CHAP. III.
THESE Christians agree with us in the maine points of religion, they are all
baptized in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, etc. And in the
principal points of controversy between the Roman Church, you shall see how
they agree with us, and differ from them. In this Chapter I will set down
therefore.

1 The principal differences between us and the Church of Rome. 2 How the
Churches before named, agree with us in the chief points in controversy. 3 I
find these Churches; not Heretical, but Orthodoxall in the maine. 4 Of the
agreement of the Protestants among themselves. 5 Of the difference amongst the
Papists: 6 Of the agreement of the Ancient Roman East and South Church, with us
in the points set down, and also of Gregory the great Bishop of Rome, who
sent Austen into England. 7 Of the Religion of the Ancient Brittans, and of
their differences from the now Roman Church. 8 Of the Piety and Devotion of
the Christians before named.
1 The principal differences between the Romanists and us.
THE maine difference between the Church of Rome and us consists, in certain
points, which they of Rome hold for important and necessary Articles of the
Christian faith, which we do not believe or receive for such.

For the things which we believe are verities clearly founded upon Scripture
and summarily set down in the Creed, and vnaminously received by all
Orthodoxall Christianes

This Creed; which the Ancients thought complete enough, seems to the
Romanists defective, and therefore they have adjoined and added to the same,
many new Articles yea, to those twelve, which the Apostles set down, for a
sufficient Summary of wholesome doctrine.

The Articles of their New Creed and

Doctrines are:

Their Apocryphal Scriptures. Their Dogmaticall Traditions, which they equal
with the holy Scriptures. Their Transubstantiation. Their Communion in one
kind. Their Purgatory. Their Invocation of Saints. Their Worship of Images.
Their Obedience to the Pope, without which no salvation. Their Latin Service.
Their Trafique of Indulgences.
These and other new doctrines are Canonized in their late meeting at Trent,
and upon these and the like, is the contestation between the Romanists and us:
these are obtruded by them, as undoubted verities, and to be believed under the
Popes curse. These are rejected by us as human inventions, some of them
cunningly devised to advance their ambition and avarice, without any solid
ground or countenance of Scripture, or Antiquity. He that desires to see mere
of the differences between the Romanists and us, let him read Doct. Field of
the Church. Doct. Field of the Church, Book 3. cap. 7. page 83.


2 The Agreement of the Churches before named with us, in the chief Points in
Controversy following.
Of the Greek Church.
AS the writings of the Greek Fathers, for above five hundred years space
after Christ, give testimony to our Religion in the maine Points thereof: So
also the Churches at this day in those parts do hold with us, and we and they
against the now Romish Church. As,

1 The Greeks deny the Popes Supremacy.
Cyrill Patriarch of Constantinople.) (...). Cap. 10. page 28.
We believe, that no mortal man can be Head of the Church, and that our Lord
JESUS CHRIST is the alone Head.

Mark, (...). Concilium Ptorens. page 721. Binius.
Ephesus.) We account the Pope as one of the Pariarks, if he be Orthodox.

Nilus, Thessalonica) The Greek Church, though it never denied the Primacie of
Order to the Pope of Rome, (...), etc. Nilus de Primatu, page 101.
yet their assumed predominancie of Authority they have always resisted.

The Emperor Ioannes Paleologus) submitted himself to the Pope in the
Council of Florence, Turk: Paulus Aemilius cited by Bishop Jewel, Defense of
the Apolog. page 411.
for which he was so hated of his people, that being dead, they denied him
Christian burial.

Jsodore Archbishop of Kiovia) returning from the said Council, Hunc
Moscovitae obedientiam Romanam praedicantem spoliaverunt, and in necem extremam
impulerunt. Mathias a Michou, de Sarmatia, lib. 2. cap. 1.
for unities sake, to move the people to submit themselves to the Pope, was
deposed from his Bishopric, and put to death.

2 They account the Pope and his Church Schismatic.
The Patriarch of Constantinople does yearly, upon the Sunday, In Praefaclene
ante acta and screpta Theelogorum Wirtembergensium and Patriarchae
Constantinopolitani, Dom. Hieremiae, An. Dom. 1576.
Dominica invocavit, solemnly excommunicate the Pope and his Clergy for
Schismatics. Summum antem Pontisicem Christi Vicarium omnesque Latinos pre
excemmunicatis babens. Elench. Alphab. omnium Hareseum, lib. 7. page 202.


Prateolus) The Graecians account Christ's Vicar, the Pope; and the Latins,
excommunicate persons.

3 Concerning Transubstantiation.
Cyrill the Patriarch of Constantinople.) (...) Cap. 17. page 60.
In the administration of the Eucharist, we do confess a true and real
presence of Christ; but such a one, as Faith offers us; not such as devised
Transubstantiation teaches: For we believe, the faithful to cate Christ's body
in the Lords Supper; not sensibly champing it with their teeth, but partaking
it by the sense of the soul: for that is not the body of Christ, which
offers it self to our eyes in the Sacrament; but that which Faith
spiritually apprehends, and offers to us. Hence it ensues, that if we
believe, we cate and participate; if we believe not, we receive no profit by it.

Hierimi the Patriarch teaches, (...). Respons. 1. page 101.
Christ, which he calls (...), that is a transmutation, which is not
sufficient to infer a Transubstantiation, because it may signify only a
mystical alteration, which the Patriarch in the same place plainly shows,
saying, the body and blood of Christ are truly mysteries, (...). 1 Patriar.
Respons. cap. 10. page 86.
not that these (says he (...),) are changed into humane flesh, but we into
them: for the better things have ever the pre-eminence.

Neither was the flesh (says he) of our Lord. which he carried about him given
to his Apostles for meat, not his blood for drink, neither now in the holy
mysteries does the Lords body descend from heaven: this is blasphemy.

Ganlterus.) The Greeks say, Malos, dum consecratum panem accipiunt, non
accipere corpus Jesus Christi: hoc ipsum perpeino Calvini Ministri in ore
habent. In Tabula Chronograph. page 604. de Photio, 19.
Christ's body: This also the Calvinists Ministers, have always in their
mouths.

4 They celebrate the Eucharist in both kinds. (...). 1 Patriar. Respons. de
Abusib. page 129.

Hieremie the Patriarch:) Mysteries.

Cyrill the Patriarch. (...). Cyrill cap: 17, page 61.


As the Institutor speaks of his body, so also of his blood, which
Commandment ought not to be rent a sunder, or mangled according to human
Arbitrament, but the Institution is to be kept entire as it is delivered to us.

Prateolus.) Item esse, necessario sub vtraque specie panis scilicet et vini
communis andum, adeo quidem, vt qui vna specie tantum communicate, etiamsi
laicus sit, peccare dicatur. quod (ut aiunt) contra Christi praceptum agat, qui
sub vtraque specie communicare praecipit. Prateol elench: Alphab: omni: Haeres:
lib: 7: page 202:
The say of necessity they must Communicate in both kinds, both of the bread
and the wine, so that if any take it under one kind, although a layman, he is
said to sin, because they say, he does against Christ's Commandment: Who has
commanded to communicate under both kinds.

5 They deny Purgatory fire.
Cyrill, (...). Cap. 18. page 66.
Constantinople.) We believe the souls of the dead to be in bliss, or in
damnation; according as every one has done.

Nilus, (...). Nilus. page 119. de Purgator. igne.
Thessalonica.) We have not received, by Tradition from our Teachers, that
there is any fire of Purgatory, nor any temporal punishment by fire; and we
do know, that the Eastern Church does not believe it.

Alfonsus de Castro.) Graecians and Armenians, Vnus ex notissimie erroribus
Graecorum and Armenorum est, quo docent nullum esse Purgatorium locum, quo
animae ab has luce migrantes purgentur, a sordibus, quas in corpore
contraxerant, antequam in aeterna Tabernacula recipi maereantur. Advers.
Haeres. lib. 12. page 188.
that they teach, that there is no place for Purgatory, where souls after
this life are purged from their corruptions, which they have contracted in
their bodies, before they deserve to be received into the eternal Tabernacles.

Guido) sarth, Quintus error Graecorum est quia dicunt Purgatorium non esse. De
Haeresibus Graecorum.
Greeks, that they say there is no Purgatory.

Gaulter.) That there is no Purgatory, Purgatorium non esse, quod idem
Calvinus, etc. De Photio, page 603.
which Calvin affirms, etc.

6 They allow married Priests. (...). Prim. Patri. Respon. p. 129.

Jerem. Patr.)

Pope Stephen the second.) Distinctio 31. Aliter.
and Subdeacons of the Eastern Church are married. (...). Cyril, Resp. ad
inter. 4. p. 97.


7 Concerning Jmages.
Cyrill the Patriarch.) We do not forbid Pictures, the Art is noble:

Damascen.) (...). Damascen. lib. 4. cap. 17 p. 343. Basileae.


8 For the Books of Canonical Scripture, they agree with us.
Damascen.) (...). Ortho. fidei, lib. 4. cap. 18.
Wisdom of Solomon, and others, are not numbered amongst the Canonical.

Cyrill, (...). Respons. 3. page 91.
Laodicean Synod has set down, and which the Catholic Orthodox Church of
Christ, being illuminated by the holy Ghost, has confessed to this day; to
wit, 22 Books of the Old Testament.

9 The sufficiency of holy Scripture.
Cyrill.) (...). Cyril, p. 91. Resp. 3.
because being divinely inspired, they set before us the doctrine which is
sufficient to instruct, to inlighten, and to make perfect him that comes to
the faith.

Again, (...). Cyrill cap: 2. page 5. Lomb: lib: 1. Distinct, 11. v. Dicunt
quod veritas in Evangelio fidem integram continet. (...). Nilus de caufis
dissent. page 2.1 (...). de Ortho fide lib. 1 cap. 1.
the Authority of the Scripture is above the authority of the Church; etc.

Men may err, and be deceaved, but the holy Scripture cannot err nor deceive,
nor be deceived, but is always infallible and certain.

Lombard.

The Grecians believe and say that the truth in the Gospel contains entirely
the faith, that is to say, the doctrine of Faith.

Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica) To accuse the Scriptures is as great a fault
as to accuse God himself.

Damascen whatsoever is delivered unto us in the law and the prophets,

10 They do not forbid the Laity the reading of the Scriptures. (...). Cyrill
Respon. 1. pa. 81.

Cyrill the Patriarch) As the hearing of the holy Scriptures is forbidden to no
Christian man, So no man is to be kept from the Reading of it: For the word is
near in the mouth, and in their hearts, Therefore manifest injury is offered
to any christian man, of what rank or condition soever he be: who is deprived
or kept from reading or hearing the holy Scriptures.

11 They Renounce works of Supererogation and Merit works.
Hierem: (...).
the Patriarch.) Affirms. That we must do good works, but put no confidence
in them, (...). Prim. Respons. Patr. cap 6 pa. 71
we must not trust nor believe in Them, Although we have fulfilled all things
yet we are unprofitable servants, according to the words of our Savior.

Cyrill the Patriarch:) (...). Cyril cap. 13.
We believe a man to be Justified by faith, not of works.

They concur in Assertion with the Protestants. Sir Fdwin Sands Relation of
the religion in the West. sect. 53.
That it is impossible for any creature to merit, as by way of right, the least
dram of reward, at his Creators hands: But whatsoever reward is bestowed upon
the creature, flows forth from the mere bounty, and gratiousnes of the
Creator, who as in goodness alone, and mere grace did make him, so also in
mere grace, does advance him to that high happiness.

12 They allow not private Mass. Chytraeus,
No private Masses are celebrated amongst the Greeks, Constat missas privatas
absque co^municantibus non ab eis celebrari solere: Chyt. de statu eccles: page
14
without other Communicants, as their Liturgies and Faithful Relations
testify.

Ioannes Hoff-meisterus.) Res ipsa clamat tam in Graeca quam latina ecclesia
Non solum Sacerdote^ sacrifica^tem: sed et re-
(...) The thing it self does speak, and cry alowd, both in the Greek, and
in the Latin Church that not only(...) sacrificing Priest but the Priest and
Deacons and the rest of the people or at least some part of the people did
communicate together. Praesbyteres, Diaconos. Nec non et reliquam plebem aut
saltem plebis aliquam partem communicasse. Ioannes Hoffmeisterus apud Cassan
consult. lib. de solita. miss. page 996.


Marcus Ephesinus says that the priest in the Latin Church cateth all and
drinks all himself, Feidl of the Chur. lib. 3 cap. pr. pa. 55.
giving no part to any that are present, no not to the Deacon that assisteth
him, yet cries aloud take and eat: So says he that they do many things
contrary to the traditions received from the Fathers, contrary to the words of
Christ and contrary to themselves and their own words in this mystery.

13 They have prayer in a known tongue. Bella. de verbo Dei lib. 2 cap. 16

Bellarmine) Confesses prayer in a known tongue continued long in the East
and West Churches.

Nicholas) The Greeks do celebrate their. Celebrane missa nella lingua loro
per poter essere intesi dal commun pepolo. Nicolas lib. 4 cap. 36.
Liturgy in their own Language that it may be understood of the common people.

14 They use not prayer for souls to be delivered out of Purgatory.
Nicholas) The Greeks deny Purgatory and affirm that the prayers of the
living profit the dead nothing. Negano il purgatorio affirmando che 1 prieghi
digiuni et elemosine de viventi nulla giovino all anime de deffuncti: idem
ibidem.


Villamont) The Greeks admit not Purgatory. N'admettent le Purgatoire
Villamont uoiag: lib. 2 cap. 21.


Prateolus) when they take away Purgatory They affirm also that prayers avayle
not the dead. Cumque tollunt Purgatorium dicunt etiam defunctis nihil prodesse
orationes Prateo page 203 lib. citato error. 15.


15 Of extreme unction.
Possevin) The Greeks reject the sacrament of extreme unction. Possevin de
Moscovia negano Greci che visiapin dinna ontione di cresima fol 86. Villamont
lib. 2. cap. 21 ils nient le sacrament d'entreme onction.


Villamont) The Greeks know not the Sacrament of extreme unction.

16 Of elevating and carrying about the Sacrament that it may be adored. Festum
vero corporis Christi more Romanae ecclesiae non venerantur Moscov. religio.

Gaugninus) The Grecians do not observe the feast of Corpus Christi And
generally all the Christians do accord against the latin Church; Cathol: tradit:
quest: 29 page 160
and do not keep the Sacrament to employ it to any other use, then our Savior
Christ has instituted it, as to carry it in procession or the like.

Sacranus) The Russes and the Greeks do not elevate the Consecrated bread to
be worshipped at the Alter. In altari positu^ nemoveueratur ne que elevatur:
sacran: elucid: errorum cap: 2: error 20.


18 Of Indulgences and Sale of Masses.
Hieremie the Patriarch) They that make gain of the Sacrament do ill. (...).
Hier. Patr. Respon. 1. page 130.


19 Of the Sacrifice in the Mass.
Neither is there in their Cannon any mention made of the sacrifice of the body
and blood of CHRIST for the Redemption of the living and dead. Nee ullam in
eorum canone sacrificii corporis et languinis Christi pro redemptione vivorum
et mortuorum oblati mentionem fieri Chytrae: de statu eccles: page: 14.


And thus much of the agreement of The Greek Church with the Protestants: This
Cyrill before cited was first Patriarch of Alexandria (to whom Archbi: Spalata
dedicated his book) and now the is (...) atriarch of Constantinople: being
Patriarch of Alex andria he wrote letters to the most Reverend father in God the
late Archbishop of Canturbury, and sent one Metrophanes to Oxford who is now
returned into Aegipt.

The manner of Administration of the Sacraments, of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, in the Greek Church.
FOR the Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism: The administration of the
Sacrament of Baptisms
The Priest having said certain prayers, taking the child in his arms, and
puts him three times into the water, saying, the servant of GOD N. N. is
Baptized, In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: and
so concludes with certain prayers as we do. Eucharist. Hierem: Patr. page 103.


For the Administering of the Eucharist or Lords supper, the Greeks have two
Liturgies, one St. Basil for some holidaies, the other St. Chrysostomes.

St. Basil biginneth. O God our God who have sent this heavenly bread, the food
of all the world, St. Basils Lieturgie. (...) ctc.
our Lord Jesus Christ; to be to us a Savior, a Redeemer, and a benefactor
blessing, and sanctifying us, bless this our offering and take it into thy
Supercelestiall Alter: Remember Lord (thou that art good, and loving to
mankind) them that offer, and by whom they offer, and keep us immaculate in
the holy service, of thy Divine Mysteries etc.

Many other prayers and thanks givings follow for Gods benefitts bestowed upon
the Church; from the beginning of the world, and for the Redemption of man kind
by the Son of God, borne for us: suffering, dying, and raised again: etc:

And then reciting the words of the Institution: (...).
Jn the night in which he gave himself for the life of the world, taking bread
in his holy and immaculate hands, giving thanks, and showing to thee God and
Father, blessing, sanctifiyng, breaking. He gave to his holy Disciples and
Apostles saying: Take ye, eat ye, This is my body which is broken for you:
in remission of sins.

Likewise he took the Cup of the fruit of the vine mingling, giving thanks,
blessing and sanctifiyng

He gave to his holy Disciples and Apostles saying: Drink ye all of this,
This is the blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you, and many, for
the Remission of sins.

Do this in remembrance of me as often as ye eat this bread or drink this Cup
confess my death, and set forth my resurrection etc.

Then the Priests pray that those Antitypes may be Sanctified by God. (...).


And that the Receivers may participate of the Sacrament, not to their
condemnation. But that they may find favor before God, in the company of all
the holy Fathers, Prophets, Apostles, Mary the holy virgin, John Baptist etc.

Then offering the Sacrifice of praise for the Catholic Church, for them that
offered Alms, for the Emperor, for all the people, for the Common wealth, for
the Archbishop, for all Ministers of the Church, for seasonable weather, for
the rooting out of Haeresies, and Schisms, and that they may all with one
heart and one mouth, celebrate God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost Eternally.

This solemn prayer being ended, and the Letanies, and the Lords prayer
premised, all Communicate.

And the remainder of the bread and offerings, being carried into the Vestry.
Cap: 21: de Institutis Graecorum, (...).
The Deacon and people give thanks to God.

Christopher Angelus) writes, that at the Chauncell door, the Priest
delivers the Evcharist, the bread and the wine mingled together, saying: N.
N. the servant of God receives, In the name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; Amen. And the people say every one, with an humble voice, Lord, I do
not kiss thee as Judas, but as the Thief, I trust thou will remember me in
thy Kingdom.

There is no mention made in this Liturgy of Saint Basil, of the offering of
the body and blood of Christ by the Priest, nor of redeeming of the living, or
dead, by this work.

Or applying of this oblation for others that receive it not.

And the bread and wine after consecration, are called Antitypes: and they
pray, that God would send his holy Spirit upon the receivers, and to Sanctify
the bread: etc.

For the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom, although there is mention made of an
oblation, yet not of a Propitiatory, of the body and blood of CHSIST, but of
an Evcharisticall Sacrifice, of praise, thanksgiving, or Alms.

We offer unto thee, this rational and unbloudy worship, we In vocate,
supplicate, and offer unto thee, (...):
for the Patriarchs, Apostles, Evangelists, for the virgin Mary, we offer to
thee, this reasonable service for all the world, for the whole Church, for our
Kings, and their Armies, as Tertullian ad Scapalum, says, we sacrifice for the
health of our Emperor to our God, and his, in pure prayer.

Although their be some things in this Liturgy of Saint Chrysostomes, which I
will not Justify to be his: which may be added since his death, yet in that I
find no Popish Transubst antiation, nor private Mass.

The Sacraments are Administered in both kinds. No sacrifice is offered in it,
to deliver souls out of Purgatory.

Married Priests administer, and it is administered in the Greek tongue.

The Mengrellians and the Circassians are of the Greek communion, and of the
Patriarch of Constantinoples obedience, Brerwoods enquiries Page, 135.
they live entirely by themselves.

The Christians.
Inhabiting the greatest part of Asia the less, live mingled with Mahometans,
and acknowledge not the Pope, but are Christians of the Greeks communion, and
also of the Patriarch of Constantinoples obedience.

Of the Georgians.
There Religion is the same, both in substance and ceremonies with the
Graecians, yet in no sort subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople: but to
their own Metropolitan.

For their Liturgies.
The Georgians have for their vulgar speech, utu^tur Graeco idiomate in
scripturis divinis et Graecorum consuetudines in sacramentis observant Vitriac:
histor orient: cap. 80. de Georgianis.
a peculiar language of a middle temper, which well agrees with the position
of their country, between the Tartarian and the Armenians, as Gesner and
Postel, have observed in their books of Languages: yet notwistanding they have
their liturgies in the Gre^ke tongue: as Jacobus a Vitriaco, Gesner, Postel,
Roccha, and diverse other; have certainly recorded, cited by Mr. Brerwood.

The Moscovites.
The Muscovites affirm, Ioannes Faber: ad Ferdinandum Regem Romanorum cui erat
a confessionibus in Theol: Muscovit: p^g. 170.
that they follow that faith which they had preached to them by St. Andrew the
Apostle, and also those things which were concluded of by 318 Bishops in the
first Nicene council under Constantine the Great: and which were preached to
them by Basil the Great, and St. John Chrysostom, which things They believe
to be so holy so firm, and sincere: That it was never lawful for any of them
to depart from them in the lest manner: as neither from the Gospel of Christ

1 Supremacy.
Sacranus) They deny the Popes Supremacy, Dicunt dominum Papam haereticum esse
cum ecclefix Romana, et anathematisant ipsum, tempore cenae domini cum suo
clero Sacr: cap, 2 error 3. in elucidar. error.
affirming the Pope to be an heretic, and they do excomunicate him and his
Clergy: They are subject to their own Patriarch of Mosco.

Prateolus) They deny the Roman Church to be head over all other Churches.
Negant Romanam ecclesiam esse caput omnium aliarum ecclesiarum: Prateolus
elench: haeres: page 228.


Guagninus) they condemn and curse the Romans, Romanos damnant et execrantur
tanquam primitivae ecclesiae desertores et septem sanctarum synodorum
praevaricatores Guagn: de: Relig. Mosco. pa. 231.
as forsakers of the Primitive Church, and breakers of the seven general
Synods.

2 They Reject Purgatory.
Sacranus) They reject Purgatory and acknowledge only two Receptacles of
souls, heaven, Asserunt Purgatorium non esse, sosu^ esse duo receptacula
aminarum, caelum et infernum Sacran: lib citat error: 33.
and hell.

Guagninus) The Greeks and the Russians deny Purgatory. Purgatorium Graeci et
Rutheni negant: Guagnin. pa. 232 lib. citat.


3 They deny the spiritual efficacy of extreme unction.
Sacranus, Dicunt sacramentum extremae unctionis nullam adversus peccatireatum
medelam confer pos se Sacra. lib: citat err: 14.
They say the Sacrament of extreme unction, does confer no help against the
guilt of sin.

Possevine) They deny the Sacrament of extreme unction to the sick. Extremae
unctionis sacramentum oegrotantibus negant Possevin de rebus Mosoovit page 3.


4 They administer the communion in both kinds.
The Priest mingling both the bread and wine together in the Chalice,
Sacramentum sacerdos cocleari ex calice in portiunculas minutas redactum, et
vino commixtum communicantibus distribuit Cassand: litur: cap. 15 esi
comunicano sub utraque specie Bot: rel: univ. par: 3 lib. 1.
distributeth it together with a spoone.

Boterus) They communicate under both kinds.

5 They allow married Priests.
Dresserus) The Russe Priests have their wives, Sacerdotes Rutenici proprias
uxores habent, et sunt coniuges apud Neand page 559:
and are married men

6 They have their service in a known tongue.
And the Gospel and Epistle is read in their Church in their own tongue, Sacra
sive missa slavonica lingua peragitur etc. Guagni. page: 230 lib citat.
and their communion in the Slavonian tongue, with some Greek hymns.

The Slavon is their vulgar tongue

7 They deny Confirmation to be a Sacrament.
Sacranus,) Dicunt Confirmationis Sacramentum nullum esse. Sacran: loco citat.
They say, that their is no Sacrament of Confirmation:

8 They abhor the Jmages, and reject most of the Saints of the Romish Church.
Guagninus,) Habent in Catalogo sanctorum Romanos quosdam pontifices quos inter
Sanctos venerantur: Caeteros vero qui post eorum schisma fuerunt: Execrantur et
pro haereticis gravissimis eos habent: Guagni: de relig. Moscovit pa: 229:
They have in the Catalogue of Saints, certain Roman Bishops, which they
reverence as Saints: but the others which were after their Schism they curse,
and account them grevious Haereticks.

Sacranus, Sacran: loco citat: err: 6:
They blaspheme the Saints of the Roman Church.

Sacranus They abhor the Images made by the Catholics. Imagines operis and
Artificii Catho licorum horrent Sacranus loco citat: err: 7


9 The wicked eat not Christ's body in the sacrament
Possevine They say that they which are defiled with some sins, Dicum qui
sunt aliquibus pecatis inquinati corpus Christi Domini non recipere. Possev: de
rebus Moscovi ^.
do not receive the Lords body in the Sacrament.

10 They refuse to Communicate with the Roman Church.
Sacranus, Si casu quis Catholicorum presbyterorum in altaribus eorum
celeb^verit mox velut execratu^, violant and effringunt. Sacran. loco. citato
err: 23.
If by chance any Catholic Priest shall celebrate upon one of their Altars,
they violate it, and break it as a thing curssed:

This Church, except in exacting marriage of their Priests, differs not in any
material point from the Graecians.

The Russe Liturgy or Church Service, their manner of Administration of the
Sacanmemts.
THEIR morning Service they call Zautrana, that is Mattms. It is done in this
order: The Priest enters into the Church with his Deacon following him. And
when he comes into the middle of the Church, he begins to say with a loud
voice, Blasslavey vladika that is, Bless us heavenly Father, Bless us
heavenly Pastor, (meaning of Christ) then he adds, In the name of the Father,
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, one very God in Trinity: and Aspod:
Pomeluy or Lord have mercy upon us: repeating three times. This done, he goes
on toward the Chauncell or Sanctum sanctorum, (as they use to call it) and so
enters into the Schars vey Dwere, or the heavenly door: which no man may enter
into, but the Priest only where standing at the Altar or Table; (set near to
the upper wall of the Chauncell) he says the Lords prayer; and then again,
Aspody Pomeluii, or Lord have mercy one us, etc. pronounced 12 times. Then
praised be the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, for ever
and ever, whereto the Deacons and people say, Amen. Next after, the Priest
adds the Psalms for that day, and begins with: O come let us worship, and
fall down before the Lord etc. Therewithal, himself with Deacons, and people
crossing themselves, bow down three times; after this, he reads the ten
commandments, and Athanasius Creed out of the Service Book.

This being done, Boter: par: 3 lib: 1 page: 81 They have diverse of the fathers
translated into their own tongue: as Basil, Chrysostom, Damascen, and
Gregory the great, whose Home lies they do read on holy days to the people.
the Deacon that stands without the heavenly door, or Chancell, reads An
Homily out of Basil, Chrysostom, Damascen, or Gregory, which they have
translated into their own tongue, or the lives of some of their Saints: After
all this, (which reaches to an hour and an half, or two hours of length) he
adds certain Collects, or prayers upon that, which he has read, and so
ends his Service.

About 9 of the clock, they have another service called, Obeidna or complim; if
it be some high or Festival day: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. and
we praise thee O God, is sung with a more solemn, and curious note.

Their Evening service is called Vecherna where the Priest begins with
Bl^slavoy Vladika: as he did in the morning, and with the Psalms appointed for
the Vecherne, which being read, he sings: Mi^s^ule does magnify the Lord,
etc And the^ the Priest, Deacon, and people, all with one voice, sing Aspody
Pomeluy, or Lord have mercy upon us, thirty times together: Whereunto the
boys, that are in the Church, answer all with one voice, as fast as their
lips can go, Verii, Verii, Verii, etc. Praise, Praise, Praise, etc. thirty
times together Then is read by the Priest (and upon the holidayes sung,) the
first Psalm, Blessed^s the man etc. and to the end of it, is added Alleluia,
repeated ten times.

The next in order, is some part of the Gospoll read by the Priest, which he
ends with Alleluia, repeated three times, so having said a collect in
remembrance of the Saint of that day, he ends his evening Service.

All this while, the Priest stands at the Altar, or high table within the
Chancell; whence be never moves all service time: The Deacon or Deacons,
(which are many in their Chathedrall Churches, stand without the Chancell by
the Scarsvey Dwere or heavenly door.) The people stand together the whole
service time in the body of the church, and some in the church porch, for peiw
or seat they have none within in their Churches: and it were to be wished, there
were none in ours

The Priest stands ready in the Churchpoarch with a tub of water: The manner
of the Russ Baptism.
The words used by the priest when he dippeth the child, are the very same,
that are prescribed in the Gospel and used by us, viz. In the name of the
Father, Guagn. de relig: Moscovit.
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. As often as the Godfathers are asked,
whether they do renounce the Devil, so often they spit upon the ground.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, And the manner of their communicating. The
administration of the Lords Supper.
First they confess themselves of all their sins to the Priest: Then come
they to the Church, and are called up to the communion table, that stands
like an Altar, a little removed from the upper end of the Church; here, first
they are asked of the Priest, whither they be clean or no, that is, whither
they have never a sin behind, that they left unconfessed: If they answer no,
They are taken to the table, where the priest begins with certain usual
prayers, The communicants standing in the mean time, with their arms foulded
one within an other, like penitentiaries or mourners; when these prayers are
ended, the Priest takes a spoon and fi^eth it full of Claret wine, Then he
puts into it a small piece of Bread, and tempereth them both together: and
so delivers them both to the Communicants that stand in order, speaking the
usual words of the Sacrament, Eat this etc. Drink this etc. both at one time,
without any pause.

After that, he delivers them again, Bread by it self, then wine, carded
together with a little warm water, to represent Blood more rightly, and the
water withal, that flowed out of Christ's side.

Whiles this is in doing, the Communicants unfold their arms. And folding them
again; follow the Priest three times about the Communion table, and so return
to their places, again having said certain other prayers, he dismisseth the
co^municants with this charg, to be joyful, and to cheer up themselves for
seven days next following: which being ended, he inioyneth them to fast for it
as long time after, which they use to observe with great devotion: eating,
nothing else, but bread and salt, except a little Cabbage, and some other
herbs, or roots, with water or quasse mead for their drink.

The Rites which the Muscovites use this day in their holy meetings ex
comentariis Sigismundi Liberi apud Cassandrum, liturg. Car 15 Page 32.

No Priest dare administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Nullus sacerdos,
^ut sacra obire aut ba^tizare aut alio quovis fungi munere audet nisi Diacono
praesente.
or Baptize, or do any other spiritual work, except the Deacon be present.

In every Church they have but one Altar, In singulis templis unicum tant^
Altar, et in dies singulos unum quoque sacrum faciendum putant
and in every day they administer but once.

They administer the Sacracrament in the vulgar tongue, Totum sacrum, seu
Missa, gentili aut vernaculalingua, apud illos perag^ solet.
and in it is their liturgy.

They read the Epistle, Epistola praeterea, Evangelium pro tempore, quo magis a
popul^ percipiantur, extra chorum populo astanti, lata voce, recitantur.
and the Gospel without the Quire, (the people standing round about them with
a loud voice.)

They communicate in both kinds, Communicant sub utraque specie miscente vino
panem, seu corpus sanguine:
mingling or putting the bread, and wine together.

The Priest takes a part of the bread, and wine, Sumit sacerdos cocleari, ex
calice portiunculam, porrigitque communicanti:
out of the cup with a spoone, and gives it to the Communicants.

The Melchites.
Or Syrians deny the Pope of Romes supremacy, Villam lib: 2 cap: 22 les Syrio^s
se vantent, estre les premiers chre stiens du monde, pour se que saint Pierro
tint son siege septans en Antioche; au paravant que d'aller a Rome qui est
cause que iamais les syrious n' ont voul^ se foubs mettre a' l' Eglise Roman:
and are under the Patriarch of Antioch, they say, they were the first
Christians in the world, and that Saint Peter was their Bishop at Antioch,
seven years before he came to Rome, and therefore they will not submitt
themselves unto the Bishops of Rome as before. Idem ibidem quand ils co^munient
cest sou. les deus especes.


They receive the Eucharist in both kinds.

They acknowledge the Souls of the just to be in Paradise, ils croient que les
iustes sont en Parad's et les meschans en enfer, idem ibidem.
and the wicked to be in hell.

Their Priests have wives. Sacerdotes eorum utuntur uxoribus: Vitriac: hist.
orient cap. 75. Patriarchi pieu ellegono e consecra no Vescovi e gl^
Archivescovi a lor suaditte Boter Rel. par: 3 lib 2 cap de melchiti.


The Patriarch,

They altogether observe the Customs, Consuetudines autem et institutiones
Gracorum, in divinis officijs et in aliis spiritualibus, Syriani pemtus
observant, vitriac: histo. orient: cap 75.
and institutions of the Greeks in divine offices,

They account the Latins excommunicate persons. Omnes latino^ excomunicates
reputent Vitriac: hist orient cap. 75 Brerwood page 138.


All these Christians before named, are of the same Communion; and in effect,
of the same Religion with the Graecians.

And whereas the Greek Church is Charged by the latin Church, with this
error, that the holy Ghost proceeds only, from the Father, and not from the
Son.

The Greeks use to say; (...).
proceeding from the Father by the Son, so say the Patriarchs Jeremy and
Cyrill, in their confessions.

And the Patriarch Joseph, in the Council of Florence, explaineth himself in
these words,

We say, that the holy Ghost, (...). Iraeneus Rodoginus.
proceeds from the Father by the Son, eternally, and substantially, as from
one beginning, and cause.

The Greeks d^e charge the Latins.
WITH whom, they will have no Communion, with these errors, and opinions
amongst others.

With their Image worship, forbidden by the Ephesin Council.

With the Popes Supremacy, which he challenges over all the Churches,
contrary to the Decrees of Ancient Counsels; and especially, to the fourth
general Council of Calcedon, which attributes Superiority, to the Sea of
Constantinople.

That they scarce read the Sacred rules, and holy Scriptures; They say, that
the Popes commandments, who for the time sits in the Sea of Rome, are their
Canons, and Laws.

The Pope and his Priestly train, will remit sins, to a prefixed and
determinated time, of Months, or years. They sport after the same manner,
with by past offenses, forgiving the sins of days, Months, or years. And
yet they cannot tell by what authority, and upon what grounds, or by what
Ecclesiastical Canon they do this.

They shut up all Priests and Deacons, from marriage by their laws, and they
hold it an abominations, to receive the Sacrament, from a married Priest. And
yet their are many Churchmen amongst them, who commit whoredo^e, and all kind
of uncleanenesse, most securely, without punishment.

When the Gospel is reading, and their Mass is singing, all men who please,
sit, and yet they are never blamed by their leaders; Laics sit with Priests,
and men of holy orders, and sometime the same Laics, carry spurs upon their
heels, and also rods in their hands; yea, which is worst, they suffer dogs to
enter into the Church; and when the Priest is sacrificing; and celebrating the
host, which they hold to be life, giving bread; they suffer dogs sitting at
the Priests feet, to bark at all those that come in, and to fawn upon the
Priests and others, that stand by, at the time of Consecration,

The too great and extraordinary exaction of the Popes legates, for when they
brought Chrisme or Creme to Constantinople, they demanded eighty pounds weight
of gold for it, beside other gifts etc. Thus farrethis author: Constantinople
had communion some few years which the Bishop of Rome, when the Latins had
taken it by force, as also Jerusalem.

You may see more of these set down, by Peter Stewart in Calecam, page 407
editione Ingolstandiensi 1608 ex variis Graecorum monumentis.

The Armenians.
AMongst the Saints, they reverence most, Inter sanctos colunt plus Thaddaeum
Apostolum, asserentes quod eos converter it, et fidem Christi docuerit. Mathias
a michou: de Sarmatia Europea lib. 2 cap. 1.
Thaddaeus the Apostle, affirming that he converted them, and taught them the
faith of Christ.

1 Supremacy of the Pope.
They have a Primate of their own, Proprium habent Primatem, quem Catholicum
appellitant, et cui, velut summo Pontifici, per omnia obtemperant. Romanum
siquidem Antistitem contemnunt, eum dicentes non esse caeteris superiorem:
Prateolus de haeres: Armeniorum Liter. A. 67. page: 63 Vitriac: cap: 79.
whom they term Catholic, and obey as their chief Bishop, and the Bishop of
Rome they do despise, and say, that he has no superiority over others.

2 Transubstantiation.
Prateolus,) Negant illi verum Christi corpus, realiter in Sacramento
Eucharistiae, sub panis, et sanguinem sub vini speciebus, contineri. Prateol:
loco citat, error. 12
They deny the true body of Christ, to be really in the sacrament of the
Eucharist, contained under the species of bread; and the blood under the form
of the wine.

They deny the true body of Christ etc. Vt supra. Negant illi verum
Christicorpus realitur. ut supra: Thom: a Jesus de convers: omnium gentium lib:
7 part 1 cap: 17 page 399.


They do not believe, Non credunt quod consecratione facta: per verba Christi
super panem et vinum, sit sub speciebus panis et vini, vere et realiter, verum
corpus, et sanguis Christi, sed tantum in similitudine, et signo. Guido, de
error: Armen: 22.
that consecration being made by the words of Christ, over the bread and wine,
the true body and blood of Christ, is truly and really, under the species of
bread, and wine, but only in a similitude and sign.

3 They mingle not Water with Wine.
Gau lterus,) In Eucharistia vino mero, ne^ mi nima aquae stilla permixto,
vtendum docebant Gaulter. lib. cit: de Armenis page 549.
They teach in the Eucharist, mere wine is to be used, not mixed, with the
least drop of water.

Guido,) Dicunt enim quod aqua non est miscenda vino in sacramento Altaris, et
si aquam ponant, dicunt nullum sacramentum esse: Guido de Haer: Armen: 24.
They say, that water is not to be mingled with Wine, in the sacrament of the
Altar, and if they put water, they say it is no Sacrament.

4 They reject purgatory.
G^ulterus,) Purgatorium explodebant, explodit Calvinus; Gualter: loc citat.
Asserunt praeterea, nullum esse purgatorium locum, in quo animae ab hac luce
migrantes, purgentur a sordibus, quas in corpore contraxerant antequam in a
terna tabernacula recipi mereantur Prateol: loc: cotat. 21.
They deny Purgatory as Calvin does.

Prateolus,) Moreover, they do affirm, that their is no Purgatory, or place,
in which Souls departing from hence, are purged from the filth, they have
received in their bodies; before they shall deserve to be received, into the
everlasting Tabernacles.

5 They admit Married Priests.
Chytraeus) Married Priests, Nec sacerdotes mariti ab administratione sacri
arcentur. Chytr: de stat: eccles. page 23.
are not put from their Ministry.

6 They distribute the Eucharist in both kinds.
Chytraeus,) Omnibus integrum sacramenlum distribuitur. Chytr. loc. citat.
To every one the whole Sacrament is distributed,

7 Of Matrimony. Negabant matrimonium esse sacramentum. Gaulter: loc. citat.

Gaulterus) They deny Matrimony, to be a Sacrament.

8 Prayers for the dead, are in vain.
Gualterus) The Prayers are in vain, Vanas esse preces, quae pro mortuis
funduntur. Gaulter: loc. citat. haeres. 26.
that are made for the dead.

9 They worship not Images.
Baronius,) Venerabiles imagines non adorant sed quod magis est, eorum
universalis episcopus cum reliquis, eos q^i adorant, anathemate percutit;
Baron. tom. 10 page: 256.
They adore not the venerable Images, but that which is more, their universal
Bishop with others, do Anathematize them, that do adore them.

They have the service in their own tongue.
Chytraeus,) They use not in their service, any other tongue, but their own
vulgar language.

10 They exercise their common divine service, Mathias Michou de sarmatia lib.
2 cap. 1 Armen: suo ritu guadent, (...) literis. Vitriac: cap: 79.
in the Armenian tongue.

And they have their Bible in the Armenian tongue, which translation, is said
to be St. Chrysostomes work, after his banishment from Constantinople; he
then living with them.

For their Liturgies, Cassander sets down three.

The Armenian Liturgy, out of the book of the observations of Peter
Bellonius. lib. 3. cap. 12 set down by Cassander; Liturg. Cap. 13 page 31
THe Armenian Priests are married, Presbyteri Armeniorum sunt coniugati, item ut
Graecorum: et in celebranda missa calice utuntur, Latinorum more, eisdemque or
namentis vestiuntur, neque vero magno pano consecrant Graecorum more, sed ut
Latini minutis oblatis seu hostiis.
and in Celebrating the Sacrament, (which he calls the Mass) they use a
chalice, as the latins do, and are clad with the like ornaments, as they are:
neither do they consecrate with a great loaf, as the Greeks do, but as the
latins, with little Cakes, or hoasts.

As many as stand near the Priest, answer, Quotquot asta^t sacerdoti,
respondent cantando Armenice.
singing in the Armenian tongue.

When the Armenian Priest reads the Gospel, they that assist, Cum presbyter
Armenicus dicit Evangelium, assistentes in vicem se dextra sinistraque
deosculantur
kiss one another, both of the right, and left side.

The People have their service in the Armenian tongue, O mnes assistentes
linguam Arm nicam, qua utitur sacerdos, intelligunt.
which they understand, being their vulgar.

The form of celebrating the mysteries of the Christians, or Armenians that
are in India, out of the book of Odoardas Barbosa written in Italian; apud
Cassand. Liturg. Cap: 14 page 31.

The Armenians in India say mass at the Altar, as ours do, Armenii qui sunt
in India, dicunt missam ad Altar quomodo nostri cum cruce ante se.
with a Cross before them.

There are three one in the middle, Sunt autem tres: unus in medio, et ad
utrumque latus singuli.
and one on each side.

Every one comes to the foot of the Altar to receive, Vnusquisque vadit, vt
partem accipiat, ad pedem altaris.


For the Element of Wine because there is no wine in India they take raisons,
Pro sacramento vini, eo quod in India reperiatur vinum, accipiuntuvas siccas,
et imponunt aqua ut molliantur una nocte: et aie sequente quo dicenda est
missa, exprimunt: quo succo, utuntur loco vini.
and put them into water to moysten them, one night; and in the day following
they press them, and the juice thereof they use for wine.

Out of the Order of the celebrating the Sacraments, which the Armenians
observed in the City of Leopolis, in Ruscia, translated out of the Armenian
tongue, by Andrew Lubelczik, set down by Cassander Litur: Cap. 12, page 29.

In communicating the Priest says. Fide credo in sanctissimam Trinita tem etc.
Fide manduco sanctum, vivificans, et salvificans corpus tuum, Domine Jesus
Christ sit mihi, ad absolutionem peccatorum meorum. Fide bibo sanctum
impermixtum san guinem tuum peccata delentem, Domine Jesus Christ in
remissionem peccatorum meorum.


By faith, J do believe, in the holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

By faith, I do eat thy holy quickening, and saving body, O Lord Jesus Christ,
let it be to me, to the absolution, and remission of my sins.

Drinking of the Cup.

By Faith, J drink thy holy, and unmingled blood, blotting out my Jinnes, Lord
Jesus Christ, for remission of my sins.

In this Liturgy, the Eucharist is administered in both kinds.

No private Mass is Celebrated, all must Communicate.

No Transubstantiation acknowledged.

They receive by faith.

Married Priests administer.

They celebrate divine service, in their own tongue.

And there is no sacrifice, for delivery of souls out of Purgatory: But I do
not take upon me, to justify all things in these Liturgies.

The Maronites, before their reconciliation.
Boterus,) They profess obedience to their own Patriarch, Boter. Relat. par.
3 lib. 2 cap. de maronit.
but have been subject to the Patriarch of Antioch.

Patriarcha Maronitarum) Our Laics, Interrog. 3 apud Thomam a Jesus lib. 7 part
2 cap. 5 page 485 Laici nostri sub utraque specie communicant.
receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist in both kinds.

Idem (In leavened bread, Idem Ibidem in azymo his verbis benedixit, fregit,
dedit que etc.
with these words: He blessed, and brake, and gave, to his Disciples, saying,
take, eat. Matthew: 26.26.

Idem, They do not reserve the Sacrament. Idem Ibidem non asservatur sacra
mentum Eucharistiae.


Possevine,) Their Priests are married. In apparatu sacro, in maron.


These Christians, reconciled themselves to the Roman Church, at what time, the
Latins held the holy Land, But when those parts were again taken by Saladine.
These Maronites, forsook the Roman Communion, until of late, in the time of
Gregory the 13 and Clement the 8: They have acknowledged the Popes
Jurisdiction. But not all of them, as I hear since.

Jerusalem.
THE Patriarch of Jerusalem, keeps Residence in Jerusalem, in which there
remain, 10, or more Christian Churches, as before.

It is reported, that Theophanes is now Patriarch of Jerusalem, Thom: a Jesus.
Cosm. lib. 9 apud Cath. traditi. page 10. The Liturgy of St. James. (...). etc.
(...)
who is a Greek, and of their Communion.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem, does usually excommunicate the Pope.

The Liturgy of Saint James, Bishop of Jerusalem.
Which begins, O Lord do not despise me, defiled with the multitude of my
iniquities, for behold, I come to this thy divine, and heavenly Mystery, not
as one worthy, but trusting in thy goodness: J lift up my voice to thee, O
Lord be merciful to me a sinner; I have sinned against heaven, and against
thee, and am not worthy, to turn my eyes toward thy holy and Spiritual
Table; in which thy only begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, is mystically
proposed, for a Sacrifice for me, who am a sinner, and polluted with all sin,
etc.

As in this prayer, he calls the Sacrament, A divine and Celestial mystery,
a spiritual table, in which the Son of God, is mystically set down before
them.

After, he craveth of God, to declare manifestly that which he sets forth in
signs, (...).
he persuades the people, to lift up their hearts on high.

The Institution of the supper is rehearsed sincerely, to which the people
answer, we declare the death of the Lord, and confess his resurrection.

Afterward, he prays that God would send his spirit on the gifts, (...).
that the bread may be made sacramentally Christ's holy body, And the Cup his
precious blood, and that it may be to them that partake thereof, for the
remission of their sins.

In this Liturgy, 1 I find, no propitiatory sacrifice to be made by the
Priest, but a mystical. 2 The Sacrament to be administered in both kinds. 3
Nor private Mass, all must communicate. 4 A confession against merit. 5 After
the words of Consecration, prayer is made, that God would by his holy spirit:
sanctify the Bread and the Cup.


In this Liturgy, there are some things that cannot be S James his, but are
inserted since his time. As a prayer for Monks, in Monasteries. etc.

Iacobites.
THey for their Ecclesiastical Government are under their own Patriarch,
Boter. Relat. par. 3 lib. 2 cap. de Iacobitis.
whose Patriarchall Church is in the Monastery of Saphron, his residence is at
Caramite.

They admit not of Purgatory. Purgatorium non admittunt Tho: a Jesus lib. 7.
par. 1. cap. 23. de conversione omnium gentium.


Nor pray for the dead. Nec pro defunctis preces admittunt Thom: a Jesus loc.
citat.


They minister the Sacrament, Mr. George Sands.
of the Lords Supper in both kinds.

In unleavened bread. Salign. Iter. Hieros. Tom. 8. cap. 1. apud Brerwood.


Their Priests are married. Sands loco citat.


They do not believe aright, Non firmiter sentiunt de primatu Romanae
ecclesiae: Thomas a Jesus: loco citat.
concerning the primacy of the Roman Church.

The Sacrament of extreme Unction, Sacramentum extremae vnctionis fere non
agnoscunt Tho a Jesus lib. 7. par. 1. cap. 23.
in a manner they do not acknowledge.

For their error of Eutiches, believing one only nature to be in Christ, is
long since abolished, as appears, by the Confession of the Iacobites of
Mesopotamia, Aegipt, Aethiopia, Armenia.

The Iacobites inhabiting in Mesopotamia, Brerwood pa. 194.
Babylon, Palestine, Syria, and Cyprus have their Liturgies in the Syriaque
language.

In which language, the new Testament has been printed at Vienna, the Copy
being brought into Europe, by Moses Mardenus a Iacobite.

It is thought, The Liturgy of the Iacobites.
that the Liturgy called Anaphora Basilii, translated out of Syriaque into
Latin by Masius which is to be found in Bibliotheca veterum patrum in Latin, is
the Liturgy of those Iacobites.

Which begins, O eternal God who in the beginning created men, etc.
afterward, he left to us a memory of his passion, these things which we set
before you, etc.

As often as you do this, set forth my death until I come.

The people answer, Lord, we remember thy death, etc. and let thy mercy be
upon us all.

Priest: Make this bread, the glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, for
expiation of our fa^^^, remission of our sins, and life everlasting to them
that take it.

The people, Amen.

The Priest: Make this Cup, the precious blood of our Lord God, etc. for
expiation of sins, etc. to them that receive it.

Christians under the Patriarch of Musall, falsely called Nestorians.
FOr their Ecclesiastical Government, Villam: voiag: lib. 2. cap. 23. leur
chef et Primat qu'ils nomment Catholic et qu'ils reverent comme leur Pape:
they are subject to the Patriarch of Musall. Their Primate whom they call
Catholic, they reverence as their Pope.

The Nestorians, Les Nestoriens appellant le Pape Evesque reprouve Thom: a Jesus
Cosm: lib. 10. cap. 25. apud trad: Cath: page 18.
call the Pope the reprobate Bishop.

They celebrate the Eucharist, Eucharistiam conficiebant Nestoriani ex pane
fermentate Gualt: lib. citat: page 377.
with leavened bread.

They communicate in both kinds. Eucharistiam sub utrdque specie communicabant
Gault: de Nestor.


The Priest breaking the bread, Mr. Sands lib: cit.
lays it in the palm of the Communicants hand, they sipping of Cup which
is held between his.

They mingle not water with wine, Villam: loco citat: ne messent point leau a
vec le vin.
in the Eucharist.

They allow their Priests, Sacerdotes mortua prima vxare secundas and
vlteriores faciunt nuptias: Tho: a les ^ lib. 7. pa. 1. cap. 2 page 354.
1.2. and 3. marriages, or oftener.

They have not the Images of the Crucifixe on their Crosses. Brerwood page: 145


They kiss the Cross, Mr. Sands.
but pray not before it,

They do not reverence Images.

They use the Caldean language or Syriacke tongue, Chaldea autem litera utuutur
in divinis scripturis Vitriac: lib. cit. cap. 77.


For their ancient error, that there were two persons in Christ, as two
natures, they have lately rejected that error, as appears by their
confession, translated out of the Syrian tongue by Masius, Bibli: tom. 4. page
1049.
extant in Bibliotheca veterum Patrum.

Indians of St. Thomas
THey call the Bishop of Rome the Reprobate Bishop. Thavet a Jesus Cosmo: lib.
10. cap. 15. apud Trad. Cath: quaest: 2.


They receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Lo pigliando sub utraque specie
Bot. par. 3. lib. 2 cap: della vecchs christia. del India. Iosep: Ind: relat:
novi orbis cap. 134. extremam unctionem non habent. Osorius de rebus Emanuel
lib. 3. apud Cathol. trad.


They have not extreme vnxion.

They admit of marriage of Priests.

These have their Service in the Syriaque tongue, Brerwood enquir. page 194.
their Liturgy is translated out of Syriacke into Latin, and to be seen in
Bibliatheca veterum patrum.

The Mass, which the ancient Christians of the Bishopric of Angamall. in the
kingdom of Malabar in the East Indies use, being amended, and purged from the
errors and Blasphemies of the Nestorians: by the illustruous and reverend Lord,
the Lord Alexius Menesius, Archbishop of Goa, primate of the Indies, in a
synod in the Diocese of Angamall, in the year 1599. which begins;

Glory be to God on high Amen.

Glory be to God on high Amen.

The Cophti or Aegiptian Christians.
THey are subject to the Patriarch of Alexandria, Mirae: lib. 1 cap: 11.
They say the Pope may err in matters concerning faith. Serenissimu^ Dominum
nostrum papam in ijs quae sunt fidei opinautur posse errare Tho: a Jesus de
conver: omnium Gentium lib. 7 par. 1 cap: 5 pa. 360.


They minister the communion in both kinds to all. Eucharistiae sacramentum
omnibus sub utraque specie confertur. idem loco citat: page: 361.


In unleavened bread. Idque infermentato. Idem ibide^:


To sick persons, they minister not the Sacrament of extreme unction. Infirmis
autem neque eleum sanctu^ administratur etc. ide^ ibide^


They admit not Purgatory, Purgatorium nec pro defunctis preces admittunt:
idem lib: 7 p: 1 cap: 23.
nor pray for the dead.

They elevate not the Sacrament. Tecla Abissin: apud Thevet, lib: 7 p: 1 cap:
13 page: 383 Corpus dominicum et calicem nunquam elevant in missis.


They repute the Roman Church Se nos latinos habere excommunicatos et
haereticos proinde Latinorum praxim ac conversationem ad instar Iudaeorum
fugiunt Tho: a Ies: lib. citat. lib. 7 pa. 1 cap. 5 page 360.
heretical, Thom: a Jesus de conver: omni gent lib. 7 par. 1 cap. 6 Tertio
concessu deo aspirante circumcisionis lex primum fuit abrogata. 363. Boterus
Rela. univer. par. 3 lib: 3 de comun consenso si annullo la leg della
circomcissione. Boter: loc. citat. lib. 3. de Christ. de Aegipt page in christ
essere due nature. Tho: a Jesus lib. 7 par. 1 Cap. 6 page 363. Qui cum idem
Deus, idem sit verus homo, et divinam habet a patre iam inde ab omni
aeternitate, naturam humanam sumpsit ex matre definitis temperum spaciis.
and refuse the Communion and conversation of the Latins, no less then the
Jews.

For Circumcision used by them; Caire Anno, 1583. And for the error of
Eutiches, they wholly renounce it.

They acknowledge Christ to be true God and man.

The Cophti or Christians of Aegipt, (although their vulgar be Arabique,) yet
have their liturgy in the Sirtaque tongue, which is composed of the Hebrew,
Calde, Arabique, and Greek tongues, but for the Gospel, after it is read in
Syriaque: it is afterward read, in the Arabique, or vulgar language.

The liturgy which they use, is the liturgy of Severus sometime Patriarch of
Alexandria, translated out of Syriaque into latin, by Guido Fabritius, to be
seen in the 6 Tom: of Bibliotheca patrum.

For the order of Administration of Baptism, the Priest begins with this
prayer.
O Almighty God, make us worthy, that we may come with purity, and holiness to
thy divine and glorious mysteries of Adoption etc.

Afterward, the Priestreadeth part of the 8 Chapter of the Acts, from the 20
verse to the 39: verse, beloved, the Angel of the Lord spoke to Philip etc.

And of the third Chapter of the Gospel after St. John, from the beginning, to
the 9 verse; There was a man of the Pharisees, whose name was Nicodemus, etc.

And part of the 8 Chapter to the Hebrews; and after some prayers, The Priest
signeth, the party baptized three times, with the sign of the Cross: such a
one N: is signed, in the name of the Father, Amen, in the name of the Son,
Amen, and in the name of the holy Ghost, to life everlasting.

Then follows an Adiuration of the Devil, and a Renuntiation or renouncing
of him.

Then when the party renounceth the Devil, (...)
his face is turned toward the west, and he, or his Godfathers say, I such a
one, N: that am haptised, I, do renounce the Devil, and all his works, and
all his Angels, all his strength, and all his warfar, and all his fear, and
all his pride, and all his worldly error: and every one that does consent to
him, or follow him.

Then he turns him to the East, (...)
and says, J such a one, N: who am baptized, do consent to thee Christ my God,
and to all the doctrine that is revealed of thee from heaven, by the Prophets,
and Apostles, and holy Fathers, I also confess and believe, and am baptized,
in thee, and in thy Father, and in thy holy spirit now etc.

Then the Priest says the Nicen Creed. (...) etc. (...)


I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, etc.

And after many prayers and Crossings, he puts the party baptized, into the
water saying.

Such a one, N: is baptized in the name of the Father, Amen: And of the Son,
Amen, (...)
and of the holy Ghost to everlasting life. And so ends with prayers.

For the administration of the Eucharist
The Priest begins with, (...)
Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

After some prayers.

Let us be made worthy sacrificers of praise, that we may perform our
Priesthood to thee O Lord: every thought, word, and work, being a sweet savor
(offering to thee peace offerings) that without spot, we may appear in thy sight
all the days of our life.

They say in Breaking.
Thou art the Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, so he
suffered, God the word in the flesh, he was offrea and broken upon the Cross,
and his soul was separated from his body, although his divinity was not
separated, neither from his soul, nor from his body, etc.

Amongst other prayers he says.
Make us worthy O Lord God, that with contrite hearts, and purged from all
euili co (...) ^ thee O Lord our God, purely and holily, reasonable and
spiritual sacrifices, in the faith of thy truth.

After other prayers he ends.
The Bible was translated into the Arabique tongue, by John Archbishop of
Sevill, Anno Dom: 717.

The Habbassin Christians.
1 For their Ecclesiastical Government Zaga Zabo. 240.

THey are subject to a Patriarch of their own, whom they call Abunna; Non
firmiter sentiunt de primatu Romanae ecclesiae Tho. a Jesus de conver: lib. 7.
pa. 1 cap, 6 page, 367.
whose place is the seventh Session in general Counsels, the next place after
the Bishop of Seleucia.

They do not well believe of the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome.

2 The Eucharist in both kinds.
We receive the Lords body, Assumimus corpus Domini, et id sub utraque specie
confessio Zaga Zabo Episcopi Abassin: apud Damian: a Goes page, 227 Boterus
part, 3 lib. 3 de Christian. del. Abass.
and that under both kinds.

As the Priest, Sacramentum integrum, verum corpus, et verum sanguinem Christi,
tam clerica quam laici, in Templo accipiunt. Matthaeus Dresserus de statu
Ecclesiae et Religio: in Aethiopia apud Neand. page 535
so the Laics receive the whole Sacrament of the true body, and true blood of
Christ, in the Temple.

All receive the Eucharist under both kinds. Sub utraque specie omnes
Eucharistiam sumunt Godign, de Abassinorum rebus lib, 1 cap 35, page, 218,


3 They sell no Masses.
We receive no price or reward for Mass. Pro Missa, nullum pretium, aut
mercedem accipimus. Zaga Zaoo; page 228.


They make no gain in the Mass. Questum in Missa, nullum plane faciunt.
Dresserus apud Nean: page 537.


4 They reserve not the Sacrament nor elevate it. Sacramentum Evcharistiae, non
servatur apud nos in Templis, vt fit hic apud Evropaeos: Zaga Zabo. page 227.
apud Dami a Goes.

The Sacrament is not reserved amongst us in our Churches, as it is amongst the
Europeans.

5 They use not extreme unction for a sacrament.
Moreover you must know, Praeterea Sciendum apud nos, Chrisma, five extremam
olei Vnctionem, pro Sacramento non haberi, nec in vsu esse. vt video hic ex
Romanae Ecclesiae consuetudine fieri, Zaga Zabo. 226. apud Dam: a Goes.
that with us Chrisme or extreme unction, is not accounted a Sacrament, nor is
in use at all.

As I see here, the custom is in the Roman Church. Non usan darla chrisma ni
extrema unction. Francis: Alvares. fol: 27.


There is no use of Chrisme or extreme unction.

6 They allow married Priests.
Marriage is no esse allowed to the Clergy then to the Laity, Coningium
Clericis et Presbyteris non minus quam politicis, permissum est sic tumen vt
mortua vx^^e prim^, ducere alia^ non liceat ni^ Pa riarch^ dispensante:
concubinam si quis alat a sacris arcetur. Dresserus apud Neandrum. page 537.
yet so, as that the first wise being dead they are not permitted to marie any
more without dispensation from the Patriarch, if any keep a Concubine, he is
driven from his calling.

And both Laity and Clergy possess but one wife. Et tam Laici quam Clerici
vnam tantum possident vxorem Zaga Zabo, apud Damia: a Goes. 215.


That the Priests may marry, we have received from St. Paul, Et quod
presbyteri apud nos vxores possideaut ex Apostolo accepimus: Qui mavult
clericum et Laicum, nubere quam vri. Zaga Zabo, lib. cit: page 215.
should marry then to burn.

7
They believe the Souls of their Infants, dying without Baptism not to be
damned.

They believe, the souls of their Infants departed before Baptism to be
saved, Alvarez Histor: Aethiopica. fol. 27.
because they are sprung from faithful parents.

8 They do acknowledge the first 3 Councels.
They accept the three first general Counsels, Zaga Zabo. lib: citat: page 236.
The Nicen, the Constantinopolitane and the Ephesine.

9 Indulgences.
For remission of souls the Patriarch graunts no Indulgences, Ad animarum
remissionem Patriarcha dat nullas Indulgentias nullos dies indulgentiarum
Patriarcha concedit. Zaga Zabo. page 213. Indulgentias nulo las dat neque
concedit. page 240.
nor gives any pardons at all.

10 Jnvocation of Saints.
As for the Saints, It is true, Sanctos quidem amant et venerantur, sed non
invocant: Matri Christi Mariae Virgini honorem, magnum tribuunt, sed neque
adorant, neque opem eius implorant. Dresser. apud Neandrum. page 536. Atias
Major, page 352. Aethiopia.
but they do not call on them: They do ascribe great honor to the Virgin
Marie the mother of Christ,

11 They have service in their own tongue.
For they retain the Epistles and Gospel, Nam et Epistolam, et Evangelium, et
verba consecrationis, sine elevatione lingua pooulo nota retinent. Chytreus,
page 28.
together with the words of Consecration, without elevation: these I say they
retain in the vulgar tongue.

12 The Conferring of Bishoprics.
The Conferring of Bishoprics, Patriarcha sive Abunna Nullum Episcopatum, aut
Ecclesiae be ^eficium in vllos confert id solum ad Precio^um Ioanne^ spectat.
Zaga Zabo, 240.
and their Ecclesiastical benefices, Field of the Church. lib: 3. pa. 73.


The Emperor has supreme authority in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil: though the Patriarch also exercise a spiritual jurisdiction.

13 Concerning Purgatory.
Godignus the Jesuit,) Godignus de Rebus Abassinorum, lib: 1. Cap: 28. page 172.
ex literis Petri Paes qui praesit Jesuit: in Aethiopia) Purgatoriu^ negant.
They deny Purgatory.

14 They do not express the number of their sins in Confession. Abassinos,
neque species, neque numerum peccatorum in confessione exprimere, sed tantum
generatim dicere, Habessen Habessen (hoc est) peccavi, peccavi. Godign: lib; 1.
Cap: 35. page 216.

They do not express in their Confessions neither the kinds, nor number of
their sins, but only generally ory out, Habessen Habessen, I have sinned, I
have sinned.

15 Concerning Jmages. Mr. Sands his iourneis. lib. 3. page 171.

They have pictures in their Churches, but no Carved Images, neither do they
bestow any undue reverence on them. Idem loco citat.


They have no crucifixes, but use the Cross as a badge of their profession,
their priests carrying crosses in their hands.

16 Thomas a Jesus.)
They have no oblations oblations for the dead, neither do they offer for the
living. Nullas pro defunctis oblationes habent, nec sacra faciunt pro vivis
Tho, a Jesus de convers: omnium Gentium lib: 7 pa: 1 cap: 8 page: 370. Praeterea
traditiones sanctas non admittunt, solumque verbo Dei scripto fidem dicunt se
habere. Tho: a Jesus lib: 7 cap: 8 page, 369.


17
Moreover they do not admit holy Traditions, but they say that they must only
believe Gods word.

The Aethiopians, do believe the holy Trinity, Zaga Zabo apud Damianum a Goes
page 204 Credimus in nomen sanctae Trinitatis, patrem filium, et spiritum
sanctum.
that there are three persons, and one God.

They have goodly Monasteries, and Monks, but only of the order of St.
Anthony; their Monks are not suffered to beg, but live on their labors.

They use the Ni en Creed.

In their Lent they taste nothing till the sun be set, neither old men nor
sick, Godignus lib. 1 cap. 35. page 218.
eat on their fasting time without offense, they begin their Lent ten days
before ours.

In their Churches, Idem lib. 1 cap. 2^ page 133, 134.
they do demean themselves most reverently, no man may walk, laugh or talk
in their Churches, they suffer not dogs to come into their Churches, or
Churchyards, they suffer no man to sit in their Churches, the aged and weak,
have only Crutches to ease them withal.

For their manner of Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, they are
Baptized, They Baptize in the Church-portch
in the Church Porch; The Priest, after he has said certain prayers, puts
the party to be baptized three times under water, saying, I do Baptize thee
in the name of the Father, the Son, and of the holy Chost the Comforter.

When he renounceth the Devil, the priest turns the face of the party to be
baptized to the West, when the covenant is made with God to the east.

They do believe that the Sacrament of Baptism, washes away origenall sin,
Godign: de Abassin: rebus lib: 1 cap. 35 page 212.
with which the soul is tainted: as soon as it is infused into the body in
the Mothers womb, yea, in the very moment of his first being.

Whereas the Aethiopians are charged with having many wives, Godign: lib.
citat. cap. 36 page 225.
it is a scandal, for no Nation punishes Adultery more severely then they.

And whereas they are accused of rebaptizing themselves yearly: Scaliger de
emendatione temporum lib. 8 page 683
True it is, they do veerely upon the day of our Lord JESUS CHRIST'S Baptism,
go into the water and wash themselves, as the Moscovites do and other
Christians, and this they do only in memorial of our Lords Baptism.

And that they abstain from blood, Scalig: loc: citat.
and things strangled: as this was forbidden by the Apostles Cannon. Acts 15.
so it was the Custom of the ancient Christians in the primitive Church: read
Cannon 53 of those which are called the Apostles.

And they do Circumcise their Children, they use it not as a sacrament but as
a national custom, and they Circumcise both Males, and Females (which the
Jews did not, and they are not bound to it by law nor religion.

And that they Baptize their Children, Scaliger de emend: temp: lib. 8.
not only with water, but also with fire; It is reported, that it is the
custom of the Aethiopians, not only of the Christians, but also of the
Mahometans, to burn their Children with a hot Iron in the temple veins, to
stop distillations from falling into their eyes.

Some write that the first Ethiopian Emperors, Godignus lib. citat. cap. 35.
page 213.
that embraced the faith of Christ, invented this burning, that every Christian
man might bear about, some outward sign of his Christianity.

Others write, that John the Emperor, who was called the Saint, who lived in
those miserable times of the Arrians, Idem page 214.
appointed that after Baptism, the Ethiopian Children, should receive three
pricks in the face with an hot Iron, in sign that they professed the faith of
the holy Trinity.

The Ethiopian Liturgy set down by Francis Alvares in the Portugal tongue
and afterward written in Italian, related by Cassander in his Liturgies. cap.
1 pa. 28. This Alvares was chaplin to K. John of Portugal, and was six year
in Aethiopia. Cassander Theologus Belga Imp. Ferdiu: 1 et Maximil: 2 (...) a
consiliis. Printed Parisiis apud Abrahamum Pacard: MDCXVI.


THey make a great Cake, or a less in their Churches, In Ecclesiis faciunt
libum magnum aut paruum, pro multitudine gentis, quia omnes communicant, et pro
multitudine faciunt erassum dimidio digito, aut integro, aut etiam crassiorem
magno digito, infundunt vinum calici factum ex uvis pressis magna quantitate,
quia quot quot communicant de corpore, totidem ^tiam communicant de sanguine.
according to the multitude of people: for all Communicate.

For the greatenesse of it they make it half a finger, or a whole finger, or
more thick.

They power wine into the Cup, made of Grapes pressed in great quantity, as
many as do Communicate of the body, so many do Communicate of the blood. Is
qui missam dicturus est, incipit alta voce, Alleluia Sacerdos facit
benedictionem cuvs cruce parva, quam tenet in manu.


2 He that says the service, begins with a loud voice Alleluia, The Priest
blesses with a little Cross, which he holds in his hand.

3 Canunt tam qui foris suut, quam qui intus.


They that are without, and within sing.

4 The Epistle is read (the blessing being asked) likewise the Gospel. Legitur
Epistola cursim petita prius benedictione Similiter Evangelium legitur.


5 Sacerdos maiore digito facit in libo, quinque signa tanquam stigmata.


The Priest with his greatest finger makes five signs or pricks upon the
Cake.

6 Consecrat in sualinguae iisdem verbis quibus et nos et non sublevat.


He does Consecrate in the vulgar tongue in the same words that we do: and
does not elevate it.

7 Id ipsum quoque facit in calice et no^ elevat.


The same he does with the Cup, but not elevate it.

8 Sacramentum panis in manibus acoipiens partitur per medium.


Taking the sacrament of the bread in his hands, he divides it in the middle.

9 Ex summitate partis paululum detrahit, quam particulam pro se accipit.


Of the uppermost he takes a little for himself.

10 The dish with the Sacrament, Lancem in^ sacramento porrigit ei qui
evangelium legit.
he delivers to him that reads the Gospel.

11 The Cup with the Sacrament, Calicom cum sacrumento porrigit ei, qui legit
Epistolam.
he delivers to him that reads the Epistle.

12 Qui continuo dant communionem sacerdotibus, qui astant altari.


Then he gives to the Priests that stand at the Altar.

13 The Deacon taking the Sacrament out of the dish, Diaconus sacramentu^ ex
lance sumens, manuquo dextra tenens, minutim distribuit.
and holding it in his right hand does distribute it in parts.

14 In the mean season, the subdeacon delivers the blood in a golden silver
or wodden spoone, Interea Subdiaconui pauxillum de sanguine cochleari aureo
argenteo, vel ligneo sumptum porigit illis, qui sumpserunt sacramentum corporis.
to them that have received the sacrament of the body.

15 In the same manner, Eodem modo datur communio illis, qui stant ante primam
cortinam, et aliis qui stant iuxta alteram cortinam.
the communion is given to them that stand near the other Cortin

16 Last of all, Postea fecularibus, qui stant inxta portam princi palem, tam
viris, quam mulieribus.
to the lay people, both men and women.

17 Whilst the communion is administering, Dum datur communio, aut altud
quippiam officii sit amnes stant erecti.
or any other service is doing in the Church, all the people stand upright.

18 To the Communion all come, Ad communionem omnes veniunt sublatis
complicatisque manibus.
lifting up their hands and folding them together.

In these Liturgies before named, although some of them seem to be corrupted,
and expurged as they plainly confess the expurging of the Jndian Liturgy,
yet the Eucharist is administered in both kinds.

There is no private Mass.

There is mention made of a spiritual sacrifice, I find not
Transubstantiation in them.

There is no elevation of the Sacrament.

Married Priests administer.

And Man's merit is renounced in them as before etc.

And the like will also appear in the other old ancient Liturgies, attributed
to St. Peter, St. Matthew, St. Ambrose, St. Andrew, St. Dennis, St. Clement.
etc. And for the Mass now used in the Roman Church, fathered upon St.
Gregory, although it has been purged, and purged again, yet therein still
appears some footing of truth and Antiquity.

As the bread and wine are called Dona, and Munera, And after Consecration,
they are called Creatures, per quem haec bona semper Creas, command thy
Angels to carry up these to thy high Altar in heaven, whereas the Priest would
have us believe, that after he has gone over them, that they are no more
Creatures, but the Creator that made all things.

One thing more I note by the way, that there is a Liturgy attributed to Saint
Peter, set down in Bibliotheca veterum Patrum, used in some part of Calahria.
Now who can believe that the Church of Rome holding so much of Saint Peter,
that under his name, she exalts her self over the whole world, would offer
Saint Peter so much wrong, as to drive his Liturgy out of Rome, and suffer a
few Priests to use it, inhabiting the Mountains of Basilica in Calabria.

Also, whereas the Romish writers call all these Liturgies Masses, as the Mass
of Saint Basil, the Mass of Saint Chrysostom, the Armenian Mass, the
Ethiopian Mass, There is a difference between the Romish Mass, and their
Liturgies, for the Church of Rome in their Mass, intends cheifely a
Sacrifice, but these Churches a Communion; The Aethiopians call the Communion
Codash and the bread Corban.

The Greeks call it the Liturgy, as the Liturgy of Saint Basil, the
Liturgy of Saint Chrysostom.

As these Liturgies before named, agree with us in many things, so also there
are some things in them which I do not Justify as before, and in viewing
them, and comparing them with our service book, I have great cause to magnify
Gods great goodness, and mercy to us, and this section, I will conclude with
the words of the Reverend and holy Martyr, Docter Rowland Tailor unto Bishop
Gardener, and others. There was says he, Ecclesiast: hist: 3. Volum. fol: 171.
Printed, 1631.
set forth by the most innocent King Edward for whom God be praised
everlastingly, the whole Church service, with the best advice of the learned
men of the Realm, and authorized by the whole Parliament and received, and
published gladly by the whole Realm, which Book was never reformed but once,
(said my author in his time) and yet by that once reformation it was so fully
perfected; according to the rules of our Christian Religion in every behalf,
that no Christian Conscience, can be offended with any thing therein contained.

I find that these Churches are not heretical but Orthodox for the maine.
Whereas these Churches are charged by some, to be heretics, you shall find
diverse good Authors to have written to the contrary.

As first for the Greek Church, Azorius thinks them to be no heretics, and
shows a reason therefore, Azorius Instit: moral: lib: 8. cap. 20. quest: 10.
because in those articles wherein they are thought to err, they differ
verbally only, and not really from those that are undoubtedly believers, and
gives instance in the question touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost,
wherein he thinks they differ in the form of words only. Lomb: lib: 1. div.
10.
And the like says Peter Lombard. The Craecians affirm, that the holy Ghost
proceeds from the Father only, and not from the Son, yet they do
acknowledge, the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the Son, as well as of the
Father, because the Apostle says, that he is the Spirit of the Son, and in
the Gospel, Gal. 4^
He is called the Spirit of Truth, and now seeing it is no other thing, John 10.
to be the spirit of the Father, and the Son, then to be from the Father and
the Son, they seem to agree with us in judgment, though they differ in
words, as also Thomas a Jesus writes: Lib. 6 page 248. solis verbis differ.
But for full satisfaction in this point, read the Conference between the
most Reverend father in God the Lo: Archbishop of Canterbury his grace, my
honorable Patron, and Fisher the Jesuit bound with the Lo: Bp. of Elies book
against Fisher.

Secondly, in questions touching the Pope his power, Privileges and
authority, the said Azorius affirms, that the Greeks have no other opinion
then Gerson, and the learned men of Paris held, who were yet never accounted
Heretics, (nor Schismatikes either,) for they yield a Primacie to the Pope,
if he be Orthodox, but no Supremacy. They acknowledge him as Patriarch over
his own Jurisdiction, but they deny as the French do, that his power is
Supreme, or his judgment is infallible, and and affirm, that he is subject to
a Council. All which things were defined, in the Council of Constance and
Basil, and the contrary positions condemned as Heretical. Neither wants there
at this day, many worthy divines, living in the Communion of the Roman Church,
who strongly adhere to the Counsels before named, as the whole king dome and
State of France admitted these, and reject the Counsels of Florence and Trent,
who would no less, with draw themselves, from the Communion of the Roman
Church, if they were pressed to acknowledge, the Popes power and authority is
Supreme, that he cannot err, and that he may depose Kings, and dispose of
their Kingdoms, as the Jesuits, and other flatterers affirm, and defend,
wherefore the Greeks are no Heriticks, as Azorius resolves. So that the
Romanists, have done the Greeks infinite wrong, in condemning to hell so many
millions of Christian souls, redeemed with the precious blood of his dearest
Son, for this point only. Andr: Fric: de Ecclesia: lib: 4 cap: 2.
Andreas Fricius also says that there are some who think that the Russians,
Armenians, and other Christians of the East part perteine not to Christ's
Church, but seeing they use the same Sacraments which we do, seeing they
profess to fight under the banner of Christ Crucified, and rejoice in their
sufferings for his sake, far be it from us, ever to think that they should be
cast out and rejected, from being fellow Citizens with the Saints, who have
endured, the heat of the day so many ages, in the vineyard of the Lord; Nay
rather I think, that there can be no perfection, nor union, of the holy Church
without them. Many of these Christians, live under the Turk, and Pagans, and
suffer very much for Jesus Christ's sake, which they might quit themselves of,
if they would renounce their religion, and also might enjoy many immunities,
and privilege, which they are for their religion, only deprived of as before.

The lamentable Calamities, of these afflicted and distressed Churches, should
cause all true hearted Christians, in true sense and compassion of their
miseries, to make their prayers, and humble petitions to Almighty God, to cast
down his pitiful eyes upon them: And far be it from us to boleive, that all
these Christians are excluded heaven and plunged into hell for not submitting
themselves only to the Bishop of Rome.

Also, although the greatest part of Christians in Assyria, Persia, Tartaria,
and other Eastern Provinces, are called by the odious and hateful name of
Nestorians, yet they hold nothing, Onuphr: in vit: Iulii. 3. hi: Nestoriani,
nomen potius Nestorij haeretici, quam errores retinuisse mihi videntur: nam
nihil plane quod ad illam sectam referat comperio. Thom: a Jesus couvers: lib:
7. part: 1. cap. 3 et 4.
savouring of the Nestorian heresy as Onuphrius writes, and the same
appears also by the confession of Elias their Patriarch of Musall sent to
Rome which was found Orthodox, and right, as Leonardus Bishop of Sidon
reports Also the A^menians are Judged by many to be Eutichian heretics, for
that they received not the Council of Calcedon, which they refused to
subscribe unto, upon a false suggestion and apprehe^sion that in that Counsel
the heresy of N^^torius conde mned in the Council of Ephesus was again
revived, Genebrard Cron: ad Annum. 1153.
of this imputatio^ Genebrard also cleereth them.

The Christians of Egypt, Asserunt duas in Christo naturas, esse vnitas,
vnamque factam naturam personatam de duabus naturis, non personatis fine
mixtione tamen et confusione: apud Tho: a Jesus. lib: citat: cap: 14.
and Aethiopia, with the Jacobits of Syria, are thought also to be infected
with the heresio of Eutiches, whom they curse for an heretic, as Leonardus
Bishop of Sidon reports, for the confounding the two Natures of God and Man
in Christ, but yet affirmed, that the two natures, are so united, that there is
one personated nature, arising of the two natures not personated: without
mixtion, or confusion.

Likewise, Mr. Brerwood writes, Brerw: Inquiry, page 183.
That the Christians of the East, have disclaimed, and abandoned, those
Heretical fantasies, touching our Savior, wherein by their misleaders, they
have been auntiently plunged, does manifestly appear, first of the Iacobites,
Secondly, of the Nestorians, by their several Confessions, Translated out of
the Syrian tongue, by Masius, extant in Bibliotheca veterum Patrum. Thirdly, of
the Armenians, by their own Confession, translated by Pretorius. Fourthly, of
the Cophti, by their own Confession of faith, mentioned by Baronius, and also
by Tho: a Jesus, and of the Abassines, by the Relation of Zaba Zago.

Moreover the Romanists scandal these Churches, with false imputations, as
Guido the Carmelite and Prateolus, impute unto the Graecians sundry errors,
which Lucinianus of Ciprus, Possevin: Bibliosk^, lib: 6. cap: 1.
a Bishop and a learned Dominican, and a worthy man, as Possevin accounts
him, shows to be fasly ascribed unto them.

1. As first, simple fornication to be no sin. 2. That they condemn second
Marriages, which he shows to be untrue. 3. That they think, that the contract
of marriage may be broaken, and the band dissolved, at the pleasure of the
parties, whereas contrary he affirms, they allow no divorce, to permit a
second marriage while both parties live. 4 They are said to affirm, that the
Sacrament consecrated on Maunday Thursday, is of more force, virtue, and
efficacy, then consecrated any other day, wherein he shows that they are
wronged, as in the other imputations. 5 They are charged to teach, that it is
no sin to lend upon usury, and that it is not necessary to make restitution of
things, uniustly taken away. 6 They are said to think, that if a Priests wife
die, he cease to be a Priest any longer, which is as mere a slander as the
rest were.
So that it is true that Thomas a Jesus says, that one of the principal
things; that makes the Graecians so averse from the Latins, is, that they are
wronged by them; by untrue reports, and unjust imputations.

And as they use them, so also us, and the reformed Churches, and many others
whom they scandal, and accuse of diverse heresies, and errors which we and they
abhor, and detest.

This point, I will conclude with Doctor Fields observations.

First, Doct. Field of the Church. lib: 3. cap. 1.
that by the merciful goodness of God, all these different sorts of
Christians, though distracted and dissevered, by reason of delivering certain
points of faith, mistaking one another, or variety in opinion, touching things
not Fundamental; yet agree in one substance of faith, and are so far forth
orthodox, that they reta in a saving profession of all divine verities,
absolutely necessary to salvation, and are all members of the true Catholic
Church of Christ.

The second, that in the principal controversies touching matters of Religion;
between the Papists, and those of the reformed Churches, they give testimony
of the truth, of that which we profess. As Docter Field also has collected 1
They all deny and impugn that supreme universalitie of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, which the Bishop of Rome claims. 2, They think him subject to
error, as other Bishops are. 3. They deny that he has any power, to dispose of
principalities and kingdoms, of the world, or to depose Kings. 4, they
acknowledge all our righteousness to be imperfect, and that it is not safe to
trust thereunto, but to the mere mercy and goodness of God. 5, They ad^nit
not of the merit of Congruence, condignitie, nor works of Superrogation. 6,
They teach not the doctrine of satisfactions, as the Romanists do. 7, They
believe not Purgatory, and pray not to deliver men out of temporal
punishments after this lfie. 8 They reject the Romish doctrine, touching
Indulgences and pardons 9 They believe not that there are seven Sacraments. 10.
They omit many ceremonies which the Roman Church uses in Baptism, as spittle,
etc. 11. They have no private Masses. 12. They minister the Communion in both
kinds to all communicants. 13 They believe not transubstantiation, nor the now
real sacrificing of Christ. They have their divine service most of them in
their own tongue. 15. Their Priests are married, and although they permit the^
not to marry a second wife, without dispensation, yet if any do, they do not
avoid or dissoluethe marriage. 16. They make no image of God. 17 They have no
Massy Images, but pictures only. 18. They think that properly, God only is to
be invocated, and howsoever they have a kind of invocation of Saints, yet they
think that God only hears them, and not the Saints.

And thus much of the Unity of these Churches with us.

4 The Unity of the Reformed Churches appears, by their several Confessions.
OF Auspurge, Set down in a book, called the Harmony of Confessio^s of the
faith, of the Chrislian and Reformed Churches. Printed, Cambridge 1586.
which was first presented in the German tongue, at the City of Auspurge, in
the year 1530: to Charles the fifth, being Emperor, by certain most renowned
Princes of Germany, and other States of the sacred Empire, who^ they call
Protestants.

Of Straugsborough, Constance, Meminga, Lindan, presented to the said Emperor.

Of Basil, called also the Confession of Millaine

Of the Helvetian Churches.

Of the Saxon, and Meissen Churches.

Of Wirtemberge, presented by the Ambassadors of Christopher Duke of
Wirtemberge, and Tecca, Earl of Mountbelgard, presented to the Council of
Trent, the 24 of the Month of January, Anno. 1552.

Of the French Confession, which was in the year 1559. presented to Francis
the second King of France.

Of the latter Confession of the Helvetian Church, which was written by the
Pastors of Zurich, in the year 1566.

Of Belgia, which was published in French, in the name of all the Churches of
Belgia, in the year 1566, and in the year, 1579. In a public Synod, held at
Belgia: it was repeated, confirmed, and turned into the Belgian tongue.

Of Bohemia, published in diverse places, was also approved by common
testimony, of the University of Wirtemberg^, published in the year, 1532.

Of Scotland, subscribed by King James of famous memory, and the States
thereof, to the glory of God, and good example of all men. At Edenborough, the
28 day of January 1581, and in the 14 year of his Maiefties Reign.

Although, some private men led more by passion, and their own self pleasing
conceit, then by the sacred rules of piety and truth, have labored to sow the
tares of dissension, in the vineyard of the Lord, and have made Crooked some
branches, cleaving unto them, as Anabaptists, Brownists, and others, yet the
general societies, of these Orthodox Churches, in the public confessions of
their faith, do so agree, that there is a most sacred har money between them,
in the more substantial points of Christian Religion necessary to salvation,
as touching the Holy Scripture, the Sacred Trinity, the person of the Sonner
of God, God and man, The providence of God, Sin, Freewill, the Law, the
Gospel, Justification by Christ, faith in his name, Rogeneration, the
Catholic Church and supreme head thereof, Christ, the Sacraments, their
number, and use, the state of Souls after death, the Resurrection, Doctor
Potters want^ of charity, page 93. Doct: Field of the Church page, 819.
and life eternal: They differ rather in Phrases and forms of speech,
concerning Christ's presence in his holy Supper, and other things, then in
substance of doctrine, and also in Ceremonies.

And to manifest, preface to Mr. Brerwoods enquiries.
this their unity. The first Act in the Polonian Synods, of which they have had
diverse lately, as before, in which assembly, are Protestants embracing
Bohemick, Augustan, and Helvetique confessions, The first Act is a religious
confession, of their unfeined consent in the substantial points of Christian
faith, necessary to Salvation, and also, that all disputation should be cut of
concerning the manner of Christ's presence. All of them believing the presence
it self, and that the Eucharisticall elements are not naked and empty signs;
but do truly exhibit to the faithful receiver, that which they signify and
represent: And for as much as they all accord in the substantial verity of
Christian doctrine, they profess themselves to be content, to tolerate
diversities of ceremonies, according to the diverse parctise of their particular
Churches.

5 Of the differences and want of unity in the Roman Church.
WHereas our Adversaries boast much upon unity, and think it to be the glory
of their Church, as Coster writes that the Catholics in the world are under
one Pope, whom they all obey, and constantly retain one faith, they speak one
thing, they think one thing, and believe one and the same in all things, so
that they disagree not in the least point of Religion Yet for all this their
want of unity will appear, not only in the want of concord and love one to
another, but also in their difference in opinions amongst themselves, and
moreover, they in their new doctrines; differ from all the true Catholic
Churches of the world, yea, even from holy Scriptures it self.

Their want of concord and unity, Schisms.
may appear in their several schisms, of which there have been 26, In
Chronolog:
as Cardinal Bellarmin reports, in which there have been 2 or 3 Popes at a
time, of whom the strongest in Battle wore the triple crown: what want of
concord was in the Church of Rome, in those times you may guess; by the Cruel
and bloody battles, fought only between Pope Urban the sixth, and Pope
Clement, in which many 1000 of Christians were slain, the French and others,
held with Clement, and our Nation and others with Pope Urban this scisme
continued above 40 year one residing in Rome and the other in Avignion.

This Urban, Platin: in vita Urban:
after that he had tormented 5 of his Cardinals, he cut of their heads, and
cast them into the River Tiber.

Also their want of concord, Bellum pontificium.
and unity, may be seen in the cruel and hateful war, between the Popes
and the Emperors, called Bellum Pontificium; wherein the Popes not only
thundered out their excommunications against the Emperors, but also absolved
their subjects from their oaths, made unto them: stirring them up against
their Princes yea sometime their own Children, against their natural Parents,
as Henry and Conrade against their natural Father, Henry the 4 who was taken
against oath given, as he was going to a Dier, and imprisoned, where he
miserably ended his days. And after his death, by the Popes command, he was
ungtaved and kept above ground 5 years.

Their want of concord and Unity, may appear, Cruelty of one Pope to
another. Platin: in vit: horum Pontifie:
by the cruelty of one Pope to another, as about the year 900. Pope Stephen
the 6, abrogated all the decrees of his predecessor Pope Formosus, and not
contented with that; took his dead body out of his grave, and cut of two of
his fingers. After him, succeeded Pope Romanus, who abrogated the decrees of
Stephanus, Pope Theodore the 2, and Pope John the 10, who all confirmed Pope
Formosus doings. But after them, succeeded Pope Sergius, who not only
dissanulled the former Popes Acts, but also again, took up the body of the
said Pope Formosus, and cut of his head, and cast his body into the River Tiber.

Their want of Unity also may appear, by the bitter contentions between the
Franciscans and Dominicans, Differences between the Dominicans, etc.
about the Virgin Mary, whether she was conceived in sin or no As also by the
qnarrells between the Dominicans, and Jesuits about grace and freewill.

Their want of unity may appear, Different opinions. Bish. Halls peace of
Rome.
in their different opinions: Doct: Hall now Lord Bishop of Exeter in his book
called the peace of Rome, sets down 300 contradictions, or differences of
opinions, maintained in the Popish Church set down by Cardinal Bellarmine
himself, And also, 60 differences of opinion amongst their doctors, in the
point of confession, only set down by Navarr.

Doct: Doct: Willets 4 pillar of Papistrie
Willet also sets down, the like, with one hundred contradictions in their
canons, which are the very synewes, and marrow of Popery.

And their differences are not only amongst private men, Differences National.
but National, as the French, and Venetians, differ from other Popish Nations
in opinion.

For the French, French decree 1611.
besides their pragmaticall sanction, by a public decree, Anno 1611. expelled
the Jesuits, except they approved these 4 Articles.

1 That the Pope has no power to depose Kings. 2 That the Council is above
the Pope. 3 That the Clergy ought to be subject to the civil Magistrate. 4 That
consession, ought to be revealed, if it touch the Kings person.
Cardinal Bellarmines book, of the Popes power in temporalls, was condemned
in the Parliament of Paris, Ano 1610 and with Marianaes book, de Rege et Regis
institutione, cast into the fiar, by the hands of the hangman.

You may see also, Varia tamfaculta it is theologicae et curiae Parisiensis, quam
aliorum Theologorum et Iureconsultorum opuscula decreta, et censurae, Item
commoncsactiones et postulata Regioru^^ in Gallia
the arrest of the Parliament of Paris, against Cardinal Bellarmines book, in
a book entitled, the works, and decrees, and censures of the Theologicke
faculty, of the Court of Paris, and of other divins and Lawyers, in which the
chief head of the Jesuits faith is overthrown, to wit, of the Popes power,
over Kings, and Princes, and their subjects, and Principalities, Cognitorum
quibus primarium Ie suiticae fides caput de Remani Pontificis super omnes Reges
et Principes, corumque sub ditos Regna et principatus evertitur.
and of the lawful power of secular Magistrates, over persons Ecclesiastical.

Amongst others, there is a treatise in that book, called Ius Regum, written
by Mr. I: Bedaeus advocate of the Parliament of Paris, against Cardinal
Bellarmine, and other lesuits; who do extol the Pope, (as he says) not only
above all that is called God, in spiritualities, but also in Temporalities.

Moreover, the Kingdom of France does acknowledge the Council of Constance,
assembled by Sigismond the Emperor, with a concurrent consent of other
Christian Princes, decreeing a general Synod, to be superior to the pope, to
be a true Council, and so likewise the Council of Basil: And affirms, that
the assembly of Trent, to be no lawful Council, and the Canons thereof to be
esteemed the Popes decrees, they being made by the Popes Creatures etc.

And for the Venetian difference, read the full satisfactorie answer; to the
late and unadvised Bull, thundered by Pope Paul the fifth, against the renowned
state of Venice, by father Paul a Friar of the order of Servie.

Moreover, their want of Unity, will appear in the manifold difference,
between Pope and Pope, Between Pope and Pope.
Council and Council, contradicting one another. Greg: imagines adorare
omnibus modis devita: lib: 9 ep: 2 Zeged: specul pont page, 36.
For the Popes, Gregory the 1. forbad Image worshipers, Pius the 4 commands it
by his bull, Gela^ius and Hillary taught against Transubstantiation, Innocent
the 3 and Pius the 4 stood for it. Read doctor James his Bellum papale, Bellum
papale.
of the difference between Pope Sixtus the 5. and Clement the 8, the one
commanding one bible only to be used, the other another, and no other, under
their curses; In which treatise the author before named, sets down the
manifold aditions, and contradictions, between the two Popes in their bibles,
in which one of them must needs err; By which, the Roman Catholics are
involved, into a miserable necessity, either to use no bible at all, or to
under go the Curse of Pope Clement, if they use Sixtus bible, or of Sixtus, if
they used Clements.

The like difference, appears in their Counsels, whereof some forbid Image
worship, as the council of Toledo, Councels. Canon 2.
others command it, as the 2 Council of Nue The Calcedon Conncell condemned
Eutiches; the Ephesine approved him, and so it may be said of many others.

Moreover, their want of unity will appear, in that the Popes of Rome, as
Lawgivers, set them down in St. Peter's Chair as they pretend, and made laws
and constitutions, contrary to Gods commandments, and Christ's institutions.

As Clement the 5 gathered a Council at Vienna, 1311, in which it was
ordained, that the Emperor should give his oath of Allegiance to the Pope,
Roman. 13.1 1 Pet. 2, 13.
contrary to the written word of God Let every soul be subject to higher
powers: And to the King, as supreme.

Also in the Council at Constance, Anno 1414, the Pope and his Prelates,
altered the Testamentall legacy of Christ himself, in taking from the Laity,
the use of the Cup in the Sacrament, the holy Symboll of Christ's blood, which
caused many true hearted Christians to tremble, for that their Prelates durst,
set their mouths against heaven, and correct the ordinance of Christ himself,
and in that rude manner, that although Christ did administer to his disciples,
under the forms of bread and wine etc. Yet they commanded no Priest, to
communicate to the people in both kinds, under the pain of excommunication.

And last of all, Paul the third, summoned a Council at Mantua, after removed
to Irent, wherein some few Bishops assembled, being the Popes Creatures,
Flaccus Illyricus in prote statione adversus concilium Tridentinum.
of which holy fathers, some were titular, as Richard Pates Bishop of
Worcester, and blind Sr. Robert Bishop of Armagh; and also two of them were
taken in Adultery, as Illyricus reports, the one stricken with a dart, the
other taken in a trap by the husband, Bp. Iuell defense page 625.
and hanged by the neck out of a window; these helped to make the new articles
of faith before mentioned, and upon this Council, the now Roman Church
depends, Against this assembly, Bellarm. de effect; Sacrament. lib. 2 cap. 25.
Francis the French King protested, and held it but for a private Conventicle,
and diverse other Christian Nations, have disavowed the same, Many of the Canons
therein decreed, and established for Articles of faith, are repugnant to the
holy Scriptures, as for example they decreed.

That Images may be made to be worshipped contrary to Deuteronomy. 27, 15. and to the
very second Commandment it self.

That prayers may be made to the Virgin Mary, and to the Saints departed,
contrary to Math. 6.9. and contrary to the practice of the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, and holy men in Scripture.

That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be ministered, and received in
one kind, contrary to Christ's institution Mat. 26.27. 1 Cor 10.16.

They that desire to see more particulars of the popish doctrines, Barnard page
18.19.20.
contrary to holy Scriptures, let them read Mr. Barnards book called Look
beyond Luther. Doct: Field of the Church lib. 5 page 114. Frequentur accidit ut
quae opinio paucis ab hinc annis usu, non erat modo communi consensione
recipiatur in Gallia et Germania nonulli scriptores tradide runt Crucem non
esse colendam hono re et veneratione ^atriae sed alio infe viore cultu at in
Hispania communi consensione doce tur Cruci cultum et honorem latriae
deferendum Azori mora ^instit. Tom 1. lib. 2 cap. 13.


And moreover, their opinions are different according to times, places, as
Azorius the Jesuit says it falls out that that which was the Common opinion a
few years since, is not the opinion now, and that which is the common opinion
of Papists in one place is not the opinion in another.

As for example, it is the common opinion in Spain and Italy that Latria, or
divine honor is due to the Cross: which in France and Germany is not so but
some inferror kind of worship is due thereunto, And Navare the Jesuit says,
that at Rome no man may say that the Council is above the Pope, nor at Paris
that the Pope is above the Council, and thu s much of their want of unity, and
difference, between the Romanists.

VI. The Agreement of the ancient Roman, East, and South Churches, with us in
these points following; Which sent Austen the Monk to us.
and especially of Gregory Bishop of Rome, who is pretended to be the founder
of the Roman Religion amongst us, who lived about the year 600. (which Tenets
are condemned by the now Roman Church) which plainly shows the Noveltie of
the Doctrine of the now Romish Church, and the Antiquity of ours.
1. The Popes Supremacy.
GRegory] I say confidently, The old Roman Church Ego autem sidenter dice, quia
quisquis se universalem sacerd^tem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua
Antichristum pracurrit. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called the universal Bishop, is
in the pride of his heart, the forerunner of Antichrist.

None of my Predecessors, Bishops of Rome, Nullus unquam decessorum meerum hoc
tam profane vocabulo uti concessit. lib. 4. Epist. 36. Distinct. 99.
Vniversalis autem nee etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur.
ever consented to use this so profane a name.

Pope Pelagius] Gregory's Predecessor decreed that no Bishop, no not the Bishop
of Rome himself, ought to be called universal Bishop.

Saint Chrysostom, The Eastern Church. Distinct. 40. C. multi ex Chrysos.
Quicunque desideraverit Primatum in terra, inveniet confusionem in coelo, nec
inter servos Christi computabitur, qui de primatu tractaverit. Chrysostom. hom.
3. ad Popul Antiochen. (...) fol. 474. Savil.
Patriarch of Constantinople] He that seeks primacy in earth, in Heaven he
shall find confusion: and he that does but once entreat of primacie, is not
worthy to be numbered amongst the servants of Christ.

Our City of Antioch is most dearest to Christ above all others, and like as
Peter did first preach among the Apostles, so among Cities, this had first of
all the name of Christians, as a certain wonderful Crown.

Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Aphrick,] The South Church. Saint August.
de Verb. Domini Ser. 13. Super me aedificabo te, non me super te. Cyprian in
sententijs Council. Carthag. ad Quirinu^.
On these words: thou art Peter, and on this rock which thou have confessed, I
will build my Church: I will build thee upon me, and not me upon thee.

None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops, neither was Peter so arrogant
to take things so insolently upon him, as to advance himself as primate, and
one, unto whom the rest, as novices and punies, should be subject. The old
Roman Church Greg. moral lib. 19 c. 13. art. 6. de qua re non inordinate
agimus, si ex libris licet non canonicis, sed tamen ad adificationem Eccl.
editis, testimoniu^ proferamus. Eleazar namque, etc.


2. Canonical Scripture.
Gregory] We do not amiss, if we bring forth a testimony out of the books
not Canonical, which though they are not Canonical, yet are they set forth
for the edification and instruction of the Church: for Eleazar, in Machabes the
6. etc.

Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea,] The Maccabees are not received amongst us for
divine Scriptures.

Saint Hierom] The book of Wisdom, The Eastern Church. Sapientia quae vulgo
Salomonis inscribitur, and Jesus filij Syrach liber, and Iudeth, and Tobias, and
Haster non sunt in Canone Hierom. Tom. 3. praef. in lib. Regu^.
of Jesus the son of Syrach, of Judeth, of Tobyas, and Haestor, are not in
the Canon.

Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria] Athana. in Synopsi.
The books of the old Testament are. 22. There are others that are not
canonical, as the Wisdom of Solomon.

St. Augustine] De mirabilibus sacra Scripturae. lib. 2. cap. 34.
not found in the Canonical Scriptures, but in the book of Maccabees. The
South Church.


3. The sufficiency of the Scriptures.
Gregory] Whatsoever serves for edification and instruction, The old Roman
Church. Greg. in Ezekiel. lib. 1. hom. 9. In hoc volumine, cunct^ quae aedificant,
omnia quae erudiunt, scriptacontinentur.
is contained in the volume of the Scriptures.

Saint Chrysostom] In opere imperfect. lib. 4. (...) Chrysostom. in 2. Thessal.
hom. 3.
He commands Christian men that will be assured of true faith, to resort to
nothing else but to the Scriptures. Again he says, in holy Scripture all
necessary things are plain, Idem. The Eastern Church.


St. Que pertinent ad veram religionem quaerendam, and tenendam, divina
scriptura non tacuit. August. Epist. 42. in ijs enim quae aperte in Scripura
posita sunt; inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque vivendi: de
doctr. Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 9. tom. 3.
Augustine] All those things that pertain to the attaining and keeping of true
Religion, the holy Scripture has not concealed.

St. Augustine] In these things which are laid down plainly in Scriptures,
all those things are found, which appertain to faith, and direction of life.

4. Reading of the Scriptures.
Gregorie] The Scripture is an Epistle sent from God to his Creature, The old
Roman Church Gregor. lib. Epist. 40. ad Theod. medicum. Quid autem est
scriptura sacra, nisi quaedam Epistola omnipotentis Dei, etc.
that is, to Priest and people; And if thou receive a letter from an earthly
King, thou will never sleep, nor rest till thou understand it: The King of
Heaven, and God of men and Angels, has sent his letters to thee, for the good
of thy soul, and yet thou neglectest the reading of them: I therefore pray
thee study them, and daily meditate of the word of thy Creator, and learn the
heart and mind of God in the words of God.

St. Chrysostom] The Eastern Church.
Epistol. ad Coll. hom. 9.
Hear you Lay people, get you Bibles, the Physic of your souls.

St. Augustine] South Chapter
Sermo. 112 feria sexta post dom. passionis. Lectio assidua purificat omnia.
Daily reading purifieth all things.

5. Concerning Transubstantiation.
Gregorie] The old Roman Church Greg. in 6. Psalm. paenitent. Quis expoenere
queat qua^tae fuerit miserationis, sacratissima pretiosi sanguinis effusione
genus humanum redimere, and sacrosanctum vivifici corporis, and sanguinis sui
mysterium membris suis tribuere, cujus perceptione corpus suum, quod est
Ecclefia, passcitur, and pouitur, abluitur, and sanctificatur.
Christ with the effusion of his most precious blood redeemed mankind, and
gives unto his members the most holy mysteries of his quickening body and
blood, by the participation whereof, his body, which is the Church, is
nourished with meat and drink, and is washed and sanctified.

St. Chrysostome] If any man takes it fleshly, The Eastern Church. In Johan.
homil. 46.
it profits nothing.

Idem: In opere imperfecto in Mat. page 810. Bas. in quibus non est verum
corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis Christicomiretur.
In the holy vessels the true body of Christ is not contained, but the mystery
of his body.

St. Augustine] The South Church. Cont. Adimant. cap. 12. Non enim Dominus
dubitavit dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret coporis sui. Ad quid
paras dentes and ventrem? creed, and manducasti. super Joan. tract. 25. Tom. 9.
Christ spoke these words, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his
body.

Jdem: Why do thou provide thy teeth and thy belly? believe, and thou have
eaten.

6. Private Mass.
Gregorie] Let not the Priest alone celebrate Mass; The old Roman Church In
lib. Capitulari. cap. 7. apud Cassand. liturg. cap. 33. page 83. sac^^ dos
missam solus neqnaquam celebret; quia sicut illa celebrari non potest sine
salutatione sacerdotis, and responsione nibilominus plebis, it a nimirum
nequaquam ab une debet celebrari: esse enim debent, qui ei circumstent, ques
ille salutet, a quibus es respondeatur, etc.
for as he cannot perform it without the presence of the Priest and people;
so likewise it ought not to be performed by one alone for their ought to be
present, some to whom he ought to speak, and who in like manner ought to
answer him.

Chrysostome] Neither do we receive more, The East: Church. 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
Homil. 4. De sacrificio missae contra Muscu^u^ apnd Cassand. lituro. cap. 35.
page 86. O^im omnes tum sacerdetes, tum ^^ici quicunque intererant sacrificio
missae, peracta oblatione cum sacrifieante communicabant, etc. Definivit
sanctu^ concilium, ut nullus presbyter praesumat solus missam cantare. apud
Cassand. page 83.
or you less of the holy table, but taste thereof equally together.

Cochleus] Anciently, all the Priests, and people did communicate together.

Concilium Nanetense] The holy Council has decreed, that no Priest should
presume to celebrate alone.

7. Communion in both kinds.
Gregorie] You have learned what the blood of the Lamb is, The old Roman
Church Tom. 2. Hom. 22. in Ewang. Quid namque sit sanguis Agni, non audiendo
sed bibendo didicistis, etc. Dial. lib. 4. cap. 58. Ejus sanguis non jam in
manns infidelium, sed in or a fidelium funditur. De conse. did. 2. c.
Comperimus, quod divisio unius, ejusdemque mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio
nequeat provenire. apud. Cassand. page 1020. (...)
not by hearing, but by drinking. Again, the blood of Christ is not powered
into the hands of unbeleevers, but into the mouths of the faithful people.

Pope Gelasius] Decreed to communicate in both kinds, because the division of
the one mystery from the other, could not be done without great Sacrilege.

Saint Chrysostome] In some cases, 2. Corinthians. Ho^. 18. Tom. 3. Edit. Savilij.
page 647. (...)
there is no difference between Priest and people, as when they must enjoy the
Reverend Mysteries. Again, But one Body, and one Cup is given to all.

Cassander] It is sufficiently manifest, Consult. de utraque specie. page 1025.
Eccle. orientalis in hunc usque diem, occidentalis vero, five Romana mill
amplius annis continuis, non aliliter quam sub duplicispecie in conventu
Ecclesiae sacramentum hoc Dominici corporis and sanguinis administrasse
legitur, etc.
that the universal Church to this day, and the Western or Roman Church, for
more then a thousand years, did exhibit the Sacrament in both kinds, to all
the members of Christ's Church.

8. Merit of Works.
Gregorie] There are some which glory that they are saved by their own
strength, The old Roman Church In 28. Job. lib. 18. cap. 25. sunt nonnulli, qui
salvos se suis viribus exultant, suisque pr^cedentibus meritis redemptos esse
gloriantur, quorum assertio invenitur sibimet ipsis contraria: quia dum and
innoce^^^^ se asserunt, and redemptes, hoc ipsum in se redemptionis nomen
evacnant.
and brag that they are redeemed by their own precedent merits, but herein
they contradict themselves, and whilst that they affirm that they are
innocent, and yet redeemed, they frustrate the name of Redemption in themselves.

Chrysostom] Although we die a thousand times, Chrysostom. de Compunct. cordis lib.
2. (...)
and if we fulfill all the virtues of the mind, yet we do nothing worthy
to those things which we have received of God.

Saint Augustine] God Crowns in us the gifts of his mercy. In Ioh. tract. 13.
Tom. 9. Coro^at in nobis Deus dona misericordiae suae. The old Roman Church
Adorare imagines omnibus modis devita. lib. 9 epist. 9.


9. Worshipping of Images.
Gregory] The Adoration of them avoid by all means.

The ancient Greek Church long withstood Images, which was a principal cause
of the division of the Empire, The Popes excommunicating, Leo, Constantine, and
others of the Greek Emperors, who were against Images; and the weakness of
the Christians divided, was a great cause of the Mahumetan conquests, and
greatness: To the Jews and Mahumetans, the worship of images is abominable.
And whereas the Turks know much of Christ, Postel. Compend. Cosmograp. p. 76.
as that he was borne of the Virgin Mary, conceived by the Holy Ghost,
received by the Christians, being the Christ promised in the Jews Law, who is
in heaven, in body and soul; and that he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead, with just judgment: yet the imageworship used by some Christians, is
so offensive to them, that it may be supposed to be a hindrance of their
conversion. The South Church. De morib. Eccle. lib. 1. cap. 34.


Augustine] I know certain worshippers of Tombs, whom the Church condemns.

Thus as you have seen the agreement of the Modern Churches beforenamed with
us, as also of the old ancient Roman, East and South Churches in the points
before named, which doctrines then taught by Saint Gregory, Saint Au^^e^, Saint
Chrysostom and others, are not now owned by the Roman Church; but by them
disallowed and anathematized.

VII. The Religion of the Ancient Britains, and the differences from their now
Roman Church.
THe Ancient writers testify, that most of the points before named, were the
Tenets of the Britains, both before and also after the coming of Austen, for
although the the Romanists pretend, that at the coming of Austen, Christianity
was lost amongst us; yet Historiographers witness the contrary, Bed. Eccle.
hister. lib. 2. cap. 2.
as Beda testifies, that at the coming of the said Austen, which was about
the year 600. there were here 7. Bishops, one Archbishop, and above 2000.
Monks of Bangor, and many learned men: And also the Queen was then a
Christian: and that Christianity was amongst us before, Bishop Iewell^ Defen.
page 11.
Bishop Jewel proves out of Saint Chrysostom, who lived about the year 400.
and Saint Hillarie, who lived about the year 360. And Origin, who lived about
the year 240. And Tertullian, who lived about the year 230. Haec epistola
communiter habetur inter leges divi Edvardi. Antiq. Britan. page 5. in margin.
And this will also appear by the letter of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome to our
King Lucius then a Christian: and as the inhabitants were Christians as before,
so the ancient writers testify, that they were them differing from the now
Romish Religion in their new Articles.

For the sufficiency of Scriptures, Tantum ea quae in Propheticis, Eva^gelicis
and Apostolicis literis discere poterant, observantes. Bed. lib. 3. hist. cap.
4. Omnes aut legendis Scripturis aut psalmis discendis operam dare. Bed. Eccl.
hist. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Beda records the Successors of Columkelle, that they observed only those
things which they could learn in the Prophetical, Evangelicall, and
Apostolical writings.

They had them also in their own language, and Beda reports amongst others
of a translation made by the appointment of King Adelstan: The Clergy and
Laity were bound to read the holy Sciptures, and they accounted them their
chief riches, according to that of Columbanus.

Sint tibi Divitiae divinae dogmata legis. Beda also commends Altfrid the
King for a most learned man in the Scriptures, Alfrit vir in scripturis
doctissimus. lib. 4. cap. 26.
and also their service was in their own language, as Bishop Jewel proves in
his reply. Bishop Jewel. page 142.


For the Doctrine of Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the same was taught then
which we teach now. Hom. in die sanctae. pascae. page 17.


As you may see in the Homily of Elfrick approved by diverse Bishops in their
Synods, This book is subscribed by the two Archbishops of Canterbury and of
York, and 13. other Bishops.
and appointed to be read upon Easterday, before the receiving of the
Communion: who says;

There is a great difference betwixt the body wherein Christ suffered, and the
body which is hallowed housell. The body truly that Christ suffered in, It was
borne of the flesh of Mary, with blood, with bone, with skin, and with sin
was, in humane limbs, with a reasonable soul living. And his Ghostly body
which we call the housell, is gathered of many corns without blood and bone,
without lymbe, without soul, and therefore there is nothing to be understood
bodily, Beda in vita Cutberti. cap. 15. page 163. Vt mittas Presbyterum qui
illam priusquam moriatur visitet, ^ique Dominici corporis and sanguinis
Sacramenta ministret. Antoninus archi. Florent cronic. 2. par. page 623.
Northmanni autem confessioni peccatorum vacantes mane Dominico corpore and
sanguine communicaverunt. Mat. Paris in Harald. Normani mane Dominici corporis
and sanguinis munimine saginati, etc. page 3.
but it is ghostly (or spiritually to be under stood.)

And this Doctrine also Scotus our Countryman did teach, for the Communion in
both kinds: Beda also reports in the life of Cuthbert, that one Hildmar an
officer of Egfrid King of Northumberland, entreated Cuthbert to send a Priest
that might minister the Sacrament of the Lords body and blood unto his wife
that then lay adying.

Antoninus Archbishop of Florence writes that William the Conqueror and his
whole Army received the Communion in both kinds; And Matthew Paris says the
same, to wit the Normans the morning before they fought with Harald,
strengthened themselves with the body and blood of Christ.

For the marriage of Priests, it was accounted as lawful then as now.

Anselme was the first that made a decree against Priests marriage in this
Kingdom, Hon. Hunting. lib. 7. page 378. Anselmus prohibuit uxores
sacerdotibus Anglorum ante non prohibitas.
as Henry of Huntington reports: Anselme, says he, held a Synod in London,
in which he forefended Priests to have wives, which they were not inhibited
before to have, which was about the year 1104.

It seems that the Priests kept their wives after Anselmes time by the Decree
made by the Cardinal of Cremen in the year 1131. against Priests marriage;
who having in a long oration commended Chastity, and in a Synod in London made
a Decree against the marriage of Priests, was himself that night found in bed
with a whore, as Matthew of Paris reports, to the no little shame of the
Clergy. What Anselme or the Cardinal did against Priests marriage, proceeded
from the Pope Gregory the seventh, who under the color of Chastity forbad
marriage. His Bull is to be seen against Priests marriage, which the Germans
and French resisted: what a holy man this Gregory was appears by the
sentences of the Council of Worms and Brixia, in which the said Gregory was,
deposed for his perjurie, for necromancy, for being a Conjurer, and many other
crimes. Ord^ Baptizandi and visitandi.


For Merit, read a book set forth by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury to be
used in his province, called the order of Baptizing and visiting the sick, in
which are these words; Do thou believe that none can be saved by his own
merits, but by the merits of Christ's passion (to which the sick party was
taught to make answer,) all this I believe: And the Priest concluded, Go to
therefore, as long as thy soul remains in thee, place thy whole confidence
in his death only, etc.

And for the Supremacy, what did King Henry the eighth assume more then Bishop
Eleutherius gave to Lucius our King, and that the ancient Kings of the Britans
assumed to themselves. Of these points and others, you may read more in the
most learned discourse of the Religion anciently professed by the Irish and
British, written by the most reverend Father in God James Usher Archbishop of
Armagh, and Primate of Ireland. And thus you may see how King Henry the eight,
or King Edward brought in no new Religion amongst us, but restored the old
ancient Religion suppressed for some years by the Church of Rome.

By this it manifestly appears, that most of the Doctrines before named, now
taught and urged for Catholic in the Roman Church, were neither the Doctrines
of the other Christians in Europe, Asia, and Africa, nor the ancient Roman,
Eastern, Southern Churches, nor of Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome, who
sent Austen hither, nor of the ancient Britains our forefathers.

And whereas inquiry is made for the visibilitie of our Church, or for any one
professing our Religion before Luther, here you may see the whole true
Catholic Church of God, upon the face of the Earth; of the which these
Churches are members professing the same faith with us.

For which common Union, we have great cause to rejoice, Hieremie.
as the Greek Patriarch having seen the Tenets of some of the reformed
Churches, congratulateth with them after this manner: We give thanks to God,
the Author of all grace; and we rejoice with many others, especially in this,
that in many things your Doctrine is agreeable to our Church. So let us thank
God for the holy harmony and agreement of these Churches with us in the point
before mentioned, in controversy between the Roman Church and us; and let us
endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

VIII. Of the Devotion and piety of these Churches.
BRochardus the Monk tells us, Brochard Monac.
that he found the Nestorians, Jacobites, Maronites, and Georgians, and such
others, whom they judge to be heretics, to be for the most part, honest and
simple men, living sincerely toward God and man, men of great abstinency,
attentively hearing the word of God.

And that the Armenians and Georgians have for their Prelates, men of the best
conversation, going before them, aad teaching them, as by word, so also by
example. Devotion. Godignus de Abass. rebus p. 133. In oratione frequentanda
non facile similes reperiri censeo, omni namque diluculo cuncti little toto
corpore in pulverem ipsu^ prostrati orationes ad Deum fundunt. Faber in Relig.
Moscovit. p. 180.


These Christians use great reverence in their Churches, no man is allowed to
walk, talk, or sit in them; the old and weak may lean against the walls:
Godignus reports that the Aethiopians do allow the old and weak, crutches
to sustain them withal as before; and Faber reports of the Russes, that he
has not seen of them the like, for their frequenting prayers and devotion in
their prayers, which, lying prostrate on the ground, they pour out unto God:
They touch not the holy Scriptures, but with great reverence, and place the
Bible in their houses in the most honorable place.

The Greeks much blame the Latins for their unreverent sitting in their
Churches, and suffering Lay men with Boots and Spurs to sit by the Priests
at time of Divine Service, and also for not keeping dogs out of their
Churches, as before.

Of these Churches I may say, although we think them not to be so learned as
we are (they wanting the means that we have) yet they are more devout.

For their Fasts, Their Fasts.
these Christians taste nothing at all till Sun set: The Aethiopians do so
macerate themselves in their Lent-fasts (which they begin ten days before
ours) that their enemies commonly set upon them at the end of their Fasts,
hoping then to find them feeble and weak: in their Fasts, especially upon
good friday, beside their great abstinence, they go like mutes, not saluting
one another, with their countenances dejected.

The Greeks also blame the Latins for drinking in their Fasts, Irineus
R^d^ginus page 15.
and that some of them are drunk before their fasts are ended, and that when
their fasts are ended, generally they eat and fill their bellies plentifully.

For their obedience to Princes, Obedience to Princes.
their Patriarchs and Bishops, although they are subject to many grievous
pressures, yet they submitt themselves to their Kings and Princes that God has
placed over them, according to that of Lactantius Religion is to be defended,
not by killing, but by dying; not by cruelty, but by patience; not by
wickedness, but by faith, etc.

For their Chastity, among the Russes, adultery is severely punished, and the
Aethiopians punish all fornication and lust, and none of the Patriarchs of
these Churches allow brothelhouses or Stews that I read of.

Whereas the Pope of Rome, howsoever they pretend Chastity, yet they only of
all Christians Patriarchs allow stews, and brothelhouses; where a father,
Sixtus ponti^ex maximus Romae nobile admodunlupanar extruxi^ Agrippa de van
ta^e scientiarum cap. 64. Atque utrique sexui assignavit Zeg. spec. ponti. page
79. Dici nequit qua^ incredibili Christianorum tum p^dore, tum etiam ^orum qui
vere tales sunt, cordolio, ut Iudae filiae scortari non licea^ Dei filiae
liceat.
his son and his brother may commit uncleanness with one whore; yea Sixtus
the fourth built a famous Stews in Rome for both Sexes. This wickedness is not
unpunished among the Jews themselves. Bishop Espensous reports to the great
shame of ( Roman) Christians, of a Jew maid, who renounced her Religion, and
turned (Romish) Christians, that she might freely exercise the art of Ribandie
not permitted by herown Religion; his words are, It cannot be spoken, but with
incredible shame of Christians, and with the great heart griese of them that
are the like; that it is not lawful for a daughter of Judah to commit
fornication, but lawful for the daughter of God: Imo Israe is filia
meretricari non aliter ante possit, quam facta per Baptismu^ sanctu^ Christi
soror, and filia.
yea the daughter of Jsrael may not otherwise play the whore, before she be
made by holy baptism sister and daughter of Christ, etc.

Moreover, he writes that we cannot but be offended to see so many Stews in
one City; and that it may be almost said of Rome Christian as of Rome Ethnic,
that the whole City is one stews.

Again, these Patriarchs and Bishops sell no pardons to deliver souls out of
Purgatory, nor allow the sale of any Sacrament, that I read; whereas the Roman
Church makes infinite gain of their Masses, Romana scorta in singulas
hebdemadas juliu^ poudent Pontifici, Agrippa loco citat. Zeg, loco. Citat. Taxa
Cancel. Apostolicae. Parisiis. 1613.
Pardons, and Dispensations; yea the Popes themselves have a rent out of the
brothell houses, every whore paying weekly a Iulie to his holiness, which rent
is more some years then 40000. Ducats. In the book of taxes of the
Apostolic Chancerie and sacred penitentiaries, you may see the prises and
rates of all dispensations and absolutions, as for murders of all kinds, as
of Clergy men, Lay men, of Father, Mother, Son, Brother, Sister, Wife, etc.
For impoisoning, enchantment, witchcraft, sacrilege, simony, etc. for
fornication, adultery, incest, without any exception or distinction, etc. Also
for dispensations for oaths, vows, and many things more, although there be
many sins reigning amongst these Christians and us; yet they are not allowed
by them and us, and so they are not the sins of the Churches, as fornication
is one of the sins of the Roman Church, as before.

To put an end to this: some of their sins are not only personal, but
Cathedral, from whence they seem to have a liberty of sinning (to use their
own distinction) their venial sins are easily done away with a short shrift;
and as for mortal sins, a man may have for money a warrant dormant, Anton. sum.
par. 3 tit. 1. cap. 11. Crantzius. saxon. lib. 5. cap. 8. Quid enim hodie per
dispensationem Apostolicam non obtinetur? Quinta causa dissidij Graecorum
credipotest species austerioris vitae quaein eorum Hiere monachis,
Metropolitis, Archiepiscopis at que episcopis frequenter cernitur. Haec igitur
austerioris vitae ratio Latins contemnendi praebuit occasionem, etc. Tho. a
Iesis. de convers. p. 284.
or dispensation to commit sins against nature, as to marie his Aunt, his
brothers wife, his niece, and his own daughter: for which Pope Martin the fifth
gave a dispensation, as Antonius reports: and what (says Crantzius their own
writer) cannot be gotten by dispensation?

To conclude, Thomas the Jesuit confesses, that the fifth cause of difference
between the Greeks and Latins, may be thought to be the show of a more
austere life, which is often seen in their holy Monks, Metropolites,
Archbishops, and Bishops: this their more austere life causes the Greeks to
contemn the Latins, etc. But the Greeks are to know that Christian
righteousness does not consist chiefly in macerating the body, but in Charity,
Faith, and Hope, Humility, and Patience, and other virtues.

WHereas there is come to my hands a book of Possevins the Jesuit written
against Chytraeus, in which he challenges these Churches for agreeing with
them; In praying for the Dead, invocating Saints, worshipping Images, having of
Monks, etc.

I answer, that I find these Churches in these things also to differ from the
Papists.

1. As in praying for the dead, they pray not to deliver Souls out of
Purgatory, nor from any temporal punishment, as the Papists do, but for their
general resurrection, Field of the Chapter page 59.
public acquital, etc.

2. For their invocating of Saints, some do it not at all, page 109. of this
book.
as the Aethiopians, as before, but I will not justify all these Churches in
their invocations.

3. For Imageworship, Nullas habent sanctorum imagines. Josephus Indus cap. 133.
some have none at all, as the Indians, others have Pictures only, to which
they give no undue reverence as the Aethiopians, yet will I not justify some
of them in this point.

4. For their Monks, Singuli pro sui Monasterij oeconemia sustinenda laborant,
alij vineas fodientes, etc. Bellon. obser. lib. 1. cap. 35.
they are not idle bellygods, or beggars, but live on their labor as before.

For other things mentioned, the Jesuit has a stream of witnesses against him.

And last of all, if these Churches agree with the Roman Church, why do most
of them excommunicate the Pope and his clergy as before

And more especially, to show their disagreement with the Ethiopian Church,
Godign. de Abass. rebus. page 225.
the Bishop of Sydonia gave new orders to Tecla Maria an Ethiopian Priest in
the Chapel of the Cardinal of Saint Severin by the commandment of the Pope
and advice of the Cardinals.

Of the Antiquity.
CHAP. IIII.
WHereas the Church of Rome boasts of her Antiquity, I purpose to set down
in this Chapter, three things.

1. That some of these Churches, are Churches more ancient then the Church of
Rome, and that the ancient Church of Rome received Christianity from them, or
some of them.

2. That the now Church of Rome, and the ancient before Boniface the third, are
not one and the same Church, but different.

3. As the now Church of Rome is a new Church, and a different from the old, so
it has new, and different Articles and doctrines of Faith, unknown to the old
Church, and not to be found for such, in the writings of any of the ancient
Fathers, for five hundred years after Christ.

FOr the first, The Church of Jerusalem is more ancient then the Church of
Rome; Jerusalem:
where our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ himself preached, and offered
himself a Sacrifice for our sins, and where the Apostles, and Disciples
first preached: for although they were sent to preach to all Nations, yet they
preached first to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, according to Christ's
Commandment. This Church is most ancient; St James was the first Bishop there
The Law went out of Sion, Matthew. 10.6.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. This City was Emporium, Isay 2.3.
(...), etc. Histor. Eccles. Lib. 5. cap 9.
the Mart of Christian faith, and the mother of all Churches, as Theodoret
says.

2. 2. Antioch. Acts. 11.26.
The Church of Antioch in Syria, where the Disciples were first called
Christians; Of this Church Saint Peter was Bishop some years before he went to
Rome; (...) ad populum Antioch. homil. 3.
and this Church is also more ancient then the Church of Rome: Saint
Chrysostom calls this Church the Head of all the world.

3. The Greek Church was planted by Saint Paul, 3. Graecians.
and Saint Andrew, from whence, and the fore named Churches, the name of Christ
flowed, Eia igitur Graecia matter nostra, cui id totum debet quod habet Latina
Ecclesia. Conc. Trid. orat. Episc. Bitont.
as from a spring, over all the world; and the faith was spread in all places;
and this the Bishop of Bitonto acknowledged in the Council of Trent. It is our
mother Graecia to whom the Latin Church is beholding for that which she has:
the Eastern Church was before the Church of Rome in Time, and from thence the
Church of Rome has received Christianity, the new Testament, the three
Creedes, the very name of Baptism, Eucharist, Bishop, Priest, and Deacon.

4. 4. Aethiopia.
Aethiopia received Christianity from the Eunuch of Queen Candases, Huic
Philippus, responsis Sancti Spiritus jussus primo ex omnibus Gentibus mysterium
fidei and sacramentum Baptismi tradidit, and velut quasdam eum Dee primitias
omnium consecrat nationu^. Eusch. Eccles. histor. lib. 2. cap. 1.
to whom (as Eusebius reports) first of all the Gentiles, Philip (by the
command of the holy Ghost) delivered the mystery of Faith, and the Sacrament
of Baptism, and consecrated him to God, as the first Fruits of all nations.
Saint Matthew also preached to the Aethiopians.

5. For the Antiquity of the Church of Rome, both St Hierom and Eusebius
testify, that St Peter came to Rome in the reign of Claudius the Emperor, 5.
Rome. Hierom Catalog. Eccles. script. page 265. Eusebius. Eccles. his. lib. 2. c.
14.16.
and in his second year says Hierom.

6. The Church of England received Christianity (as some say,) from Joseph of
Arimathea; others from Simon Zelotes the Apostle: 6. England. Guildas Sapiens
de excidio Britan. Christus suos radios (id efl) suapraecepta indulget tempore,
ut scimus su^mo Tiberij Caesaris, quo absque ullo impedimento eius propagabatur
religio. Bibli. vet: Pat. tem. 5. par. 3. page 675. Britannia omniu^
provinciarum prima publicitus Christi nomen recepit Sabel. in Ennead. 7. lib. 5.
Guildas reports that our Island received Christianity in the time of
Tiberius Caesar, who dyed in the year of our Lord 39. which if it be so, the
Church of England received Christianity before the Church of Rome, some years
before Peter came to Rome; which was in the time of Claudius, who succeeded
Tiberius. And for the Honor of my Mother Church, I speak, that Christianity
was first publicly professed by authority in this Kingdom, about 130. years
before it was in Rome; Lucius our King being (as I read) the first Christran
King in Europe, who reigned about the year of our Lord, 170. And moreover,
Constantine the Christian Emperor was borne amongst us, who gave the first
public liberty of Religion to the Roman Church. So that Rome was beholding
for the public liberty of Religion to Constantine Our country man. Speedes
histerie. page 207.
Also the inhabitants of Britain as I read were instructers unto others, as
from hence was Netherland converted to Christianity, as testifies the story
of Swithbertus: Burgundy by our Columbanus, says Sigebert: Swedia by Gallus,
as says Petrus de Natalibus: and Frisia by Wilfred, as it is recorded by Beda,
and Matthew of Westminster: The Franconians, Hassians, and Turingians by
Winifred our Devonshire man. The Norvegians by Nicolas Breakespere of
Middlesex. And the Lituanians by Thomas Walden of Essex, and all the reformed
Churches in Christendom derived their light from the learned Wickleffe of
Oxford. In regard of this, Polidor Virgil does rightly call England the Parent
or Mother-Monasterie of all Europe. And Peter Ramus terms Britain to be
twice Schoolemistris to the Kingdom of France: Terra Britanniae ante adventum
Christi unius Dei consensit religionem. hom. 4. in Ezech.
moreover Origin writes, that the Britains received the religion of one God,
before the coming of Christ.

Secondly, whereas the Church of Rome boasts of Antiquity, The Church of Rome
since Boniface the 3 and the old Church of Rome planted by St Peter, and St
Paul, are not one, and the same, but are far different. The old Church of
Rome as St Paul tells us, was a branch of that Tree whereof Christ Jesus was
the root: The now Church of Rome will be no branch, but the root it self.

The ancient Church of Rome was but a member of the Catholic Church of God,
of which Jesus Christ was Head: But the now Church of Rome is the Catholic
Church it self, of which the Pope is head; and such a Church was never in Rome
for 600. years after Christ: for so long no Bishop of Rome durst presume to
take upon him Christ's title, to be head of his Church, and husband of his
spouse, till Boniface the third; and with him began this Church.

Thirdly, And as they have a new Church, so they have a new Creed, and
Articles of Doctrine: as for example sake.

1. That the Pope, the head of the Church, cannot err in the matter of faith.

2. That all Ecclesiastical power depends upon the Pope.

3. That he has power to canonize Saints.

4. That he has power to depose Kings.

5. That the Popes pardons are requisite or useful to release souls out of
Purgatory.

6. That there is a treasury of Saints merits, and superabundant
satisfactions, at the Popes disposing

7. That the Priest can make his Maker.

8. That the sacred Host made by the Priest, ought to be elevated, and carried
in solemn procession, and adored.

9. That the effects of the Sacrament depends upon the intention of the
Priest.

10. That Infidels and impious persons, yea ratts and mise, may eat the body
of Christ.

11. That the Laiety are not bound by Christ's institution to receive the
Communion in both kinds.

12. That private Maffes, wherein the Priest says Eat and drink ye all of this,
and yet eats and drinks himself only, is according to Christ's institution.

13. That extreme Unction is a Sacrament properly so called.

14. That the public service of God in the Church, ought or may be celebrated
in an unknown tongue.

15. That we may worship God by an Image, etc.

These and other new Tenets and Doctrines defide, of the now Church of Rome,
cannot be showed to be the Doctrines of faith of the old ancient Church of
Rome.

To conclude this point, as there is Antiquity of Time, so also of Truth and
Doctrine: for a people to receive Christianity, and the true faith from the
Apostles, or Christ himself, profits nothing, except they do still retain
the said Faith and Doctrine, as our Lord told the Pharisees boasting of
antiquity, that they had Abraham to their Father: That they were of their
father the devil, not doing Abraham's works. So it may be said of them, John 8.
that boast only of Antiquity of Time, without Antiquity of Truth and Doctrine.

The succession of Bishops.
CHAP. V.
WHereas inquiry is made but for one Bishop of our Religion before Cranmer,
although we need no witnesses, having our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, the great Bishop of our Souls, and the twelve Apostles, with Saint
Paul, Saint John Baptist, St Mark, and St Luke for our Bishops and Doctors,
teaching the truth professed by us, yet I have set down a fuccession of
Bishops in some of the Patriarchall Churches, as of Jerusalem, Antioch,
Alexandria Constantinople, and also of Rome, for the first 600 years amongst
whom you may find, very many noble witnesses.

Jerusalem.
St. James. Simeon Cleophas Iustus a Jew Zacheus Tobias Benjamin John Matthias
Philip Sennecas Iustus the second Levi Ephrem Joseph Judas Marcus Cassianus
Publius Maximus Iulianus. Caius Symachus Caius the 2. Iulianus the 2. Capito
Maximus Antoninus Valens Dolychiauus Narcissus Dios Germanon Gordius Narcissus
and Alexander Mazabanes Hyminaeus Zambdas Hermon Macarius Maximus Cyrillus
Herenius Heraclius Hilarious Cyrillus John Nepos Prayllius Invenalis
Polycbronius Theodosius Anastasius Martyrius Salustius Helias Petrus Macarius
Eustochius John, etc.

Antioch.
St Peter Euodius Ignatius Heroes Cornelius Theophilus Maximinus Serapion
Asclepiades Philetus Zebinus Babylas Fabius Demetrianus Paulus Samosatenus
Domnus Timaeus Ciryllus Dorotheus Tyrannus Vitalis Philogonus Eustathius
Eulalius Euphonins Placitus Steven Leontius Eudoxius Anianus Meletius Euzojus
Dorotheus Paulinus Evagrius Dorotheus Meletius Flavianus Porphyrius Alexander
Theodotus John Domnus Maximus Martyrius Iulianus Basilius Peter Gnapheus
Stephen Calandio Peter Gnapheus Paladius Flauianus Severus Paulus Euphremius
Domninus Anastatius Gregorius, etc.

Alexandria.
St. Mark. Anianus Abilius Cerdo Primus Iustus Eumenes Marcus Celadion
Agrippas Iulianus Demetrius Heraclas Dionysius Maximinus Theonas Peter Achillas
Alexander Athanasius Gregory Peter Timothy Theophilus Cyrillus Dioscorus
Proterius Timotheus Aelurus Timotheus Basilicus Peter Athanasius John
Theodosius Zoilus Appollinarius John Eulogius.

Rome.
St. Peter. Linus Clemens Cletus Anacletus Euarestus Alexander ^yxtus
Telesphorus Hyginus Pius Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor Zepherinus Calistus
Vrbanus Pontianus Anterus Fabianus Cornelius Lucius Steven Xystus Dionysius
Felix Eutychianus Caius Marcellinus Marcellus Eusebius Miltiades Silvester
Marcus Julius Liberius Felix Demasdele Siricius Anastasius Innocentius Zosimus
Bonifacius Celestinus Sixtus Leo Hilarious Simplicius Felix Gelasius Anastasius
Symachus Hormisda John Boniface Agapetus Silverius Vigilius Pelagius John
Benedict Pelagius Gregory the great. etc.

Constantinople.
St Andrew. Stachis Onesimus Polycarpus Plutarchus Sedecion Diogenes Elutherius
Felix Polycarpus Athenodorus Euzoius Laurentius Alippius Pertinax Olympianus
Marcus Cyrillianus Constantius Ciriacus Castinus Titus Domitius Metrophanes
Probus Alexander, etc.

AS there is a Succession of Bishops in the Patriarchall Churches before-named,
so generally of the Metropolitans and Bishops, kept in the Registers, as is
reported.

Titus was the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians, Tit. cap. 3.
placed there by St Paul; he was not a Parson, Tit. cap. 1.15.5.
or Minister of one Parish, but Bishop of the whole Isle, called Hecatompolis,
of one hundred Cities; placed, as aforesaid, by St Paul, to ordain Elders in
every City; Mirae. lib. 4. pa. 181. de notitia episcop.
Miraeus reports, that there are in the Isle of Crete, one Archbishop, and
seven Bishops.

Of Ephesus, Timothy was the first Bishop, 2 Timothy 4. in fin.
placed there also by St Paul; Caius succeeded him, and many other famous men,
as Mark, so famous in the last Florentine Council.

Of Thessalonica, Silvanus was the first Bishop, Theatrum convers. gentium
anthor. frat. Arnol. John Merman. page 42. Chryt. de statu. Eccles. page 159.
Idemibidem.
placed there also by St Paul; I hear that Athanasius is now Metropolitan
thereof; and I read ten Bishoprics to be under that See.

In Corinth, Silas was also placed by St Paul: The Metropolitan of Corinth
has four Bishops under him.

Of Caesarea, Apollo, was the first Bishop. Idem. page 44. and 45.


Of Sardis, Clemens, the first Fruits of Achaia, or Convert of the Gentiles.

Of Nicomedia, Procorus the Deacon.

In Nice, St Andrew placed Calistus.

In Iconium, Tertius was first.

In Smyrna, Polycarpus.

In Thebes, Rusus.

In Philpipi, Hermas.

And so I might name some others: But to show the Greatness of some of these
Churches, I will set down a Catalogue of some of their Metropolites.

Of the Metropolites and Archbishoprickes which are, or have been belonging to
the Patriarch of Constantinople.
Metropoles.
1 Caesarea 2 Ephesus 3 Heraclea 4 Ancyra 5 Cyzicus 6 Sardes 7 Nicomedia 8
Nicaea 9 Calcedon 10 Sida 11 Sebastea 12 Amasea 13 Melitene 14 Tyana 15 Gangra
16 Thessalonica 17 Claudiopolis 18 Neocaesarea. 19 Pissinas 20 Mira 21 Caria 22
Laodicea 23 Synada 24 Iconium 25 Antiochia 26 Sylaeum 27 Corinthus 28 Athenae
29 Mocissus 30 Seleucia 31 Calauria 32 Patrae 33 Trapezus 34 Larissa 35
Naupactus 36 Philippopolis 37 Trajanopolis 38 Rhodus 39 Philippensis 40
Adrianopolis 41 Hierapolis 42 Dyrrhachium 43 Smyrna 44 Catana 45 Ammorium 46
Camachus 47 Cotyaium 48 Sancta Seuerinae 49 Mitelena 50 Novae Patrae 51
Euchaita 52 Amastris 53 Chonae 54 Hydrus 55 Kelzene 56 Colonia 57 Thebae 58
Serrae 59 Pompeiopolis 60 Rossia 61 Alana 62 Aedelenus 63 Tiberiopolis 64
Euchania 65 Cerasus 66 Nacolia 67 Germanicia 68 Madyta 69 Apamea 70 Basileum 71
Drystra 72 Nazianzus 73 Corcyra 74 Abydus 75 Methymna 76 Christianopolis 77
Rusium 78 Lacaedaemonia 79 Naxia 80 Attalia, etc.
Archiepiscopatus.
1 Bizya 2 Leontopolis 3 Maronea 4 Germia 5 Arcadiopolis 6 Parium 7 Miletus 8
Praeconesus 9 Selybria 10 Chius 11 Apros 12 Cypsella 13 Nice 14 Neapolis 15
Selga 16 Cherson 17 Messana 18 Garella 19 Brysis 20 Dercos 21 Carabyzya 22
Lemnus 23 Leucas 24 Misthea 25 Cudrae 26 Soteropolis 27 Pedachthea 28 Germa 29
Bosporus 30 Cotradis 31 Eroina 32 Carpathus 33 Mesembria 34 Gotthia 35 Sugdaia
36 Phullae 37 Aegina 38 Pharsala 39 Matracha
Bishoprics which have belonged to the Church of Antioch.
Seeds 1. Tyrus: sub qua sede sunt episcopatus. XIIII Porphyreon Archis
Ptolemais Sydon Sarepta Byblium Botryon Ortosia Arados Antarados Paneas
Maraclea Araclia Tripolis

Seeds 2 Tharsus: sub hae sede sunt episcopat. V. Sebastia Mallos Thina
Choricos Poderades

Seeds 3 Edissa: sub hae sede simt episcopat. X. Virchi Constantiae Capron
Marcopolis Varnon Cedmaron Himeria Querquensia Tapsaron Celimeos

Seeds 4 Apamia: sub qua sede sint episcopat. VII. Epiphania Seleuconvilla
Larissa Valanea Mariania Ruphania Arethusa

Seeds 5 Hierapolis: sub qua sede sunt episcopat. VIII. Zeuma Surron Varnalis
Neoecaesaria Perri Ormion Dolichi Europi

Seeds 6 Bostra: sub qua sedesunt episcopat. XIX. Cerasson Philadelphia Adraon
Midanon Anstamidon Belmindon Zoroyma Herry Iceny Entemy Constantia Paramboli
Dionysia Conothaton Maximopolis Philippolis Chrisopolis Heylon Lorea

Seeds 7 Anaverza sub qua sunt episcopat. IX. Epiphania Alexandris Hirenopolis
Cambrisopolis Flavias Rossas Castravalet Egnas Lysia

Seeds 8 Seleucia: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus. 24. Claudiopolis. Diocaesarea
Oropi Dalysanidos Serinla Celenderis Anemory Titopolis Lamosy Antiochia parva
Nephelia Ristra Selinuntis Hioropy Philadelphia parva. Hermopolis
Germanicopolis Mosoda Demenopolis Sbydi Synopolis Adrasson Myim Neapolis

Seeds 9 Damasens: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus. XI. Ably Palimpon Laodicea
Euria Renocora Hiabanda Danabi Carathea Hardam Surra Quini

Seeds 10 Amida: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus. VII. Hynilon Valentium
Arsamosata Sophin Caytaris Riphi Zeuma

Seeds II Sergiopolis: sub hac sede sunt epis. IIII. Byzanonias Marcopolis
Venethall Ermenia

Seeds 12 Theodosiopolis: sub hac sede sunt epis. VII. Oricos Mazmini
Mauriocastron Agyamaria Axieri Tarosia Palitinios

Seeds 13 Emissa: sub hac sede sunt episcopatus IIII. Arqui Orisson Herigem
Oragison

Metropolitani per se sustinentes. VIII. Piericus Heliopolis Laodicia. Samosata
Cyros Pompeiopolis Mopsphestia Adama

Archiepiscopi. XIII. Verea Calquis Gabula Scleucia Piperia Anasar Phon Paltos
Germanicia Salamias Varcosos Fassos Ananagarthon

The Bishoprics which have belonged to the Church of Jerusalem; set down by
William Metropolitan and Archbishop of Tire.
Seeds 1. Caesarea maritima: Tyrrius histor belli Sacri lib. 14. cap. 12.
sub hac sede sunt episcopat. XX. Dora Antipatrida. Idmnias Nicopolis Onus
Sorutis Raphias Regium Apatos Regium Hierico Regium Livas Regium Gadaron Azolus
Hiaralias Azotus Hippon Estomason Triconias Taxus Saltum Constantinianum

Seeds 2. Scythiopolis: sub hac sede sunt episcopat. IX. Capitoliados Miru
Gadaron Pelon Philippus Terraconias Clima Gallanis Comanas

Seeds 3. Rubba Moabitis: sub hac sede sunt episco. XII. Augustopolis Arnidilla
Carah Hierapolis Memsidos Eluris Zora Virossam Pentacomia Mamapson Mitrotomias
Saltum Hieraticon

Seeds 4. Becerra Arabiae: sub hac sede sunt episcopat. XXXV. Adrasson Dias
Medavon Hierasson Nein Philadelphia Hierapolis Esuos Neapolis Phenustus
Philopopolis Dionysius Constantianis Pentacomias Tricomias Conafados Saltu
Vocaneos Hexacomias Euacomias Comagannas Comogeros Comostanis Comis Mahederon
Comocoreatos Comis Copion Comis Iulianos Comis Pygmaretho^ Comis Petius Comis
Anathon Comis Neotis Clima Anatolis quae visinon Comis Anochis Comis Traliconos
Comis Nephdomos Suffraganeae. Lidda Ioppe Ascalon Gaza Lennas Diocletianopolis
Bergrobin Neapolis Sebastea Hiericuntos Tiberiadis Diocaesarea Legionum
Capitolina Mauronensis Gedera Nazareth Thabor Caracavel Petra Hadroga Aphra
Helem Faran Helenopolis Mons Syna

For the Church of Alexandria.
SAint Mark consecrated with the mysteries of Christian Religion Egypt,
Merman Theatrum conversionis. page 80.
Libya, Marmarica, Aemmoniaca and Pentapolis. Idem. page 30.


Alexandria, for the worship of God flourishing therein, is often called the
Paradise of God.

To this Patriarch belonged ten Provinces; Mirae, lib. 1. cap. 11. page 24. de
notitia Epis.
so many Metropolitanes, Theodosius and Valentinianus commanded to be
Convocated in the Epistle to Dioscorus, which is repeated in the first Act of
the Calcedon Council.

The Church of Alexandria challenges a succession from St Mark to Gabriel,
the late Patriarch of Alexandria

The Bishoprics which have been in Africa, Alphabetically set down by
Miraeus in his Notitia Episcopatuum.
Page 94. Abbeze^sis Episcopus Abiddensis Abbiritensis Abbirmaius Abbissensis
Abitinensis Abbrensis Abziritensis A casis Favensibus A casis Silvanae
Acemerinianus Aceniensis Adequizirensis Adrumetinus Advocatensis Aggeritensis
Aguensis Agnensis Ajurensis Altiburitensis Amburensis Ammoderensis Amphorensis
Ancusensis Anguiensis Apissanensis Aptucensis Aptugnitensis Aquae Albensis
Aquae-Nonensis Aquensis Regiorum sieve Aquisregiensis Arenensis Asenemsalensis
Assabensis Assuritensis Aturburnitensis Avicoateriensis Avinicensis Auincensis
Auvidarcensis Ausugradensis Auzagerensis Azugensis Badiensis Bagvaiensis
Bajesitensis Bahannensis Bamaccorensis Bartiniziensis Bauzarensis
Bazarididacensis Bazaritanus Bazienus Bazitensis Betagbarensis Bennefensis
Beucennensis Bicensis Bizaciensis Bladiensis Bonustensis Bosutensis
Botrianensis Boucarensis Bucaborensis Buccomensis Bullensis Burensis Buritanus
Burugiatensis Caesariensis Calamensis Calanensis Canianensis Caniopitaneorum
Capsensis Carcabianensis Carianensis Carpitensis Carthaginiensis Casensis
Mediane^sis Casensis Nigrensis Castellanus Catagnensis Catharensis
Cathauguritensis Caviopipavorensis Cebarsussensis Cediensis Celerinensis
Cellensis Cenculianensis Cenensis Cenestensis Centenariensis Centurionensis
Centuriensis Ceramuensis Cerramusensis Cessitensis Cilibiensis Cillitensis
Cincaritensis Cliensis Clypiensis Constantiniensis Creperulensis Cresmiensis
Cubdensis Cufrutensis Cuiculitensis Cullitensis Culusitensis Dianensis
Dionysianensis Druensis Drusilianensis Drusitensis Dusensis Dydritensis
Edistianensis Eguilguilitensis Eguizetensis Eptiminensis Ermianensis Euerensis
Felicianiatensis Feraditensis Ficensis Fissanensis Flumen-Piscensis Furvitensis
Gaguaritensis Garbensis Gartanensis Gazabianensis Gegitensis Gemellensis
Germaniensis Ginesittensis Girbitensis Gisipensis Gittensis Giuiritensis
Gobbensis Gratianopolitanus Guirensis Guzabentensis Gypsuriensis Habensis
Hermianensis Hierpinianensis Hiltensis Hippensis Hipponiensis Hirenensis
Icositensis Iadessensis Idicrensis Idicrisensis Idurensis Imuntensis Infitensis
Inucensis Iubaltianensis Iucundianensis Iziarianensis Labdensis Lacuducensis
Lamasbensis Lamasuensis Lambiensis Lambiritensis Lamiggigensis Lampuensis
Lamsortensis Lamzellensis Larensis Laritensis Legensis Lelalitensis Leptitensis
Lettimiensis Libertinensis Lubertimensis Lucimagnensis Macanianensis
Macomadiensis Macomarensis Macrensis Macrianensis Mactaritensis Madaurensis
Margarmelitensis Magnensis Magomaziensis Malianensis Mamillensis Manazenensis
Mandasunutensis Marazenensis Marcellianensis Masculitensis Masdianensis
Mataritanensis Mazacensis Mazulitanensis Medefessitensis Medianensis
Melzitensis Memblositensis Membressitensis Merferaritensis Mesarfeltensis
Metenensis Metensis Midicensis Midiliensis Migirpensis Milensis Mileuitanus
Moptensis Mullitensis Munavilitensis Mustitensis Mutigennensis Muznensis
Muzucensis Naraggaritensis Narensis Nasaitensis Nationensis Neapolitensis
Nebbitensis Neglapolitanus Nigizubitensis Nomapetrensis Nonasinuensis
Nouasumensis Novensis Numidiensis Nurconensis Obbensis Oensis Olivensis
Omzensis Oriensis Pauzerensis Perdicensis Pisitensis Presidiensis
Pudentianensis Puppitensis Putiensis Putisiensis Refalensis Regensis
Ressianensis Rotariensis Rusipitensis Rusticianensis Rusubiccariensis
Rusuccadensis Rusuccuritanus Rusucensis Sapensis Satafensis Satatensis
Scillitensis Segiomitensis Seleuciamensis Serrensis Serteitensis Siccesitensis
Sicilibbensis Sifaitensis Signitensis Sililitensis Sillitensis Simidiccensis
Simittensis Simmaritensis Simungitensis Sinitensis Sinnipsensis Sitensis
Sitifensis Sitipensis Solencianensis Suboabburitensis Subratensis Sucardensis
Sufasaritensis Sufetelensis Sufetensis Sululittensis Tabaicariensis Tabanensis
Tabazagensis Taborensis Tabracensis Tabudensis Tabudesensis Tacapitensis
Tacaratestensis Tacaratensis Tagannitensis Tagaratensis Tagareyensis Tagorensis
Talensis Tamagristensis Tamallensis Tambalensis Tamiggigensis Tanudaiensis
Tanussensis Tamogadensis Tasfaltensis Tebestinus Tegulatensis Telensis
Teleptensis Temonianensis Tenitensis Tesaniamensis Teodalensis Tibaritensis
Tibilitensis Tibizabulensis Ticcnsis Tigillanensis Tigillabensis Tigisitensis
Tigimmensis Tignalensis Tignensis Tignicensis Tigualensis Tunicitensis
Tinistensis Teseditensis Tisilitensis Tiuicitensis Traprurensis Tricensis
Trigisitensis Trisipensis Trofimianensis Truvascaninensis Tubiensis Tubiniensis
Tubulbacensis Tuburbitanus Tuburbitaronensis Tubursicensis Tubusubtensis
Tuccensis Tuggensis Tullitensis Tumidensis Tuneyensis Tunsudensis Tunugabensis
Turensis Turreblansiensis Turre^amallume^sis Turrisalbae Turubitensis
Turudensis Turuzitensis Tusdritensis Tusuritensis Tuzummensis Tzellensis
Vagalitensis Vagealensis Vagensis Vaiensis Valletensis Vamaccorensis
Vanarionensis Vatarbensis Vazaritanensis Vcimaius Vculensis Vensanensis
Verronensis Vesceritensis Vicensis Villagerensis Viltensis Vindensis Virensis
Visitensis Viuensis Vndesitensis Volitensis Vosetensis Vrugitensis Vsilensis
Vticensis Vtimarensis Vtinensis Vtinicensis Vtinunensis Vtunnensis Vzalensis
Vzittarensis Vuaggiensis Vuazensis Zamensis Zaraitensis Zaritorensis
Zattarensis Zellensis Zenitensis Zertensis Zicensis Zipparitanus
Zugabbaritensis Zummensis.

The Church of Constantinople fetches her Original from St Andrew the
Apostle, as Nicephorus testifies, who has had a succession to Cyrill, the now
Patriarch. St Andrew ordained Stachis, Bishop of Bizantium, now called
Constantinople.
The Bishops and Patriarchs of Constantinople. Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 6. page 540.
St Andrew. Stachis Onesimus Polycarpus Plutarchus Sedecion Diogenes Elutherius
Felix Polycarpus Athenodorus Euzoius Laurentius Alippius Pertinax Olympianus
Marcus Cyrillianus Constantius Ciriacus Castinus Titus Domitius Probus
Metrophanes Alexander, Paulus Euscbius Macedonius Eudoxius Demophilus Euagrius
Gregorius Nazianzen. Nectarius Johannes Chrysostom. Arsacius Atticus Sisinnius
Nestorius Maximianus Proclus Flabianus Anatolius Genadius Acasius Phrabitas
Euphenius Macedonius Timotheus Johannes Cappadox Epiphanias Anthinius Menas
Eutichius Johannes Eutichius Johannes Diaconus Cyriacus Thomas Sergius Pyrhus
Paulus Petrus Thomas Johannes Constantinus Theodorus Georgius Paulus Calinicus
Cyrus Johannes Germanus Anastasius Constantinus Nicetas Paulus Tarasius
Nicephorus Theodorus Antonius Johannes St Methodius St Ignatius Photius
Stephanus St Anthonius Nicholaus Euthimius Nicolaus Stephanns Polyenostus
Basilius Anthonius Nicolaus Sisimius Sergius Constantinus Johannes Cosmius
Eustratius Nicolaus Leo Michael Cosmus Theodosius Basilius Nicetas Leontius
Dositheus Georgius Xiphilinus Johannes Michael Theodorus Maximus Manuel
Germanus Methodius Manuel Nicephorus Arcenius Germanus Josephus Johannes
Josephus Georgius Athanasius Johannes Athanasius Niphon Johannes Gerasinus
Isaias Johannes Calistus Philetus Macarius Nilus Antonius Calistus Euthymius
Josephus Gregorius Genadrus Sophronius Simeon Maximus Niphon Pachomus
Theoliptus Ieremias Dionisius Joseph Metrophanes Ieremias, to whom the
Ministers of Germany sent their Confessions, 1576. Macarius Mattheus Gabriel
Theophanes Meletius Mattheus Neophitus Mattheus Raphael Neophitus Cyrillus
Tymotheus Cyrillus

The pretended Succession of the Bishops of Rome.
FOR the Succession of the latter Bishops of Rome, of which Boniface the third,
was the first; they succeeded the former Bishops, many of them only in name,
and place; but not in Title, Jurisdiction, holiness of life, nor faith, as is
hereafter showed and so, not worthy to be named, or ranked amongst them.

1. Generally for the Title, the former Bishops of Rome, were most of them, men
of great humility, their glory was to be members of the holy Catholic
Church, of which Christ Jesus was the alone head: But these latter Bishops,
have presumed to take upon them, the Title due only to Christ, to wit, to be
head of the univerfall Church of God, and Husbands of Christ's Spouse, the
Church.

2. For their Jurisdiction, The former Bishops were subject to higher powers;
even to cruel Nero, and other persecuting Emperors 25 of them were Martyrs;
but these latter by degrees have got Jurisdiction, not only Spiritual but
also Temporal, above Princes, and the Emperors themselves.

3. For life, the former of them were most of them holy men; these latter, most
of them most wicked ad vicious.

4. For doctrine, for the former (their Faith was heard of in all the world:
these latter are fallen from the truth, in many maine points, as afterward
follows.

First, Title. Pelag. distinct. 99
for Title, Pope Pelagius the second, in his days perceiving that Maurice the
Emperor went about to make and establish an universal Bishop, very much
opposed it, and decreed, that no Bishop, no, not the Bishop of Rome himself,
ought to be called the universal Bishop. And Pope Gregory his Successor
writes, that none of his Predecessors, ever consented, to use so profane a
name, as before.

Secondly, Jurisdiction.
for Jurisdiction the Pope claims both Spiritual, and Temporal, not only
over all Bishops, and the Church of God, but above all Kings and Emperors,
causing some of them to lie under his feet, some to hold his stirrup, Kings to
lead his horse by the bridle, some to kiss his feet, placing and displacing
Emperors, Kings, Duks, whom, and when he li^^, taking upon him: to translate
the Empire at his pleasure first from Greece to France, from France to
Germany, preferring and deposing, whom he pleased.

3. For the life and conversation of some of them, Baronius reports, Baron.
Annal. 985.
that Boniface the seventh, was a very villain, a Church robber, a Savage
thief, the cruel murderer of two Popes; and invader of Peter's chair; Sigon.
reg. Ital. lib 7.963.
John the thirteenth, Was accused in a Synod for Murder, Adulteries, Incests,
Periuries, and vices of all sorts, etc. B^tron. Ann: anno. 912.
What was the face of the Roman Church (says Baronius, and how most filthily
did it appear, when the most impudent and base Queanes bare all the sway at
Rome, changed Sees, and gave Bishoprics at their pleasure, and (which is most
abominable, and not to be named) placed their Paramours into St. peter's Chair.

Their own Genebrard, confesses that there were fifty of those Popes
irregular, disordred, Quod per anno^ 150. pontifices circiter. 50. a Ieannc
scilicet. 8. ad leonem 9 a virtute maiorum prosus defecarint. Genebrard. Chron
lib. 4. page 553. John 5.39. Psalm. 1.
and Apostaticall.

Fourthly, for their Doctrine, some of it is contrary to the Word of God,
pernicious to men's consciences, and injurious to Christ himself, viz.

1. Whereas Christ has commanded us to read the holy Scriptures; and the Holy
Ghost blesses them that delight therein.

The now Church of Rome, forbidd th the reading thereof to the Laity in the
vulgar tongue, without special license

2. Whereas Christ has taught us to pray to God; (and St. Paul) to call on
him, in whom we believe. Romans 10.14.


They invocate Saints, in whom they do not believe, and call on Some, whom they
are ignorant of, whether they be in Heaven, or Hell

3. Matthew. 26.26.
Whereas Christ has commanded us to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
in both kinds, in his holy Institution (as it is set down in the holy
Scripture.)

They now sacrilegiously forbid the people under a Curse, the Symboll of
Christ's precious Blood.

4. Whereas holy Scripture testify, that marriage is honorable unto all men,
Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 10.9.
and che bed undefiled and Saint Paul teaches, it is better to marry, then
to burn.

They now Teach Doctrines of Devils, Gravius peccare sacerdotem si uxorem
ducat, quam si d^^ni concubinam foveat. Coster in enchrid. cap. 17. ^rop. 9. 1
Cor. 14.
forbidding Marriage; and that it is better for a Priest to have a concubine
then to marry.

5. Whereas Saint Paul teaches us to pray in spirit and understanding.

They teach men to pray in an unknown Tongue without understanding.

6. Whereas the worship of Images is flatly forbidden by God in his moral Law,
under Gods curse; Confounded be all they that serve graven Jmages.

They now command due worship, and veneration to be given to Images, under the
Popes curse.

7 Whereas God curses all them that add or diminish to his holy word. Rev.
22.18.19.


They have made many new Articles of Faith, contrary to Gods holy word; and
curse them, that observe them not.

8. Whereas holy Scripture teaches us to rely only on the Merits of Christ,
Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are all they that trust in him. Bell. de iustif. 5^ l. cap.
7.
which Bellarmine confesses to be the safest way;

They join their own Merits with Christ's Merits.

9 Whereas we are to build our Faith on the Scriptures, which cannot err;
Regula credendi certissima and tutissima. Bell. de verbo Dei. lib: 1. cap. 1.


They on the Pope and his Church, which do err.

10 And whereas St. Paul tells the Roman Church, that they are not the Root,
but a branch grafted into the Tree; and bidds them take heed of Pride:

Yet the now Church of Rome will not acknowledge herfelfe to be only a branch
or member of Christ's Church; but will be the Root or Head, of the holy
Catholic Church, and teach that no man can be saved unless he be a Member of
that Chuch. Thus you see how the latter Popes of Rome differ from the former
Bishops in Title, in Jurisdiction, in Holiness of Life and Doctrine: so not
worthy to be numbered amongst them, or to be accounted their Successors.

To the Succession of Bishops, I have added the Succession of the Emperors of
Constantinople, who have many of them, opposed the Popes greatness, and
Doctrines, and also the Emperors of Ethiopia, who have never been subject to
the Pope as far as I can read, viz.
The Emperors of Constantinople, before the division. Constantinus Constans
Constantius Iulianus Apostata Iovintanus Valentinianus Gratianus Theodosius
Arcadius and Honorius Theoddosius 2. Martianus Leo Zeno Anastatius Dicorus
Justinius Iustinianus Fl. val. Justinius Tib. Constantinus Mauritius Cappa dox.
Phocas Heraclius Constantinus Constans Constantinus Pogo natu^ Iustinianus
Leontius Absimarus Philippus Bardanes Artemius seu Anastasius Theoaosius Leo 3
Isauricus Constantinus Co. Leo 4 pronymus Irene.

Emperors since the Division. Nicephorus Michael Curopalates Leo A^minus
Michael Balbus Theophilus Michael Basilius Macedo Leo Philosophus Alexander
Constantinus Romanus Nicephorus Phocas Joan Cimifces Basilius Porphyrogenitus
Constantinus Romanus Argyrus Michael Paphlago Michael Calaphates Zoe
Constantinus Mononachus Theodora Michael Stratioticus Isacius Comnenus
Constantius Ducas Romanus Diogenes Mich. Parapinacius Niceph. Boteniates
Alexius Comnenus Caloioanes Manuel comnenus-Tryphon Andronicus Comnenus Isacius
Angelus Alexius Angelus Alexius Junior Baldninus Comes Flandriae Henricus
Petrus Altisiodorensis Robe tus Balduinus Michael Palaeologus Andronicus
Palaolog us Andronicus Junior Ioannes Palaeologus and Ioannes Cata. cuzenus
Eminuel Palaeologus Ioannes Palaeologus Constantinus Palaeologus

Emperors of Aethiopia. Baazena Lacasa seu Candace cujus Eunuchus a Philippo
fuit bapti-Zatus Baazena Mesve Sectua Agdala Agba Mali Able D^dima Autetes Alda
Zeahim de Rama Gafeles Beseseoch Azgua Agua Hherch Besane Guachena Hadas
Saghell Affe Asgehba Asgueba Samra Aiba Stendhem Zacham San Igaam Alamida
Achinna Abraham and Azba fratres deinde solus Abraham Asfa Asba Albamedon Abra
Sahell Ghebez Sekul Azba Abra^ and Adakana zaham Amida Sahan AZba Zahan Gabed
Jacob and Dabid frat. Arma Zittahana Jacob Constantinus Beth Esrael Gabra
Mafchall Nalek Bazen Bensaghed Bahar Saghed Gherma Aapher Saliuba Callula Sion
Sargue Zarui Bagaharna^ Gianscheda Zeonechia Malgeres Sepharad Agdai Abraham
Asbaha Asfa Afra Amsi Ahan Arcada Aladana Alameda Tabena Caleb Gabra Maschel
Constantinus Beza Agher Asfa Arma Gianasfa Gianascheda Fressennai Adazahaz
Aizar Delnahadan Madai and Sahada regina Ambazandin Gemoasfare Girgas Degva
Michael Bedegaz Arma Cullandin Sbinahanni Tredda Gabez regina Gabez filius
Tredda Gabez Nep. Tredda St. Zalibala St. Zimra Naakutolah Icum Nuam Lach Iacba
Hazcon Baazarda Ezbrahad Cadem Saghed Vdim Raah Amdezeon Sepharab Vdma Asfan
David Theodorus Isaacke Andreas Hezbinaam Zarach Bethemariam Schender Amdezcon
Nabud Helena Lebnadenghel danid cum matre Helena Asnasgahet Caudius Adamastus

By what means the Papal Monarchy has been raised, and how it has been,
and is, upheld.
CHAP. VI.
THere was a Time when the Bishops of Rome were holy men, Of the primitive
estate of the Bishops of Rome.
many of them suffering Martyrdom: And then they acknowledged our Lord Jesus
Christ to be the only Head of his Church.

Pope Pius the second testifies, that before the Nicen Council, Aeneas
Silvius in epistola 301. Ante Nicenum concilium sibi quisque vivebat and ad
Romanam ecclesiam parvus habebatur Re spectus.
the Bishops of Rome had small or no respect: That Council divided the
Regiment of the Church, into four Patriarchall Sees; Rome, Alexandria,
Antioch, and Jerusalem.

They had all equal Authority given them in their own Provinces, as
appears by eight Counsels, cited at large by Doctor Willet.

Afterward, Synopsis page 148.
there was a certain Primacie of Order, Can. 28. quia urbs illa imperaret
granted to the Patriarch of Rome; as, To have the first place, to sit first;
To give sentence first, for that Rome was then the Imperial City: This reason
is yielded in the Calcedon Council.

2. For the Popes Title, about the year 604. Boniface the third obtained with
much contention of Phocas, 2. Popes Title. Egit is ab initie administrationis,
cum Phoca, ut Romana Ecclesia esset omnium aliarum capnt, nec sine multa
contentione Apostolicae sedi datum, Sabell. Ennead 8. lib. 6 page 396. For this
read Mouns. Plesses, his History of the Papacy who proves it by many
Testimonies.
who murdered his Master Maurice the Emperor, the title of Universal Bishop,
and that the Church of Rome should be head of all Churches.

This Phocas murdered also the Empress with her children, and being
displeased with Cyriacus Patriarch of Constantinople (who would not allow of
his cruel Murders) gave the title which he claimed, to Boniface Bishop of
Rome.

This murderer tyrannizing over the Nobility: some of them with Photinus
(whose wife he had ravished) took him and cut off his head, feet, and
privities, giving his body to the Soldiers, who burnt it.

Platina reports, that since this time the Popes have in all their Mandats used
these words; In^it^ Bonifacij. 3.
Volumus and Iubemus, We will and command.

Also Pope Adrian the second, flattering another Traitor, to wit, Basilius, who
had murdered Michael the Emperor, Baronius.
the said Basilius deposed Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople, who had
debarred him from the Communion, for his murders, and advanced the Bishop of
Rome, suffering none to enter the Council then called, that did not subscribe
to the Popes Supremacy: This Basilius also came to an untimely death, being
killed by a Stagge: and thus was the Supremacy founded.

Donnus the first, subjected the Church of Ravenna to the Papacy, Sabell.
Ennead. 8. lib. 7. page 415.
by the help of Theodore the Archbishop. After whose death Felix the
Archbishop his Successor, going about to shake off the Roman yoke, had his eyes
put out with a hot iron, and was banished into Pontus.

Stephen the ninth, subdued the Church of Millan to the Papacy, which had bin
free from the Apostles time.

3. For the Popes Temporalties, 3. Popes Temporalties. Stephanus 9. Ecclesiam
Mediolanensem quae a temporibus Apostoloru^ libera fuit, sub obedientiam Romani
Pontificis redegit. Zeged specul. Pontif. page 15. Sigon: de reg. Ital. lib. 3.
ne ^i tributu^ darent, aut alia ratione obedirent, indixit.
Gregory the third, did excommunicate his Lord, and Emperor Leo the third: who
was desirous to abolish the Worship of Images, (then creeping into the Church)
and caused them to be defaced.

Also the said Pope forbad the Italians to pay the said Leo tribute, or to obey
him: Upon this Sentence and inhibition of Popes, part of Italy rebelled
against their Emperor, and laid violent hands upon his Deputies and
Leivetenants, of whom they slew two, and put out the eyes of a Third: by reason
of which uprore and tumults ensuing, part of the country that rebelled was
conquered by the King of Lombardy and Rome: and the dominions of the Roman
Dukedom, fell unto the Pope. So the Pope, who till that time had been a
Bishop only, became a Prince, Zacharias Papa ex authoritate sancti Petri
Apostoli mandat populo Francoru^ ut Pipinus qui potestateregia utebatur, etiam
nominis dignitate frueretur. Ita Hildericusultimus Merovingoru^ qui Francis
imperab^t depositus est, and in monasterio missus est. Marian. Scot. historiae.
lib. 3.4. How the Pope got Superiority above the Emperors.
and that also by Treason.

Pope Zachary the first, absolved Pipin, and the French, from their oaths to
Chilperich King of France; who being put into a Monastery, Pipin was made
King in his stead: for reward hereof, the Exarchat of Ravenna, and other lands
are given to the Papacy; which lands are now called St Peter's patrimony: and
by this means also the Popes Temporalities are increased.

Nicholas the second, gives Apulia, Calabria, and Sicilia to the Normans,
conditionally, that when they should conquer those Regions, and take them from
the Greeks, they should hold them of the Papacy, and pay an Annual tribute
for them. Gregor. 7. primus imperium pontificum condidit, quod successores
invito mundo, invitis Imperatoribus adeo duxere, ut inferos, superos in ser
vitutemredegerint, etc. Avent. Lib. 5.


Gregory the seventh, before called Hildebrand, founded the Pontifical
Empire, which his Successors have enjoyed to this day in despite of the World,
and of the Emperors.

For although since the time of Charles the great, the Popes have often opposed
the Emperors: Yet it was not the will of Almighty God to suffer them totally
to cast off the yoke of obedience, by holy Writ invested upon Princes, until
the time of this Gregory: who contrary to the custom of his predecessors,
usurped the Papacy without any consent of the Emperor at all. And he also
decreed that he had not only power in Heaven to bind, Formula Decreti extat.
C. si quis deincep.
and to loose, but also that he had plenitude of Jurisdiction in Earth, to
take away, and to give Empires and Kingdoms, and Principalities, etc. Henry
the fourth being then Emperor, although infinitely perplexed with the War of
Saxony; yet to suppress this novell pertinacy of this Pope, calls a
Council at Worms, in which a Decree was made: That sithence Hildebrand, a
fugitive Monk, first of all other, incroached upon the Papacy, without the
good liking and privitie of the Emperor, constituted of God, to be his
Sovereign lord, and that contrary to the custom of his predecessors, contrary
to Law, and contrary to his oath of Jnstalment, etc. ipso facto he was deposed:
Platina in vita Grego. 7.
Hildebrand receiving this sentence, excommunicateth the Emperor: Him he
proscribeth, depriveth of all Kingly authority, despoileth of his Kingdoms,
and absolveth his Subjects from their Oaths of obedience: Some of the Princes
of Germany taking notice of this Curse, and threatening a Revolt, This great
Emperor being a man neither unlearned, Vspergen. Cronicon. page 170.
nor a coward (for he had fought above 60. battles) was compelled to wait
barefooted, clad in canvas, with his Empress and his son, three days at the
Popes gate for Absolution: to whom also, in token of obedience, he resigned
his Imperial Ornaments. The Pope fearing that the Emperors great stomach
would not digest this indignity, for all his absolution given, goes about to
depose him; and sends an Imperial crown to Rodulph Duke of Swevia the
Emperors brother in law: who although he was his Leigeman, and had received
many benefits from him, yet seduced by the Pope, he takes upon him the title
of Emperor, and invadeth the lands of his Sovereign: The Pope to help,
renews his excommunications, Vspergensis Chron. folio 172. Fertur in ext^^nis
positus and abscissam dexteram intuitus ad Episcopesqui forte aderant graviter
suspirans dixisse Ecce haec est manus qua Domino meo Henrico fidem sacramento
firmavi, etc. Vspergensis Chron. page 171. impres. Argentorat. 1609. Idem. page
170.
and sends forth his Mandates, full stuffed with fury. Henry, after many
bickerings, in a battle overthrows Rodulph, who being deadly wounded, and
having lost his right hand, says to his Bishops who were present, looking upon
his hand, My lords, this is the hand, with which I plighted my faith to my lord
Henry, at your entreaties, thus and thus many times, yet has unfortunately
fought against him. Return ye, and make good your first Oath to him: I am to
depart to my fathers. Rodolph being dead, Henry calls a Counsel at Brixia:
where the Acts of Hildebrand being examined, he had judgment to be deposed,
and expelled; For unadvisedly preaching of Sacriledges and Factions, defending
perjuries, and scandals, a believer of dreams and divinations: a notorious
Negromancer, a Man possessed with an unclean spirit, an Apostate from the true
faith, etc. This being done, the Pope stirs up the Saxons to create Harman
Prince of Luxenburg Emperor, who was slain by a woman with a stone cast from a
wall: Then he seduceth Ecbert Marquis of Saxony to take upon him the Empire,
who was slain in a Mill by the Emperors Guard, hard by Brunswicke. All these
Plots failing, the Emperor Henry calls an Ecclesiastical Diet, wherein
Heldebrand is again condemned and deposed; and Gilbert Archbishop of Ravenna
is chosen Pope, and called Clement the third: Hildebrand dyed in exile; after
whose death Vrbane intruded upon the Papacy, aided with the Duchess Matildas
Money, and the Armies of the Normans, who confirms Hildebrands Decrees; and
also draws into Parricide the Emperor Henry's son, Conrade, who was by his
Father made Vizeroie of Jtalie: and the Pope bestowing Matilda, the rich
Princess upon him, they expulse Clement. But Urban the Pope, and Conrade being
quickly dispatched, Paschal, by the aforesaid Faction, was made Pope: who
reviveth Hildebrands curse against Henry; and procures the Emperors other
son Henry, to take Arms against his Father, and to take upon him his
Imperial Estate: Henry the Father, whom they could not quell by force, was
taken by treason, against public oath of safe conduct, as he was traveling
to Ments to a Diet, and so was degraded by his Son, and by him committed to
Prison, where he finished his troublesome days in most miserable manner. Thus
by the means before named, the Papacy has obtained such greatness, that
whereas before, the Popes were to have the Allowance and Confirmation of the
Emperors: since Gregory the sevenths time, the Emperors crave the Popes
allowance, and confirmation.

For means to get money to support Papacy, Means to get Money. Agrip^ de
vanit. scientiarum. eap. 61. primus in dulgentiarum nundinas, primus in
purgatorium extendit indulgentias. idems.
they have invented many; as,

Pope Boniface the eighth, first instituted the sale, or Market of Pardons; he
first made pardons extend into Purgatory: Of their blasphemous Bulls, and
Indulgences read a book called Fiscus Papalis.

The sums of money which the Pope receives for first fruits, Palls,
Jndulgences, Bulls, Confessionalls, Jndults, Rescrips, Testaments,
Dispensation, tot quots, cannot be counted.

The Archbishop of Ments, paid for his Pall to the Popes, 26000. Florence.

The Curtezans of Rome pay yearly about 40000. ducats.

The Popes Legates demanded, or received for Chrisme, in one City before named,
Ireuaeus Rhodoginus.
80 pound weight of Gold.

What may he have in all other places, also, for Palls, Curtesans and Chrisme?

The Archbishop of Maidenburg, writes, that in the time of Pope Martin the
fifth; There was brought out of France, to Rome, nine times 1000. Crowns: What
then might the Pope have out of Germany, Spain, England, and other Countries?

You may see a relation of the Popes receipts out of England, page 640.
in Bishop Jewels defense.

The Popes Treasure issuing out of Purgatory only, is inexhaustible: a Mint
lately found out, and possessed by the Pope alone, for no Patriarch in the
world, has any share in it, Boter in Latin, printed at Coloine. Pape non
deerunt pecuniae, quans diu ipsi manus eruns and calamus.
or ever had. For the Popes means it is reported; That Sixtus the fourth was
wont to say, that the Pope could never want money, solong as his hand could
hold a pen.

For the Popes State and Magnificence, His State and Magnificence.
it is set down in the books called Caeremoniae Ecclesiae Romanae, Sacrarum
Caeemoniarum. lib. prim. page 17.
in words to this effect: Whenever the Popes holiness is persuaded to ride
on horseback, then must the Emperor, or King, which is present, hold his
stirrup, and after a while, lead the horse by the bridle in his hand. And
always when the Pope will be carried in a Chair; then is the Emperor or King,
whosoever it be, bound of duty; to how down his neck, and to take up the
Chair upon his shoulders. And likewise, when the Pope goes to Dinner, the
duty of the Emperor, or King, is to serve him with water, wherewith to wash his
holy hands: And he must besure to attend at the Table, until the first course
beserved; And all men living are bound of Duty, as soon as they come within
his presence, to fall three times down upon their knees, and then to kiss his
feet; And wheresoever he passes by, there must they all fall down upon their
knees, and worship him, etc. as it is set forth in the Book aforesaid.

As you have seen the Popes Magnificence, so his munificence, For his
Munificence and gifts. Camden in the life of Queen Elizab. 141. Idem ibidem.
and largesses issuing out of his Treasury, are not very great, as Pope Clement
the 8. gave to Tyrone, for all his good services in Ireland, a plume of Phoenix
feathers; And Urban the third, gave Earl John, son to Henry the second King
of England, a Coronet of Peacockes feathers; Leo the tenth, gave a Rose to
Frederick Duke of Saxony; and Julius the second, a sword to King Henry the
seventh: And some Princes they reward with Titles, or give them their Feet to
kiss for a Favor. And oftentimes he pays his men of War, with his
treasure issuing out of Purgatory, as Clement the sixth gave to his crossed
Soldiers by his Bull, power, every one of them, to deliver three or four
Souls out of Purgatory, even whom they would. And by reason of this his
wealth, and greatness before named, the Pope takes upon him superlative
Authority, and he is very unlike our Lord and Savior, whose Vicar he
pretends to be: for whereas Christ paid Tribute to Caesar, he makes Caesar
pay him Tribute: And whereas Christ washed his Disciples feet, the Pope makes
the Emperor his Lord, kiss his Feet.

To confirm the forenamed relation of the Popes rising, read Guiccardines
history, His Relation. Lib. 4. prope finem.
who in the latter end of his fourth Book, not only denies the feined
Donation of Constantine, but affirms, that diverse learned men reported, that
Silvester, and he, lived in diverse Ages; Then he shows how obscure, and base
they were, during the time that the barbarous nations made havocke of Italy.
Secondly, that in the Institution of the Exarchate, the Popes had nothing to
do with the Temporal Sword, but lived as subject to the Emperors; Thirdly,
that they were not very much obeyed in matters Spiritual, by reason of the
corruption of their manners. Fourthly, that after the overthrow of the
Exarchate, the Emperors now neglecting Italy, the Romans began to be governed
by the advice, and power of the Popes. Fifthly, That Pipin of France, and his
son Charles, having overthrown the Kingdom of the Lombards, gave unto the
Popes, The Exarchate, Vrbin, Ancona, Spoleto, and many other Towns and
Territories about Rome. Sixthly, That the Popes in all their Bulls or Charters,
expressed the date of them in these formal words; Such a one our lord the
Emperor reigning. Seventhly, That long after the translation of the Empire from
France to Germany, the Popes began to make open protestation; that the
Pontifical Dignity was rather to give Laws to Emperors, then to receive any
from them. Eighthly, That being thus raised to an Earthly power, they forgot
the Salvation of Souls, Sanctity of Life, and the Commandments of God,
Propagation of Religion, and Charity toward men. And to raise Arms, to make
War against Christians, to invent new devices for the getting of Money, to
profane Sacred things for their own ends, and to enrich themselves, their
Children, and kindred, was their only study; and this is the substance of
Guiccardine in that place; an Author above all Exception.

Having thus a little glanced at the means by which the present demeasnes of
the Church of Rome, were first gotten, and increased: The policies by which the
Popes keep that which they have.
Let us consider by what Policies, the Monarchy has been held up in respect,
and magnificence.

The donation of several Kingdoms to those that have no right, or Title to
them, but from the Pope, and in force of his Donation, cannot but oblige them
to him.

Their allowance of Marriages prohibited by God and Nature; the issue of which
cannot but uphold the Popes infinite Authority, without whom, their Birth is
unnatural, and their persons not capable of their Estates.

Their dispensing with Oaths of Princes, which both preserve their Credits, in
not being perjured, as they think (since allowed by the Church) and also get
somewhat, for which they cannot be unthankefull to the Papacy.

Their State has the firmest foundation of any, as being laid in the
Conscience of men, by persuading them of their infallible Power, and their
Ecclesiastical, and temporal Jurisdiction, which they have over Heaven, Hell,
Earth, and Purgatory.

The Choosing of younger Sons of potent Families into their Cardinall-ships,
by which means, the whole Lineage are ready to support him, as the chief
staff of their Brothers, or Cozens preferment.

The innumerable Preferments of men of all sorts and humors, as having
well-nigh in their disposing all the Benefices and Bishoprics of Italy, half
in Spain, diverse in France, and Germany, which keep the Clergy in an
infallible bond of Allegiance, especially enjoying diverse privileges, which
they of the temporality are not capable of.

The multitude of Friars, their spiritual Knights or Soldiers, whose hopes
depend upon his safety, are known to be more then a Million whereof half at
the least, would grow fit to be employed in any Warlike service, and all them
are maintained at other men's costs, themselves not disbursing a penny.

The readiness of their Ministers to kill such as resist them, cannot but
deter Princes from injuring them, and constrain them to keep their
Friendships, especially since by a Writ of excommunication, they can arm the
Subjects against the Sovereign, and without levying of a Soldier, either
utterly to destroy him, or bring him to good Conformity.

The Severitie or Tyranny of the Inquisition crusheth not only the beginnings,
but the smallest suppositions, in being contrarily affected.

To which I add, that the Church of Rome having been conscious of their
errors, and Corruptions, both in Faith, and manners; have sundry times
pretended Reformation; yet their great Pride, and infinite Profit, arising from
Purgatory, Pardons, and such like, has hindered all such Reformations:
Therefore to maintain their greatness, errors, and new Articles of Faith;

1. They have corrupted many of the ancient Fathers, and reprinting them,
Doctor James, in his treatise of the Corruption of Scriptures, Councels, and
Fathers. etc.
make them speak as they would have them: as Doctor James has set down at
large.

2. They have written many Books in the Names of the ancient Writers, and
forged many Decrees, Canons, and Counsels, to bear false witness to them. As
for example; Whereas in the beginning of this Chapter, you hear of Pope Pius
the 7. his report, that the Church of Rome was but of little esteem before the
Nicen Council: The answer of the now Archbishop of Arimagh to a Challenge made
by a Jesuit: page 12.
You shall have (as the Primate of Armagh relates,) a Crafty Merchant
(Jsidorus Mercator, I trow they call him) that will help the matter, by
counterfeiting Decretal Epistles, in the name of the primitive Bishops of Rome,
and in bringing in Thirty of them in a row, as so many Knights of the Post, to
bear witness of that great Authority which the Church of Rome enjoyed before
the Nicene Fathers were assembled; If the Nicene Fathers have not amplisied the
bounds of her Jurisdiction, in so large a manner as she desired, she has had
her well-willers that have supplied the Counsels negligence in that behalf;
and made Canons for the purpose in the Name of the good Fathers, that never
dreamed of such a business. As if the power of Judgeing all others will not
content the Pope, unless he himself may be exempted from being judged by
any other.

Another Council, as ancient at least as that of Nice, shall be suborned,
wherein it shall be concluded, Council. Romans Sub Syluest. cap. 20. Nemo enim
judicabit primam s^dem. Council. Sinuessan. circa finem.
by the consent of 284. Jmaginarie Bishops, that no man may Judge the first
Seat: And for failing, in an elder Council then that, consisting of 300.
Buckram Bishops of the self same making, the like Note shall be sung, Quoniam
prima seeds non judicabitur a quoquam, The first Seat must not be judged by
any man. Lastly, if the Pope do not think that the fullness of Spiritual
power is sufficient for his Greatness, unless he may be also Lord Paramount
in temporalibus, he has his followers ready at hand, to frame a fair
Donation, in the name of Constantine the Emperor, whereby his Holiness shall
be estated, not only in the City of Rome, but also in the Seigniorie of the
whole West: It would require a volume to rehearse the Names of those several
Tractates which have been basely bred in the former days of Darkness, and
fathered upon the ancient Fathers of the Church, who if they were now alive,
would be deposed, that they were never privy to their begetting.

3. As they have expurged ancient Writings; so also the holy Commandments of
God. And lest the Lay people should smell their Idolatry, they leave out the
second Commandment of the Ten, out of (...) Psalters and Catechismes: and they
are published by the Church of Rome in this manner following.

1. I am thy Lord God, thou shall have no other Gods but me. 2. Thou shall not
take the name of God in vain. 3. Remember to sanctify the holy days. 4.
Honor thy Father and Mother. 5. Thou shall not kill. 6. Thou shall not commit
adultery. 7. Thou shall not steal. 8. Thou shall not bear false witness. 9.
Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. 10. Thou shall not desire thy
neighbors goods.
4. And that which is worst of all, they forbid the Reading of the holy
Scriptures, Haeresin esse si quis dicit necessarium esse ut scripturae in
vulgares linguas convertantur: Sander. visib. monar. lib. 7. hares. 191. Credo
institutum hoc a Diabelo esse inventum. Peresius de Trad. par. 1. Assert. 3.
page 47. Characteres mortui, Lindan. Lib. 2. Stromat. cap. 3.6.
traducing them, and blaspheming them, viz. that it is (...) that it is the
Devils in vention to permit the Laity to read them: that they are dead
Characters, and not to be permitted. Which if they should be suffered to be
read, they would casily discover their new Articles of Faith, to be
blasphemous, their Image Worship to be Idolatry, and their not erring Bishop,
to be a mere Imposture, and Deceiver.

5. And also to breed an Antipathie, and hatred between the Papists, and
Protestants, they are taught to believe, that the Protestants are Blasphemers
of God, and all Saints; That in England, Churches are made Stables, and that
the people are grown barbarous. To these they have wilfully feyned many
scandalous lies of us, and the Reformers; set down by learned Doctor Hall, In
his scrious disswasive from Popery, page 37.
now Lord Bishop of Exeter, as of Wickliffs Blasphemies, of Luthers advice from
the Devil, of Tindalls community, of Calvin's blasphemous death, of Bucers
breaking his neck, of Beza's Revolt, of the blasting of Hugonites, of Englands
want of Churches and Christendom; of our putting English Catholics into
bears skins, and casting them to dogs to be baited; of the Lutherans
nightrevelling, of Scories drunken or dination of our Bishops in a Tavern, of
the casting of the remain of our Sacraments to Dogs, of Mounsier Plessis
overthrow, and the like.

And lately they have published two Books, commonly sold in Jtalie, and in
France: one of them of the late Right Reverend Father in God, Doctor King, late
lord Bishop of London, his Apostacy: the other, containing a relation of Gods
Judgment shown upon a sort of Protestant heretics, by the fall of a house in
Blackfriars London; in which they were assembled to hear a Geneva Lecture,
Octo. 26. Anno. Dom 1623. By which the simple people were made to believe, that
Judgment to be upon the Protestants, which God sent upon the Papists: and as
they scandal us, so also the other Christians, not subject to them. Thus you
may see in the Church of Rome, Religion to be Metamorphised into Policy, and
all their Policy tending to maintain their achieved Majesty and greatness.

The Conclusion.
TO Conclude, in this little Treatise you may see the Church of God not to be
in Rome only, but to be Catholic, and dispersed over the face of the whole
Earth; Here is also set down the large habitations, and dwellings of the
Christians not subject to the Pope; and how they do agree with the Protestants
in the main Points in difference, and the Harmony of the Protestants amongst
themselves; with the differences in the Roman Church: Also the Antiquity of
some of these Churches, with a succession of Bishops in some of their Churches,
not subject at all to the Pope, nor acknowledging the Papal Jurisdiction.

And as these Churches agree with us, so you may see what Correspondency they
have with the Bishops of Rome.

The Greek Church excommunicateth yearly the Pope and his Church, for
Schismatickes.

The Muscovites account him an Heretic.

The Christians under the Patriarch of Musall call the Pope, the reprobate
Bishop, as before.

The Churches of Asia answered Pope John the 23. who wrote to them, that he
was the alone Head of the Church, and Christ's Vicar, after this manner: We
firmly believe thy great authority over them that are subject to thee; we
cannot endure thy great pride and ambition: we cannot satisfy thy great
Covetousness, etc.

And whereas Pope Gregory (as before) calls him Antichrist, and Lucifer, who
shall but in the pride of his heart, desire to be called universal Bishop;
what would he say, if he lived now to see the Pope lifted up above Kings, and
Emperors, and the whole Catholic Church.

To conclude; I wish every man that has a care of his Soul, to follow the
grave and divine instruction of that excellent Light of the Church, Saint
Augustine, for establishing of his Conscience, to perform our Saviors
Commandment, Search the Scriptures.

1. Now search diligently, whether you can find in holy Scripture; that Christ
made Saint Peter and his Successors, his alone Vicars 2. Or gave them dominion
over the other Apostles. 3. Or gave them power to depose Kings. 4. Or to
dispense with oaths, made Sacred by Gods holy name. 5. Or to license
incestious marriages. 6. Or to give pardons for money. 7. Or to release Souls
out of Purgatory. 8. Or whether in holy Writ marriage is forbidden to Priests.
9. Or the reading of the Scriptures to the Laiety. 10. As also the Symbol of
Christ's blood in the holy Sacrament 11. Or power given to a Priest to make his
Maker. 12. Or to Communicate alone.
And if thou can find none of these things in holy Scripture; remember what
Saint Paul says, Gal. 1.9. if any man preach any other Gospel unto you, then
that you have received, let him be accursed.

And whereas our Adversaries boast, and make a great cry of the Catholic
Church; here you may see how the Catholic Church of God agrees with us.

Now to put an end to this Treatise, I thank God for his truth revealed unto
us, and his Church, and most humbly entreat his divine Majesty, to open the
eyes of them that err, and have gone astray, that they may return to the
great Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls; and for them that are in darkness,
that they may also know the great Mystery of Salvation in Jesus Christ: Now to
Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask or
think, to Him be Glory in the Church, by Jesus Christ, throughout all ages,
world without end, Amen.

Literae a Patriarcha Alexandrino ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem, ex Aegypto
in Britaniam transmissae, ex autographo Cyrilli graeco in Latinum, jussu
Archiepiscopi traductae a Daniele Featleyo, eidem Archiepiscopo a sacris.
Inscriptio literarum.
Beatissimo and magnificentissimo Domino Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, totius
Angliae Primati, and Metropolitano, Georgio Abbati, mihi multis nominibus
colendissimo, officiose cum honor and debita reverentia in Britaniam tradantur
istae.

Subscriptio.
Cyrillus dei gratia Papa and Patriarcha magnae urbis Alexandriae, and Iudex
oecumenicus.

Exemplar Literarum.
BEatissime and amplissime Archiepiscope Cantuariensis, totius Angliae Primas
and Metropolitan, Domine Georgi, Domine and frater charissime.

Exopto amplitudini vestrae prosperam valetudinem ademolumentum and
coagmentationem concrediti tibi gregis. Cum jam Christi gratia Aegypto nostrae
redditi, pace fruamur Ecclesiastica, res postulat, ut fidem per literas Beatit:
vestrae astrictam liberemus. Nusquam siquidem magis, quam hac innostra Christus
Ecclesia altam agit pacem, nulla de fide lite aut contentione inter nos
gliscente, idque adeo inimicis Christiani nominis acerrimis and infestissimis
habenas moderantibus. A quibus etiamsi variis exagitemur exerceamur que modis,
nobis tamen pro Christinomine quem spiramus, cujusque stygmata in corpore
circumferimus, ab istiusmodi hominibus perquam volupe est affligi, vexari, and
sinecesse est, durissima atque ultima sustinere, ut hac exploratione fides
nostra magis magisque splendescat, and Dei gloria illustretur. Ab his igitur
nihil nobis timemus, sed a canibus potius and operariis sudolis, Hypocritis
dico, quibus solenne est, aliud clausum habere in pectore, aliud promptum in
lingua; qui deum ipsum projecta audacia impetere haud erubescunt, dummodo
Romani pontificis tyrannidi quoquo modo velificentur: hi emissarij terrorem
mirum in modum nobis incutiunt, nostraeque imponunt simplicitati, cui
mancipandae varias admovent machinas, maxim frcti eruditionis fuco, and
spinosarum disputationum aculeis, cum nos interea eruditorum penuria laboremus,
qui cum sciolis istis aequo mart congrediantur. Etenim propter peccata nostra
despicabiles factisumus prae omnibus gentibus, and cum imperio arts quoque
liberales amisimus. Haec cum crebro animum feriret cogitatio, negotium tandem
cum charitate vestra contulinus, vestrumque consilium, and auxilium
imploravimus, Ac ex responso vestrae Beatit; maximum cepimus solatium: quo (non
sine mandato principis) nobis authors fuistis, ut quendam e nostratibus
transmitteremus, qui sedulam sacro-sanctae Theologiae apud vos navaret operam.
En igitur hominem graecum, gradu presbyterum, graecis literis non leviter
tinctum, Ecclesiae nostrae Alexandrinae alumnum, haud obscuro loco natum,
ingenio ad reconditiorem eruditionem imbibendam probe comparato. Cujus
progressus non poenitendes fore speramus, gratiae Divinae aura caelitus
aspirante, and Beatit: vestra dextram auxiliatricem porrigente. Ac quia (utexte
audio,) allubescit hoc consilium nostrum serenissime, and a Deo coronato regi
Iacobo primo, gratiae debentur ipsius humanitati qua adcaelestis regis
bonitatem and misericordiam proxime accedit. A quo certe nec aliud expectari
poterat, utpote cui Deus coelitus benedixerit, and uberrimis eum gratiae donis
locupletaverit, and ex speciali providentia tanti talisque imperij gubernaculis
admoverit. Quapropter prime a Beatit. vestra petimus, ut nostro nomine, summa
cum reverentia, and humillima corporis inclinatione, celsissimam ipsius
majestate^ venerabunde salutes, cui ex intimis nos sensibus vitam prolixam, and
senectutem productam comprecamur. Deinde ab ipsius humanitate submisissime
petimus, ut pro innata, and prope dixeram immensa, benignitate, scintillulam
beneficentiae aliquam huic nostro Metrophani jubeat affulgere. Ad extremum, si
quid in hisce literis nostris, quod ad hunc hominem instruendum perpoliendumque
pertinet, desideretur; id omne tua facile assequetur, supplebitque prudentia,
quem deus extulit, and tanquam facem clarissima^ in edito loco constituit, ut
and aliis solatio esse possis, nec tuis tantum Britannis, sed and Graecis
nostratibus lucem porrigas. Vale vir beatissime: largiatur tibi Dominus Deus,
diuturnam and felicem vitam, unaque vires subministret, quibus and
regninegotijs, and Ecclesiae curis par sis subeundus: ex Aegypto, calendis
Martijs aerae Christianae, Anno Millesimo Sexcentesimo decimo sexto.

A Letter sent out of Egypt into England, from the Patriarch of Alexandria, to
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury: Translated by his Graces appointment into
Latin, out of the Greek original, by Doctor Featley, his Graces Chaplain in
house.
The Indorsement.
To the most Reverend, and Gracious Prelate, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Adverbum, most blessed and magnificent.
Primate of all England, and Metropolitan; George Abbat, my most honored
Lord, with due respect, and reverence present these, in England.

The Subscription.
Cyrill by the grace of God, Many Christians call their Priests Papas.
Pope and Patriarch of the great City of Alexandria, and oecumenicall Judge.

The Letter.
MOst Reverend, Adverbum, most blessed and great.
and right Honorable Lord, George Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of
England, and Metropolitan; our dearest brother. I pray heartily for the
continuance of your Graces health, for the welfare of the flock committed to
your charge. Now that, through the favor of God, we are returned into Egypt,
and enjoy peace in our Church, It is requisite, that by our Letters we should
acquit us of the promise whereby we stand engaged to your Grace: for, there is
no Church (God be blessed) at more peace, then ours is at this present; no
controversies, nor variances arising amongst our selves concerning faith: And,
which is more to be admired, the mortal enemies of Christ's name, sitting at
the stern, and bearing all the sway: by whom though we are many ways
molested, and disquicted; yet for the name of Christ which we profess, and
whose marks we bear about in our bodies, it is a joy to us to be thus
afflicted, and vexed: yea also (if so it be the will of God) to abide the
utmost extremity of their cruelty, that in the fiery trial our faith may
shine more brightly, and God receive the greater glory; from these therefore
we fear little hurt, but rather from Dogs, deceitful workmen, I mean
Hypocrites, who speak one thing, and mean another; who blush not with
boldness, to set upon God himself, so that by any means they may advance the
Papacy These Romish Scouts do very much terrify us, and put tricks upon
our simplicity, endeavoring to enthrall us, with sophistical arguments and
Logic quirkes, but especially they bear themselves upon a show of learning,
and acuteness of disputation, we wanting learned men to deal with them at
their own weapons: for by reason of our sins, we are in comparison of other
nations become despicable, and together with our liberty, have lost all
liberal Arts: When this thought often came in my mind, in the end, I brake
the business to your Grace by letters, and implored your council and
assistance, and from your Graces answer I received extraordinary comfort, in
which, by order from his Majesty, you wished us to send over one of our
Countrymen, to study Divinity among you; and lo, here now I have sent you
this Grecian, a man in holy orders, not meanly skild in the Greek tongue, a
member of our Church of Alexandria, well borne, and of ready capacity: who,
we hope through Gods grace, and your helping hand, will make no small progress
in learning in short time: And for that (as your letters testify) this our
Motion is well entertained by the most renowned, and the Lords anointed, James
the first: let thanks first been returned to him, for his great goodness,
wherein he does nearly resemble the bounty of our heavenly King: And indeed no
less could be expected from him, upon whom God has plentifully showred down
his blessings, and by his special Providence set him upon the throne of so
great and powerful an Empire: wherefore we beseech your Grace, to tender our
most humble respects, and dutiful prostration, to his most excellent Majesty,
to whom we wish from the very bottom of our heart, a long life, and fullness
of days. Next we humble crave of his Majesty, that he would be pleased out of
his imbred (I had well-nigh said) infinite bounty, to vouchsafe to let a little
spark light upon our Metrophanes: Lastly, if any thing be omitted in these
our letters, which might conduce to the farther instruction and furthering of
this our countriman, it may easily be supplied by your Graces wisdom, whom
God has lifted up, and set as a beacon in an high place, to give light, not
only to the Britain, but also to the Grecian coasts: Farewell most Reverend
and wise Prelate. Adverbum, most blessed.
The Lord grant you a long and prosperous life, together with strength to
undergo your great charge, and to manage the weighty affairs both of Church,
and common wealth.

From Egypt Call. Mar. in the year of our Lord. 1616.
Georgius Abbat, divina providentia Archiepiscopus Cantuariens is, totius
Angliae Primas and Metropolitanus, sanctissimo domino, and fratri, Cyrillo,
Papae and patriarchae Alexandrino, and Iudici oecumenico, in Christo salutem.
CVmmulta sint quae universalis Ecclesiae in membris sympathiam, suavissimamque
conspirationem loquantur: tum eandem vel hinc maxim in hoc tempore
persentisco, quod mihi fraternitatem vestram de facie nunquam cognitam,
longissimisque adeo terrae marisque spatijs dissitam, tanquam praesentem
ambabus datur ulnis amplexari; utrumque nempe fideiunitate colligante, and
communi charitatis vinculo constringente, per unum eundenoque spiritum. Quo
Christum, quem uterque spiramus, meritis celebramus laudibus, vobisque pacem
ecclesiasticam, nullo (ut affirmas) schismate, aut malo intestino turbatam ex
animo gratulamur, nec non externam tranquillitatem haud quidem omni ex part
inviolatam and halcyoniam, stapendam tamen, quactiam inter hosts Christiani
nominis acerrimos infensissimosque fruimini, Psalm. 110.2.
juxtaillud prophctae Regis de Christo vaticinium, dominare in medio inimicorum
tuorum. Vestram and nos vicissim rogamus pietatem, ut nobiscum una laetetur de
varijs dei donis in ecclesiam Britanicam affatim effusis. In qua (quod olim de
nostris insulis vester Chrysostomus) audire est ubique populum e scripturis
sacris Philofophantem, Chrysostom. homil. quod utilis sit sacrae scripturae
lectio.
voce quidem peregrina, fide domestica, lingua barbarorum, utentem moribus
sanctorum. Etenim quod in ecclesijs Romano pontifici dicatis obtineri nequit,
populas Christo colendo addictissimus in clarissima evangelij luce versatur,
and aquae vivifica rivis limpidissimis, arcente nemine, sitim abunde explet. Ac
ad disciplinam quod spectat (quod in alijs ecclesijs etiam a faece papismi
repurgatis, aliter habet) antiquissimam ecclesiastici regiminis formam
distinctosque ministrorum gradus retinemus. Haec nobis aeternum servet bonorum
omnium largitor Deus, at nos (quae naturae nostrae est pravitas) propter
peccata nostra, maxim labem animi minus grati jamdiu meruimus, ut candelabrum
nostrum aureum, suo dimoveretur loco, nosque omni sacrarum scripturarum luce
penitus destitueremur. Nec enim haec quibus fruimur bona, nostris (quae nulla
sunt) meritis acocpta ferimus, sed divinae primum misericordiae, deinde
singulari qua electum suae gloriae organum complectitur charitati, regem
dicoserenissimum Iacobum, qui laudatissimae Elizabethae, tum regni, tum
religionis haeres, utraque and firmat legibus, and illustrat exemplo. Etenim
non solum ass iduum se praebet sacrarum concionum auditorem, and ad tremendam
mensam dominicam in celebrioribus praesertim ecclesiae festis convivam, sed
etiam, quod exemplo majus, and in Rege magno maximum,

Qui tot sustineat, qui tanta negotia solus: de abstrusissimis scholae
mysterijs cum episcopis in palaestra theologica exercitatissimis nervose
disserit. Imo and de re theologica multacalamo regio accurate exaravit, quae
nuperrime typis mandata sunt, ad fidem orthodoxam statuminandam, and errores
praesertim pontificios convellendos. Talem tibi tantumque regem perquam
gratulor amicum, qui lectis vestrae sanctitatis ad me literis, vestram Beat:
pie resalutat, and de vobis honorifice loquitur. Ac quosuam erga vos
benevolentia^ testatiorem redderet, mihi in mandatis dedit, ut dilectissimus
vester Metrophanes humaniter, amiceque exciperetur. Quem quidem ego, ut amor is
in me vest^i obsidem, arrhamque pretiosissimam in sinu habebo, and quae illi
necessaria erunt, aut opportuna, omnia haud gravate impendam. I am vero etiam
generosum hunc e seminario graecanico surculum, quo apud nos germinet,
fructusque mature proferat horto amaenissimo inscrui, Academiae Oxoniensi,
Bibliotheca instructissima, and septendecim collegiis splendidissimis
conspicuae, in quibus, studiosorum, eruditorumque gens numerosa tanquam in
Prytanaeo public alitur, Horum catalogo vester inscriptus iam est Metrophanes,
qui cum matururit, and fructus ubercs exerurit, prout vestrae prudentiae visum
fuerit, and e re crit vestrae ecclesiae, aut apud nos fixas aget radices, aut
in natale solum denuo transplantandus remitietur. Quod reliquum est, vestram
(sanctis^ime frater) imploramus pietatem, ut precibus ad deum assiduis
ecclesiam Britanicam habeatis commendatam, sicut and nos pro vostra
graecaitidem interpellabimus: uti^a una cum tota catholica divinae providentiae
presidio seu muro circumcincta, in veritate juxta ac pace firmetur. Nec non ut
ab emissariis istis novatoribus Christianam veritatem pariter ac libertatem
cuniculis oppugnantibus liberetur. Quos inter imprimis cavenda and averruncanda
pseudomonachorum turba recense figulina prodeuntium, intemer andum seruatoris
cognomen sibi arrogantium, qui pacem sectari se profitentur, turbant tamen
miscentque omnia, and veritatiunice studere videri volun^, equivocum tamen
mendacium, etiam perjurio implicitum dogmatizant. Ab his vulpeculis lupisque
rapacibus universis gregem suum tueatur magnus ille ovium pastor, unaque
vestram pietatem in gratia perpetuaque felicitate conservet.

Londini Novembris 17. 1617. vestrae beatitudinis frater amantissimus, and in
Christo conseruus, Georgius Cantuariensis.
George Abbat, by the divine providence Archb. of Cant. Primate of all England,
Ad verbum most holy. Bis. ad ver. Pope. which title was anciently given to all
Bishops and and is retained this day in the Greek Church.
and Metropolitan; to Cyrill his most honored Lord and brother, the Bishop and
Patriarch of Alexandria, and judge ccumenicall sends greeting in Christ.
AS in many things else the sympathy of the catholic Church, and the most
sweet communion among her members manifests it self: so at this time
especially it appears to me, in this that I have opportunity to salute your
brotherhood, whose face I never saw, and embrace (as it were) with both arms,
a person distant from me many 100. miles, and severed by a large tract both of
land and sea. yet the unity of faith joyneth us, and the bond of charity tyeth
us fast together, through one and the same spirit. Profess. ad ver. we both
breath.
By which we worthily magnify one Christ, whom we both profesle, and heartily
congratulate the peace of your Church troubled with no schism (as you
intimate) nor other intestine evil. Also we rejoice together with you for your
outward tranquillity and after a sort halcyon days, which you enjoy, and though
even amidst the sworn and most implacable enemies of the Christian faith,
Psalm. 110.2.
whereby the words of the Kingly Prophet are concerning Christ's king dome
accomplished in you, be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. We in like
manner, Ad verb, piety.
beseech your Grace to bless God with us for the manifold gifts of his bounty
liberally bestowed upon our Churches of great Britain, wherein that which your
Chrysostom spoke of old concerning our british Islands is verified at this
day, every where a man may hear the people discoursing of the scriptures,
strangers indeed in speech, yet of the household of faith, in tongue barbarians,
but in conversation drawing nearer unto Saints, for the Christian Laity in our
Churches (which is not permitted in the Roman) walks in the most clear
light of the Gospel, and drink their fill of the pure streams of the water
of life in Scripture, none driving them from thence, but rather encouraging
them there, abundantly to quench their thirst. And for discipline (which is not
so in other reformed Churches) we retain the most ancient form of Church
government, and distinct orders and degrees in the clergy in every Diocese.
The fountain of all goodness continue these blessings unto us still, though we
(such is the corruption of our nature) by reason of our sins, especially the
stain of ungrateful hearts, have long ago deserved, that our golden
Candlestick should be removed, and we left in the dark utterly destitute of all
comfortable light of Gods word: for far be it from us to ascribe these
extraordinary blessings of God to our merits, which we know are none at all.
But first we attribute them to Gods merey; next, to the singular love which he
bears to his anointed, our Sovereign King James, the choice instrument of
his glory, Heir to Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, as well in her
Religion, as in her Realms: both which, he establishes by Law, and is a
principal ornament to both, by his princely example: for he is not only a
constant hearer of Sermons, and a most devout pertaker of the Sacrament, and
religious observer of the festivals of the Church: But, which is beyond
example, and most to be admired in so great a King, who alone bears the
burden of so weighty affairs, he strongly maintains argument with his
Bishops (best versed in controversies) about the most intricate points of
School Divinity. Moreover we are indebted to his Royal pen for many excellent
Treatises written by him, and lately printed by special command, wherein he
fortifieth the orthodox faith, and demolisheth the Romish forts newly erected
against it. I am exceeding glad that your Grace has purchased unto you the
friendship of such, and so great a Monarch, who most courteously returns your
Salutations and speaks all good of you; and in testimony of his great good
will unto you, gave me charge to make much of your Metrophanes whom I receive
from you, as a pledge of your love, and most precious pawn of our indissoluble
friendship, and accordingly I will see him provided of all things fitting. And
for the present, I have set that noble plant taken out of your Greek Nurserie,
in a most fertile garden: to the end, it may grow the faster, and more kindly
and maturely bear fruit among us; I mean the University of Oxford, beautified
with seventeene Colleges fairly built, and a Library furnished with infinite
variety of Books, in which Academie, as in the Prytaneum of Athens, a
multitude of learned Students is maintained at the public charge: into which
number your Metrophanes is admitted, who as soon as he shall grow ripe, and
fructify among us, as your wisdom shall think fit, and it shall stand with
the good of your Church: either his Root shall be fixed with us here, or he
shall be returned back, to be transplanted in his native soil. For
conclusion, we most earnestly desire your affectionate prayers (most holy
brother) for our British Churches, as we also shall not cease to offer up our
fervent devotions for your Greek Church, that you together with all the
members of the Catholic Church may be compassed with the Divine custody, as
with a of brass, and may be established in Truth and Peace together, and
withal, that you may be freed from those prying innouators (you speak of)
who undermine, as well Christian verity as liberty, among whom you are chiefly
to beware of a sort of Monks newly come out of the Romish forge, assuming to
themselves the most venerable name of our Savior, who prefesse themselves to
follow peace, yet trouble all the Christian world: and they would seem to
teach only the truth, yet deliver doctrinally the art of lying, even with
implied perjurie, under the name of equivocation, from these Foxes and ravenous
Wolves, Ad verb. Piety.
the great Shepherd of the sheep preserve his flock, and in it your Grace,
crowning you with his manifold favors and perpetual felicity.

London, November the 17. Your Graces most loving brother and fellow servant in
Christ, Ad verbum. Your blessedness.
GEORGE CANT.

IN the Epistle, page 11. Line 13. The Armenians have not so many Bishops as
the Card. reports. Jn the Contents, page 19. line 16. r. most of them. p. 4. l.
21. To be aded. Part ^.
read Jerusalem and others. page 10. line 23. in England 4. ships, for one.
page 20. line 19. add Luxenburg and part of Guelders. page 22. line 1. Some of
the Grecians. p. 32. l. 27. Meotis and Tanais. p. 33. l. last read, one of. p.
44. l. 9. Alexandria has two Patriarchs, one a Cophite, the other a Greek. p.
130. l. 2. r. most. p. 152. l. 14. for these, r. some of these p. 154. Espens.
de continent. l. 3. c. 4.

Margent, Nicephorus sets down most ofthem. p. 40 l. 16. some of the. p.
Part 2.
41. l. 14. r. 1000. 1000. p. 44. l. 11. r. some Psalters. p. 55. l. 2. in the
margent put, Microcosme. the same page 50. l. 12. p. 52. l. 19. Zeged speculum
pontif.

Page 1. l. 9. of the Epistle, r. their Church. p. 14. l. 5. r. Wit temberg. p.
18. l. 3. r. Errata Part 1.
100000. margent add extendit. p. 19. in the margent, for numbers univers. p.
22. l. 5. r. Bulgaria Rascia. p. 44. mar. (...). page 49. l. 13. for called r.
of. p. 59. mar. 6. r. (...). p. 6. mar. r. (...). l. 4. (...). p. 63. mar. read
(...) p. 66. mar. r. (...). p. 94. marg r. non reperiatur. Ibid. for vas, r.
uvas. p. 136. l. 25. r. Navaret. p. 137. mar. r. consensit. p. 141. mar. r.
pascitur and potatur. p. 139 mar. for Hester r. Paster. p. 146 for Andrew
^^stusten.

Page 9 l. 16. for desmadell, Damasus. p. 10. l. 3. for Silverius, r. Liberius.
l. 6. add Felix. p. 11. l. 20. r. Philipi. p. 12. l. 21. for Caria, r.
Stauropolis. l. 2. add Creta. Errata Part 2.
4. Rhegium. 10. for Euchania, r. Achaia. p. 42. l. 6. for Henry the Seventh,
read Henry the Second. p. 52. l. 10. r. as before p. 56. l. 13. for sudolis,
r. subdolis.

Other literal faults mend with thy pen.

Protestants.


Papists


Papists Protestants


Greeks mingled with Turks.


Moscovites



