AN ANSWER To the unjust complaints OF William Best, And of such other as have
subscribed thereunto.

Also an ANSWER to Mr. John Davenport, TOUCHING His Report of some passages,
His Allegations of Scripture against the baptising of some kind of Infants, His
Protestation about the publishing of his writings.


By JOHN PAGET.

At AMSTERDAM,

Printed by John Fredericksz Stam, dwelling by the South-Church, at the sign
of the HOPE.

ANNO MDCXXXV.

A Preface to the Reader.
CHRISTIAN Reader, there came forth of late an injurious Pamphlet, entitled A
just complaint against an unjust doer; wherein is proclaimed to the world, The
miserable slavery and bondage of the English Church at Amsterdam: and the blame
of this misery is laid upon me, as being procured by my tyrannical government
and corrupt doctrine etc. Heinous accusations denounced as with sound of
Trumpet from an high pinnacle of the Printers Tower, and blown abroad into many
Countries. My hope and help against this tempestuous blast, is in that our
merciful and faithful Advocate, who pleads the cause of his servants, and
brings forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgments as the noone
day.

To consider who have been the special Actours in this work, may give some
light unto the Readers for the better discerning and judging thereof. For as
Mr. Davenport in his Protestation says, he knew not neither could imagine what
motive set this Publisher upon this work, unless he knew the man: So when the
Readers shall in some part know the persons that have been the chief (...),
they may in some part know or imagine what motive did set their discontented
humors upon this scandalous enterprise.

The Printer hereof Sa. St. that left out his name in the title page, did yet
of himself voluntarily acknowledge that which he had done therein. Now he being
a Brownist, no marvel if he had a hand therein.

Those that framed the Title, who did also make the conclusion of this book,
having a hand either jointly or severally, both in the beginning and end
thereof, are by their own confession known to be Brownists, I.C. and S. St.
It is not strange that these men for the furtherance of their own cause,
should encourage these complaina^ts against me, and as it were clap them on the
shoulder, and say unto them in their conclusion, stand fast therefore, quit you
like men in striving for the maintenance of this part of the faith, etc.

The principal Publisher hereof, that sought help of the Brownists, and caused
it to be printed, is found to be Wi. Be. the foreman of the subscribers, who
though in the subscription he have the foremost standing, yet that he is one of
the least understanding among them, appears by his rash proceedings in this
business. The Printer of the Brownists noted him to be a Simplician, when he
would not otherwise express his name. And well might they account him a simple
Person, that would suffer them to have a hand both in the Title and conclusion
of his book, he not perceaving the evil thereof. Mr. Davenport himself
deciphers him as an injurious one, a sower of discord, and a busy body in other
men's matters.

The first part of the Pamphlet was made by Mr. Davenp. containing a threefold
writing, partly against the Classis, and partly against me, each of them having
his name subscribed thereunto. Now howsoever Mr. Davenport be a man greatly
renowned and famous for his learning and gifts in preaching, yet (...) (^s it
seems) discontented that his calling among us did not succeed, and coming
nearer unto the Brownists in this question about baptism then unto us, it is
therefore the less marvel that he also had a hand in writing complaints
against me for not desiring him.

The two Persons of trust, of whom Mr. Davenport speaks in his Protestation, to
whom he committed his writings for the satisfaction of others, before they were
printed, are unknown unto me, otherwise then by conjecture. His secret friends
that are my secret enemies, do yet walk in the dark.

The second part of the Pamphlet is subscribed with the names of many persons
among us, all of them special friends of Mr. Davenport, that have made it
their complaint and protestation against me; though many others among us do
utterly dislike and disclayme that which is done by them. Diverse of them having
formerly been Brownists, and left their separation to come unto us, do yet
show hereby that they still cleave too much unto some of their opinions. And
for some others of them, I wish that they had not showed so much affection and
respect that way.

The Person that brought these complaints into such frame and method, does yet
lurk in darkness, as becomes such a work, neither is he yet certainly known.
Diverse of the subscribers themselves do profess, that they know not who wrote
them, and such as do know, do yet hide the same.

One fore-reader of the complaints to such as met together in the house of N.I.
for the subscribing of them, is confessed to be Io. Tra. one that is no member
of our Church, one that was once a Brownist of Mr. Robinsons company, and
whether he have renounced that Church, or they him, or have any dimission from
that Church, or whether he be now of any Church or none, I know not. Might they
not well have suspected the matter, to see such an instrument employed in the
business?

The Title of the Pamphlet is, as I hear, generally disliked by the
subscribers and complaynants themselves, and by some of them condemned as a
vile Title. But the truth is, As is the one, so is the other: If the complaints
be just, then is the Title just, being framed according to the contents and
special subject of the book: if the Title be a vile Title, then is the book
also as vile; neither have I so much cause to complain of the Brownists that
made the Title, as of them that made the book. If this Church be deprived of
that liberty and power which Christ has given it, etc. If the Elders be
deprived of their power in government, for the good of the Church, etc. If I
have subjected the Church under the undue power of the Classis, etc. If these
and the like assertions in their book be true, then is the Title and
superscription as lawful as the subscription; then is there cause to complain
of the miserable slavery and bondage of this Church, and of Tyrannical
government, etc. Then is there cause to commend and prefer the liberty and
freedom of the Brownists, which are not subject unto the power of any Classis
or Synod, before the government of other Reformed Churches. And then (if these
complaynants had by the Word of God justified their complaints) it were
reasonable that all the ancient churches of God in Europe should come to these
complaynants, and learn of them their new form of government.

But I find no just ground that these opposites bring for their complaints,
nor any due proof of their many reproves: therefore though I be covered with
reproach by them, I do yet comfort my self in the Lord. That which some will
have to be the slavery and bondage of a Church, that I esteem to be the
liberty, safety and preservation of Churches. That which they count a
Tyrannical government, that I believe to be a Sanctuary against Tyranny. That
single uncompounded policy (as Mr. Jacob calls it) whereby particular
Congregations are made to be independent, not standing under any other
Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves, that I conceave to bring with it
manifold disorders, confusion and dissipation of Churches. For the testimony of
this truth, I am not ashamed to suffer that reproach which some lay upon me.
Though I have already been smitten on the right cheek, yet am I ready to turn
the other also, rather then to forsake this truth, which I judge to be of great
importance. Yea if I were cast upon my deathbed, ready to deliver up my soul
into the hands of the Lord, I should judge it to be my duty, and a special
fruit of my love and care for the flock of God, among my last words to warn
them of these things, as now I do. And for these my opposite brethren, I
desire they would be like-minded, that laying aside all prejudice and
inordinate affection, they would suffer themselves to be better informed in
these things, wherein they have been evidently mistaken through want of due
circumspection; that they would labor to do those things, which God would
have them to do, and whereof they are to give an account unto him, they know
not how soon.

It cannot but be greevous to see contentions abound and overflow, to see
enemies of the Church insult and hardened in schism and error; yet is not the
truth to be betrayed or neglected. Nature and Religion teach men to answer for
themselves when they are accused, and to make a defensive, when others make an
offensive war. The state of Churches at this day is like unto a glassy Sea
mingled with fire, Rev. 15.2.
with fire of fervent contentions at home and abroad, yet even there do the
faithful stand with the Harpes of God rejoicing in the profession of that
truth, which is oppugned and contended against. As for my self, how unjustly
soever I am dealt withal in this kind, being called as it were to the public
bar of a general judgment before the world, and accused before all men, in
this day of man, yet while I learn thereby to judge my self, striving still,
and more then formerly, to be further of from the evilles unjustly imputed unto
me, my hope is that the Lord will do me good by these wrongs, and that I shall
reap such fruit, as shall increase my comfort in the day of the Lord. And as
for others, one special fruit that I exspect from this controversy, is that
those which are wise and godly, will hereby take occasion to think more
seriously of these things, taking heed what new forms of Churches and
Church Government they frame unto themselves, or commend unto others. For these
my opposites I wish unto them, that as some of them have already discerned
their fault in this unadvised subscription, that so the rest also following
their example, may come to the sight and confession of their error, and
thereby find true rest and peace unto their souls. The God of glory, that
brings light out of darkness, and greater love of truth from sight of dangerous
errors, guide us by his Word, and illuminate us by his spirit, to discern the
things that differ, and to follow that which is good, to ponder the path of our
feet, and to turn neither to the right hand nor to the left. AMEN.

IOH. PAGET.

AN ANSWER To the Complaynts of WILLIAM BEST and others that together with him
subscribed their names thereunto.
And herein is inserted An Answer to Mr. DAVENPORT touching his Report of some
proceedings about his calling to the English Church in AMSTERDAM.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECTION I.
THe grievances and complaynts of the burdened and oppressed members of the
English Church in Amsterdam. Anno 1634. the 18 of October.

ANSWER.
IN the title and forefront of this writing, the things that first offer
themselves unto our view are these: The Argument of it, which is grievances and
complaynts; The persons by whom it was written, and ^ese described by their
profession, members of the Church, by the designation thereof, both in respect
of the ^ation, the English Church, and of (...) place, in Amsterdam; by their
condition, the burdened and oppressed, and by the time of year, month, and
day, Anno 163^. October. 1^.

For the Argument; these grievances and complaynts would have been more
grievous unto me, if the Lord in his goodness had not provided a Record of the
like unjust complaynts against his dearest servants. Exodus 16.2.3. and 17.2-7.
Numb. 14.1-10. and 16.1.2.3. and v. 41. with Numb. 12.3.
How often did Israel in the wilderness rise up against Moses and Aaron? sometimes
the chieftaines, men of renown and famous in the congregation; sometimes the
whole congregation of Israel; sometimes crying out and lifting up their voices
with weeping; sometimes accusing them as if they had taken too much upon them,
and lifted up themselves above the Church of God, and as if they had killed the
people of the Lord; yea wishing rather to bear the burdens of Egypt, and the
cruel yoke of Pharaoh in the house of bondage, then to carry the sweet yoke of
the Lord under the guidance of Moses the meekest man on earth? What wonder then
if I be brought to wade through the fordes of Meribah and Massah, and made to
drink of the waters of strife and contention?

For the persons, Professors and members of the Church. To be opposed and
complained of by such might aggravate the grief, but that the Holy Ghost
shows, Sol. Song. 1.5.6. Mat. 23.37 1. Cor. 1.11. and 6.5.6. Gal. 5.15.
that the godly have the sons of their mother to be angry against them, and not
only those without, but even the members of the Church, living in her bosom.
Israelites under the Law, and Christians under the Gospel, have been
instruments of trouble and raysers of strife. The Churches of the Jews, o^ the
Corinthians, of the Galathians and others, are pregnant witness hereof, least
any should stumble at the like offenses.

When they do more particularly design of what Church they a^ members, viz. of
the English Church at Amsterdam, whereof I am Minister, this is yet further
cause of grief. It was grievous unto David, when those that came out of his
own bowels were the instruments of his trouble and affliction: and so it
cannot but be grievou^ when out of the bowels of the same Church there arise up
such (...) are instruments of contention to trouble those that have at least
(...) some weak measure endeavored to do the office of a father un^^ them.
Esa. 1.2.
But we see the father of fathers complaining and calling heaven and earth to
witness that he himself had found such dealing; that he had nourished and
brought up children, and that yet they had rebelled even against him: and
therefore it ought not to seem strange, if men from men, and fathers from
children do find cause of complaynt.

And for the place, that this is done, at Amsterdam, where the contentions of
the Brownists are already so infamous, both to the common reproach of our own
nation here for breeding and sending forth so many contentious persons unto
them, and to the common reproach of this City in England, for nourishing and
intertayning the same: this I say, does also make me the more ashamed, to
think that occasion is hereby given unto adversaries to reckon us with those
other authors of schism. The very name of this city, and the injury that is
done unto it by those that multiply contentions therein, might justly have
restrained these complaynants from doing new wrong unto the City of their
habitation, by so great a work of new strife in the mids thereof.

The condition of those complaynants is described by the title of the burdened
and oppressed: but in stead thereof they might much more justly have styled
themselves the burtheners and oppressors, and this both in respect of me and
of themselves. They burden me with a load of slanders in the several parts of
this their writing, as will appear in the answer thereof: so that as the Lord
complained of ungrateful men, Amos 2.13
I am pressed under you as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves, so may I
complain of their pressing me with reproaches. The fittest title for this their
writing might have been this, The cart-load of reproaches. They burden
themselves also and are guilty of their own oppression, when in this writing
they complain of being subjected unto the undue power of the Classis: for were
they not under the wings of this authority and power of the Classis, they would
be deprived of that help and refuge which the Classis affoordeth unto those
that are burdened and oppressed in a particular Congregation.

Moreover it is to be observed how these complaynants intitling themselves
indefinitely the burdened and oppressed members of the English Church, do
herein speak ambiguously, and the words may be so understood, as if the body
of the Church were here meant by the members of the English Church. But in such
a meaning their words are notoriously false. These 21 subscribers are not the
Church, but a faction in the Church, and the greatest part of the congregation
(so far as I hear) do complain of these complayners. Those complaynants are
such a congregation as David mentions in the Psalm, Psalm. 58.1.
Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O Congregation? be speaks not to the whole
congregation of Israel, but to a congregation in the congregation, that is to
say to a faction in the Church. The original word there used, Elem.
carries in it the signification of a sheafe of corn: for as in a sheafe many
stalks are bound together, so in a fact^^ many persons are combined together
in an enterprise. The writing (...) these complaynants is like unto Ionath Elem
rechokim, Psalm. 56. title.
which does not signifye as in the old translation, the dumb dove in a far
country, neither would it in such sense agree with these complaynants, who are
no dumb doves, but rather as the clamorous birds. The words do signify the
oppression of a faction of them that are far off, the oppression and trouble
which a faction works, and a faction of such as are far off and such are
these accusers, though not far off as the Philistines in Gash, yet far off from
their own country, and bold in another where they are strangers, and also as
far from truth and equity in this their writing that follows.

The time of their writing these complaints was Anno 1634. October. 18. For the
year it was a time when the Churches of God were in great affliction, by the
oppression of Antichrist, the enemy prevayling so much in Dutch-land. And these
judgments of God abounding in such measure near unto us, might have restrained
these men from so insolent an enterprise in such a time. For the day of the
month it was unto me a day of mourning, when God had taken out of this world a
godly member of our Church, and my faithful servant, who being dead and yet
unburyed, and my self also weak and sickly, Ezekiel. 24.17.22.
even just at this time, in stead of the bread of men, which neighbors of old
used to bring unto mourners for the comforting of them, these importunate
complaynants reached me this reproachful writing as a sponge of vinegar upon a
reed. So was Christ comforted by the Jews on his cross; Mark. 15.36.
and the servant is not above his Lord.

I have a long time, with great patience borne many reproaches; but now being so
heynously accused, and so vehemently urged by the importunity of these brethren
that have made this most unreasonable and unjust writing against me, I should
betray mine own innocence, and prejudice both the profession of Christianity,
and the work of my ministry, which God has committed unto me, if I should
not give answer unto them, and make an Apology for my self, as diverse worthy
servants of God in like case have done. And yet howsoever I take liberty to my
self to speak freely unto my opposites in showing them their transgression, my
purpose notwithstanding is by the grace of God not to do the least wrong unto
them, for the greatest which they have done unto me. And to this end, I beseech
his heavenly Majesty to guide me with his Spirit in all and every one of my
answers, that I may not err from this mark which I have set up unto my self:
Hab. 2.1.
but that being set with the Prophet upon my watch, I may see what he will say
unto me, and what I shall answer unto him that reprooveth and reprocheth me.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. II.
WHereas offense has been taken that some of us whose names are underwritten,
did absent ourselves from the Lords supper the last communion day; we thought
it good to give the reason of our absences in writing, with our names
subscribed thereunto: being willing to bear our blame, if it shall be prooved
to us out of the Word of God, that we have sinned in so doing, for which we
confess that the cause thereof was no contempt or slight account of the Lords
supper, the free enjoyment whereof in a right manner, we account an especial
privilege, and whatsoever hinders us from it a very grievous affliction.

In which respect we are the more deeply and inwardly greeved with the sinful
proceedings of Mr. John Paget, which deprived us of so great a comfort at that
time. For howsoever we do not think that the personal sin of any man can
defile the ordinances of God to us, if we be meet and fit to partake thereof;
yet we know that a man may make himself partaker of other m^ns ^^its, by
neglecting his duty in seeking reformation, and so communicate unworthily.

Wherefore having waited that some thing should have been done by others in
this case, but in vain, we durst not approach to the Lords supper, till we had
in some measure discharged our duetyes in this particular, which we thought we
should have a fit opportunitye to do, when we should be called upon to show
the reasons of our absence at that time, which formerly we could not obtain.

ANSWEER.
WE see in the subscription two sorts of complaynants; the first such as
withdrew themselves from the Lords supper, the other such as notwithstanding
their complaynt, did yet hold communion with the Church in the participation of
the Sacrament. Of the first sort are those 9 that are foremost in the
subscription; of the second, those 12 that subscribed last. To the first sort
in the first place, I answer,

1. As for those plausible speeches, and pretenses of Reverence to the
ordinance of God, they are such as that the Brownists themselves will say as
much even in the midst of their separation. They will be content to profess
that they do not separate out of any contempt or slight account of the Lords
supper, the free enjoyment whereof in a right manner, they account an especial
privilege, and whatsoever hinders them from it a very grievous affliction.
Thus far the Brownists may acknowledge by their own principles touching their
separation one from another: and what singular thing have these complaynants
then spoken in excuse of themselves?

2. From excusing of themselves they proceed to the accusing of me, and
complain that the sinful proceedings of Mr. John Paget have deprived them of
so great a benefit at that time. But had these complaynants well considered
their own ways, and the way of truth, they would then have left the complaint
upon themselves, and upon the proceedings of Mr. John Davenport. As for
themselves, it is their slander of me, which they can never prove, that I have
deprived them of the benefit of the Lords supper. And as for Mr. Davenport, he
is guilty of nourishing contention in our Church, while those roots of
bitterness and evil weeds of unjust complaints are watered by him: whiles he
himself by his writing which was first secretly spread abroad among our
people, does make the like yea and many the very same complaints that these men
have. Hereby they are confirmed in their murmurings, and their hands are
strengthened unto evil. Book of Complaints p. 12.
His pretense of care to preserve my peace and the Churches, cannot excuse him:
he says of our Church, had he not exercised much patience and industry, it
would certainly have fallen from me, etc. But as he does vainly praise himself
and wrong me, so does he notoriously dishonor and wrong the body of our Church,
of which he speaks indefinitely without exception. For 1. he does hereby
accuse our Church generally to be of a schismatic disposition, either
through their blindness, or of a malicious purpose, in being so ready to break
communion, and to rend themselves from their Pastor. His folly and vain
credulity is the more in that he avoucheth this with such a peremptory
asseveration, certainly they would have fallen from him. The untruth of this
his assertion appears in the greater part of the congregation, by the
testimony of their respect unto me, and of their hatred of schism, witnessed
partly by their diligent attendance upon the ministry of the Word, and partly
by their speeches otherwise. 2. For these complaynants themselves though in
their have and coffeehouse, they might happily have threatened to leave
communion, and to forsake the Church, yet is it not credible, especially for
the greater part that they would have been so wicked and scandalous as Mr.
Davenport would have us to believe. And even these 9 that abstained lately from
the Lords supper for once, do here in this place seek to excuse themselves for
it, when they say that they durst not approach to the Lords supper, till they
had in some measure discharged their duetyes, etc. which seems to import they
had no absolute purpose of making a rent. 3. His vain glory in this confident
asseveration is so much the greater, in that he arrogates unto himself the
hindering of them from so great wickedness, ascribing it to his own great
patience and industry; and that otherwise they would certainly have done it.
What is this else but to magnify himself with the diminishing of the grace and
power of God; as though God had not other means enough without Mr. Davenport;
and without his industry to have sta^ed these complaynants from such a
scandalous act? It is against modesty and conscience to pronounce so certainly
touching the issue of things to come. Yea though these complaynants themselves
should all of them still presume to say in like manner, that had it not been
for Mr. Davenport, they would certainly have made a separation, yet were not
such rash speeches to be rested upon, Prove. 20.24. and 16.1.9. Ier. 10.23.
seeing the Lord does so often frustrate such vain purposes and resolutions by
persuading the heart of man, and turning it another way. But touching his
industry and service in this business more hereafter. 4. Though some of these
inordinate complaynants have gone yet further; though others have gone
sometimes to hear the Brownists, and to communicate with them in the publicq
worship of God; though this be a dangerous tempting of God, and offensive
diverse ways: yet cannot men certainly conclude a falling away thereupon. The
slippery and irregular practices of unsettled persons are so many and diverse,
that men cannot build a peremptory asseveration touching the issues of them.

3. To come nearer unto the special point of the controversy, it is a
defective and too short a rule of keeping communion, which they note in showing
their judgment that the personal sin of any man cannot defile the ordinances
of God unto us, if we be meet, etc. for neither the personal sin of any man,
nor yet the sins and corruptions which are in the very estate of a Church, in
the ministry, offices, calling, government and order thereof, can defile the
ordinances of God unto us, so long as we our selves do not practice and act
evil, nor give any approbation thereof. Luke 1.6.8 with Mat. 15.6.9.
For as formerly in the Church of the Jews, so now presently in diverse true
Churches, besides the personal sins of men, there be many corruptions in the
ministry, order and government thereof, and yet are not the ordinances of God
therein defiled unto such as do their duty in their own eschewing and
witnessing against evil.

4. If this rule were not defective, it could not (according to their
profession) be any just excuse or warrant unto these complaynants of keeping
communion in our Church: for they do not only accuse me of personal sin, but
show that the very estate, order and government of our Church is corrupt^^
thereby. If the Church be deprived of that power which Christ has given it in
the free choice of their Pastor; if the Elders be deprived of their power in
government; if the Church be by me subjected unto an undue power of the
Classis, as they complain; then is the very estate of our Church an enthralled
estate, wanting the liberty and power of Christ. And therefore if either my
personal sin, or if the publiq corrupt estate of our Church could defile the
ordinances of God unto them, then could they not keep communion with us, But I
suppose it is their uncircumspectio^ that made them or their scribe to allege
this insufficient rule of keeping communion, rather then their advised and
settled judgment.

5. If these complaynants be willing to bear their blame (as they profess
here) when their sin is prooved unto them out of the word of God: then let them
look upon these words of God, where he ordained by Moses, that Numb. 9.13.
the man which neglected to keep the Passover, should bear his sin; where
Christ 1. Cor. 11.24.25.
commanded to observe the Sacrament of his Supper, in remembrance of him; where
the H. Ghost requires that we should Heb. 10.25.
not forsake the assembling of our selves together. These express
commandments have been transgressed by these that withdrew themselves.

6. Though men may complain of known evilles to preserve themselves from
partaking in other men's sins; yet the preposterous order of these men is
inexcusable, that first separated from a solemn act of religion with the
Church of God, Ier. 8.7. Ephesians. 4.2^.27. and 5.16. Prove. 15.23. and 25.11.
and afterward came to tell the cause thereof; doing that in the last place
which should have been done in the first, contrary to the direction of the Holy
Ghost, who teaches us to know the times, and to redeem them, and to observe
the fit seasons for performing of our duties.

7. If men have neglected their duty for reforming of evil in others unto the
very day of communion in the Lords Supper, and time permit not then to
complain, what remains then to be done? shall men with these complaynants
leave the communion for that time, and so add to their former neglect a new
offense and scandal? we have no such rule or commandment from God: but the
negligent are to be humbled in soul presently before the Lord, and pardon is
to be des^^^d in Christ, with purpose of performing their duty upon the next
opportunity, which being done, they may then with good conscience approach unto
the table of the Lord, Isa. 65.24.
who is ready instantly to forgive.

8. When men pretending to testify against evilles, in stead of just complaints
do bring reproach and slanders, and complaynts of that which is good and
lawful, then in stead of clearing themselves they are more polluted. James
3.6. Prove. 17.15.
Their own tongue defiles them. And that this is the case of these
complaynants, once guilty for their forsaking of the communion, and double
guilty for their testification afterward, the sequel will plainly manifest.

9. Whereas they tell, how they waited that some thing should have been done by
others, but in vain, etc. what they mean hereby I know not, except it be of
the Eldership calling upon them to show the reasons of their absence from the
Lords Supper, of which they speak also. Now although no man can excuse his
own neglect of duty by waiting on others, yet the waiting of these men in
this particular, cannot be said to have been in vain: for had they not
prevented it by bringing this their writing, it was agreed in the Eldership,
that in their visitation before the time of the next following communion, they
should have been spoken unto touching the reasons of their absence. And this
might have been done by the Elders, though I was not able through weakness at
that time to have gone about with them.

10. Above others William Best who is the foreman in this subscription, has
the least color of excuse for his offense and disorder in leaving the
communion: for he having been with the Eldership before, and made known his
complaints both by word and writing; suppose his complaint had been just, what
needed he now to withdraw himself for fear of partaking with those sins,
against which he had so solemnly testified already? It seems he was more
forward then others to complain, and yet more ignorant then the rest of the
nature of lawful communion.

11. Seeing W.B. could thus find an opportunity to come unto the consistory,
and there to discharge his imagined duty, by showing his grievances and
complaints both by word and writing, and was thereupon presently informed
touching his duty in the consistory, and afterward visited by me at his own
house, and conferred again withal for his further information: why might not
any one of these 9 complaynants have done the like? Hereby it appears how
unjust that part of their complaint is, when touching such opportunity they
say, that formerly they could not obtain it. For why might not each of them
have taken their desired opportunity as well as he, and in such manner as he
did, before any discommunion had been made by them? But in this also he is most
of all to be blamed, that whereas he actually had this opportunity, and full
liberty of declaring his mind, he not only absented himself, but also sets
his hand and subscribes his name to this complaint as well as others, as if he
could not formerly have obtained that, which he know that he had.

12. The offense of L. C. being a Deacon of the Church, is also the greater in
this regard, not only in leaving the communion whereunto he was bound as a
Christian, but also in leaving his service and attendance upon the Lords table,
whereunto he was bound as a Deacon, and which he was wont to perform with the
rest of the Deacons. Every evil example of such an one becomes a greater
stumbling block, does more hurt to others and procures more blame to
themselves.

13. It is to be observed that the 9 first are condemned by the 12 latter
subscribers, who though they join with the first in the complaint, yet did not
join with them in the schism, but kept themselves pure from the scandal of
separation. If these 12 did lawfully in communicating with us, then did the
other 9 unlawfully in refusing of communion. If they will not learn of me, yet
let them receive instruction from their own fellows.

14. Before the 9 separatours had resolved upon a matter of so great danger in
forsaking the table of the Lord, especially if they had been so deeply and
inwardly grieved, as they pretend, for loosing so great a comfort of the Lords
Supper, then it had been meet for the preventing both of their own grief and
others scandal, that they should have taken advise of Mr. Davenport, with
whom they were familiar most of them, and all had opportunity enough
thereunto, Prove. 15.22
for by counsel thoughts are established. To refuse counsel in matters of
great weight and danger, when it may easily he had, what is it (...) but to
wink with the eyes for fear of seeing the truth? If they had his counsel and
refused it, they are in that regard the more culpable, both for committing such
an offense at first, and for not repenting of it since.

15. As for the 9 in regard of communion; so in regard of the complaints
following, godly wisdom and good conscience required of them all, both of the
9 first and 12 latter complaynants, that they should have the counsel of Mr.
Davenport, touching such weighty points of government, as do concern the good
estate not of our Church only, but of other reformed Churches in these
countries, before they had set their hands unto such heinous accusations, as
are here contrived by them. If they did not consult with him, their headlong
and headstrong rashness was extraordinary great. And if he being consulted
withal did approve of this their reproachful writing, then will it appear
that he has been an extraordinary author of contention and disturber of our
peace: yea such an one as when he himself could not receave a calling into the
ministry among us, according to that manner he liked, did then go about to
subvert my ministry, by bringing it into reproach with our people.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. III.
WE conceave that Mr. Paget does administer the Lords Supper to us by virtue of
his Pastoral office, whereunto he has been called in this Church, and that
amongst communicants, especially Pastor and people there should be an union in
Christian love and affection, and communion in all the fruits thereof, one
whereof is seasonable admonition, which in case of publiq scandal and offense,
must be publiq (...) we conceave it is in this present case.

Which we would have borne if the injury had been but personal to any one of
us, and covered if it had been a mere infirmity, or but a private offense; but
seeing the matter is a publiq injury, and obstinately persisted in to the great
dishonor of God, and hurt to the Church, w^ are not to be silent any longer,
but by these presents do testify to a^^^en, principally to you the Elders of
this Church, That howsoever Mr. Paget bears the name, fills up the place,
and does many works of a Pastor amongst us: Yet he does not behave himself, as
becomes a Pastor, neither in government, nor in doctrine toward us.

ANSWER.
AS there is a liberty and duty of Christians sometimes to admonish even those
that are no members of the Church: as the bond for performance of this duty is
more strait among those that are by covenant united into the same particular
Church: and as the Pastor himself is not exempted from receaving admonition:
so this same relation betwixt Pastor and people, does bind them in the
performance of this duty to him, whom God has set in his stead to teach and
govern his people, 2. Cor. 5.20. 1. These. 5.12.13. Heb. 13.17.
to see that they have both a just ground of their admonition, and that they
perform it in a modest and reverent manner. But neither of these things have
been observed in the offensive and unconscionable writing of these
complaynants, either toward me or to that whole assembly of Ministers in the
Classis, who altogether with me are most unworthily and injuriously dealt
withal by these persons. If these slanderous accusations be the fruit of their
Christian love and affection, what shall be the fruit of their contrary
passions? And as for seasonable admonition I marvel that they are not ashamed
to speak thereof: for 1. is it seasonable admonition to come now and complain
of matters done above 20 years agone, about Mr. Forbes, and Mr. Parker? 2. Is
it seasonable admonition for men first to forsake the communion, and afterward
by admonition to tell the cause thereof, in such a preposterous order as the
first rank of the complaynants have done? 3. Is it seasonable admonition after
matters have been brought unto the Classis, and there judged and my innocence
there manifested, to come with new complaints in rehearsing of the same
matters, as is often done in this writing? where shall men lightly find more
unreasonable and more unseasonable admonitions then these?

Again, to mollify the great evil of their heinous accusations, they make a
preamble wherein they make profession of the goodness, gentleness and patience
which they would have showed, and this in diverse degrees: The first degree of
their patience is, that if the injury had been but personal to any one of
them, they would have borne it: But what if it had been personal to any two of
them, had it then been intolerable, and not to be borne? The second degree of
patience and gentleness in conceit, is, that if it had been a mere infirmity,
they would have covered it: But I demand of them, how they know when a fault
is committed of mere infirmity? and again whether no faults are to be
covered, but those which are mere infirmities: and if other may be, why do
they boast for the very imagination of that they would do in this? A third
degree of their pretended favor, is to have covered my fault, if it had been
but a private offense. But what if no offense at all have been committed
against them? What if their accusations be notoriously false? Prove. 25.14.
Then as he that boasts of false liberality, is like unto clouds and wind
without rain; so are these men in their boasted favors and patience. And
besides even publiq offenses may be made more publiq then is meet; and yet
these men profess to do so, when they say in this place, that by these
presents they do testify unto all men, etc. But further they do not only
boast of that which they were willing to have done, but of that which they have
done; for when to aggravate my offense, they do now say, that they are to be
silent no longer, they do hereby imply, that before this their writing they
have used long silence. Now to prove that formerly they have not been silent
men, I have many witnesses; and first I allege these two witnesses against
them, the Damme, and the Burse, the Marketplace and the Exchange: Two other
witnesses are the Classis and the Consistory. Again I allege two other
witnesses England, and Netherlands, through both which the clamours that a^
here raised by them are scattered abroad. Ministers and people friends and foes
can be witnesses hereof. Prove. 12.10.
If formerly they have ben^ silent, what clamours must I now exspect, when they
break their s^lence? The Holy Ghost shows that the very mercies themselves i^
some men are cruel; such are the former favors of these complaynants. If
favors be such, and their curtesy so hard, how cruel sha^ their cruelty it
self be?

To proceed, it is not enough for them to accuse me of sinful proceedings,
but to aggravate the matter, they do in their preamble avouch that this injury
is obstinately persisted in to the great dishonor of God, etc.

1. I answer, that hereby they do make themselves guilty of great and wicked
slander. That person is to be accounted obstinate, who having his sin in due
manner showed unto him out of the Word of God, does yet continue therein
without any professed purpose of reformation. But this they have not done unto
me, I may truly say with Job, be it that I have erred, mine error remains
with me: Job 19.4.
though ye magnify your selves against me, yet which of you have convinced me
of error? Let this be considered more particularly.

2. When some of these complaynants have upon occasion objected unto me, that
nothing but customs and examples of men were urged against Mr. Davenport; I
signified unto them at diverse times, that if Mr. Davenport would set down any
reasons from the Scripture for the maintenance of his opinion, I would (God
willing) endeavor to give him an answer by writing from the Scriptures, and if
I could not answer his arguments and allegations, I would then be of his mind,
and labor to join with him, and stand for that practice he required. But this
offer not being accepted, nor acceptance procured by them, what color of
reason had they to accuse me of obstinacy?

3. If they think Mr. Davenports writing which he gave to the Classis with the
reasons of his opinion, might serve to convince me, and thereupon infer that
I am obstinate, they are far deceived, for neither is their any such convincing
power in any of his allegations, as I hope will be manifested by others. And
suppose these complayners do judge otherwise, yet had there been a few drops
of charitable construction in them, they might at least have conceaved that I
erred through the example of so many learned Ministers concurring in judgment
with me, and so being carried away with the stream, that my offense was of
ignorance and not of obstinacy. I my self do also judge even of some of these
my accusers, that they are ignorantly seduced through the example of others,
rather then of an obstinate mind.

4. As for the several heads of their complaynts, if they mean that I am
obstinate in each of them (for they have not excepted any) then is their
slander yet the greater; for where and when, or by what Scripture or sound
reason have they prooved me an obstinate offendour therein?

But furthermore, it is not yet enough for them simply to accuse me of
obstinacy; but they come unto a solemn Testification, and say that by these
presents they testify to all men, and principally to the Elders of this Church,
That howsoever Mr. Paget bears the name, fills up the place and does many
works of a Pastor. Yet he does not behave himself as becomes a Pastor,
neither in government nor in doctrine toward us. Against this vehement and
unjust accusation, I have these comforts wherewith I do comfort my self in
God.

1. My unfeigned desire and endeavor has been to serve the Lord in the
ministry of the Gospel, and thereby to edify his people. Before I was called
to the ministry, I felt my heart strongly inclined thereunto, and did so
direct my studies, that I might be prepared thereunto. When I was yet a child,
before I was 12 years old, I felt this impression and this ardent affection to
that calling; and that for this cause to instruct the people of God, and to
show the way of life unto others, and not for the proffit or preferment sake to
be obtained thereby. That small patrimony and inheritance of free land which
belonged unto me, I ever despised, and was content it should be otherwise
disposed of for the comfort sake which I exspected from this calling. And for
these 38 years and upward, wherein I have already continued in the ministry,
I am privy to my self that this desire has remained in me even to this hour.
And therefore how weak soever my labors have been, yet do I assure my self,
that I have not been deluded with the vain title and shadow of a Minister.

2. Whatsoever inward desire I had to the work of the ministry yet I never
sought the place of a Pastor, till I was lawfully called: did not intrude nor
thrust in my self for a Pastor; neither did I ru^ before I was sent. I went
not to fill up the place of a Pastor upon disordered sending for by some
particular person without knowledge of the rest, but waited for an orderly
election, and call by the free consent of the congregation. This assurance of a
lawful calling is a shield of comfort against many encombrances and troubles
which do attend upon the ministry of the word.

3. Being settled in this calling, I have not wanted a comfortable experience of
Gods blessing upon my labors. God that works by weak means, has often
showed his grace and power in my great weakness. I will not speak further
hereof what I justly might, nor show the ample testimony which formerly has
been given unto me in other places. Only yet let me remember the testimony of
sundry these my opposites, and that at such time when they were offended with
me, when there was controversy about Mr. Hooker. In their protestation carried
to the Classis by 2 Elders, 2 Deacons, and 2 members of the Church in the name
of diverse others. In that writing they testify thus much; for so much as
concerns Mr. Paget our teacher, we acknowledge that his life and doctrine is
such, that (without flattery it is spoken) we can have no better, who has
continued with us now 20 years and more, and has obtained great praise with
us, and with all that know him. And this was written in the name of the
Consistory and of the members of the Church.

4. Whatsoever troubles have befallen me in this calling; whatsoever dangers I
have undergone for testifying against the corruptions of the times and places
where I lived; yet did I never voluntarily desert or forsake that work of
ministry which was committed unto me. The fear of persecution has not caused
me to make a resignation of my place, nor to look back when I had put my hand
to this plough of the Lord. And my resolution still is by the grace of God to
cleave unto Christ, to take up his cross and to follow him; and so long as it
pleases the Lord to grant me life, strength and liberty, to serve him in the
Gospel of his Son, to preach the glad tidings of salvation unto the contrite,
and to call men from the paths of error and destruction.

Whereas these importunate complaynants do tell us further in this writing,
that they do by these presents testify unto all men, etc. Though this their
writing be vile and most unworthy to be published unto a few, much less unto
all men: yet seeing the matters of these complaynts are already for the most
part spread far and near, before this their writing was made, I am therefore
content to join with them therein, desiring that this my Apology or Answer may
go as far, for the satisfaction of all men, to whom either these their presents
shall come, or their other former reproaches have already come.

Whereas they add that they testify this, principally to the Elders of this
Church, it is no marvel that they should dedicate this their writing unto
them, seeing some of these Elders are parties with them, and that in diverse
points as is after to be showed: Neither can I give a full answer unto this
their writing in sundry particulars thereof, but that I am to reprove the
Elders as well as them. Those to whom I principally intend this answer, are
such as be abused with untrue and unjust complaints already blazed in so many
places; and among these I suppose, are diverse of these complaynants themselves,
who being misled by others without due consideration of that which they have
done, by the help of this my answer may come to the sight of their error and
wrong done unto me.

But leaving their preamble and general proposition, let us now come to the
particulars, whereby they would prove that I do not behave my self as
becomes a Pastor, neither in government nor doctrine.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECTION IV.
THat he does it not in government, will appear in these particulars. First he
depriveth the Church of that liberty and power which Christ has given it in
the free choice of their Pastor, contrary to Act. 6. v. 3. and 14. v. 23.

ANSWER.
FIrst of all, it is to be observed that in this heinous accusation they do
not only accuse me, but the Ministers of these Reformed Churches also, and
specially those to whom we are nearest united in this Classis, under which we
stand, whose order and practice in the choice of Ministers I do for my part
labor to follow so near as I can: and therefore through my sides they wound a
multitude of others. Yea the persons themselves are not so much taxed hereby,
as the very government and order of discipline established in these Churches.
It is untrue which they say, that I deprive the Church of her power: if the
Church be spoiled of the power that Christ gave, this is not to be imputed unto
me, seeing this order was here in these Countries established before my coming
unto them: neither is it in my power to alter and change the form of their
government.

Secondly, behold the partiality of this accusation. The order observed among
us in the choice of Minister, Elders and Deacons is that practice wherein the
whole Eldership together with the Deacons have had their hand jointly so well
as I. If the order observed be unlawful and contrary to Act. 6. and 14. then
are they guilty of those disorders and defiled with the transgression of those
Scriptures as well as I; seeing they have still joined with me in such
elections. And how unreasonable a thing is this, that the blame of such a
proceeding which is common to many should be laid upon me alone?

Thirdly, suppose they had indifferently accused the whole Eldership together
with me for depriving the Church of her power, yet what is the reason that they
never framed such an accusation and protestation before this present; seeing
this practice has continued among us from time to time so many years, even to
the last election of Elders and Deacons this last year, against which no such
exception was made? why have they slept so long, and who has wakened them at
this present? How have they been meet partakers of the Lords Supper, and
preserved themselves from partaking in other men's sins according to their
former pretense, while they have not sought reformation of this imagined evil?
I leave it to their own consciences to consider, whether now also they would
not have kept silence, if they could have brought in Mr. Davenport even
according to this corrupt order used by us as they complain of it.

Fourthly, To come nearer unto the consideration of these places, Act. 6.3. and
14.23. I acknowledge (as I have also diverse times publicly taught in the
exposition of these 2 places) that the free consent of the people is required
unto the lawful calling of a Minister: neither is the same denied or excluded
in our practice. The Synods of these reformed Churches describing the order to
be observed in the calling of Ministers, do require a choice to be made by the
Elders and Deacons, approbation of the Magistrates, allowance of the Classis,
and in the last place consent of the Congregation, before whom the names of the
persons called are publicly propounded from the Pulpit diverse Lords days,
that they may take knowledge of the matter and witness their consent or dissent
as they shall find occasion. This is the order of these Churches and this is
our practice, and therefore it is a false accusation of such as affirm the
people to be deprived of their power hereby.

Fifthly, whereas some object from Act. 6.3. that the people ought to go before
in seeking out officers for themselves, that is the question to be examined by
us. To this end it is to be considered, 1. That the Scripture makes no mention
of eitheir teaching or ruling Elders ordained at that time when the Deacons
were first chosen Act. 6. If there were at that time no Elders, how could they
then go before the rest, as now they may do in those places where they are?
2. If there were no Elders then, yet the Apostles that were then present may
justly be accounted presidents going before the people in that action in stead
of ordinary Elders. For though the multitude of disciples being many thousands
at that time, be spoken unto for seeking out of Deacons, yet is not the
precedence of the Apostles excluded thereby, and it is partly expressed, in
that they prescribed both the thing to be done, the number of persons to be
elected, and the quality of them. 3. Suppose the Apostles had wholly withdrawn
themselves from that business of nomination and election of Deacons, yet were
there many excellent men full of the Holy Ghost at that time; such as had been
the Disciples of Christ before his death; such as had received extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit; such as Barsabas, Barnabas, Stephen and others, who then
in all reason were to go before the rest in guiding the action in stead of
Elders; according to that Numb. 8.9.10.
example in the Scriptures, where that is asscribed unto the Congregation,
which of necessity was to be performed by some chief persons going before the
rest with their consent. 4. That other place, Actor. 14.23. where the act of
electing is attributed unto Paul and Barnabas, although the consent of the
people be showed thereby, yet does it withal imply such an order, that they
went before others as leaders therein. That one (...).
original word of electing applied unto those two persons, does import a
double power of assent in the people; of precedence and presidency in Paul and
Barnabas. 5. The titles of Heb. 13.17. 1. Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.8. 1. Tim. 5.17.
guides, of governors, of foregoers, of forestanders, which the Scripture in
other places gives unto Ministers and Elders, do likewise show, that they
were to go before the Church in all the public actions thereof, and
consequently in elections.

Sixthly, unles the meaning of that place Act. 6.3. be thus explaned and
determined by conference with other Scriptures, men might hence take occasion
to run into such uncouth absurdities as by the relation of one of these
complaynants, were committed in his presence at the confirmation of a certain
English Minister in these countries, where the women being required and called
upon to that end, did lift up their hands for testimony of their consent in
calling him to be their Minister. For it is said that the Act. 6.2.3
multitude of Disciples were called together about the election of Deacons, and
required to look out fit persons for that office; and Act. 6.7. with Act. 9.36.
women being in the Scripture called Disciples and reckoned among them, might
hereby seem to have a hand allowed them in this work, save that in 1. Tim.
2.12.
other places there is a restraynt to exclude them from such acts of power,
whereby they might oversway the voices of men. And as for the title of
brethren, Act. 6.3. that would not easily have cleared the matter, seeing under
that Romans 12.1. 1. Cor. 5.11. and 6.6.
title the Holy Ghost uses to speak unto women as well as unto men. Thus also
might that infamous and scandalous action of T.F. and E.S. in going about to
houses, gathering and writing down the names of such women and maids as gave
not their consent to the calling of Mr. B. obtain some color of defense to
the great disturbance of Churches, if those things that are spoken generally
and indefinitely in one place, did not receyve a limitation and determination
of order from other places.

Seventhly, if these complaynants were each of them apart well examined touching
the due order of elections, and touching the ground thereof from these places
Act. 6. and 14. I do assure my self that very few of them would be found to
agree with one an other. It is very probable that they neither understand
themselves, nor one an other, but are carried blindely and inconsiderately in
these great and important charges. A notable evidence hereof we have had
already about the gathering of the names of women and maids by T.E. and E.S.
to oppose the election of Mr. B. for at that time when many of the thief of
these complaynants, Iun. 25. 1633.
viz. T.F.A.H.I.C.H.D.I.S.D.B. I.P.H.P. and others, came together to the
consistory, at that time, there was this remarkable dissension and difference
among them, in three kinds. Some of them acknowledged that they did not allow
that women should have voices in the election of Ministers: Some of them
professed they could not tell what to judge thereof: Some of them in defense
thereof alleged the judgment and practice of certain Ministers for the
consent of women. Might not this example have brought them to some feeling of
their ignorance and vanity, and have made them to abstain from such peremptory
charges and accusations, as they have now presumed to make in this their
writing?

Lastly to deprive the Church of that liberty and power which Christ has given
it in the free choice of Ministers, must needs be an heinous crime and no less
then sacrilege. And the guilt thereof does involve not only the principal
agent, but all that are any way accessory thereunto, even those that receave a
calling from a Church, wanting that power which Christ has given and ordained
for the calling of officers. Now if their accusation be true, concerning the
enthralled estate of our Church deprived of their power and liberty by me, then
see how these blind accusers, not to speak of others among us, do enwrap not
only other Elders and fellow Deacons, but themselves also in the sacrilegious
crime of entering into their callings, not by the right door of a free choice
according to Act. 6. and 14. but by a backdore or posterne of unlawful
intrusion without free consent of people, which they say is wanting among us.
For both W. B. formerly and L.C. now presently a Deacon, have received their
office by no other order, then this which I defend and they accuse. If I be
guilty of robbing the Church of her power, these also must be thieves in
receaving that which I stole. Neither can it help them to say, that their
accusation is about the choice of a Pastor, seeing Christ has appointed but
one order for the choice both of Pastor and Deacon. And the place alleged by
themselves Act. 6. speaks more expressly and immediately of Deacons then of
Pastor. Thus the heat of their fiery contention is so vehement, that it burns
themselves; as once the mighty men of Babel were consumed by the flame of that
fiery furnace, Dan. 3.20.22.
into which they cast the servants and martyrs of the Lord.

But let us again hearken what further proof they bring, to show that I
deprive the Church of that power which Christ gave unto it, etc.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. V.
THis we prove by his rejecting and opposing the most worthy servants of God
(who came out of England for the same cause he did) whom the Church with one
consent desired, as Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Davenport of later times, and also Mr.
Parker, Dr. Ames, Mr. Forbes, Mr. Peter, etc.

ANSWER.
THis complaint is confirmed and aggravated by Mr. Davenport, when in his
writing he says of our Church, that had not he exercised much patience and
industry, it would certainly have fallen from me, being overburthened with the
loss of so many men so much desired by the Congregation, etc. These
complaynants entitle themselves the burdened members, he intitles them the
overburthened; and makes their burden so great, that had it not been for him,
they would certainly have been broken and fallen from me. May not these
complaynants think that they have great cause to put up Articles of grievance,
and to complain of their burden in that very thing wherein he tells them they
are overburthened? What wonder if they follow when they are so led forth, and
by such a grave leader? The vanity of Mr. Davenport in this speech is upon
other occasion further showed hereafter. I will now for the present turn me to
those complaynants, and in their reproof Mr. Davenport may in part read his
own.

For the more general assertions, I answer 1. Though I and these above
mentioned do all agree in dislike of some corruptions, against which we have
testified, yet it cannot be showed that all came out of England for the same
cause. Each might have their peculiar reason for that.

2. It is untrue and cannot be prooved, that the Church with one consent
desired each of these persons that are here named for instances, especially
after their opinions were once known.

3. What wonder is it that I should oppose some of the persons here named, when
each of themselves were opposite one to another? Mr. Davenport both by his own
confession unto me, and in part by testimony of others, is or was opposite to
Mr. Hooker touching the admission of Brownists to be members of our Church,
while they persisted in their separation from the Church of England, touching
private men's preaching, touching repentance going before faith, etc. Mr. Forbes
was mainely opposite to Mr. Hooker touching the authority and use of Synods and
Classes. Mr. Parker and Dr. Ames were opposite to Mr. Forbes touching the
authority of Magistrates in Ecclesiastical causes. Mr. Forbes having printed a
book touching Adoption going before Justification, and touching the active
obedience of Christ in the point of Justification, Dr. Ames has in print also
declared himself opposite unto him in both those points of doctrine. Mr. Peter
has by his practice declared his judgment, that it is lawful to communicate
with the Brownists in their worship, and by his example has strengthened
diverse members of our Church therein, such as sundry of these complaynants are,
already too much addicted to resort unto the assembly of schismatiqs and to
hear them: but Mr. Davenport hitherto has showed himself opposite to Mr.
Peter's herein, etc.

4. Suppose that many worthy and eminent men do come out of their country for
the same cause; this hinders not, but that there may be in the same eminent
persons diverse eminent offenses and errors, which may be just cause of
opposing them, and refusing them as unfit Ministers for some particular
congregations, when there may be proffitable use of their labors in some other
place of employment. Mr. Hooker said well in this, that every key is not fit
for every lock, though both the metal and the make thereof be good.

5. Though either I or any other man do at any time refuse to give our voices
for the calling of some persons, and do oppose the election of them, is this
to deprive the Church of her power? cannot I use mine own liberty in declaring
what I judge best for the Church, without destroying the liberty of another? Or
if I conceave things to be unjustly carried and swayed against me in the Church
or Consistory, and do therefore bring the matter to a higher lawful
judicatory as the Classis or Synod, that they may judge betwixt us, and
determine what is most for the edification of the Church, this does not prove
that I deprive the Church of that liberty and power which Christ has given
unto it. This is the point that ought to be prooved: this is the (...) ^d be
insisted upon. For this these accusers bring nothing but a mere assertion,
nothing but their bare word, which is far from a proof, far from convincing
their parties to be obstinate in sin.

6. Have not diverse of these complaynants also showed themselves opposite and
averse to the calling or sundry worthy servants of God, both godly and learned,
which have preached among us, whose names I spare to mention? Are they
therefore such as deprive the Church of her power?

To come nearer unto the persons mentioned by them, such as were refused were
not by my authority put back, but some of them by authority of the Magistrate,
as Mr. Parker; or of the Classis, as Mr. Hooker; or of the Consistory in not
consenting and agreeing to call them, as Mr. Forbes and Mr. Peter's; or by their
own voluntary desistance as Mr. Davenport, to avoid the violent rejection by
the Classis, as he himself speaks: Though the authority of the Magistrate did
afterward further restrain us from seeking again either Mr. Hooker or Mr.
Davenport.

To come yet more particularly unto the several persons that are here objected
by them. First for Mr. Hooker, his opinions being made known unto the Classis
from his own handwriting, that was translated and showed unto them, Anno 1631
October. 6.
the Classical assembly did thereupon judge, that he could not with
edification be allowed hereafter to preach in the English Church of this City.
And as for my dealing in that business, they judged also, as appears in the
same act and sentence of the Classis, that I had therein proceeded according to
a good conscience in every point, and had not done otherwise then the care
which I owe unto the Church did require, and therefore for the same ought to be
thanked, and not accused or rebuked as having done evil, etc. And afterward
notwithstanding all opposition made against this act, the Classis still
mainteyned and confirmed the same. And when the knowledge of this controversy
did at length come unto the Synod, Anno 1632 September. 7.
the deputies thereof together with the deputies of the Classis, did in like
manner judge, that a person standing in such opinions as were in writing showed
unto the Classis, could not with any edification be admitted to the ministry
of the English Church at Amsterdam. Had these complaynants been wise and
considerate persons, they would rather have sought to bury the memory of these
things, then by their importunate complaints to compel me in (...) own
defense, to write these things which otherwise I should not have done.

For Mr. Davenport, let Mr. Davenport himself answer for me, though he do it
grudgingly and with a very evil will; for in the midst of his complaints
against me, though he seek to lay blame upon me in the beginning, middle and
end or his writing; yet in his postscript, after his letter to the Classis,
breaking out into complaints against the Classis, he lays upon them the blame
of his rejection, tells how they seemed to be offended at his writing, and
threatened to complain to the Magistrates; and further he says, after much
debate they concluded that I should have but a months time, in which if I did
not answer categorically that I would conform to the orders and customs of
the Dutch Church, and to this particularly in question resting in the judgment
and resolution of the 5 Dutch Preachers, and join with the Classis, or
voluntarily desist, they would complain to the Magistrates, etc. What remained
now to be done but either voluntary desistance on my part, or violent rejection
on theirs? Now although there be in this postscript sundry faults and an
injurious relation of matters to be further examined hereafter; yet thus much
may hence appear, that it was the conclusion of the Classis which caused Mr.
Davenport to desist; that they disliked his opinions as well or more then I;
and that they thought him not a fit Minister for us in that course of his
dissension from us. And why then have not these men directed their grievances
and complaints of opposing and rejecting Mr. Davenport rather against the
Classis then against me. And how is it, that they are not ashamed afterward to
write and say, we conceave Mr. Paget the only cause we are deprived of such
heavenly means for our edification? Herein Mr. Davenport plainly contradicts
them, confessing the Classis to be so strong a cause thereof. And those that
are indifferent judges, may easily perceave how unjustly they lay this
complaint upon me. But of Mr. Davenports calling more hereafter.

For Mr. Parker, I answer, 1. Though there was some difference in the manner of
proceeding about his call, yet did I not reject him, or oppose his calling. But
this I did; I propounded the matter unto the Dutch Ministers, who made some
difficulty about it. When Mr. Halius and Mr. Plancius two ancient Ministers,
were deputed to deal with us hereabout, I labored to clear the difficulties
objected by them. Somewhile after a Dutch Minister and an Elder coming to Mr.
Thomson, signified from the Burgemaisters of this City, Anno 1613
that they desired to keep friendship with his Majesty of Great Britain, that
therefore we should surcease from the pursuit of this business. Beside other
evidence, I have a copy of that letter, which our Eldership sent unto Mr.
Parker, subscribed not only by me, but by Mr. A. and Mr. T. then our Elders,
which may serve for confirmation hereof. And there be some ancient Ministers of
the Classis yet living, whose testimony may give further light hereunto. But I
spare to speak of many things too long to be related, which might be of use
for reproof of this slander. 2. It is yet to be observed, how to make up their
accusation against me, they rake into this business that fell out above 20
years past. If the affairs of these complaynants and their dealings for 20
years together, were called to remembrance, what complaints might be found
against many of them.

For Dr. Ames, 1. I do not remember that ever his name was propounded in the
Eldership, so as that voices were asked and gathered; neitheir is there any
evidence in the acts of our Consistory, that either such a proposition or
motion was made for him, much less of any agreement or resolution to call him.
Only this I remember, that one asking me occasionally in discourse of him, I
signified so much that I thought him not fit for us, neither could I give my
consent for him. A special reason of my judgment was this, that Puritanismus
Anglicanus, c. 2. art. 3. and 6. edit. Latin. Anno 1610
he denied the authority of Synods and Classis. For howsoever I acknowledge, he
has written diverse learned and worthy treatises of much good use for the
Church of God, and many do justly rejoice and give thanks for his labors: Yet
this opinion and practice according to it, could not choose but procure (in my
judgment) great confusion and disturbance of Churches. And how then could I, or
any that so judges, willingly intertayne such an occasion of contention and
scandal? Against this opinion of his, I have earnestly contested with him,
ever since I was acquainted with him. And howsoever in some of his later
writings he has set down his opinion more obscurely and covertly, yet finding
that he persisted therein, I had no reason to seek such an assistant in
government. 2. And besides this, (not to speak of other things) he was
generally held to be a man fitter to be a Professor of Divinity in the
Schools, and that his gift was rather Doctorall then Pastoral. And when he
left his profession in the University, it was generally disliked of all learned
men (so far as I could hear) throughout these countries, none that approoved
him therein. Such also as were supposed to be occasion of his removal, were
much blamed for it; and had I done it, I should have borne a blame even for
this also; for calling him from the Academy, where the Curateurs were so
unwilling to leave him.

Anno 1610
For Mr. Forbes, About some 24 years past, there was a motion of calling him to
be Minister among us. One cause of stay was this: He being banished out of
Scotland, because of the Declinatour or appeal, which he and some others made
from certain civil judges unto the general Assembly or Synod, as only judge
competent in such an Ecclesiastical cause as was in question; Hereupon arose
some question betwixt us, I thinking such an appeal to be unlawful, and he on
the other side not only sought to maintain it, but avouched also that the
oath of supremacy touching the Princes power in Ecclesiastical causes, which
the Ministers of England, whether conformists or non-conformists do all take,
was an unlawful oath. Upon this I was moved to enter into a more serious
consideration, both of his appeal and of my own oath, and desired of Mr.
Forbes that there might be a meeting of Ministers for the hearing of this
difference, offering to show unto him before them the unlawfulnes of his
Appeal. But this offer he absolutely refused: and hereupon not only I, but
all our Elders with one consent, seeing he refused to give us satisfaction, did
also refuse to proceed in the calling of him. And was this my offense? was it
to deprive the Church of that power which Christ gave unto it?

For Mr. Peter's, Though at his first coming I gave some way and opposed not
such as sought to have him here: Yet after some time of his continuance in the
country, when he was called, and confirmed for Pastor of the English Church at
Rotterdam; when after this a new proportion was again made for calling him
hither, I acknowledge that I did not consent unto it. And I think it needles
to give a reason here, why I gave not my voice for him: but I do yet think it
needful to enquire of these complaynants these 2 things; 1. Who be their
witnesses of my opposing Mr. Peter's, for hereby it seems that some sitting
among us, have unlawfully divulged this, which ought to have been concealed,
and that this accusation is framed from the suggestions of such as it least
becomes. 2. This also would be demanded of them, why their complaint is so
partially directed against me alone, seeing there were others in the Consistory
besides me, which did likewise oppose the election of Mr. Peter's, and refused
to give their voice for him, and so were as much guilty of robbing and
depriving the Church of her power as I. But let us hear their further proof.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECTION VI.
SEcondly by his pressing others upon the Congregation, abusing his interest in
the Magistrates and Classis to that purpose, to the unspeakable injury and
grief of the Church, in which course he has prevayled so far as to procure
that none of our own nation that come immediately from England, though never
so fit and able shall be admitted, but we must be forced to take one that can
speak Dutch, and one in this country: though the Lord has fought against his
course hitherto by the great unfitnes of those, who have preached here by his
nomination or consent in sending for.

ANSWER.
OUr Savior teaches us in doing good, to give good measure, Luke 6.38.
pressed down, shaken together, and running over. In stead hereof these
accusers in doing evil unto me, fill an Ephah with slanders; hereof they give
a large measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, as appears
in this section.

1. It is a slander that I press others upon the Congregation; seeing in this
act of election I use no power, but of giving my voice or suffrage as the rest
do: other authority I do not arrogate unto my self: I do not claim unto my
self any more then one voice. Every Elder and Deacon has in like manner a
voice as well as I, in the free choice of Ministers or other officers. If they
conceave any error to be committed in the election, they have equal liberty
and power to seek redress by the same ordinary and lawful means as well as
I.

2. It is an other vile slander, when they say, I abuse my interest in the
Magistrates and Classis to that purpose. It had been requisite that these
accusers should have brought their witnesses for proof of this charge. But lo
in stead of proof we have nothing but their bareword, which is not to be
admitted.

3. It is a further slander, pressed down in their measure, which doubles
their guiltines, in that they spare not to involve the Magistrates in the same
crime with me. If I procure them and prevayle so far with them, that the Church
be thereby deprived of that liberty and power that Christ has given it, for
the free choice of a Minister, to which purpose this is alleged; then are the
Magistrates also guilty in suffering themselves to be abused and corrupted by me
or others for me: and this not in a small matter, but in sacrilege and.
Church-robbery, in taking away that power which Christ gave. Thus to make me a
deceaver, they make them Tyrants, and so that they may wound me, they care not
to shoot them through also with the arrows of their slander.

4. Their slander is yet the greater and the measure thereof shaken together,
when they extend it unto the Classis also, unto the faithful and godly
Ministers, both in the City and Country adjoining thereunto, as if they were
generally so blind and corrupt as to suffer themselves to be abused by me, and
to be carried away even unto sacrilege also to deprive the Church of her
liberty and power. So that they may fall upon me, they spare neither Civil nor
Ecclesiastical estate, they neither honor Magistrates nor reverence
Ministers. That they may make me vile and filthy, it is here evident, that they
spare not to cast the mire and dirt of their reproaches into the faces of
principal men, both in Church and commonwealth. Who would think that W.B.
I.Po. T.Fl. Th.Fa. I.Cr. and their fellows should exalt themselves to such a
height of pride in bold slandering? I.S. in special being a publiq Notary,
whose work is to write down the testimony of witnesses, and ought to know
that matters are thereby confirmed; how is it that he sets his hand unto such a
slanderous accusation, both of Magistrates and Classis abused by me, and led
unto so great sacrilege, and this without pregnant witness, or if they have
sufficient witness, why did they never bring the same unto me for my conviction
before this time?

5. It is to be observed how in the mids of their slander, their very reproach
it self serves to the clearing of me; for if I have such interest both in the
Magistrates and Ministers of the Classis, and can so much prevayle with both,
as they here do write; may not those that are unpartiall, and wise in heart
conceave hereby, that I have obtained this interest in them, not by abusing and
corrupting them, but rather by walking uprightly before them, and approoving my
ways in their sight?

6. That which the Magistrates have done is this: After the departure of Mr.
Hooker, calling for me and two of our Elders, and exhorting us to proceed
without delays unto the choice of such a Minister as should accord with the
Classis, they required also that if it were possible, such an one should be
called which could speak dutch, giving this double reason thereof; that both he
might be fit to sit in the Classis where the affairs of the Church are debated
in the Dutch tongue, and that he might be the mouth of the Church unto the
Magistrates upon occasion as necessity should require in those things that were
to be treated of with them. And since also they have required that we should
choose one out of these countries near unto us, rather then to send into
England for one, giving likewise this double reason thereof; that both they
might better inform themselves touching the state of the Minister that was to
be allowed by them; and because it would be a greater repulse and trouble unto
the Minister, sent for so far out of England, if it should fall out that they
did not like him nor admit of him. Let reasonable men judge whether there be
such abuse, and such unspeakable injury as these accusers complain of, upon
this act of the Magistrates: especially considering that a Minister called unto
this place, which cannot speak Dutch, is in great measure no better then a
dumb Minister in respect of one special work of his calling, which is to give
advise for the greatest difficulties in the government of these Churches, in
the ordinary meetings of the Classis.

7. Notwithstanding this charge given by the Magistrates, yet when Mr.
Davenport was come out of England, although not lawfully sent for, though he
could not speak Dutch, yet when there was hope of his accord with us, upon
intercession of the Dutch Ministers, who were informed that he agreed with
them, the gentleness and equanimity of the Magistrates was such, that they were
content to dispense with his want of the Dutch language, and for supply of our
necessity to allow of him. But finding after that they were deceaved in him,
that he did not rest in the advice of their Ministers, and that great
contention was thereupon raised among us, what wonder if they renewed their
charge more strictly then before?

Lastly, behold here the greatest slander of all, and the measure of their
slander running over; whiles in their rash judgment and sinful taking of the
name of God in vain, they make him a party and an adversary against me, by
affirming that the Lord has fought against my course hitherto, etc. for
whosoever in their unjust contentions do make the Lord an enemy where he is
not, and to fight against such as he does not, they do reproach the Lord
himself, and lay iniquity upon the Lord, making him a partaker with them for
maintenance of their sin. Their proof that the Lord has fought against me,
is from the great unfitnes of those who have preached here by my nomination or
consent in sending for. But this maine proof is many ways to their own just
reproof.

The first that preached here by my consent in sending for him, though not by
my nomination was Mr. Balmford, and this after the charge given by the
Magistrates. His great unfitnes is their great slander that avouch it, unless
they could prove it. How some of these complaynants fought against his calling
is notorious through the country, to the shame and reproach of our Church.

The next that preached here by my consent in sending for, together with
consent of the Eldership, is a man endued with special gifts of learning,
piety and utterance, adorned with the testimony of worthy men in those parts
where he lived; and it is another notable slander to speak of his great
unfitnes. Such reproaches are quickly broched, but the guilt of them is not so
quickly and easily taken away.

The next that preached here, for whom I have borne many reproaches, before this
accusation was written, is a man also of special note for his learning and
labors in the Church of God, and much commended unto us by diverse men of
esteem. Howbeit there was none that made so much scruple in sending for him as
I did; neither did I at all give my voice unto him, but being overswayed by
voices, I yielded at their desire to write unto him in the name of the Elders
and Deacons, and subscribed it as a witness of that which the Eldership
desired, which was only to hear him and to take trial of his gifts. It may
here be observed what double and treble injury is done unto me in this business,
1. how unjustly I am dealt withal by them that tell abroad, and that so
falsely the things that are done in the Consistoty. 2. How partially I alone am
blamed for that which others did, and I least of all contented unto. 3. How
unjustly I am blamed for that, which is absolutely lawful, namely to take
trial of men's gifts, knowledge and utterance, howsoever they prove upon
trial; for he had no calling, but was only sent for that we might hear him
and confer with him. How ill advised then have these complaynants been, upon so
weak a foundation to build so heinous an accusation that God has fought
against me? I may better say with the Psalmist, Be merciful unto me, O God,
Psalm. 56.1.
for man would swallow me up, he fights daily and oppresses me.

Neither am I fought against by these complaynants only, but Mr. Davenport
also fights against me in like manner, when to prove that I did not desire
him here, he alleges this reason in end of his third writing: because he has
always so much urged to have one that has lived some years in this country,
and has hitherto opposed diverse worthy men that have come immediately from
England, my hope is at an end and I must rest. The answer before given unto the
complaynants, may also serve for answer to Mr. Davenport. Only in this Mr.
Davenport overlasheth more then they; and his assertion has more untruth in it
then theirs, when he says, I have always so much urged to have one that has
been some years in this country, etc. for I never urged this, till the
Magistrates urged us to have consideration hereof: and they never urged it till
of later time; it was not urged till after Mr. Hooker, and therefore the
ignorance of the Dutch tongue was not alleged as any hindrance either of Mr.
Hookers calling, or of any other nominated before his time. Here through the
importunity of Mr. Davenport breaking in upon me, I shall a while leave these
complaynants, and make a necessary digression for the declaration of such
things as have been occasion of the strife raised up in this place.

The Story of some proceedings about the calling of Mr. DAVENPORT. The occasion
of writing this Story. SECTION VII.
WHiles I was busy in writing down my answer unto these complaynts, it is
given me to understand, that an other complaint is written against me by Mr.
Davenport, and secretly dispersed among our people. Having gotten a copy
thereof, I find that he has dealt very injuriously with me, not only in
misreporting many things, but in sundry unjust inferences and reasonings which
he makes thereupon. I find also that most of his complaints are for the
substance of them, the very same that these complaynants have framed against
me, as if they and he had spoken out of one mouth, or as if the same pen had
written both. His writing is threefold, and each of them has his name
subscribed. The first is his Letter written to the Classis, translated out of
Latin into English: The second an instruction given unto some of our Elders:
The third is a new addition unto the former, both against me and the Classis
also. Each of these three writings are stained with untruth, and matter of
reproach, and are fit to kindle contention in our Church, and to harden these
complaynants in their unjust opposition, not against me only, but against the
Classis and the governors of these Churches; which is a very evil office, and
far unbeseeming a Minister of the Gospel, and such an one as is so eminent and
renowned in the Church of England. Therefore before I proceed further in the
refutation of these complaynants and their objections, I have thought it
needful to set down a short story or narration touching the calling of Mr.
Davenport, and the issue thereof, which may serve to give light unto this
controversy, in stead of so many broken and false relations, which here and
there are made to my prejudice, and serve to darken and obscure the truth. His
two former writings for the full answer thereof, I do for this present leave
unto the consideration of the Classis, unto whom they were given, to deal
therein as shall be judged most convenient: For the third writing, I purpose
now to answer it in every particular thereof; yet so as I shall take them in by
the way, and insert them (as I have already begun) into that answer which I
make unto these complaynants, in such place and upon such occasion as I shall
judge the fittest, seeing they all may be referred eitheir unto this story, or
unto one or other head of their complaints. Yea and for the matters of fact
contained in his former writing to the Classis, because some of them are the
very same which these complaynants do object, therefore can I not altogether
pass by them without some touch thereof.

Of his disordred sending for out of England.
Mr. Davenport out of England, did not according to good order communicate the
matter with those whom it specially concerned, who in all such weighty and
public affairs of the Church, should by their counsel and direction have
gone before others therein. And Mr. Davenport himself had done more wisely, if
before his coming he had consulted with us. Now notwithstanding this
disorderly and unlawful manner of sending for, without my knowledge, and
without the consent or knowledge of our Eldership; yet being come out of
England, I made no exception hereat for the stay or hindrance of his calling. I
desired him to preach and entered into deliberation how to accomplish his
calling. But this Mr. Davenport in his third writing perverteth to show that I
did not desire to have him, because (says he) several times he showed his
dislike of my coming hither without his desire, or consent in sending for me,
though it is apparent that God sent me hither at a needful time, when without
me they would have been destitute, he being unable to preach or to come unto
the Church. Hereunto I answer,

1. He does untruely and unjustly relate my speeches, by leaving out the
special cause of my dislike: he speaks only of my desire and consent, which
was wanting in his sending for; whereas I spoke how he was sent for without my
knowledge, and without the knowledge or consent of our Eldership. And who sees
not how great a difference there is betwixt my words and his misreport of them?
If the matter had been communicated with the Eldership, and if his sending for
had been allowed of the most, his coming over upon such a warrant, might have
been lawful and just, though my desire or consent had been wanting, but to
send for him without my knowledge, and without either consent or knowledge of
the Eldership, this was the thing I showed my dislike of.

2. When at several times upon occasion, I showed my dislike of the disordred
course in sending for him, and yet in such manner, that at the same time I
still showed withal, that this disorder should not hinder me from furthering
his call, and that I would not take any exception thereat, if he did otherwise
accord with us; this is a plain proof that I was willing enough to have him
with us, and his contrary inference from hence is vain.

3. Though in regard of Gods providence which extends it self unto all
things, good or evil, Mr. Davenport might say he was sent of God in a needful
time, when I was sick; yet this is no warrant or excuse at all for that
disorder used in sending for him: for God oftentimes sends wicked men and
wicked spirits in needful time, to accomplish his will, and to serve his
providence, both for deliverance of his people and for punishment; and yet
those wicked instruments that were so sent of God, are not excused thereby.
Thus the 1. Sam. 23 27.28.
Philistines might be said to be sent of God in his providence in a needful
time, to rescue David from Saul at S^la-hammalekoth, and yet no thanks to them
that wanted lawful calling to invade the Israelites.

4. It is apparent that Mr. Davenport his not-comming in the needful time, was
one special means of my sickness: for upon the report and exspectation of his
coming, there grew a neglect in time to provide other means for supply of my
place the Lord's Day before his coming, thereupon being frustrate of that
exspectation, rather then the place should be destitute, I strayned my self
above my power, not being fully recovered, and so the same evening of that day,
I got a dangerous relapse, and my sickness was renewed through his occasion,
whereby we were disappointed. Otherwise there was great appearance of my speedy
recovery. This is that needful assistance, whereof there is further occasion
to speak hereafter, where it is again boasted of, and I upbrayded with it
again, both by him and by these complaynants also.

Of Mr. DAVENPORT his resignation of his Pastoral charge in London. SECT. IX.
HAving passed by this disorder of sending for him, there was also another
difficulty, which I did not insist upon, as I might have done, if I had been so
desirous to hinder his calling as he pretends; for though it be necessary that
those which leave a Pastoral calling, should bring authentiq testimony of
their lawful dimission, before they be admitted to take upon them the like
charge in another place, yet neither did the want of this, cause me to make any
delay in the calling of Mr. Davenport, as justly it might have done: but I
accepted and rested in his own relation of the matter, though I confess it
was something more for furtherance of his calling, then I ought to have done. I
do the rather note this, because Mr. Davenport, to manifest that I never
desired him, alleges that before he came hither, when I heard he was to come
over, I preached publicly against his resigning up of his place, etc.
whereunto my answer is,

1. He complayneth unjustly against me for that which I did not. I had indeed
preached upon those words of the Apostle; 2. Cor. 4.16
for this cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, etc. and there
among other instances of men's unlawful fainting in affliction, I reckoned that
for one, when men through fear of danger and trouble do unlawfully leave
their stations and flocks, and forsake the calling of God. Iona. 1. Ier. 20.9.
I showed the danger hereof in the example of Jonah fleeing from the presence
of God, and from Jeremy that was tempted thereunto, etc. But it does not
appear from hence, that I preached just against his resignation of his place,
the manner whereof I knew not; no more then I intend to speak against the
person of such or such a particular sinner, when I preach against the special
sins that are common in the world.

2. Whereas he adds touching his resignation, that I afterward justified it,
when he related unto me the cause thereof, the carrying therein, and the consent
of many worthy divines, and of the Congregation it self thereunto. The truth
is, as I remember, that I did approove of diverse particular things, which he
told me that he had done in that business, which I conceaved to be so as he
related, yet did I not therefore absolutely justify his resignation.

3. Herein appeared that I was willing enough to admit of him, in that I did
not enter into a stricter examination of these two things; first of his
evidence, to show that both these Divines and his Congregation did clearly
consent unto his resignation; and secondly of the grounds whereupon they
consented, which were needful to be known, with some other things also that
belong unto so great and weighty a matter, as that was; especially considering
that worthy Divines are sometimes mistaken in such questions, and justly
corrected by others.

4. Suppose that I had preached against his resignation, yet would not this
justify his collection from thence, namely, that I never desired him; for both
before I heard of his resignation, and after again, if it had been as he
faith, that I justified it upon his relation, he might then have conceaved an
alteration in me, and so not have concluded, that I never desired him.

Of the knowledge which Mr. DAVENPORT had of our differences before his coming
over unto us. SECT. X.
Mr. Davenport before his coming into these Countries, had heard of our
troubles and controversies, and he had heard of the occasion thereof; he knew
what was required of Mr. Hooker, and saw in writing a copy of the differences
between him and us, as both Mr. Davenport himself has confessed and others
have testified. He might well think that if he brought the same opinions with
him unto us, he should thereby bring the like troubles, and revive and rekindle
that fire that was quenched. If at his coming over he was of the same mind
with us, how is be so suddenly changed? If he was not of the same mind with
us, what meant he to come over to disturb our peace? If he came with a
discordant mind, what could he exspect but new contentions, rents and schisms
about those things, which he knew had occasioned so great disturbance before?

Mr. Davenports excuse touching his knowledge and sight of the questions
proposed unto Mr. Hooker, is that he saw the questions in London above a year
before his coming over, when he was far from any thoughts of coming to
Amsterdam, or to any place out of his own Land. But if he saw them so long
before, he had the more time to deliberate ripely. If he either forgate them,
or lost the writing which was communicated with him, he had opportunity and
means enough to have got them again. And when he was by some particular
friends moved to come hither, had he not then just occasion to have considered
the state of these Churches, before he came over to disturb their peace by his
opposition and contrariety unto them? When his thoughts of coming to Amsterdam
did arise with in him, ought not this care to have risen up in his heart
together, to consider our estate and his own disposition for agreement with
us, least he should add fuel to that flame of contention, the light whereof
has been seen so far of.

He answers further, And when he did come over, he purposed both in England
and here, that he came but for 3 or 4 months, for which time what need was
there of knowing, much less practicing or conforming to the Dutch Churches?
But he ought to have considered better,

1. For a man of plausible gifts, eminent, and of fame, and wanting present
employment, to present himself where a place is vacant, where much contention
has been about that place, though he offer to stay but for 3 of 4 months; who
sees not that such an one does manifestly give occasion of seeking him and
calling him unto that place? Diverse learned and godly Ministers being our
neighbors in this Country, have been loath to show themselves in this place,
and notwithstanding their just occasions of coming hither, have willingly
absented themselves a longer time, least they should seem to offer themselves
unto this calling: such was their modesty and care to avoid all appearance of
intrusion. Mr. Hooker also though sent for by a private man, yet being come
over to Rotterdam, yet there he stopped and stayed himself, and was not willing
to come hither, before he had been sent for by our Eldership.

2. Such as secretly sent for Mr. Davenport, and I.C. that fetched him over,
did they seek him but for 3 or 4 months? The friend which by an open and
unsealed letter, which Mr. Davenport himself brought unto me from London,
entreated me to receave Mr. Davenport for a fellow-helper, did not desire that
for 3 or 4 months only.

3. Was it likely that after 3 or 4 months preaching among us, he could easily
be dismissed? And must not our labor and care of seeking and calling another
Minister, be interrupted for that time, if not wholly broken off?

4. Suppose he purposed to stay but 3 or 4 months only, yet even for that
time it was needful for him to know the state of the Dutch Churches, and of
ours with them, there being such controversies raised as he had heard of, and
to that end to inform himself by inquiry, that being come unto us, he might so
much the better have applied himself to do good. For seeing a good conscience
suffers not a man to be neutrall, nor to suspend his judgment, when it is
seriously desired, but forces him to bear witness unto the truth, when it is
called into question, in those things which he esteems to be necessary and
agreeable to the will of God; how dangerous then had it been for Mr. Davenport,
not to be well informed of our estate, when the members of our Church should
require his judgment for their satisfaction and help? In 3 or 4 months time a
man might do more hurt even by his private conference, then in 7 years could
be repaired again.

5. Suppose Mr. Davenport had never purposed to have come into these Countries,
yet had it been very needful and useful for him, or any that desires the
reformation of a Church in any Country, to know the state and practice of
adjoining Reformed Churches, and that for their help in diverse present
controversies, which help while some have neglected, they have dangerously
stumbled and fallen to the great offense of many.

Mr. Davenport answers yet further and says, When he did consider of that
question (touching Baptism) as it was put to Mr. Hooker, there was not neither
in the question nor answer sufficient light to inform him of that which time
has discovered herein, neither can any man from thence know what in this
question is to be disliked.

But on the contrary, many men from that question and answer might have known
what was to be liked or disliked therein, neither is there such obscurity
therein as is pretended. If Mr. Hooker had not understood it, as it was put
unto him, he being then in these Countries, might easily have informed himself
further, even the same day that it was propounded unto him. If Mr. Davenport
doubted of the meaning, and if I. C. one of these chief complaynants, being
sometime with him in London could not, yet the Ministers of the Dutch Church
his neighbors in the same City, could easily have informed him: and if he had
not found that sufficient, yet had it been ten times better for him to have
waited for a letter of information from hence, either touching that or any
other question, concerning the practice of these Churches, then to have raised
such broils and contentions among us by coming over unresolved to agree with
us, and by bringing his dissension with him.

Of the private conference had with Mr. DAVENPORT after he was come over unto
us. SECT. XI.
BEside the knowledge which Mr. Davenport had of our estate before his coming,
I was willing to manifest the same further unto him after he was come to
Amsterdam; and upon conference with him about such things wherein Mr. Hooker
differed from us, to the great disturbance of our Church, he seemed unto me to
accord with us, and to dislike the opinions of Mr. Hooker generally. The maine
or only difference which he persisted in for a long time, was about the
baptism of infants, whose parents were no members of the Church, nor would
submit unto any private examination by him, further then their public
profession of faith before the whole Church. I showed him what scandal had
risen among the Brownists by denying of Baptism to the infants of such as made
profession of the same says with us; how they had written and printed books
against the Dutch and French Churches for this matter as well as others; how
they had excommunicate Mr. Slade, for defending the practice of the Dutch
here^^, how Mr. Johnson, Pastor of the Brownists, began at length to see his
error, and acknowledged his fault to Mr. Slade so wronged by them; how
unworthy a thing it would be for us, to take up the error which some of the
Brownists began to lay down; how the other Brownists would now a fresh insult
against us; how some among us that were come from the Brownists, would be
hardened in their error; and in sum how all the Church generally would take
offense to see a double practice, and so different betwixt us, to see me
ordinarily baptising those, whom he should refuse to baptize; to see him make a
separation from me in the administration of Baptism, which was wont to be
performed jointly by me, and my other fellow-minister, the one (whose course
was to preach) declaring the institution of Baptism from the Pulpit, and the
other sitting below to baptize the infant according to the manner of these
Churches. I did also propound unto him some places of Scriptures, touching the
examination of parents above-sayd, for the baptism of their children, and
showed that when so great multitudes were at once baptized by John Baptist Mat.
3. Mark. 1. and by the Apostles Act. 2. there could not be a strict private
examination of every particular person; by conference of other Scriptures their
confession of their sins, and profession of faith, were rather to be conceaved
some solemn and public testification of their consent unto the Doctrine that
was preached unto them, etc. but by such private conferences I prevayled
nothing with him in this point.

And in this place I have just occasion to answer the unjust complaint of Mr.
Davenport for my no better usage of him. In his Page 12.
third writing as it is in the printed book, he pretends two special
injuries, which I should do unto him: The first is, that I said and reported
that I had often desired to dispute or confer with Mr. Davenport touching
this point, but that he refused it, etc. Hereunto I answer,

1. It is untrue that I so reported; I know we did diverse times confer and
talk together about this point, and I know that many others did know it well
enough. But this I have said and reported diverse times; when after our
conference together, some of these complaynants came unto me, and spoke against
me, and the Dutch Ministers, as if we had no word of God, but customs and
examples of men for our practice, then upon such provocation (as has been
noted before, Sect. 3.
) I offered unto them, (...) Mr. Davenport would set down in writing any
warrant from the Scripture for his opinion, I would then give him an answer in
writing, etc. But though this was offered unto them sundry times, yet did none
of them procure that the question should be in writing discussed betwixt us.

2. Whereas he says, there passed 2 or 3 serious conferences between us,
wherein this point was disputed, etc. I acknowledge that all our conferences
were serious, because they were not in jest, but that there were any accurate
or exact disputations betwixt us, as Mr. Davenport seems to say, that I deny.
And for his part, I do not remember, that ever he propounded any argument in
maintenance of his opinion, further then to make some exceptions upon occasion
of that which I spoke.

3. Where he adds touching these conferences, that he has them in writing by
him; Herein I do complain of Mr. Davenport for want of sincere and plain
dealing; that he should write down my speeches, and the talk that passed
between him and me, without my knowledge in such a stealing and secret
fashion. It seems he came prepared so to speak, as that he would have his
words written, which was far from my thought. I dreamed of no such underhand
course, but discoursed as occasion was given in that time of my sickness, when
this was done. Honest and upright dealing required that he should have
acquainted me with his purpose, which had I known, I should have condescended
unto a writing upon equal terms, as willingly as he. It was strange unto me,
when I did first hear of this by one of our Elders that told me, how he had
written down the passages betwixt us, when he departed home from me, and in my
heart I loathed such his dealing, which here he is not ashamed to publish
himself, saying that he has these conferences in writing by him. Had he
either given me leave to write mine own words, and not like a deceytfull
Notary, to set them down at home in a corner as he thought best: or had he at
least showed me afterward what he had written, to see whether I would have
owned th^se speeches so covertly recorded by him behind the curtain, it might
have been some part of amends, though not sufficient. How can this m^n
complain for want of brotherly love in others, and yet he so far from honest
and ingenuous dealing himself?

4. The mis^^p^^t that Mr. Davenport has already made of the private
conference that (...) between him and me, does give me just cause of
disclayming and rejecting his apocryphal scripture, or hidden writing of his
and my words. For in his first writing to the Classis, he offends both in
excess and defect; both relating what was not spoken, and omitting that which
was spoken, and needful to be known for the matter in hand. In setting down
the conference about his examination of parents, he neither reports my
question, nor his own answer rightly and truly. I demanded of him what
measure of knowledge he would in his examination require in parents for the
baptising of their children, which question is of great use for deciding of the
controversy: but this my question is concealed, and another feigned in stead
thereof. His answer to my question, which I often and plainly urged him
withal, was not as he relates, which is also from the point, neither was it
satisfactory, for he professed that measure of knowledge required, could not be
declared till the time of examining the persons; that then he should judge
thereof. In the same writing also he does make a very defective relation of his
answer and my question, about his consent unto the writing of the 5 Ministers,
of which more hereafter. Hereby may be conceaved what impartiality and
sincerity we are to exspect from his lurking notes of this conference.

5. Whereas he speaks of his not ceassing till I gave over; of my leaving it
now to the Dutch Preachers; and that I would speak no more with him alone. Let
the reader know, that I did not give over conference for fear of being
convinced by any force of his arguments; but seeing little fruit of my talk
with him, I desired him to confer with the Dutch Ministers, that could give him
better satisfaction. Neither did I then say, that I would speak no more with
him alone; but afterward upon his refusal of the calling, when he came into
the Church, and desired to speak with me alone from the rest of the
Consistory; I required him to speak in their presence, and refused to confer
with him alone about that matter, for fear my words should be perverted: and
likewise when I first understood how his manner was to write down my words,
when he came home, I then professed unto diverse, that it was not safe for me to
confer with him alone, unles witnesses were present.

Th^^^saile of 5 Dutch (...) ^ting of Mr. DAVENPORT. SECT. XII.
WHen I had in vain privately conferred with Mr. Davenport, to persuade him to
accord with us; when as he still refused to join with me in that order of
Administration of Baptism, wherein Mr. Pot had so long continued with me, I
offered further that if any other convenient way of accommodation could be found
out, I would willingly hearken unto it. After this there came unto me Mr.
Geldorpius, and signified unto me, that if I would send for 40^ 5 of the Dutch
Ministers, and confer with them about the business of Mr. Davenport, for the
accommodating thereof he thought they would willingly come unto me, but that
they would not come unsent for; and if I would send forthem, he would be the
messenger. I thanked him for his offer, and accepted willingly his motion,
praying him to go for them, which he also did. Hereupon there came unto me 5
of them, some of them being also requested thereunto by some of our Elders.
Being come, after some conference and deliberation together, they found it good
to set down their advise for accommodation in writing. The copy whereof,
translated out of Latin into English, is as follows.

We the underwritten Ministers of the Dutch Church in the City of Amsterdam,
being specially and lovingly requested and desired of the Reverend Mr. PAGET, a
faithful Pastor in the English Church of the same City, as also of the
Reverend Brethren the Elders and Deacons of the same English Church, that we
would not refuse sincerely to declare and show our private judgment about the
calling of the Reverend, most famous and learned Mr. DAVENPORT, which seems to
be desired of the whole Church aforesaid; and that in this particular case
alone, concerning the Baptism of those infants, which are offered to be
baptized in the English Church: Having well understood and duly weighed the
whole matter on both sides, and having thoroughly examined it according to the
rule of Gods Word, and the order received in the Re^^^^^^ (...) these
Provinces, in which the aforesaid English Church does profess it self a
member under the Classis of Amsterdam: We do sincerely, and in the presence of
God with good conscience answer and declare, that we desire nothing more, then
that the foresaid Mr. DAVENPORT, whose notable learning and singular piety is
very much approved and commended of all the English our Brethren; whom also in
this regard, and for his other commendable gifts, we understand to be most
dear unto Mr. PAGET, may be lawfully promoted unto the ministry of the
English Church aforesaid: We do also greatly approove of his good zeal and
care of having some precedent private examination of the parents, and sureties
of these children in the Christian Religion; Yet touching the matter it self
we do so judge, that this foresaid examination be ordained so far as may stand
with the edification of the English Church; but if happily the parents or
sureties shall refuse to come and undergo this examination, or if for the
shortness of time, or for other just causes it cannot be done, or if those that
do come shall not seem for that time to satisfy the judgment of the Brethren,
one of mo^e that do examine them, that yet the infant, whose parents and
sureties are manifest to be Christians, and which publicly before the Church
do profess Christian Religion, at the reading of the leiturgie of the
Sacrament of Baptism, shall not therefore be excluded from Baptism, or
deprived thereof; but that such ignorant parents and sureties, be further
instructed after the infant be baptized, to wit, because the infants of
Christians ought not to bear and suffer the punishment of the ignorance, or
yet of such disobedience of their parents or sureties. If yet any other case
fall out, whereby it may seem that the infant presented should not be
baptized, that then the judgment of the whole English Presbytery, or also if
(...) be, and if conveniently it may be done, that the judgment of the Classis
of Amsterdam be obtained and heard, and rested in.

So was it done and transacted in the house of Mr. PAGET, the 28 day of
Ianuarij 1634.

The subscription was Ioannes le Maire. Iacobus Triglandus. Rudolphus Petri.
Iacobus Laurentius. H. Geldorpius.


This their advise being thus written down and read before me, they enquired
of me, whether I for my part did rest therein. I signified my consent with
them, and so yielded unto the accommodation of Mr. Davenport, as far as they
could in conscience desire of me. Hereby then it may appear, how vainly and
unjustly Mr. Davenport does report of me in each of his 3 writings.

In his first Book of complaints page 3.4.
writing to the Classis, he tells how I dealt extremely with him, and rejected
all his labor for a peacable composing, prudent accommodating and brotherly
ending of matters betwixt him and me privately, or by the counsel of the
Elders of his own Church, nor would (...) to his advise for accommodation
without consent of the Classis. In his Page 11.
second writing the instruction given to some of the Elders, he reports that I
would not yield any brotherly moderation unto him, etc. In his Page 15.
third writing, he reports that I refused all means of accommodation. All
these reports are untruthes. And this writing witnesses for me; that I was
willing to yield unto this peaceable composing and prudent accommodation, which
these learned and prudent men at first without knowledge of the Classis, at the
motion of their friend, at the entreaty of our Elders, and at my request did
privately advise us unto, they protesting in the presence of God, that they
dea^ sincerely and with good conscience, desiring nothing more then to further
the calling of Mr. Davenport among us. And is not this their solemn and
conscionable protestation as much and much more to be regarded of me, then the
imprudent and unbrotherly reports and complaints of Mr. Davenport?

Of the order agreed upon in the Consistory also, for the accommodation of Mr.
DAVENPORT. SECT. XIII.
MOreover about the same time, before the writing of the 5 Ministers was
communicated with Mr. Davenport, and before his consent thereunto was demanded,
Ianuar. 15. 1634.
there was an order made in our Eldership, and concluded by consent both of
Elders and my self, that the Coster or Keeper of our Church, should send or
bring unto Mr. Davenport such parents as came unto the Coster beforehand, to
tell him of their children which they had to be baptized.

And above this for enlarging of this order, and for further accommodation of
Mr. Davenport, I voluntarily offered and promised to send unto Mr. Davenport
those parents which came unto me, to advertise me of their infants to be
baptized, and so departing from my right and interest in that business, I was
content to refer the whole work of examination unto his discretion, that so
whether he or I declared the institution of Baptism from the Pulpit, as our
course was to preach; whether he or I baptized the infants standing below when
our course was not to preach, he might either way receave satisfaction by a
precedent examination, so far as we could procure it from the parents.

Of Mr. DAVENPORT his consenting unto the writing of the 5 Ministers, upon the
order made in the Consistory. SECT. XIV.
THis order above-sayd being made, and a copy of the 5 Ministers advise in
writing, being brought unto Mr. Davenport; at our next meeting in the Church,
after the second sermon was ended, I demanded of Mr. Davenport whether he
rested in the counsel which the Ministers had given: And he then signified
his consent both by Mr. W. to whom he referred us for answer; and partly by
himself upon consideration of that order in the Consistory, which Mr. W. had
told him of.

Hereupon immediately even the same hour both Elders and Deacons assembling
together in the Consistory, Ianuar. 22. 1634.
and Mr. W. witnessing that he consented, upon condition that the order taken
by us in the Consistory might be observed, the consent of Mr. Davenport was
then recorded, and upon that (...) it was presently resolved by us both to
elect him for Minister, and to depute some to go unto the Magistrates to seek
their approbation.

But here Mr. Davenport steps in and complains of wrong; for here we have fit
place to mention and insert that second special injury, Book of complaints
page 12. and 13.
which he says I did unto him in reporting that he was gone from his promise,
for that he said he would rest in the writing of the 5 Ministers, but now would
not. He objecteth against me in the same place, and says, I know that from the
first to the last, my self never heard him speak any such word. Hereunto I
answer,

1. Suppose that I my self had never heard him speak any such word; yet when
as he upon my demand of his consent, did refer me for answer unto Mr. W. and
said, he had given his answer unto him, I was then to take the answer of Mr. W.
as if it had been his own word, and as if he himself had spoken it. If Mr. W.
had spoken of himself without such warrant from Mr. Davenport, his word had
been of less weight, but now referring me for his answer to Mr. W. he thereby
gave authority both unto him to speak, and unto me to receave his testimony.

2. I went yet further, for though he had referd me for his answer unto Mr. W.
yet I told him at the same time, that it was better that he should give his
answer himself; whereupon he said (not as he reports in his letter to the
Classis, Page 4.
that the writers themselves did not require this of him,) but this he said, he
thought the Dutch Ministers had done as much as they could, and so referd
himself to that order of the Consistory, which Mr. W. had told him; and Mr. W.
being present, said unto me, that I needed not to speak further unto him about
it.

3. Whereas he says further, that the night before they went to the
Magistrates for their consent to his call, I apprehended his answer rightly,
and told the Elders that I perceaved he did not rest in that writing of the 5
Ministers, further then it made way for an order to be made in the Consistory.
If this be true, it follows that he did consent and rest in that writing of
the Ministers, seeing this order was made and confirmed in the Consistory. And
therefore when as on the contrary he afterward would not rest in that writing
and order together, both being made for his accommodation, this shows that he
changed and went back from his answer rightly apprehended by me.

4. When he yet adds touching this order, and the way made unto it by the
writing and his consent in that manner, that I showed my self discontented
thereat, it is both untrue, and has no color of reason for it (if he mean
that the order was made without my consent or against my will) seeing I had a
principal hand in the making that order, not only consenting, but also
motioning and propounding it, as is noted in the act, and departing from mine
own right to make the same as is showed before.

Mr. Davenport excepteth further touching that Elders speech, viz. Mr. W.
testimony of his consent, and says, That Elder denies that he said so, and
knows that I said otherwise to him; that which he said (as I am informed) was
only to quiet Mr. Paget, etc. I answer,

1. Upon the relation of Mr. W. to whom Mr. Davenport referd me for answer, it
is recorded in the Ianuar. 22 1634.
acts of our Consistory, that we found Mr. Davenport consenting unto that
writing of the 5 Ministers, and to their counsel and advise upon condition
and promise that a Ianuar. 15 1634.
former Act of the Consistory should be observed: which Act or order before
mentioned, having been propounded by me, and approoved by the rest, was never
reversed, but Februa. 1^ 1634.
confirmed and enlarged afterward: And therefore that Act still remaining
firm and inviolate, his consent also was to be deemed firm in like manner.
This record is an authentic witness of his consent which we found testified
unto us.

2. This consent of Mr. Davenport does not only remain upon record with us;
but Mr. W. himself being then scribe of the Consistory, did with his own hand
write down this consent of Mr. Davenport: And therefore he cannot deny, that
which thus passed among us, without double blame, for denying both the truth
and his own handwriting.

3. Whereas Mr. Davenport says, that he said otherwise unto him, and that he
knows it. This concerns them two to look unto, and to debate among
themselves what the one has said, and what the other knows of it.

4. Mr. W. has not only in Consistory testified this consent of Mr.
Davenport, but has also said as much unto some of the Dutch Ministers, when
they were entreated to further the calling of Mr. Davenport with the
Magistrates. Then Mr. W. testified also, that though Mr. Davenport made some
difficulty at the first, yet in the end he had consented unto their writing.
Should Mr. W. deny what he has said, as Mr. Davenport would have it, from
thence also might he be convicted. By this it may appear, how untrue the
report of Mr. Davenport is, who says afterward again, It has been often
cleared, that he mis-understood that Elder, if so he understood him. For it was
never once cleared: but the contrary is clear and evident by plain testimony,
both in and out of the Consistory.

5. If that which this Elder Mr. W. did say, was only to quiet Mr. Paget, as
Mr. Davenport says he is informed, then is this Elder guilty of great
dissimulation. For if Mr. Davenport did not consent, would he to quiet me, and
only to quiet me, abuse the Eldership with a false testimony, and make it a
ground of their proceedings? for as is expressed in our Act aforesaid, upon the
signification of Mr. Davenport his consent, it was thereupon agreed by general
consent, that Mr. Davenport should be chosen for Minister unto this
Congregation, and that parties deputed should go unto the Magistrates to seek
their approbation and consent for his calling. What had this been else but to
have laid a false ground for his calling? And hereupon occasion of controversy
might have risen hereafter, and the lawfulnes of his calling might have come
into question as being procured by deceit and false information. Would Mr. W.
only to quiet me, abuse both Magistrates and Classis also, who likewise upon
opinion of his accord with us, did give their consent for this calling of Mr.
Davenport? When Mr. W. signified unto D. Laurentius, that Mr. Davenport
consented unto their writing, was that also only to quiet me? Who sees not
what an unsufferable abuse this should have been, for an Elder of the Church to
have dallyed with so many persons, and to have deluded them in so weighty a
cause?

6. That which Mr. Davenport adds, that this Elder told me, that some part of
that writing, with an order to be made in the Consistory, being joined
together, would settle things, etc. this had been as vain as the rest. But
neither was I, nor the other Ministers so simple to be deluded with such talk
of a piece, or part of the writing, whereunto consent was required: And besides
his consent mentioned in the Act of the Consistory, and written by Mr. W.
himself, is not to a part, but absolutely to the writing; and if after such
absolute mention of consent to the writing, he should go about so to expound
his meaning, that he had meant but a part of the writing; what had it been ^^s
but plain equivocation and legerdemaine?

7. Whereas Mr. Davenport relates how this Elders speech unto me, was of an
order to be made in the Consistory, which being joined together, would settle
things, etc. herein it seems they mis-tooke one another: The speech and
testimony of the Elder, about the consent of Mr. Davenport, and the record of
his consent written by Mr. W. hand, was not in respect of an order to be made,
but of an order already made; not in respect of a future, but of a former Act;
and upon the observation of that former Act is his consent expressly signified,
and set down in the book of our Consistory. Whether this be the error of Mr.
Davenport, or the error of Mr. W. let them determine among themselves.

Of our going to the Magistrates to seek their allowance for the calling of Mr.
DAVENPORT. SECT. XV.
UPon the consent of Mr. Davenport to the writing of the 5 Ministers,
considered with the order of the Consistory above mentioned, it was thereupon
resolved that some should with the first go unto the Burgemaisters, to seek
their approbation. Hereunto were deputed Mr. A. and Mr. W. together with my
self: and though I at that time was very weak, and not fully recovered of my
sickness, yet above my strength I made diverse journeys with our Elders, both
unto the Stadthouse and unto the private houses of diverse Burgemaisters, to
seek their consent for the allowance of Mr. Davenport, and to further his
calling. And some of the Dutch Ministers also being informed by some of our
Elders, that Mr. Davenport rested in their advise, did thereupon make
intercession to the Magistrates for their admission of Mr. Davenport, which at
length they granted with admonition that we should keep correspondence with the
Dutch Churches.

Whereas I have often professed, that I would not have gone to the Magistrates
to seek their consent, unless Mr. Davenport had consented to the writing of
the Ministers and their advice, etc. Book of complaints page 13.
Hereupon Mr. Davenport makes this inference; If he would not upon other
terms have gone to the Magistrate, the whole Congregation and I am the less
beholding unto him. I answer,

1. The Congregation is then beholding unto me, when I seek to avoyde
dissension, which is then done, when I refuse to go unto the Magistrates for
their approbation of such Ministers as would nourish dissension among us, by
their different practices and discord from us and the Classis, unless by the
word of God we were convicted of our sinful courses, which Mr. Davenport has
not done.

2. Our whole Congregation (whereof he speaks) does not desire that I should
go to the Magistrates in such case; many have witnessed the contrary unto me;
and so far as I can discern, the greater part of our Congregation do desire
such Ministers and none but such, as do accord with the discipline and order
observed in these Reformed Churches, and therefore must accordingly account
themselves beholden unto me for my labor therein, though Mr. Davenport do not.

3. Observe how Mr. Davenport is a sower of discord among brethren, by seeking
to implant evil surmises in the hearts of our people, by persuading the members
of this Congregation, such as are committed to my charge, that they are not
beholden unto me: and how great an injury is it thus to labor to alienate the
affections of a Congregation from their Minister?

The great pains which I took in going often to the Magistrates in time of my
great weakness, this also is ingratefully perverted by Mr. Davenport diverse
ways. He says, it is evident how little I spoke to give satisfaction, and
what I spoke might rather serve to increase suspicion. But this is neither
evident nor true; and I appeal unto the testimony of the Magistrates
themselves herein. I propounded the matter unto the Magistrates, both with
special commendation of Mr. Davenport, and with declaration of the special
necessity of our Church. I do ordinarily use the fewer words before the
Magistrates, speaking in the Dutch tongue, because I am not perfect therein. I
spoke the less also, because I would not willingly speak more then I
conceaved to be true. And our Elders that were with me, spoke so much that I
needed to speak the less.

He says further, that the Magistrate was satisfied by other means: But he
shows not what those other means were, as had been requisite. And though other
means did concur, that should not deface the fruit of my endeavor also.

He does also ingratefully insinuate matter of evil furmise against one of the
Dutch Ministers, that was entreated by some of our Elders, to make intercession
to the Magistrates for their consent. Mr. Davenport says, It was so brought
about by one of the Dutch Preachers interposing, that the Magistrates gave but
a conditional consent unto his call, and made his conformity to this custom
of promiscuous baptising, the condition thereof, so that now matters were in a
worse state then before. As though the Magistrate could not have given a
conditional consent, but by the interposing of that one Preacher; or as though
one might not both justly in regard of the matter, and yet with unfeigned
affection to Mr. Davenport desire the consent of the Magistrate, upon condition
of his agreement with their Church.

He is injurious unto me again, when he says, It is apparent that if Mr.
Paget was at that time content to have me join with him, it was but
conditionally, that I would do whatsoever he or the Classis would have. For
though it be reasonable that I should consent unto his call upon condition of
his accord with me and the Classis, yet he overlasheth and loses the reins
unto his tongue, when he says, that he should do whatsoever I or the Classis
would have; as though his doing of our mere will and lust in all things
whatsoever, must be the condition of his calling.

It is yet a further reproach when he says of me, upon which terms he is
content to have others, whom he has no cause to desire for colleagues with
him. So his words are in the printed copy, to desire for colleagues with him.
And if so they be read, there is a great untruth in them, which he cannot
justify, by showing that I desire such unworthy colleagues, whom I have no
cause to desire. In the written copyes which I have seen, his words are, to
refuse for colleagues with him; and if so they be read, they contain a
reproachful skorne worse then the other untruth, by carping at my desire, and
contentednes to have others, and such colleagues and upon such terms. But this
is unworthy of further answer, unless he had showed more plainly what he has
to say of those others, whom I do desire to have for colleagues with me.

Of our going to the Classis to seek their consent for the calling of Mr.
DAVENPORT. SECT. XVI.
AFter consent of the Magistrates, so soon as it could be known, order was
taken, that a Classis should be procured to meet extraordinarily, before the
appointed time, it being then mid-winter; and this being obtained, there were
some deputed from among us to go with me unto the Classis, Febr. 6. 1634.
where I propounded the matter unto them, who understanding from us how he had
declared his consent with them, did readily and willingly in like manner give
their consent for his calling.

If it be true which Mr. Davenport writes, that upon the conditional consent
of the Magistrates, matters were now in a worse state then before; and if he
were further from consenting with us, and resting in the advice of the
Ministers, why then was the Classis called in vain? why was I not advertised
thereof, that so the labor and charge of assembling the Ministers, both of the
City and out of the Country also, might have been prevented? Had I known that
he was unresolved to accord with us, and to go on in the same practice with
us, I would never have made such a proposition for his admission as I did in
the Classis: And if any of our Elders that were deputed to go with me, were
acquainted with his irresolution or dissenting, why did not they acquaint the
Classis therewith, when they heard me testify the consent which he had given?

Mr. DAVENPORTS withdrawing of his consent, first made known unto me. SECT.
XVII.
Febr. 8. 1634.
THe consent of the Classis being obtained, our Eldership at the next meeting
agreed forthwith to draw a writing, wherein the calling of Mr. Davenport was
contained, just in the same form that had been used in writing for Mr.
Balmford before. And I my self with Mr. Allen one of our Elders, were sent
with this letter unto Mr. Davenport, and prayed him to accept the calling. Upon
the receipt of this letter, Mr. Davenport gave us thanks for our good will, but
contrary to exspectation made some demurre upon the matter, desiring time for
deliberation, and after some few days signified unto us, that he could not
promise to rest in the advice of the 5 Ministers, contained in their writing,
and confirmed by the Magistrate, nor for the present to accept the calling upon
such condition.

Mr. Davenport in his third reason, to prove that I never desired him,
complayneth that I delayed the calling of him so long, that the Elders begun to
be impatient, of my delays, for what reasons I best know. Not only I, but our
Elders and Mr. Davenport know well enough the cause of my delay, which was to
understand and find first of all that he did accord with us. When his consent
was once signified unto me, this story shows how without all delay I proceeded
with our Elders to hasten his calling. The very same hour that his consent was
first made known unto me, the same hour we went into the Consistory, and
resolved to elect him for Minister: The next time that the Magistrates sat, we
went so seek their consent: Then the Classis without delay was extraordinarily
hastened: And then immediately at our next meeting in the Eldership, was the
letter of his calling written, and forthwith sent unto him. So vain is his
complaint of delays.

An other Act of Accommodation, for the satisfying of Mr. DAVENPORT. SECT.
XVIII.
Mr. Davenport being thus gone back in withdrawing his consent, which before he
had given, though it was a just cause of offense unto me and others; yet
notwithstanding this I considered with my self what might further be done for
his accommodation. And at the next meeting of our Eldership, Febr. 11. 1634.
I propounded some thing more then the Classis had counseled or yielded unto,
namely that if any at unawares should bring into the Church to be baptized such
infants, whose parents were no members of the Church, we should desire and
consaile them by the Coster (without absolute denial) to defer the Baptism of
them for the present, and to bring their children the next following exercise,
that in the mean time there might be convenience of examination. This being
done, and the former act confirmed again, and I promising for my part to
prevent all further occasions of offense so much as in me lay, and all the
Elders and Deacons each severally and jointly promising the like so much as in
them lay, hereupon withal was written down in the same Act a testification of
the Eldership, that this being done, we are persuaded no occasion will befall
to work any scrupule unto Mr. Davenport in that which he fears. Now I confess
that herein I yielded unto him more then was meet, and more then I mean to
yield unto again; for if infants brought into the Church for baptism, had
been carried away unbaptised, suppose it had been done by our entreaty and
persuasion only, yet is it like that there would have been much offense taken
hereat, with coffeehouse and murmuring, both in parents and others,
especially if such infants had dyed before the ne^^ ^^ing in the Church.
Howbeit this also would not content Mr. Davenport unless there might have been
an absolute denial of baptism, in such case, if entreaty would not serve. And
hence it may appear how unjustly Mr. Davenport complains of me, for the want
of brotherly moderation, and for not harkening to means of accommodation,
which I had so carefully thought upon more then others, and more then I ought.

Whereas I have diverse times affirmed and testified in these regards, that I
had done so much in the business for the furtherance of Mr. Davenport his
calling, that I would not hereafter do the like again, he frames an
objection, to show that once I had desired to have him. Then he gives this
answer and says, If ever he did desire me, I gave him no cause to repent of
it, but to desire it more, unless he takes offense at this, that I dare not
venture upon doing that which I account unlawful, or at this that I report the
truth of things as they passed, when I am provoked thereunto. But he ought to
know, that though I take no offense at that which he mentions; yet in these
things he has given great offense, that he durst venture upon the doing of
that which through his fault has kindled so great a fire in our Church: that
he in such a time of controversy among us, about Mr. Hookers opinions, durst
venture to thrust in himself among us, before he was resolved to agree with us
in the practice of these Reformed Churches; that he did not better inform
himself touching things lawful and unlawful, before he came to condemn that
by his practice as unlawful, which is lawful and necessary, and so to give
sentence against us, to the hardening of many sorts of our adversaries; that he
has not spared to misreport matters, but spread abroad sundry untruthes, as I
have partly showed already, and am to do it further. For these and such like
reasons, I have less cause to desire his being among us, then I had before.

Februar. 15 1634.
Mr. Davenport having refused the calling of a Pastor among us, yet a while
after he made this offer unto us, that if the Consistory desired it, he would
continue as an assistant unto me in preaching for a convenient time, that he
might therein acquaint himself with the Dutch Ministers, the orders of the
Classis and Synods, and state of this Congregation, etc. But though our Elders
liked of this offer, and thought good to desire him to remain with us as an
assistant, as is before said; yet I thought it not safe without first taking
advise of the Classis. This refusal of his offer by me, is complained of both
by Mr. Davenport in his writings, and by these complaynants hereafter, where in
answer unto them I show the reasons why I liked not his offer.

The Acts of the Classis after that the dissent of Mr. DAVENPORT and his
refusal of the calling was known. SECT. XIX.
WHen the Classis understood that Mr. Davenport did withdraw his consent, and
would not rest in the advice of the 5 Ministers, Februar. 27 and 28. 1634.
nor accept the calling offered unto him, according to their exspectation; then
was that writing of the 5 Ministers taken into consideration by all the
Ministers of the Classis, and by them all with one consent approoved and
confirmed. And though the Classis did not like this change in Mr. Davenport,
yet did they not suddenly break of with him, but deputed diverse Ministers to
go unto him, and to persuade him to accept the calling we had given unto him,
and to rest in the counsel of the Ministers formerly given unto him. These
deputies went unto him, and with earnest entreaties and persuasions sought to
induce him to accept of the calling.

At the April 3.
next Classis, he sent a writing unto them, wherein he alleged diverse reasons
why he could not rest in the advice of the 5 Ministers, as appears in the
printed copy thereof. And yet again after that writing and his dissent
specifyed therein, they did not yet cease to deal with him, but by an other
deputation of Ministers sent again unto him, to persuade him unto agreement
with them, and to the acceptance of the calling, but could not prevayle with
him.

After this at the May 1.
next monthly Classis, he sent unto them a further answer, delivered unto them
in writing, wherein he signified that his mind was wholly turned away from
accepting of our call, and that he did voluntarily desist: and withal he added
diverse unjust complaints against me, which are also published in the book of
complaints. Besides this the Elder Mr. W. that brought this writing unto them,
did further signify from him, how he complained that in stead of arguments to
persuade him, there was nothing but quaeso, quaeso, bidden and smeecken, that
is to say, nothing but praying and beseeching. Hereupon the Classis having had
so much patience, and used so much (...) in vain, did now at length take this
his answer, and rested in his refusal of this calling. The Magistrates also
somewhile after this, sending for me with two other of our Elders, required
that we should desist from seeking of Mr. Davenport, either for a Pastor or
Assistant, and that we should proceed to the calling of another Minister.

The Classis also considering what Mr. W. had reported unto them from him,
touching that quaso, quaeso, (whether it was given him as a private instruction
so to speak, I will not determine, because it is not specifyed in those
public instructions written by Mr. Davenport, and subscribed by him) they did
thereupon depute some to make answer unto his writing and his reasons therein,
which being done, they yet thought good to keep by them unless they found some
new provocation.

The preaching of Mr. DAVENPORT in a private house. SECT. XX.
WHen Mr. Davenport had in this manner left the calling that had been offered
unto him, and did now cease to preach in the Church, yet did he not cease to
preach in a private house, where a great part of the Church with most of the
Elders and some of the Deacons did meet together to hear him. Under the name
of catechizing he took a text of Scripture, and expounded the same unto them,
and so in a private house kept a public and solemn exercise in a large room,
furnished with benches and seats for commodity of hearers, so that by
estimation and relation of some that were present, more then an 100 persons
have been there sometimes gathered together; an ordinary time being kept upon
the Lord's Day in the evening, when the sermon in our Church was ended. The fame
and noise hereof being bruited through the city, and many wondering thereat, as
if some new sect of the English had sprung up; and the report hereof coming
also to the ears of the Classis, they deputed two Ministers to enquire the
certainty hereof; and it being found that such an assembly was kept, the
Classis appointed two Ministers to go both unto Mr. Davenport and to Mr. Wh.
in whose house they met; to admonish them of this their meeting, and to show
unto them in the name of the Classis, the inconveniency and the dangers of such
assemblies, to the end that they might desist. And after this admonition it was
left off.

Some of the members withdrawing themselves from the Lords Supper. SECT. XXI.
AS one extremity sometimes follows an other: so was it with some of the
complaynants. As they gathered themselves together disorderly in an Assembly,
where they ought not; so they withdrew themselves disorderly from the assembly
where they ought to have been present. When the time of administering the Lords
Supper among us drew near, about two or three days before. Mr. Davenport
takes a journey out of the city: some members of the Church (as I heard) did
go with him, and leave the communion: a company of the rest, of his special
friends, withdraw themselves from the Lords table, and so gave great occasion
of strife and other offense to the Church, by this their course tending to
schism. Among those that separated themselves at that time, the chief were
those 9 first complaynants, that in the first rank subscribed their names, as
is above noted. Now howsoever Mr. Davenport (as I hear) does dislike and
speak against separation and schism, and reprooves the same, which is no
wonder it being so gross and so generally condemned; yet can he not altogether
clear himself from being some occasion of division among us, while he
mainteyneth such practices so different from us, and from these Reformed
Churches, whereby our people are hardened to contention and opposition, etc.

The injurious writing of Mr. DAVENPORT first spread abroad secretly and
afterward printed. SECT. XXII.
AFter the scandalous schism, followed the slanderous writing of the
complaynants against me: and after the comes forth the injurious writings of
Mr. Davenport, not only against me, but against the Classis also.

The title of that writing is unjustly called a true report of passages.

In his preamble he does generally complain of misreports and injurious
speeches; but he shows not particularly what they were, much less prooveth
them to be such. If he intend those that are mentioned afterward page 12. they
are already answered.

He bids us be assured that this English copy is a true translation out of the
Latin. But this translation of his letter is not true in this, that having
twice ^^ed that odious phrase pro imperio, or imperiously; in the second place
it is left out in his translation, both in this printed, and in so many other
written copyes as I have seen. This I note the rather, because the Classis in
their answer showing the injury of this his speech, do complain, that it is
once and again used by him; which answer of theirs, if it were compared with
this faulty translation, could not be found to accord therewith in regard of
this omission.

In his first writing, namely his letter to the Classis, what untruth there is
in his misreporting of the private conference which he had with me, and other
complaints, I have showed before Section 11. and is further to be showed
hereafter.

In his second writing of instructions committed to some deputed Elders, if he
mean any lawfully deputed by the Eldership, there is a foul untruth or
falsification, both in the superscription and the subscription thereof, when he
says of those instructions, that they were delivered by the Elders of the
English Church deputed, for M. W. that brought them, was not deputed by the
Eldership thereunto, neither was any such deputation made in our Consistory.
And in the description of those instructions, what untruth there is in that
unjust complaint for want of brotherly moderation, I have noted before Section
12.

In his third writing, after he had in his first complained of me to the
Classis, to make me odious to them; having in his second writing given
instructions to some of our Elders, to teach them how to fill their mouths
with reproach of me, and how to accuse me, as well as to excuse him: he proceeds
yet further, and in his third writing he most strangely accuses me to the
other members of our Church, by such an undermining course as is fit to stir
up and incense the Congregation against me, by affording unto them matter of
complaint, and giving them opportunity to spread abroad, and disperse his
defamatory writings in such manner as is done.

In this his third writing page 12. there is an unjust upbrayding of me for his
assistance of me, with a vain boasting of himself, answered Section 2. and
Sect. 8. and 40.

He does therein complain of two special injuries done unto him by me,
whereof the first complaint is answered Section 11. and the second Sect. 14.

He frames 5 objections from report of my speeches, and then sets down his
answers thereunto, of which answers, the first is refuted Section 14. the
second is refuted Sect. 15. the third is refuted Sect. 15. the fourth is
refuted Sect. 10. the fifth is refuted Sect. 18.


Then he brings 6 reasons to prove that I never desired to have him, of
which reasons the first is answered Section 9. second is answered Sect. 8.
third is answered Sect. 17. fourth is answered Sect. 12. fifth is answered
Sect. 28. sixth is answered Sect. 6.


But suppose I had not desired to have Mr. Davenport, and that I would in our
election of a Minister, rather have preferred some other before him; must this
needs be made a quarrel and a matter of contention? Is he such a man of
desire, that I might not withhold my desire from him in the act of election,
and use my liberty in giving my voice unto another, whom I might judge to be
more lowly, more loving, more faithful and upright, and many ways a more fit
fellow laborer for me? It is certainly a want of modesty and prudence in him
to make such disputes about his own desireablenes; and little care had he of
the edification of our Church, to furnish them with such reasons written down
by him, to prove that I desired him not. Would I follow his example, I might
set down 6 new reasons on the other side, to show that I was not bound to
restrain my desire to him, but might rather have desired some others. But it
becomes not the servants of Christ to enter willingly into such disputes; and
I wish I had not been compelled by his importunity to answer these his
complaining reasons given out against me.

To return then unto these complaynants, where I left them for a time, having
answered their first, let us now proceed to their second maine proof, whereby
they would manifest that I do not behave my self as a Pastor in the
government of the Church.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXIII.
SEcondly Mr. Paget depriveth the Elders of their power in government, for the
good of the Church, which will thus appear.

First, when matters have been referred to the Elders to determine, he has
rejected their counsel and opinions, sometimes accusing them of partiality,
sometimes of insufficiency to judge, when he thought they would conclude
against his purpose.

ANSWER.
FIrst of all, the decision and determination of matters in our Eldership, has
always been by most voices: If three Elders judged one way, though both the
Ministers were contrary minded, yet plurality of voices did still prevail. I
never claymed or usurped such power to give sentence of any controversy by any
sole authority of mine; neither do I ever remember any one resolution
concluded without consent of most. And therefore this complaint is a very
unjust slander.

2. Though I have often and upon occasion still do oppose the counsel and
opinions of some Elders, sometimes more, and sometimes less, it follows not
that I therefore deprive them of their power in government. I should be base
man-pleaser, and no faithful servant of Christ, if I should not oppose,
contradict and reject that which I conceave to be against right and truth,
hurtful to the Church or to any member thereof.

3. The Elders themselves in those matters that are brought before us, do in
like manner as they judge best, refuse and oppose the counsel and opinions,
both of me and of one an another: Will. B. formerly and La. Co. presently a
Deacon, sometimes upon special occasion sitting with us, and ordinarily in
their own session about the affairs of the poor, have given contradictory
voices, and sometimes reject the counsel and opinions of one another. What is
it then that blindes the eyes of these two complaynants in special that from
the observation of their own practice, they cannot see this, that the
rejecting of other men's opinions does not prove a deprivation of power in
such? Yea is their any Senate either civil or ecclesiastical, wherein this
refusal and rejecting of opinions does not fall out? And therefore most
unreasonable are these complaints that argue and in^erre a deprivation of power
thereby.

4. For my accusing them sometimes of partiality and insufficiency to judge,
had these complainants noted the particular instances, wherein I so accused
them, I should then have given further answer. I do remember that during the
controversy about Mr. Hooker some such things have been spoken. What I then
spoke with my reasons thereof, which I then alleged, I conceave to be just,
but will not now enter into the large narration thereof, upon such a general
provocation as this is. He that rehearses a matter, seeks strife, as do
these complainants, and especially Will. B. that does hereby violate the
agreement made before the deputies of the Synod and Classis, and consented unto
by himself that was present, by accusing me of such things as were then ended.

5. As for our Elders being parties, (not to speak of any other things, then
of such as these complaynants do accuse me of in this their present writing) I
have just cause to except against them in this controversy about Mr. Davenport,
and therefore not to allow them for judges, they being parties, namely these
three, Mr. Wa. Mr. Wh. and Mr. Bea. as appears diverse ways,

First, these three have diverse times professed themselves to be of the same
opinion with Mr. Davenport, touching the Baptism of infants, contrary to the
received order of our own and the Dutch Church; and therefore are fitter
themselves to be judged as parties, then to be allowed for judges of such an
accusation, as these complainants do make against me in this writing, for
calling Mr. Davenport his opinion an error.

Again these three have by their example allowed and countenanced that
unwarrantable assembly of so great a multitude meeting in Mr. Wh. his house,
without just allowance, and therefore more fit to be judged of the offense that
they have given to many thereby, then being parties to be admitted for judges
in this controversy, wherein these accusers complain of me, for depriving them
of their benefit obtained by such an assembly.

Again, these Elders having made an Act for Mr. Davenport his preaching among
us, as an Assistant for a certain time, not assented unto by me, nor after
allowed by the Classis, though these complaynants come again, and bring this
as an accusation of me, yet are not the Elders, who are now parties, to be
allowed for judges to give sentence, whether themselves have done well in
making this Act, or whether I did well in not consenting unto them.

Moreover these complaynants do here accuse me, for bringing matters to the
Classis by violence, without consent of the Eldership^ the Elders themselves
have made like complaint heretofore: The Classis has judged hereof; the Elders
have appeared to be parties; how can they then judge of these things, without
presuming to be judges in their own cause that is judged already?

Even the Elders themselves have sometimes acknowledged, that when such
complaints as these have been brought unto them, they had no power to judge
thereof: When after the refusal of Mr. Hooker by the Classis, October. 19. 1631.
diverse complaynants came unto the Consistory, and complained of me about the
carriage of the business, it was answered them by the Eldership, that the
judgment of the matter was out of their hands and in the Classis: How much
more ought it now to be so answered unto them, when after so long a time, they
come again and complain not only about Mr. Davenport, but about Mr. Hooker
also? It must needs be manifest partiality, and our Elders were justly to be
excepted against as parties, if they should resume the same business, and
presume to give a new judgment thereof.

6. As for the insufficiency of our Elders, not to speak of that common
insufficiency that is in all men, in regard of spiritual and holy
administrations and services, 2. Cor. 2.16
of which the Apostle says, Who is sufficient for these things? I have just
cause to except against their insufficiency in some special cases, and namely
in such particulars whatsoever have been already judged and determined in the
Classis, but principally in such a weighty and important business as is this
present controversy of these complaynants, which concerns the innovation and
alteration of the discipline and government, so long practiced in these
Reformed Churches. For not the Classis it self, nor yet a Provincial Synod,
has power to determine and appoint such a state and form of government, as
this writing of my accusers pleads for: seeing no inferior judicatory can
reverse that which is judged and decreed by a superior; and therefore can no
Classis or Provincial Synod, abrogate and disanull that which is concluded by
a National Synod: Much less then is the Consistory of one particular Church
sufficient to do it; least of all may a piece of the Consistory do it; and
such a piece as consists only of some Elders ^i^joy^^d (...) Ministers, one or
more, and wanting their assistance therein; especially when the same Elders are
known to be parties, and justly complained of therein. Thus is their first
reason answered; what is their second argument to prove the Elders deprived of
their power in government?

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXIV.
SEcondly, when the Elders have declared their judgment with one consent, he
has protested against it, and carried it to the Classis, though the matter
has been such, as seeing it might have been ended in the Consistory, ought not
to have been brought thither, as,

ANSWER.
1. WHat if I protest against the unanimous consent and judgment of the Elders
in some special case, wherein I think they err? do I therefore deprive them
of their power in government? How can they ever prove this consequence? This
imagined consequence is the string that they are still harping upon, but it
still jarreth and erreth; they can never bring it into tune, nor ever confirm
it with any good reason. They have made themselves opponents and accusers, and
it lies upon them to bring proofs, but they bring none, neither from
Scripture, nor from any good reason. With what face or conscience can these men
accuse me, not only of sin, but of obstinacy in sin, and yet bring such weak
and lame reasons, without any virtue or power to convince?

2. If I should not protest against the concordant judgment of Elders, and
bring the matter to further trial, when I conceave their resolutions to be
unlawful and hurtful to the Church, I should sin against God and mine own
conscience, Exodus 23.2. Ephesians. 5.11.
in following a multitude to do evil, and in partaking with the unproffitable
works of error and darkness.

3. Seeing we maintain against the Romish Church, that Synods and Counsels
are subject unto error sometimes, and for proof thereof Ezekiel. 7.26. Ier. 4.9.
1. Cor. 13.9 Romans 3.4. Heb. 5.2.
many evidences are showed from the Scriptures; seeing in such cases there is
liberty for the servants of Christ, to protest against those resolutions and
decrees, which they are in conscience persuaded to be erroneous: how much more
may we think that a Consistory, where 3 or 4 Elders make an agreement and
decree, without consent of their Minister, are subject to error, and therefore
in such case may lawfully be protested against by the same Ministers. If
neither Classis nor Synods be exempted from protesting against, what reason is
there that I should be blamed for protesting against the least kind of
Eldership, as though they were quite overthrown thereby? Who knows not that a
child, a servant or subject may sometimes lawfully protest against the
commandments of their father, master, or governor, and refuse to obey them,
and yet not deprive them of their power in government, though in that
particular act, which they conceave to be unlawful and dangerous, they refuse
to hearken unto them? Ephesians. 6.1. Act. 4.19.
Now as obedience to superiors ought to be in the Lord; so all agreement and
consent to Elders ought to be in the Lord, and no further.

4. Whereas they say further that I carry the matter to the Classis, when it
was such as might have been ended in the Consistory, etc. that I deny, and they
cannot prove their assertion. And when is the time, that matters cannot be
ended in the Consistory, but then especially, when neither part can satisfy an
other touching their differences? When neither Elders can satisfy me, nor I
persuade them in that which I believe to be just and necessary, then in such
case the judgment of others is needful for determination of the question. And
therefore in these cases ordinarily matters are brought unto the Classis: When
either there is a common business that concerns many Churches, and therefore
requires the consent of all: or when the business is so weighty, that by former
general consent of Churches testified by their deputies, meeting together in
their Synods, it has been agreed, that the same shall not be proceeded in
without advise of the Classis, such as is the election of Ministers, the
excommunication of offenders and the like: or when in matters of less
importance there is an opposition, strife and disagreement, some thinking wrong
to be done to themselves or the Church, when others are opposite or contrary
minded: or when there is but fear or danger of hurt imagined, to seek
counsel for preventing the same. The reason hereof is taken from the very
foundation of government, and Deuteronomy. 17.8 ^ith 1.12. 2. Chron. 19.8.9.10.
institution of diverse judicatories, which was to take away disagreement,
strife, controversies or different pleadings among men.

5. Suppose I had erred in bringing any matter unlawfully unto the Classis, yet
had not the power of the Elders in government been overthrown thereby, but the
blame would have come upon my self; seeing the order and manner of the Classis
is in such cases to remit the matter unto the Consistories again, when it is
not duly and lawfully brought unto them.

Come we now to the particular instances, whereby they exemplify their
assertion.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXV.
FIrst, when the Consistory agreed, that an order should be made, that all that
were not members of this Church, should make themselves known unto Mr.
Davenport, that he might be satisfied concerning them, before they should
present their children to Baptism in this Church, which order would have ended
the difference between them, if it had taken place, but Mr. Paget protested
against it.

ANSWER.
1. IT seems these complaynants have been very careless of witnessing the
truth, and speak they know not what. Section 13. Ianu. 15. 1634. and Sect. 18.
Febr. 11. 1634.
For as I have showed before, there was an order made in the consistory for the
accommodation of Mr. Davenport, by procuring so far as we could, that the
parents, which were no members of the Church, should be sent unto Mr.
Davenport, that he might be satisfied by the examination of them, before their
children were baptized: And this order was so made, that the Eldership has
testified in the writing thereof, that they were persuaded, upon the
observation thereof, no occasion would befall to work any scruple to Mr.
Davenport in that which he feared. And I was so far from protesting against it,
that I was the first that propounded the same.

2. As for any other peremptory order to compel and bind the parents to come
unto him, or else by an absolute denial to repel their children from baptism;
I do not remember that there was any such order agreed upon in the Consistory:
neither is there any evidence in our Church-booke, that either our Elders had
so agreed, or that I had protested therein against them.

3. If any such order had been peremptorily resolved in the Consistory, there
had been just reason for me to have protested against it, seeing the Consistory
neither has power over those which are no members of the Church, to compel
them to come unto the private examination of Mr. Davenport, nor yet sufficient
cause to deprive their infants of Baptism, so long as the same parents refuse
not to make public profession of their faith before the whole Church,
according to the form observed in the administration of Baptism. But as for
entreaty and persuasion of them to come unto Mr. Davenport for private
examination, I did even more then was meet, as is noted before.

4. If I had protested against such an order, yet had I not deprived the Elders
of their power in government thereby. Such a proteste might have served for a
correction and direction to guide them to the right use of their power, but did
not tend to the destruction thereof. These ill-advised complaynants do make
themselves guilty of false accusations, while they want proof to warrant their
unjust inferences. But what other instances do they bring?

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXVI.
SEcondly, when the Elders agreed that Mr. Davenport should have a years time
to go on in assisting Mr. Paget in preaching, to see if in that time he could
procure that this question might be laid down, and might be fully informed of
all the orders and customs of the Dutch Church, whereunto Mr. Paget would
bind him to conform, as a condition whereupon he was to be admitted to the
Pastoral office in this Church, Mr. Paget opposed this as if the Consistory
could not have power to do so much without the Classis, and many the like
things might be brought; as that he would not let Mr. Weld preach, whom he
professed he had nothing against, without the leave of the Classis, etc.

ANSWER.
1. IT is untrue that the Elders agreed he should have a years time granted.
They thought it not expedient to specify the definite time of a year; but
without limitation they agreed he should have a convenient time. So is it
testified in the records of this Act.

2. It is here to be observed, how the affairs of the Eldership, which ought
to have been kept secret, are unlawfully divulged contrary to the laws
thereof; and that untruely also. So was it in the former instance about the
order taken for examination of parents, both disorderly and falsely reported
abroad, which reports these complaynants have unjustly received against me.

3. It is a partial and odious relation of them, when they speak of my
binding Mr. Davenport to the orders and customs of the Dutch, whereas he could
not be bound thereunto by me; neither would I take upon my self to bind any man
by my authority: He that is bound in such case, must be bound by the authority
of a lawful Ecclesiastical assembly.

4. As for the Elders agreement of an uncertain convenient time, which might
have been, I know not how long, I did not absolutely oppose it neither, as I
might justly have done, but thought it not safe to consent unto it without
advise of the Classis, and so is my speech recorded in the Act thereof. The
reasons I had were diverse, both in respect of my self and the Church. For

Hereby, the coard of contention should have been drawn out, and lengthened
among us, whiles matters were kept in suspense, and no conclusion of the
business.

Hereby, in the Consistory, where I had most trouble, I should have had least
assistance: no help at all, where I most needed it, and the Church also: seeing
he could not sit with us there, while he had no Pastoral charge, but must have
been a loose assistant.

Hereby in the administration of Baptism, in stead of an Assistant, I should
have had a Resistant: his daily example in refusing to baptize such as I
should, serving to strengthen others in their opposition and contention against
me.

Hereby should have been hindered the calling of an other Minister, who agreeing
with us, might be a true assistant unto me.

Hereby the Church should have wanted the comfort, which another Minister
lawfully called by virtue of that bond, might have ministered unto them, in such
visitations as Mr. Davenport uncalled should not have been bound unto.

Hereby offense might have been given unto the Classis, which had formerly
disallowed such an agreement of the Elders about the entertaining of Mr.
Hooker, as a lecturer or assistant, though not confirmed as a Pastor among us.

And in sum I esteemed this agreement as an act of intrusion for Mr.
Davenport, that he having preached so long among us, might afterward not easily
or not without difficulty be dismissed, whether he should then agree with us or
not: and so had been no end of dissension.

And though Mr. Davenport in his writing to the Classis do also complain of
me for this very thing, Book of complains page 1.2. and 8.
even as these complaynants do, and does twice largely repeat this agreement
of the Elders, as a matter ^o worthy to be insisted upon, and professes his
hope that they would assent unto their agreement of the Elders, having been his
own motion and offer, and as he says, so cheerfully embraced by the Elders;
yet notwithstanding the Classis found no reason to satisfy his exspectation
therein. And for this cause as he had spoken of it in the beginning, and end of
his first writing unto them, so he comes again the third time in his late
postscript, and complains of the Classis, Page 9.
saying, And who would not have thought that the Classis would have approoved
of the desire of the Consistory, that a years time should be granted me for
the ends aforesaid? Yet on the contrary they seemed to be offended, threatening
to complain to the Magistrates, etc.

It is here also to be observed, how Mr. Davenport goes before these
complaynants, and by his example teaches them to take up this complaint
against me. They do fill the vial of their indignation and contention, out of
the cisterne or lake of his complaints. He having three several times
objected it, it is not strange that they should be inflamed, when he so often
blows the fire. But why do they not rather complain of the Classis as he
began at last? And what reason have they to bring such complaints as this,
which have been determined in the Classis upon the complaint of Mr. Davenport?

A third instance which they allege, is that I would not let Mr. Weld preach
without leave of the Classis, though I professed I had nothing against him.
Hereunto I answer,

1. Though there was no particular error which I imputed unto Mr. Weld, yet
for his behavior in general, this was an offense and trouble unto me, and
made me the more unwilling to have him preach, being a stranger, because he
refused to declare himself, and to show his opinion touching our present
controversies: herein I thought he dealt not so plainly as he ought to have
done for my satisfaction. And seeing him most familiar with those that were my
chiefest opposites, I feared least he might do as Mr. Hooker had done before,
in strengthening and animating them against me, by preaching against that in the
afternoon, which I had taught in the forenoone, viz. by his giving allowance
unto private men to preach.

2. Even that which I did herein was not unadvised: for going unto the Dutch
Consistory, which consists of many Ministers and many Elders, and desiring
their counsel; they though they had no power to judge and determine the matter
by their sentence, being but a member of the Classis, as we also are, yet they
refused not to give their counsel unto me, which was that I should bring the
matter to the Classis; which counsel I also followed.

3. When upon further conference with Mr. Weld, I perceaved in him a peacable
disposition, and conceaved that he would not give offense by his preaching
among us, I made the same known unto the Classis; whereupon he was admitted to
preach, and my desire was that he might have done it longer.

Such are the instances whereby they would prove that I deprive the Elders of
their power, and give too little unto them; let us now proceed unto their next
maine complaint, that I give too much power unto the Classis; thereby to
manifest that I do not behave my self as a Pastor in the government of this
Church.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXVI.
THirdly, he subjecteth this Church under an undue power of the Classis, which
he brings it under merely for his own ends, as we conceave, without any
warrant from the Word of God, as thus appears,

ANSWER.
IN this third complaint concerning government, observe these unconscionable
slanders in the proposition thereof:

1. It is a slander of the Classis, when they charge it with an unlawful or
undue power, under which our Church is subjected. This slander is against the
very state of government and form of Discipline, observed and practiced in
these Reformed Churches. Our Church is no otherwise subject unto the Classis,
then are all other Churches that stand in the same combination with us, for
their mutual help and benefit. Accusers are to bring proof: if these accusers
can bring proof from the Word of God, then is it meet that the Classis and
every member thereof should confess their faults, their tyranny, usurpation,
unlawful dominion and undue power that has been exercised by them. Then is it
meet that this present government should be dissolved, and a new order of
discipline established, such an one as Will. Best, Ia. Cr. Nic. Ia. Th. Fl.
Aug. Hor. Ios. St. and their companions can show unto us out of the Word of
God. But this is their double guiltines; they are too hasty and quick in
accusing, and too slow in prooving. They ought to have deferred their
accusation, till they had brought their proofs from the Scripture with them.

2. It is another slander when they say, that I have subjected this Church
under an undue power of the Classis; that I have brought it under etc. That
power which the Classis exercises is ancient; the same power which they had
long before I either knew them or they me; the same power which has been
determined, limited and agreed upon in many national Synods of old. And as for
me, if I had the will, yet have I no power to be the author of such an exployt
as they do here asscribe unto me.

3. It is a further slander and unjust surmise, when they say of me, that I
have done this merely for mine own ends. The purest and perfectest men on
earth, have their mixtures of the flesh with the spirit, defiling their best
works; but to say of this imagined enthralment and subjection, that I have done
it, and this only or merely for mine own ends, as if they were such perfect
discerners of the thoughts and intents of the heart, this is a great arrogance,
and a setting of themselves in Gods stead, whose peculiar it is to search, and
to judge the heart and reins.

4. If the power of the Classis be an undue power, as they say, then would I
feign know of them, what that due power is, by which they would have the Church
to be governed, unto which they would willingly be subjected. For my part I
could never yet come to the knowledge thereof by any of them. Is it that power
of popular government exercised among the Brownists, so as Mr. Aynsworth
maintained it? Or is it that power of an Eldership, which Mr. Johnson taught
without any Classis? Or is it that kind of single uncompounded policy, which
Mr. Jacob required? Or is it any new unknown form of government, which they
have found out? If they can show us what it is, and agree of it among
themselves, and show further that it agrees with the Word of God, then as they
desired their complaints against me might be registered, with place left for the
names to be subscribed, that after times might know what evilles they had
testified against: then I say, they may as well desire, that their exployt may
be recorded, that their 20 names may be registered, that after times may know
who the persons were, that above other learned men have found out where the due
power of the Church is.

Let us hear their instances to declare how I subject this Church to the undue
power of the Classes.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXVIII.
FIrst he gives them power to serve his ends, in keeping out any Minister,
whom he would have kept out, for causes pretended by him (though he would have
had other that to this day hold the same opinion) though such as he keeps out
be known to be most eminent, able and godly men, and such as abhor all
Heresy and Schism, which he has caused the Classis to execute upon Mr.
Hooker, Mr. Davenport, etc. which we are confident they would not have done but
by Mr. Pagets suggestions, to the great grief and hurt of the members of this
Church.

ANSWER.
IN this instance there be also sundry bold and rude slanders,

1. In saying, I give them power to serve my ends in keeping out any Minister,
etc. The power which the Ministers of the Classis have, is not of my gift; they
had that power which they exercise before I was. And if by giving of them
power, they mean that I approove their power; yet that also is slanderous in
making my approbation of them, to be an instance and evidence of my
ill-governing the Church.

2. In this accusation they are notorious slanderers of the Classis, in making
them no better then thieves, unlawfully receaving that power, which I
unlawfully give unto them, as if they were my vassalles and bondslaves to serve
my lusts. If it were true which these immodest accusers do suggest in this
writing, then where should men find either more base flatterers on the one
side, or more cruel tyrants and oppressors on the other side, then are the
Ministers of this Classis, that like blind unconscionable judges, for my
pleasure, by my suggestions, for causes pretended by me, to serve my ends,
should deal so unrighteously, with so eminent and godly men, by executing
their undue power upon them? As Herod to kill one infant, spared not to kill a
multitude of other infants: so these complaynants that they may undermine me,
and blow up me into the air, they care not, nor spare not with the gunpowder
of their fiery contention and reproaches, to blow up with me a multitude of
learned and godly Ministers, being of the same judgment and practice.

3. Whereas they say of Mr. Ho^ker and Mr. Davenport, that they were such as
abhor all schis^^; it appears to the contrary, that they did not abhor
schism as was meet. Not Mr. Hooker; whiles he maintained that such of the
Brownists, as persisted in their schism or separation from the Church of
England, might lawfully be received of us for members of our Church:

Whiles he would not disallow such of our Church, as went to hear the
Brownists in their schismatic assembly:

While he maintained that private men might preach and expound the Scriptures
at set times and places, where the members of sundry families met together, and
this without allowance of the Church:

Whiles he maintained that Churches combined together in the Classis, might
choose a Minister, either without or against the consent of the Classis, under
which they stood.

So to practice in these Reformed Churches, is no other then a plain act of
schism, a tending from the Classis, and a breaking off from their communion in
the government of the Church.

Not Mr. Davenport; whiles he gathered unto himself a great and solemn
assembly apart, by preaching unto them at set times in a private house, without
allowance of the Church:

Whiles he approoved the Act of our Elders, in admitting him to preach as an
assistant, without the consent of the Classis, in such manner as is before
noted.

While he maintayneth the power of every particular Church to be chief in its
own particular matters; and applies this to the admission of Ministers to
preach as assistant, etc. though these Churches be united in Synod and Classis.
In all these things they did not abhor schism as they ought to have done.

4. Whereas they speak so much of eminent persons refused; who knows not what
imminent danger arises by them, when even they sometimes are led aside by
their own spirits, and blinded with love of their own private opinions? Mr.
Ainsworth, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Robinson were all eminent men, professing godliness,
and for learning not inferior to Mr. Davenport, and yet withal mainteyned
such opinions and practices, some of them more and some less, as tended to the
ruin and desolation of Churches, so that they could not safely have been
called to the ministry of the Gospel in any of these Reformed Churches.

5. It is here to be observed, how these complaynants as they go along with
their particular accusations of evil and tyrannical government, still they
make Mr. Davenport the burden of their song. They accuse me that I deprive the
Church of that liberty and power that Christ has given it in the free choice
of their Pastor; This they prove, because Mr. Davenport with others were
rejected and opposed, etc. They accuse me of depriving the Elders of their
power in government: This they would make to appear by instances, that an
order of the Elders for the satisfaction of Mr. Davenport, by examination of
parents was opposed and protested against by me; and because I consented not
Mr. Davenport might have a years time to go on in assisting me to preach,
etc. They accuse me of subjecting the Church to the Classis, by giving them
power to keep out any Ministers, and they prove it by the instances of Mr.
Davenport, etc. And so in other points afterward. They accuses me of bitterness
in doctrine, and they would prove it by instances of provoking Mr. Davenport
thereby. In the maine circle and circumference of their disputation, Mr.
Davenport is the center, and all the chief lines of their complaint are drawn
from this center. The inordinate desire of Mr. Davenport has made this trouble
to the Church.

6. As for that their parenthesis, wherein they note that I would have had
other that to this day hold the same opinion: This Mr. Davenport himself
alleges more plainly and expressly, as his first reason, to prove that I
never desired to have him. The first instance he brings against me, is this;
Book of complaints page 15.
He pressed earnestly to have Mr. Balmford of the Haghe, though he gave him the
same answer unto the question which I have done, before I came into these
parts. Hereunto I answer,

First, it is untrue, and I do utterly deny it, that Mr. Balmford gave me the
same answer unto the question, which Mr. Davenport did: neither can Mr.
Davenport ever prove this his assertion. If Mr. Balmford should affirm his
answer to have been the very same; yet ought not his affirmation to be taken
against my denial in such case as this. The reason is evident from the
express ordinance of God, who has appointed, Deu. 19.15 Mat. 18.16 Ioh. 8.17.
that for determining the truth in controversies, touching matter of fact, two
witnesses at the least should be had. One witness shall not rise against a man
for any trespass, 1. Tim. 5.19.
or for any sin, or for any (...) that he offends in, etc. In special
against an Elder, no accusation is to be received under two or three witnesses.
And therefore can no man with good conscience receave the single testimony of
one person against me, as Mr. Davenport has done.

Ianuar. 4. 1635. n. style.
Secondly, to take the answer of Mr. Balmford, even as he himself has now of
late set it down, under his own hand; yet can it not thence be justly
concluded, that it was the same answer, which Mr. Davenport gave. Mr. Balmford
says, that he being asked whether he would baptize those which were presented
to Baptism, though not children of any member of our Congregation, his answer
was to this effect, viz. that the case might be that I should, and the case
might be that I should not: And more then to this effect (he says) he answered
not. Now this is not the same with Mr. Davenport his answer, and that in diverse
respects, which I could show: but this may suffice for the present, that even
in the writing of the 5 Ministers, confirmed by the Classis, and impugned by
Mr. Davenport, there is a liberty reserved in some cases that may fall out,
that the Minister doubting whether the infant presented ought to be baptized,
may then first require the judgment of the whole Consistory, or if need be of
the Classis, and so obtain further resolution thereby. But this would not
satisfy Mr. Davenport, which yet might have satisfied Mr. Balmford,
notwithstanding any thing that appears in his answer to the contrary.

Thirdly, that Mr. Balmford was not of the same opinion with Mr. Davenport, and
therefore could not give the same answer with him, may appear by that form of
calling, which was sent in writing unto Mr. Balmford, October. 18. 1632.
when he was called unto this place. For being called to minister the word and
the dependances thereof, according to the order of these Reformed Churches, and
especially of these which are combined with the Classis of Amsterdam; and
making no exception against this form, but resting therein after that this
question had been propounded unto him, this is taken for an evidence that he
was willing to observe their order in the administration of Baptism to such as
they use to do, and so it was understood by the Classis. And had Mr. Davenport
accepted this call, when it was in the same form offered unto him, that would
also have been taken for a grant of his professed agreement with us, otherwise
then we now find.

Fourthly, if it be demanded why I did not more particularly and strictly
inquire into the opinion of Mr. Balmford, as well as of Mr. Davenport; my
answer is, because I found not such ambiguity in the answer of Mr. Balmford
unto the other questions, which I had propounded unto him, as I did in the
answers of Mr. Davenport, especially concerning the authority of Synods and
Classis, about which he made some difficulty, and was hardly drawn to consent:
And though at length I conceaved that he agreed with us, yet it seems that he
did in some manner hide his meaning, as appears by that which he has written
since unto the Classis, touching the power of particular Churches, as being
chief in their own particular matters.

Fifthly, considering the estate of that English Church, whereof Mr. Balmford is
Minister, and what the practice thereof has been in the admission of members,
and receaving them unto the Sacraments, as has been formerly signified unto
me, I thought there was no reason for me, to be more earnest in enquiring of
this matter; wherein I judged him not to use more strictnes then was observed
by us.

The other instance to prove that I desired him not, Mr. Davenport sets down
in these words, And since he has nominated Mr. Roe of Flushing: though he in
answer unto a letter, which Mr. Paget sent unto him concerning this matter,
professed himself to be of my judgments. Hereunto I answer,

1. If I had given my voice for the calling of Mr. Roe, being of the same
judgment with Mr. Davenport, yet would not this prove that for which Mr.
Davenport alleges it, viz. that I never desired him. It might prove that I
desired Mr. Roe more then him, and that I would have borne with the difference
of Mr. Roe more then of him, etc. But this cannot prove that I did never
desire him, or not at all desire him; seeing there are diverse degrees of
desire; and for the desire of some friends, a man can tolerate more, then for
others whom he yet truly desires and affects, though not in the same
measure.

2. The truth is; that nomination which I made of Mr. Roe, was not a giving of
my voice for his calling, but only a mentioning of his name among many other
Ministers in these Countries, that were taken into consideration, and that to
this end, that there might be made a further enquiry touching their gifts, and
touching their agreement with us, by sending for them, that we might hear
them, and confer with them, as we have done with diverse others, with whom yet
we never proceeded so far as to come unto the election of them. This nomination
of Mr. Roe was not such an act of election as when I gave my voice and consent
for the calling of Mr. Davenport. And therefore things are here notably
mismatched together by Mr. Davenport, which might deceave an ignorant reader.

3. Whatsoever profession Mr. Roe did make of agreeing with the judgment of Mr.
Davenport, yet was it not strange or unreasonable for me to hope, that upon
conference with him, he might be brought to leave that his opinion. Why might I
not mention his name to this end that he might be sent for, that so I might
have had opportunity to see whether I could have satisfied his objections, and
taken away his scruples? Seeing so great pains was taken with Mr. Davenport
for his persuasion, not only by such as were deputed of the Classis, but by
sundry others upon occasion, why might not some part of the like love have been
showed to Mr. Roe also? What an unworthy thing is it, that Mr. Davenport should
make such a dispute about himself, touching my desire of him, and spread these
complaints among our people in such an unwarrantable manner as he has done?

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXIX.
SEcondly he gives them power to make laws and orders, whereunto whosoever
will be Minister of this Church, must submit, as to observe all the orders and
customs of the Dutch Church, though some of them are such as the Ministers of
the Dutch would cast off, if the vastues of their Church (being but one in so
great a city) did not force them thereunto; of which the promiscuous baptising
of all that are brought, without difference or knowledge of them, is one; for
which Mr. Davenport is kept out of this Church, though there is no need of
tying the Minister of this Church to that custom, the Congregation being
small; and who can think they would tie us so strictly to all their orders,
when one of them said to Mr. Paget (on occasion of his complaint in the Classis
of Mr. Davenport, not conforming to their orders) why? your self do not
conform to all our orders; and certainly they would all have rejoiced, to have
heard that all our differences had been ended amongst our selves; yea he has
of late (as we hear) required of the Elders to make an order in the
Consistory, that whatsoever Minister shall hereafter be called to this Church,
should conform to a writing which he got 5 Ministers, to make in his own
house about that question, and sent it to Mr. Davenport, which we think no
godly man will absolutely be bound unto.

ANSWER.
THeir second instance to show how I subject the Church unto the undue power of
the Classis, is because I give them power to make laws and orders, etc. I
answer,

1. It is untrue that I give them this power.

2. If I had first given them counsel to use this power, how do they prove
that this power of making such orders is an undue power? or how can they prove
their principal accusation from hence, that I do not behave my self as a
Pastor in the government of the Church?

3. These complaynants themselves do allow the Consistory to make orders and
laws; they complain of me, that I protested against making of an order for
accommodation of Mr Davenport, by sending the parents unto him, etc. Can this
power of making laws and orders be lawful and due in a Consistory, and yet an
undue power in the Classis? Are they not condemned of themselves?

4. When they say, I give them power to make laws; they do in some measure
free me from usurpation, in that I do not arrogate and take this power to my
self, but give it unto others. Could they have said that I usurp the power of
making laws, their accusation had been heavyer.

5. It is false, which they speak of submitting to observe all the orders and
customs of the Dutch Church; for neither do I give, neither do they take or
exercise such power, that whosoever will be Minister of this Church, must
submit himself to all the orders and customs of the Dutch Church; some of
them being of lesser importance, about things indifferent and such as might be
omitted without offense, for which they would not exclude a Minister.

To that which they say of the Dutch Ministers, willing to cast off some of
their customs, if the vastues of their Church (being but one in so great a
City) did not force them thereunto, etc. I answer,

1. For things that are simply unlawful, there is the same reason of them in
a great Church as in a small, and they are to be cast off as well in the one as
in the other. To deny baptism unto such infants as it belongs unto, is simply
a sin: To determine that such or such infants are under the covenant, or not
under the covenant, is a matter of great weight; and to give wrong sentence
therein, either way must needs be a great sin: neither have I heard of any
one Minister among them all, that would deny Baptism on such a ground as Mr.
Davenport does.

2. Though the Dutch Church in this City be great, yet the Dutch Churches that
are in the villages round about, being members of the same Classis with us, are
generally or for the most part far less then this of ours; and yet even there
also in those smaller Congregations the same order is observed for baptising of
those infants, whose parents are no members of the Church. And therefore their
exception in this regard is vain.

Whereas they tell of one Minister that should speak of my not conforming to
all their orders, and collect thence that they are not willing to tie us so
strictly to all their orders etc. I answer,

1. It is needful to be known who has acquainted these complaynants with the
speeches and voices of particular men, contrary to the laws of the Classis. If
I should in like disordred manner relate, and make known the particular
speeches of several men, against the opinion of Mr. Davenport, what contention
and trouble might arise thereupon?

2. The mind of the Classis and their willingness to tie us unto their order,
is not to be collected by the speech of one, but by the general sentence and
conclusion of the Classis. Any wise man may see what wrong collections these
men do make.

3. The speech of this Minister is not in right manner repeated by them: for
neither were his words directed unto me in the second person, neither were they
uttered with such an interrogative why, by way of expostulation, to urge me to
answer him.

4. This one Minister, even he yea more then many other, has declared himself
to be far from Mr. Davenport his judgment and practice; by his undertaking in
writing to satisfy Mr. Davenport his objections, and scruples; who also after
he had receyved an answer from Mr. Davenport, replied and wrote again the
second time, unto which writing he received no answer from Mr. Davenport.

5. For my not observing every several custom of the Dutch Church, beside the
special allowance of the Classis, which I have had in some of them,
Kerckenordeningh Art. 85.
I may also allege for my self the resolution of the National Synod at Dort,
which in things indifferent does allow the Churches of other nations in these
countries to vary from their customs.

Furthermore whereas they tell again of an order, which (as they hear) I
required our Elders of late to make in the Consistory about conformity to a
writing of 5 Ministers, etc. I answer,

1. It would here also be demanded of these complaynants, who has been the
talebearer of whom they have heard such things out of the Consistory
concerning me. For by this and sundry the like instances, it may appear from
whose suggestion and information this slanderous writing has been made.

2. I neither did, and what need had I to seek the confirmation of that
writing by a new order in our Consistory, which was already approoved and
confirmed by the Classis? Upon occasion of another speech, I showed it to be
unreasonable, if the observation of that order, contained in that writing,
should not be required of any other Minister, as well as of Mr. Davenport.

3. It is an odious and suspicious manner of relation, when they say, I got the
5 Ministers to make that writing in mine own house; when as by the motion of a
Dutch Minister, and a special friend of Mr. Davenport, that was the messenger,
and by the request of some of our Elders, as has been showed before, they came
unto me, and with protestation of their desire to accommodate Mr. Davenport,
and to further his calling, they made that writing, and therefore came unto my
house, because being weak and sickly, I could not so well go out of my house
to meet them elsewhere.

4. Here also there is fit place to show the untruth of that report, which Mr.
Davenport in his Page 4.
writing to the Classis sets down touching these 5 Ministers, viz. that upon
Mr. Pagers request alone they did in writing declare their private judgment,
etc. for being come unto me in such manner as is before noted, they resolved of
that course of writing their advise, not upon my motion or request, but upon
the motion of one of those Ministers, which was approoved by the rest. But if I
had been the only seeker thereof, what cause is there for them that mean to
deal uprightly to complain of such a safe and lawful course?

5. It is also a rash and presumptuous judgment, when they say of that writing,
they think that no godly man will be absolutely bound unto it, as though they
had power to canonize saints and godly men, and to put out of that canon all
these Ministers of the Classis that confirmed it, with all such as are not of
Mr. Davenport his mind in refusing to be bound unto it. Suppose also there had
been error in it, yet they do not all cease to be godly men that are guilty
of entertayning some such errors, and suffering themselves to be bound
thereunto.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXX.
THirdly, he violently without consent of any of the Consistory, brings
matters thence to the Classis, when he cannot have his will unjustly satisfied;
and so destroys the power of the Church utterly, often affirming they can do
nothing in these cases without the Classis; of whom we reverently esteem for
counsel and advise in all difficult matters, that cannot be ended amongst our
Consistory.

ANSWER.
1. IT is no act of violence, as they call it, but a just defense and refuge
against violence, to refer those things to the Classis, which men conceave to
be unjustly done, or unjustly delayed in the Consistory: in such cases I have
done and still purpose to bring matters unto the Classis. Whereas they say,
that so I destroy the power of the Church utterly, this is utterly false and a
notorious slander, proceeding either from gross ignorance, or else from some
worse root of bitterness, and they can never justify the same. They have made
themselves plaintiffes and accusers, and from such is exspected their proof,
which the defendant is then to answer, when it once appears. Where is the
warrant of W. Best, N. Ia. Ia. Cr. Io. Pol.? etc. where is the evidence of Ios.
St. La. Co. Aug. Horse. Tho. Fl. or any of the rest? How prove they that I do
utterly destroy the power of the Church hereby, why are they not ashamed to
bring their bare word?

2. Mark here the folly of these complaynants; they pretend to stand for the
liberty of the Church, and yet seek to bring themselves into bondage. If men
should stay from bringing their complaints unto the Classis, until their
opposites, whether Elders or any others did consent thereunto, what a miserable
servitude would this be? In the title of their complaint, they call themselves
the burdened and oppressed members of the English Church, but they might then
indeed call themselves burdened and groan under their burden, if the least
member in the Church being unsatisfyed in the Consistory, might not have
liberty to bring their complaints to the Classis, to try where the wilfulnes or
the fault is. In the Brownisticall title of the printed book, there is
proclaimed the miserable slavery and bondage of the English Church, by reason
of the tyrannical government and corrupt doctrine of Mr. John Paget, but if I
should in doctrine oppugn, and in practice deny unto the members of this
Church, this liberty of appeal unto the Classis, as they do here condemn it
in me, then might they justly complain of tyrannical government and corrupt
doctrine, then had they cause to bewail their slavery and bondage. So unwisely
do they go about to pluck upon their heads that which they would seem to put
away.

3. They are here again to be called upon to show what their meaning is, and
what they would have men to do, when they think the Elders to be in error,
and to judge unjustly in any matter. Shall men sit still and look for no
redress? Or shall men bring the matter to the body of the Congregation to be
debated and discussed openly before the whole multitude of the Church,
according to the practice of the Brownists? Or what other course do they
require? let them deal plainly, and tell us what they would have.

4. The matter of this accusation about destroying the power of the Church, and
taking away the liberty thereof, for bringing matters to the Classis without
consent of the Elders, is very like and of the same nature with that act and
law of the Elders, and made heretofore upon occasion of the controversy about
Mr. Hooker: Now seeing that act of the Elders is disannulled by the Classis,
and made of no force; seeing the Classis together, with the Deputies of the
Synod, have judged and decreed that this unlawful Act should be rased out of
the Church-booke; and seeing this sentence of the Classis has been made known
unto diverse of these complaynants, as Th. Fa. Th. Fl. Tho. Ad. and others,
Novem. 10. 1631.
who came unto the Consistory, to inquire what the Classis had resolved, to
whom it was signified, that some were deputed from the Classis to come unto the
Consistory to disanull that act; and to see it cancelled, this might have been
a warning unto them, not to have set their hands again unto a new writing in
opposition unto the Classis. For though they showed themselves discontented at
that time, and not willing to rest in the resolution of the Classis, yet time
and better advice might have taught them more wisdom since, both for
themselves and their fellows, whom they ought to have dissuaded from such a
contentious enterprise as is taken in hand by them.

5. Whereas they say they do reverently esteem of the Classis for counsel
and advise in all difficult matters, etc. These words of complement may deceave
a simple reader, and happily some of the subscribers themselves that do not
well understand one another tenet. For what is this their reverent esteem? it
is but a lame, halting, and half reverence, namely for their counsel and
advise, but not for their authority to judge of controversies, and decide them;
as they do further manifest in their next instance. Yea had they but duly
esteemed of the counsel of the Classis, though they would not have submitted
unto it as a sentence, yet the reverence and respect of it as an wholesome
advise, might have been a means to restrain them from the offensive courses
that have been taken by them. The truth is, that this pretended reverence is no
more then that which Mr. Jacob and his company did give to Classes and Synods,
for counsel and advise. Confess. Art. 38.
Yea the Brownists themselves do seem to give as much, when they confess
that particular Churches are by all means convenient to have the help of one
another in all needful affairs of the Church, as members of one body in the
common faith, under Christ their only head.

6. Whereas Mr. Davenport himself takes up a like complaint, that I would not
hearken to his advise for accommodation without consent of the Classis; Book of
complaints page 3. and 4.
besides that which I have answered before, let wise men judge whether his
advise was to be preferred, or was so safe for me to follow as the advice of so
many godly and judicious men, consulting together in the Classis, having also a
calling to judge of such matters. Book of complaints page 15.
He says, that he told me the bringing of it to the Classis would make matters
worse; but seeing such assemblies of Ministers are therefore called together to
make matters better, and to reform the worse, what reason has he of such a
speech, unless he knew of some, that meant to deal the worse, when good
counsel should be given unto them? Though he say further, that some of the
Dutch Ministers did approove of what he said unto me, and that matters would be
worse else: I cannot believe that they did simply and absolutely speak as he
writes, because I know some of them have said otherwise unto me, and had he
named the Ministers, I should have known how to have given him further answer.
It may be some have wished that the matter might have been ended privately, or
in the Consistory, viz. by his according and agreeing with us, and that
otherwise it would be worse for him, and harder for them to allow of his
calling. If it was (as he says) unlikely that the Classis would make an order
in favor of him, to condemn their own customs; then was it also unlikely
that the Dutch Ministers, members of the Classis, would counsel or allow any
such order to be made by our Consistory for the condemning of them; then was it
unlikely, unreasonable and not to have been exspected of Mr. Davenport, that to
gratify him, and to gratify the Brownists also, we should have made a new order
to strengthen them against us in error.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXI.
FOurthly, under pretense of asking and taking advise of the Classis, he
subjects the Church under their authority and power, as he calls it, though
the Church never acknowledged any such power to be due, as the Scripture in any
place gives not to such a company of Ministers, nor as becomes any, except
the Apostles, that could not err, to have.

ANSWER.
FIrst, it is untrue which they do here again repeat, that I subject the
Church under the power of the Classis, especially speaking of an undue power as
they do.

2. This accusation (being the same in effect with some of the former, for
whatsoever show of method is made herein, yet are the parts of their divisions
diverse times confounded) is not so much or not more against me, then against
all the Ministers of these Reformed Churches, and the discipline that is
exercised by them. If the subjection of this Church unto the Classis, will
prove that I do not behave my self as becomes a Pastor in the government
of the Church, for which end it is alleged of these accusers; then may every
one of these Ministers, in this regard, be in like manner accused of not
behaving themselves as becomes Pastors, seeing the Churches whereof they are
Pastors, are as much subjected under the power of the Classis, as is this of
ours. And if this power of the Classis were taken away by them, then should a
principal part of their Church Government be taken away, and their discipline
overthrown: And not only here, but in the Churches of Scotland, France,
Geneva, etc. where the like power and authority of Classical Assemblies, as
the special bond of union, and sinew of government has been established and
practiced.

3. It is another injury, when they say I subject the Church under the
authority of the Classis, under pretense of asking and taking advise of the
Classis: for that which men do under a pretense, that they seek to do
covertly, and not to be seen therein. Men use to hide themselves and their
meanings under the veil of pretenses; but as for me, I have always and do
still openly profess, the authority and power of Synods and Classis, to be
lawful and necessary, as well as their counsel and advise: I do in like
manner pretend the one as well as the other, and not one under the other.

4. Whereas they speak of our subjection to this power of the Classis, that
the Church never acknowledged any such power to be due, etc. this is a plain
falsehood. The English that first made suite; the Dutch Ministers that furthered
the suit; the Magistrates that granted the suit, did all agree in this, to have
such an English Church as should accord with the Dutch, in the same order of
discipline and government, and be as the Dutch.

Since my first coming, which was at the first erecting of this Church, I was
admitted to be a member of their Classis, with ordinary subscription and
promise of union with them. Both I and the Elders ever since as they were
deputed thereunto by the Consistory, have from time to time, even unto this
present, appeared in the Classis, in the same manner that others did, and both
by submission unto their resolutions, and by actual exercise of the same
liberty and power, in giving our voices equally with them, have so acknowledged
the authority of Classical assemblies to be lawful and just.

Those that are received for members of this Congregation, and are newly added
to the Church from one communion to another, do not only make profession of
the same faith with us, but do also by solemn promise, covenant to submit
unto the discipline of this Church, according to the rule of Christ. And being
admitted, diverse have upon occasion resorted unto the Classis, and have
submitted unto their authority, for the judgment of such causes and
controversies, about which there has been question among us.

The many Brownists that have come unto us, leaving their separation, were
never received nor admitted to come with any protest against this power of the
Classis, and subjection thereunto. Th. Fa. of old, when he was received of the
Dutch Church and since of us, and Th. Ad. with St. Of. Ed. Ph. and Ed. Sc. of
later times, which now with other subscribers do complain of the undue power
of the Classis, had as much reason to have protested against this power at
their first admission to the Church. For howsoever the acts and sentences
proceeding from this power, have been multiplied on sundry occasions; yet the
power it self, and the authority of the Classis, was the same at first, and no
other then it is now.

Among many other evidences, there is one pregnant testimony hereof, upon
occasion of an English Synod, which Mr. Forbes in special labored to have
erected in these Countries: For when he urged us many ways to have joined with
them, we for many weighty reasons being unwilling thereunto, did in the name of
Ministers, Elders and Deacons, with the liking also of sundry of our people
acquainted with this business, declare and testify, both unto Magistrates and
the Synod, that as we had no will, so we had no power to withdraw or disjoyne
our selves from the Classis, with which we were combined as members of the
same, without their consent: and by this testification their power was then
acknowledged of us.

To omit other things in so plain a case, consider we but one testimony of
one of these my accusers, who though (forgetting himself) he has subscribed
unto this protest against the power and authority of the Classis, yet has he
of late given great approbation thereof. Sto. Ofw. in his book against the
Brownists, having said that it is far from the true Church to admit of
disorders, Heady and rash Censures p. 29.
though that be not always true, seeing many true Churches are often defiled
with much disorder, and may not therefore be accounted false Churches, yet that
which follows is both true, and directly against this accusation, which
himself and others have made. Speaking of an holy order observed at Geneva,
and in particular how every Church is to use the censures appointed by Christ,
he tells how they have their meetings of Ministers and Elders, some less and
some greater, some monthly, some yearly, even just according to the order of
Classical and Synodicall meetings in these Countries; and this also as he
says, for to give definitive sentence, and for deciding of matters. Now these
things being acts of power and authority, and more then counsel and advise,
and they commended of him for it, who would think he should be so carried away
with the whirlewinde, as to subscribe to the contrary with these complaynants,
and to reproach me for subjecting this Church to such a power, which had been so
lately commended of himself?

5. Their insolency in accusing is so much the greater, in that they do still
leave their proofs behind them. They say touching the power of the Classical
assemblies, that it is such as the Scriptures do not in any place give to such
a company of Ministers: but they do not allege any one place of Scripture to
condemn the same. Though I for my part have in my sermons diverse times
alleged sundry evidences and grounds of holy Scripture, for proof and
maintenance of such authority as is exercised by Synods and Classis; yet now
being so ^^hemently and hainously accused by these complaynants, I wait for
their arguments and proofs, which hitherto have not appeared. They are false
accusers until they have justified their charge. It is enough for the
defendant or party accused, then to give answer when arguments are brought
against him.

But these complaynants might yet have seen themselves contradicted by their
forenamed fellow-complaynant St. Ofw. who brings a remarkable place of
Scripture to warrant the exercise of that power, Act. 15.
which here they deny. He alleges that when a controversy arose at Antioch,
they sent to Jerusalem for to bring the Church there unto unity and order,
which the Apostles performed; Then he adds immediately, and the like do the
Reformed Churches here and in France, and at Geneva. Now if the Churches here
do practice and exercise a power, so as was done at Antioch and Jerusalem, and
by Apostolical direction, then is not their power an undue power, nor the
Churches unjustly subjected thereunto. This one allegation is sufficient to
evince the falsehood of their assertion.

6. It is also false and absurd, which they say touching the authority of the
Classis, that it is such as does not become any, except the Apostles, that
could not err, to have: But it is the less marvel that these men do speak
on this manner, when as they see Mr. Davenport himself going before them, and
using a much like speech in his letter to the Classis, touching his consent
required to the writing of the 5 Ministers, namely, Book of complaints and page
5.
that such a subjection is greater then may be yielded unto any Council,
whether of Classis or Synods, etc. that thereby the writings and decrees of men
are made infallible, and equal with the Word of God, which is intolerable. But
what wise man is there that sees not the strange folly and vanity of such
assertions as these? Is no truth uttered or described by men in our times,
whereunto the consent of men may be required, because there be now no Apostles?
Do not all Reformed Churches at this day require a subscription unto their
confessions of faith in the several articles thereof? Do they hereby make
their writings of equal authority with the Word of God, and themselves equal
to the Apostles that could not err? It is far from them. Neither Mr.
Davenport, nor these complaynants, shall ever be able to justify these
slanderous complaints. Nay if this were true, how could Mr. Davenport subscribe
his name unto his own writing sent unto the Classis, to show his consent unto
it? Did he thereby make himself an Apostle or his writing equal with the Word
of God? Why may we not show our consent, and subscribe to other writings of
men, upon persuasion of the truth so appearing unto us, as well as he
subscribed to his own?

They are so far from prooving these assertions, that they offer not to go
about it; we acknowledge there is no judicatory on earth, either civil or
Ecclesiastical, either of Consistory, Classis, or Synod, but they are subject
to error: when that error is showed by the Word of God, it ought to be
corrected. This also is their practice, one Synod often reforming that which
has been decreed by another. Yet does not this take away their authority for
the judgment and deciding of controversies. For by such reasoning they might
take away all government, and bring in confusion.

By these and suchlike injurious speeches, they do exceedingly gratify many
sorts of Libertines, Arrians, Socinians and other Herericks, which do
therefore so much abhor the subscriptions required in the Churches of God,
because they serve for detection and discovery of their errors. But as the
preaching of the Word is not therefore to be condemned, because some preach
error; so are not subscriptions and that consent, which is required to many
truths, therefore to be rejected, though some do unjustly urge subscription
unto errors.

7. Observe here also the inexcusable partiality of these complaynants, who
accuse me for subjecting the Church under the authority of the Classis, and yet
frame no such complaint against the Elders of this Church, which (whatsoever
some of their opinions have been or are) yet have they all of them by their
practice acknowledged the authority and power of the Classis, where they have
sit with others, and have exercised as much authority as any member of the
Classis, by giving their voices for deciding, judging and determining of any
controversy, or cause that was brought unto them, as well as the rest. Hereby
men may learn the better what to judge of this their writing.

Having heard their complaints in respect of the whole Churches power and
liberty, the Elders power in government, and the authority of the Classis, let
us now hear what their complaint is in respect of the particular members
thereof.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXII.
FOurthly, he does not the duty of a Pastor to the particular members of the
Congregation, which we prove after this manner.

First, when godly persons make their complaints of those that walk
disorderly, and that the censures are not executed upon offenders, they that
seek the good of the Church, are checked and discouraged by him.

ANSWER.
1. THis accusation is false and slanderous. My desire and endeavor from my
first calling unto this place, has been and is, that the vigor of discipline
may be mainteyned in our Church; and according to my power, I have labored
that the censures might be executed in due manner, for discouragement, not of
the godly, but of the ungodly and offenders; and as well against the richer as
the poorer sort, without acception of persons. When care and zeal is showed in
the administration of discipline, commonly the persons reprooved and censured
are displeased and discontented: they and their friends do often murmr and
complain, and by themselves and by their instruments great troubles are raised
up in the Church. And it comes to pass sometimes that the Ministers of Christ
are never more reproached for unrighteous dealing, then when they have done
most righteously and zealously in the censure of offenders.

2. This accusation is partial. For seeing the rebukes and censures of
offenders are not concluded nor executed, but by the most voices and consent
at least of the greatest part of the Eldership: if wrong and injustice have
been committed, then if not all, yet the greatest part must be guilty. And what
partiality is this, to frame an accusation against me alone, and to complain
of me alone, and to require of me that I alone should answer for that, which
others have done with me? This shows with what conscience they have proceeded
in this work.

3. This accusation is contradictory to that testimony, which the chief of
these complaynants themselves have given of me in their protestation unto the
Classis, with so great commendation both of my life and doctrine, and in such a
measure that they desired no better Pastor, and this in the name of Elders,
Deacons, and other members of the Church, upon occasion of the controversy
concerning Mr. Hooker. Hereby they make themselves guilty and trespassers
against the truth. If then they spoke without flattery, as they professed; how
can they now speak without slander, touching my injustice in this kind,
without some new evidence thereof.

4. This accusation is most disordered, for if such evils have been committed
by me in the Eldership, why did not these accusers seek redress at the same
time? Or if they could get no redress in the Eldership, why did they not
complain to the Classis? Or if they would not subject the affairs of the
Church unto the undue power of the Classis, as they call it, why did they not
then bethink themselves of some other form of discipline, that might have
affoorded them more redress of evils? Or if they had now just cause to
abstain from the communion, for Mr. Davenport his cause, until they had
testified against evil, why had they not as just reason then? What good can be
exspected to ensue upon such disordred and unconscionable courses?

5. This accusation can with less reason be made by these men, then by many
others. For if there have been a failing in the Eldership, for not censuring of
offenders (and what governors of the Church, even the godlyest, do not
sometimes fail?) then has it been in the not censuring of the offenses of
some of these complaynants. For example, William Bast, the foreman of the
subscribers, and the publisher of that scandalous pamphlet of complaints
against me, has given great offense, and is become an evil example unto many,
by the open violation of the Sabbath in his own house, and by his resorting
unto the assembly of the Remonstrants. He has been admonished by me, and in
the name of the Eldership, and has justly deserved further censure. With what
face can he complain that the censures are not executed upon offenders? Why
does not this complaynant awaken his own frozen and benumbed conscience, to
consider better of his own ways, before he take up stones to cast at others?

Tho. Flet. another of these complaynants has heretofore caused great
disturbance in our Church, by the disordred and offensive courses taken by him.
For (as has been noted before) when he sought to hinder the calling of Mr.
Balmford, and to discourage him from coming unto us, he then went about from
house to house, with a catalogue of names to get and gather the consent, not
only of men, but of women and maids also, as if they had had power to give
voices in the election of Ministers, and being admonished of this scandal by
the Eldership, he yet refused to acknowledge his fault therein. If we have
failed in censuring offenders, surely there is much cause to remember our
remissenes toward him.

And not he only, but other of these complaynants that were importunate in his
behalf, have reason to consider their own guiltines in that which they
unjustly impute unto me. For notwithstanding this great disorder of Tho. Fl.
which the Elders would have taken into further consideration, yet A.H. H.D. Io.
Po. Ia. Cr. Io. St. D.B. and others, coming to the Consistory the evening
before the Lords Supper, were urgent to have a present end without further
delay, though Th. Fl. would not acknowledge this his fault, signifying that
otherwise they were not willing for this time to come to the communion. This
was such an act of violent dealing, in hindering the just censure of offenders
and disordred persons, as I do not remember the like since the Church was
first erected. They were so earnest in the business by threatening a kind of
schism, that it was thought good by the Eldership, together with the Deacons,
to give place unto the importunity of these brethren, and for that time to let
pass that which was past; having first showed what their duty was in such
cases, and always reserving our liberty to witness the truth, and to deal
against such errors and disorders hereafter, as occasion should be given.

Moreover, what is it that more hinders the due administration of discipline,
causing that the censures are not executed upon such as walk disorderly, then
when there is a conspiracy and combination of many persons together in some
evil enterprise? It is commonly observed among men, that the multitude of
offenders procures impunity of offenses. If men that walk disorderly, would
devise how to break down the wall of discipline, and free themselves from
censure, what readyer course could they take, then to band themselves in
companyes, and so to rush forward in their ways, and to discourage and weaken
the hands of such governors of the Church, as should correct their disorders?
Now this is the very practice of these complaynants in this their present
enterprise, in this their injurious writing: for here they join hand in hand,
they set name by name, and who shall now stay them?

This consociation in evil makes them in a high degree guilty of that very
thing they complain of in this article. Hereby they strengthen and harden one
another in sin. Hereby others are seduced and drawn away, to follow their
course, as is noted in the end of the printed book. And while they walk so
disorderly, how can the censures without great difficulty be executed? Prove.
16.5. and 27.17.
Yet let these remember the word of the Lord, though hand join in hand, the
offenders shall not be unpunished.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXIII.
SEcondly, when some have been suspended from the Lords Table, they may live
many years and dye in their sins, before he looks after them to reclaim them.

ANSWER.
1. THe admonition of suspended persons is performed either in the Consistory,
when they are sent for thither, or when some are deputed out of the Consistory
to go unto them; or when they are upon occasion spoken unto by one alone. And
each of these ways have I many a time and often admonished such persons, that
they might be reclaimed, and neither live nor dye in their sins.

2. Seeing suspended persons are ordinarily often admonished before their
suspension, the admonition which belongs unto them most properly, is in the
Eldership, after that more private admonition has been despised of them. If
this duty have been neglected in the Eldership, what partiality is it in these
accusers, to complain of me alone, for that thing which concerns the rest of
the Elders, when as they know not which of us be most faulty therein?

3. There is also a difference to be put betwixt suspended persons: some of
them being more tractable and ready to hear; others more obstinate, and ready
to rend those that admonish them with reproaches and raylings. And the Scripture
shows that we are not so much bound to admonish the one sort as the other;
least the name of God should be taken in vain, and his holy things despised as
well as we rent.

4. The order agreed upon in the Consistory, is this, that in cases of
admonition those Elders or Ministers, in whose quarter the persons to be
admonished do dwell, are ordinarily to be employed therein before others.
Neither do I know that in my quarter any suspended persons have remained
without admonition by me. And it is unreasonable to blame me for that, which
has been neglected in another quarter.

5. If any of these complaynants had at any time discerned, or thought that
there was a defect or neglect of duty, in regard of any one suspended person,
and that there was special need of admonishing such an one; had there been a
Christian consideration of their duty in such case, they might have been led
thereby, either to have advertised me thereof in private, or to have signified
it unto the Eldership, and to have required their further care therein, at
least before they had made such a scandalous protestation to the offense of
many.

6. I have the less encouragement to the performance of this work, through
the fault of some of these my accusers, and to give instance hereof; A certain
person of our Church being suspended for profaning the Lord's Day, and being
admonished of this scandal, has this answer in readiness; why do you not as
well suspend such and such persons, and by name Will. Best, for his open Shop
upon the Sabbath Day? Thus is this accusers evil example a stumbling block to
many, and though the others fault is in a higher degree, and therefore is
suspended rather then he, yet even that which is done by him also is very
offensive, both for strengthening of others in sin, and for weakening of us,
that should admonish the suspended person.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXIV.
THirdly, the visiting of members at their houses is so far neglected, that not
only diverse members were never once visited by him in diverse years, but also
the visitation of the members against the Sacrament is wholly left off.

ANSWER.
1. FOr visitation of the sick, it is a duty wherein by the blessing of God, I
have had much comfort in ministering of comfort unto others; and therefore have
been careful to perform the same, according to my power and above my power,
both to rich and poor, to English and Dutch, to the members of the Church, and
to them that are no members of the Church, to such as were diseased in body,
and to such as have been afflicted in mind. My labor and wearines in going
from one side of the City to another upon this occasion, has been such, that
thereupon I have evidently and sensibly fallen into great sickness. And where
more danger was, being called thereunto, I have not refused to visit many
visited with the Pest, to comfort them in the time of their anguish: Yea in the
most infectious places, as where in one poor family, the floor has been
covered with death, some persons being already dead of the plague, and some
ready to give up the ghost, lying so thick on the ground, that I could
scarsely set my foot beside them, being six of them in one small room, 3
dead, and 3 dying upon their pallets; yet have I with cheerefulnes and comfort
gone among them, to exhort them, to pray with them, and to minister the
consolations of Christ unto them as need required. And though in regard of
weakness, I am not able to do so much as I have done; though my strength be
less, yet I purpose and hope that my care shall be more, and when I cannot go
faster, yet to creep forth for performance of this duty. Whereas by the
favor of the Magistrates there are mainteyned in this City certain
Siecken-troosters, or Comforters of the sick, for assistance of the Dutch
Ministers, to supply their place in visiting of the sick, especially when
contagious and pestilentiall diseases do abound, and thereby the Ministers of
the Dutch Church are excused and eased of a great part of their burden, labor
and danger in visiting of the sick; yet have I not sought any such help for my
excuse in this behalf, but have alone willingly undergone the burden hereof.
Had these complaynants well considered of the matter, they would rather have
themselves become Siecken-troasters, to supply what was wanting in me, Mat.
25.36 43. etc. Iam. 1.27. 1. These. 5.14.
then in so scandalous manner to have reproched and accused me; it being also
the duty of every particular Christian, to be a visiter and comforter of the
sick, and especially it might have been exspected of some of these
complaynants, that have taken upon them so much, even more then they ought in
preaching and expounding the Scriptures, when they were not lawfully called
thereunto.

2. For visitation of members before the Lords Supper, though I have duly and
ordinarily in former times observed it, yet upon the death of Mr. Pot my
fellow-minister, and faithful fellow laborer in the Lord, the Elders of our
Church took upon them to free me from that labor, by visiting the members at
such time, until another Minister might be provided, which was then hoped
would be no long time. When I then intermitted that visitation, it was not that
I might live in idleness, for my labor was double to that it was before, by
preaching as many sermons, as both he and I together did before; and withal
visited sick persons upon occasion as I could. This being continued for 2
years after his death, at length through infirmity of body, rheumes, and
hoarsenes of voice, I was forced to leave some exercises, as that sermon on
Wednesdayes, and that before the Lords Supper, preaching only twice on the
Lord's Day. After this I had also long sicknesses with many troubles, so that my
weakness is now very great, and will not permit to endure such travel in
visiting as I have done. Common humanity might have taught my accusers to have
considered these things, and so not to have been so immodest and unreasonable
in reproching of me.

3. As for this solemn visitation of members before the Lord's Supper, seeing
it does not appear from the Scriptures, that it was any express or immediate
ordinance of God, yea or that it could be well practiced in the primitive
Church, when as it seems they did celebrate the Lords Supper so frequently,
Act. 2.42.
and even every Lord's Day, they ought for this cause also to have been more
sparing in their accusation. Otherwise, where communions are not so frequent, I
acknowledge that there is proffitable use thereof, and my purpose also is as
the Lord shall enable me to observe the same.

4. For that they speak of diverse members never once visited by me in diverse
years, that might also well be, and yet without any fault of mine. For seeing
the City where we live, is large and great, and the members of our Church
scattered here and there throughout the same in many streates, lanes and
corners thereof, it was therefore by order and agreement among our selves
divided into diverse quarters, which were to be visited and attended upon, each
knowing his own quarter, that none might be left unvisited by one or other.
And what wonder then, if those members of the Church, which dwelt in an other
quarter, were never visited by me, that had my station and special
watch-assigned unto me in an other place? And thus it is also with the Dutch
Ministers in their visitations of their people, whose order we follow herein.

5. For visitation of the sick, Iam. 5.14.
seeing it is a duty which the Holy Ghost has in special manner laid upon the
Elders of the Church; seeing my care and diligence in performance of this
duty, has not been inferior unto the care of the Elders; seeing many members
of the Church do more complain of the negligence of the Elders in this
regard; this shows how partially and unconscionably these complaynants have
framed their accusation in blameing me alone, which yet have had as just excuse
as our Elders, of whom they do not here utter any one word of complaint at all.

6. It is also to be remembered touching the visitation of the sick, that the
Apostle exhorts those that are sick to call for the Elders of the Church, that
they may pray for them, etc. For being called for, Iam. 5.14.
they may with more comfort undertake the work. And this direction of calling
for them, ought at least to prevayle so far with men, as to stay them from
contumelious reproach of the Ministers, until they have called or sent for
them. And had this been thought of by these complaynants, it might have stayed
them from accusing of me, who (if it were possible) never (to my knowledge)
refused to visit any that called for me, whether in my quarter or of an other;
whether members of the Church or not.

7. That which should encourage a Minister unto the visitation of the sick, is
the peacable entertainment which he finds when he comes unto them. There be
houses that are houses of strife, and some sick persons that are sick of
strife, when their desire and will is no satisfied. The visitation of such does
sometimes exasperate the unreasonable passion of impatient strife, Prove. 29.17.
and therefore as the Lord warns all men to withdraw their foot from their
neighbors house, when there is fear and danger, that visitation may occasion
hatred and indignation, Luke 10.6.
even so Ministers also are directed of Christ, to have respect unto this rule
of conversation, by observing where the children of peace do dwell, and
disposing their way accordingly. And in such cases a Minister ought to be
excused, if he visit not so often as otherwise he would.

8. For the visitation of the members of the Church before the Lords Supper, I
have not had so much encouragement thereunto of later time as formerly I have
had. For seeing our manner and order is, that Ministers and Elders go together
about this work, and seeing some of the Elders have declared, both by word and
practice, that they are of Mr. Davenport his mind, touching some of these
controversyes, that have been so offensive among us; if any of these Elders
going with me in this visitation, we should find some members of the Church,
which signify unto us that they are also of Mr. Davenport his judgment, and
say that they are troubled in conscience about these things, and require
resolution of their doubts; what is now to be done? I labor to show him Mr.
Davenport his error; The Elder with me (if he deal in conscience according to
his profession) labors to maintain Mr. Davenport his opinion, and to resist
me in this visitation. If on the contrary we meet with such of our people, as
dislike the judgment and practice of Mr. Davenport, and tell how they are
offended with such as do oppugn the discipline and order of these Reformed
Churches, and require the Elder to show warrant of his opinion, wherein he
takes part with Mr. Davenport; If hereupon this Elder begin to plead for Mr.
Davenport, what could I do in conscience but plead against him, and witness
the truth whereof I am persuaded, and so oppose the Elder going with me? And
what trouble then was to be exspected in this visitation?

Lastly, besides the former kinds of visitation in time of sickness, and before
the Lords Supper, there is an other kind of more ordinary visitation of
members of the Church, when according to the bond of Christian communion and
fellowship, those that are neighbors and friends do meet together, especially
when the poorer families, the fatherless and the widows are visited in their
wants. It is not enough sometimes to visit the houses of the poor, unless the
poor be allowed to visit us, unless by a loving and kind invitation they be
called unto us; if there be not, as the H. Ghost speaks, Esa. 58.10.
a pouring out of the soul unto them in familiar conference and conversation
together. This duty I have endeavored according to my power to perform, and
that with cheerfulnes and singlenes of heart. This course of visitation has
been duly and constantly observed by me, neither do I know that ever any week
has passed for more then 20 years together, wherein some or other, more or
less, have not been thus visited by me, if not by my going to them or
otherwise, yet at least by their coming unto my house, if sickness or a
journey, or some other necessity did not hinder, and that to this end, that we
might rejoice together in the Lord, and that we might communicate together in
the gifts of God, for our mutual comfort, both theirs and mine. I should have
abhorred to speak so much of my self, but that my importunate accusers have
compelled me by these complaints: and in such case many men of God have not
refused to do the like.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXV.
FOurthly, whereas it was desired that the weekly sermons on Wednesdayes, and
those usual before the Sacrament, should again be begun, and assistance has
been offered him therein without his charge at least; he neither would perform
them himself, nor suffer any other we could get to do it, though the Eldership
agreed it should be so.

ANSWER.
FIrst it is untrue which they say concerning the weekly sermons on
Wednesdayes, that the Eldership agreed, that upon my refusal any other they
could get should do it. It was agreed by the Eldership, that Mr. Davenport
should be spoken unto for his assistance therein, but no agreement for any
other. This is evident from their own act thereof.

2. It is also untrue which they write of the Elderships agreement, that any
other they could get should do it. In one sentence they are guilty of double
untruth, as before there was an untruth in regard of the persons to be got, so
here another untruth in respect of the persons by whom they should be got. For
this had been most unreasonable, that it should have been referred unto these
complaynants to get whom they could. This had been many ways against good
order.

3. As for Mr. Davenport his preaching in that manner, before we were assured of
his accord with us, it had been a mean to nourish and continue strife in the
Congregation; a means to delay and hinder the calling of another Minister, as
I showed before in answer to their complaint, which is here idely repeated.

4. Although Mr. Davenport had before offered his assistance in preaching, if
the Eldership should desire it, and although the Elders did agree, and conclude
for Mr. Davenport, and thereupon deputed some to speak unto him about his
assistance in preaching on the week days, and to entreat him to begin with
the preparatory Sermon on Saturday next following, etc. yet even they
themselves or Mr. Davenport, or both, seeing the inconveniences and danger that
might ensue thereupon, did not proceed to put their rash agreement in
execution, but (as it seems) thought it best to surcease, at least until a
better occasion.

5. Whereas they speak of assistance offered unto me without my charge at
least, this was but a vain offer: for as on the other side I needed not to be
at any charge for such assistance, so had it been an unreasonable thing, if in
regard of freedom from cost and charges, I should have consented to such a
course of assistance, which I conceaved to be against the peace of our Church.

6. Suppose their offered assistance had not been the least charge unto me, yet
might it have been a very great charge unto the Church, if they had paid for
it according to the proportion of that collect, that was made for Mr.
Davenport, and therefore worthy of consideration in that regard.

7. Whereas they say further of these weekly sermons, that I would neither
perform them my self, nor suffer, etc. they know, or may know well enough,
that I did perform those weekly Sermons my self alone, both diverse years
before the coming of Mr. Pot, and after his death for two years together,
whiles my health and strength permitted, and this without any charge at all
unto the Church.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXVI.
FOr his doctrine, we have much against it: but to let pass his slight
Sermons, which be many for a man of his Abilities.

ANSWER.
HAving answered their manifold slanders, touching my behavior in the
government of the Church, let us now hear what they have to object against my
doctrine. And here playing the Rhetoricians, they make a show of passing by
some fault, which they do not reckon in the number of those particulars that
follow. They seem I say, by a minsing figure of extenuation, to let a fault
pass, which yet they do not. They are content to have somethings, which are
no light matters, nor of small reproach, to be reckoned for small in
comparison, and to let pass the proof of them; that so these things, which
they profess to stand upon, may be imagined to be the greater and the more
heinous. But here they do not let pass this lighter fault, without a
threefold reproach, 1. that my Sermons be slight; 2. that these slight
Sermons be many. 3. They aggravate it, that this is done by a man of my
abilities.

For the sleightnes of my Sermons, I answer,

1. This accusation is slanderous, they have not offered to prove it, neither
can they do it. Whatsoever my weakness is, yet the doctrines, exhortations,
consolations, delivered in my Sermons, being drawn by just consequence from
the word of truth, conteyne in them the wisdom of God, and the power of God
unto salvation, and therefore not to be slighted. Whatsoever infirmities have
appeared in my delivery of this word, they ought from thence to have taken
occasion of glorifying God, who perfecteth his power in man's weakness, 2. Cor.
9.12.
and will therefore have the treasure of his Gospel to be carried forth in
earthen vessels, and the excellent pearl of the knowledge of Christ, to be
kept in 2. Cor. 4.7
oystershelles, or vessels made thereof, as the Greek words import, that the
excellency of that power might be of God, and not of the Ministers. For as
there is a huge difference of price betwixt the base oysters, and the costly
pearls that are found therein; so the infinite price and virtue of the
Evangelical pearl is the more to be acknowledged, being found in the
ministry of frail humane shelles.

2. No marvel that I should be slighted of them, when the most holy Apostles,
2. Cor. 10.10. Esa. 53.3. Luke 9.22. Ioh. 10.20.
when Paul himself was slighted, as a man whose bodily presence was weak,
and his speech contemptible, or of no value; they complained of him for his
slight Sermons. Even Christ himself was slighted and rejected of men, made
as nothing, esteemed as a mad man, and not to be heard.

3. It is the less marvel that I should be thus slighted by some of these
complaynants, that do magnify themselves, and have set up themselves to be
preachers in their ordinary meetings, where diverse members of sundry families
have met together to hear them, and this without allowance of the Church. It
seems the sermons of Tho. Flet. Ia. Cr. and others, have been so excellent,
that they themselves, and other of these complaynants, that have been their
hearers, do so esteem thereof, that my Sermons, in comparison of theirs, are
but slight Sermons. May I not say to these accusers, as the Apostle once to
some among the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.8.10.
Now ye are full, now ye are rich, etc. we are fools for Christ's sake, but ye
are wise in Christ, we are weak, ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we
are despised. Ye are eminent men, and we are slight teachers.

For the number of my slight Sermons, which they will have to be many: I leave
it to the judgment of unpartiall hearers of me. And if need be, I am ready to
submit the trial of any of them to the judgment of the learned, having the
notes of them all by me. Had these complayners given an instance but of any one
Sermon, and showed wherein the sleightnes thereof did consist, I might then
have given a more full answer unto them.

For my Abilities, which they odiously allege, to aggravate my fault, as if
through sloathfullnes and idleness, I had done the work of the Lord
negligently; I answer, that Abilities are either of body or mind.

For my Ability of body, it is very small, and when I was in the strength of my
age, I was but a weak man. But now through age and labor, and much sickness,
my strength is exceedingly decayed, and my weakness augmented. Yet in this
weakness I have labored above my ability and strength of body, both in study
and in speaking with extension of voice, so that I have thereupon fallen into
further sickness, and sensibly discerned an increase of my weakness. And being
much troubled with an infirmity of hoarsenes, the things that are spoken with
a low, weak and hoarse voice, seem unto some to be weak and slight, even to
such as regard a sound of words, more then soundnes of matter.

And for Ability of mind, it depends in some part upon the Ability of body:
Eccl. 12.12
for when the body is not so able to endure the labor of study, of writing and
reading, which are a wearines unto the flesh, then is the mind less furnished
through want of study. Again, heavines in the heart of man brings it down;
and so the mind is weakened. Now whether many of these complaynants have not
sought so much as in them lies, to make me dejected with heavines, let any
judge that reads this their writing, and hears of their other behavior
suitable thereunto. And let themselves think whether they be not guilty of
giving occasion, that I should make the sleighter Sermons; considering what the
Apostle testifyeth, Heb. 13.17
that it is unprofitable for the people to make their Ministers sorrowful. As
for me, my desire has been, and my resolution is, not to hide my Talent in a
napkin, but through the grace of God (by which I am that I am) according to my
ability, to employ the same to the good of Gods Church, hoping at length with
the faithful servants to enter into my Masters joy.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXVII.
FIrst his self-preaching and mis-applying of holy truths, which has been
done with such bitterness of late, that some of us are discouraged from hearing
him, and all of us are sent home with sad hearts, when those of his side are
made glad and insult; who pretend to cleave to Mr. Paget, out of their enmity
against us, and those ways of godliness, wherein we desire and endeavor to
walk.

ANSWER.
IN this their first exception against my doctrine, behold an heap of slanders
couched together.

First, they accuse me of selfpreaching; but they do not tell wherein this
self-preaching does consist. Had they done it, they might have been more fully
refuted. Men preach themselves, when they do unlawfully seek their own
proffit, pleasure or preferment thereby. I have not in my doctrine used any
colored covetousnes to get gain, or to extort any thing by contributions or
collections from them. I have not sought theirs, but them. I have not
prophesyed of wine and strong-drinke, nor preached to this end that I might be
entertained with feasting and banquet^^^^ I (...) not (...) gloriously (...)
the praise of humane eloquence and learning, by alleging the speeches and
sentences of Poets, Philosophers, or Fathers, nor Greek and Latin language,
to amaze the hearers by such vain oftentation: Neither have I vented new
conceits or opinions of mine own, to please men, or to get honor to my self
by such doctrines. Neither do I know any other reasonable pretense for such a
slander.

2. It is another slander, when they say, I mis-apply holy truths. They say
it, but they do not name any one truth mis-applyed by me; much less do they
prove it.

3. An other slander is, that I use such bitterness. And yet they allege no one
bitter speech or doctrine uttred by me. If it be enough to accuse, who shall be
innocent?

4. That some of them should be discouraged from hearing me, and all of them
sent home with sad hearts, it does not appear by the behavior of diverse of
them. The trial of their countenance testifyeth against them; neither do
these complaynants give instance of any one speech of mine, whereby a godly
heart might be either discouraged, or unjustly made sad in heart. And yet we
know there is a godly sadness of heart; and it is a blessed thing for the
hearers of Gods Word, to be sent home sometimes with such sadness of heart: such
sorrow is the seed of joy, and far better is such sadness of heart, then that
madness of heart, whereby some spurning against the Word of God, do break out
into contemptuous and scornful gestures, laughing, giering, winking and
nodding at others, and power out reproaches against their Ministers at home and
abroad. If any be pricked in their consciences, 2. Cor. 7.9.10.
I desire it may be a godly sorrow, leading unto repentance, not to be repented
of. I desire not that any be sent home with such a sadness and indignation of
spirit, 1. Kings 20 43.
as was that of wicked Ahab, when upon the rebuke of the Prophet, he returned
so heavily to his house. And for my comfort, I look unto Jesus Christ, who was
yet worse dealt withal, when not some but many even of his Disciples taking
offense at his doctrine, Ioh. 6.60.61.67.
as if no man could bear his hard sayings, and as if they had been discouraged
from hearing of him, went back and walked no more with him.

5. Whereas they speak of some persons, whom they call those of my side;
thereby they give to understand the evil whereof they be authors, in making
two sides or factions in the Church. Whereas (...) pro^^essed agreement with
me, both in doctrine and discipline, and for ought I knew we were all one, both
among our selves and with the Dutch Churches, it seems that there is now (as
if Christ were divided) a divisio^ in the Church: some of Mr. Davenport his
side, as these complaynants show themselves, and some other whom they call
those of my side. For my part, I abhor this siding; I desire to walk in the
old beaten path of that discipline and government, practiced by these Reformed
Churches, and established in their Classis and Synods. They that stand for
innovation, and seek to shake of the government by the Classis, and deny the
authority thereof, are guilty of this offensive siding among us.

6. It is a further slander, when they accuse those that cleave unto me, for
their enmity, not only against them, but even against the ways of godliness,
wherein they desire to walk. This is a very heinous charge, which I know not
how ever they can justify. And what and how many are those special ways of
godliness, wherein these complaynants endeavor to walk? Why did they not in
particular rehearse them as plain dealing required, that their meaning might
be known?

7. How disordred a thing is it, to accuse diverse of their brethren, members of
the Church with them, and to blot the Church with this reproach, and neither to
show the persons that are to be admonished, nor yet the particular sins whereof
they are to be admonished? Why might they not have complained of them to the
Elders, as well as to heap up so many complaints against me? But their
partiality is evident on each side. They complain of me by name, and of these
without name.

Lastly, if those ways of godliness, wherein they desire and endeavor to
walk, be those different practices, wherein some of them have walked, as
namely sometimes to leave our exercises, and the worship of God with us, and to
go unto the exercise of the Brownists, and to hear them: and beside this to
have a new exercise of prophesy among themselves in worse manner, then the
Brownists themselves, who allow no such meetings of their people apart from the
Church; if these or the like practices be those ways of godliness, whereof they
boast, then have they no just cause to complain, though many of the Church do
oppose and dislike their course, that is unwarrantable. Yea it is much to be
doubted, that these complaynants do not (...) themselves, touching these
practise^ and therefore I would (...) of some of them, as of Will. Best, L^^,
C^^. Au. Hor. Ios. S^^. Tho. Fa. Ham. Den. N. Ia. Ge. B^. whether they do
unfeignedly desire, and endeavor to walk in these ways of godliness, as
sometimes to hear the sermons of the Brownists, sometimes to hear the sermons
of Tho. Flet. and Ia. Cr. and to tread in the steps of Tho. Ad. and Hen. Pull.
that have frequented these ways; yea whether they account these ways lawful
and warrantable.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXVIII.
SEcondly, for his taking of text of purpose, fit to stir up contention, as of
late that of the 5 of Isaiah, about the vineyard; upon which 5 first verses, he
has taught a great while, which with what bitterness he has taught against the
godly, many passages and members will witness, and insinuating things against
us, which we never thought of, making us vile before the whole Congregation,
and to be insulted over by unworthy terms from those of his side, to our great
grief and continual vexation, and 10 days since, strayned the 5 verse, which
tells what God will do to his vineyard, and spoke altogether of men's
disorders in the Church, etc.

ANSWER.
THeir second exception against my doctrine, is for taking a text fit to stir
up contention, etc. Hereunto I answer,

Psalm. 12.6. and 19.7.
1. There is no text of H. Scripture that is fit to stir up contention, seeing
every word of God is pure and perfect, and has in it self no fitnes at all to
be applied unto evil, but unto good only. All applying of any text of
Scripture unto contention and error, is only from the corruption of man, and
deceitfullnes of Satan, in perverting the Scripture; and so there is no text of
Scripture whatsoever, but it may be perverted and abused unto error and
contention, ^. P^t. 3.16
as well as this fifth of Isaiah. And therefore howsoever these complaynants
shall se^ke to excuse their speech, yet can they not be without blame in such a
broad and loose kind of expression.

This accusation not only of my doctrine, but of the very text it self for my
sake, is not unlike to the accusation made against a certain Minister in
England, lately related unto me by a friend. This Minister was complained of in
a Bishops court, concerning the doctrine which he had preached, and to
aggravate the complain, it was said, My Lord, the very text which he chose is
Puritanicall. But the Bishop reprooving the complaynant, wished him to abstain
from accusing the text it self: and this might serve for a just rebuke of these
my accusers, that do so overreach in striking at me.

2. This text of Isaiah the fifth touching the vineyard, is so far from being
fit to stir up contention, that on the contrary it is very fit for the
repressing of contention, and for the reproof of contentious persons. This may
be observed in special, both from the blessing of the vineyard, to have an
hedge, verse. 2. and from the desolation of the vineyard, in taking away the
wall and hedge thereof, verse. 5. which is done by contention, which violates
the order of the Church, which is the wall thereof. Contention also may well be
reckoned among the wild grapes, which the Lord there complains of, it being
comprehended under that oppression, clamor or crying, noted verse. 7.

3. It is special comfort unto me to remember, that even as our blessed Lord
Jesus, for expounding this very text from Isaiah the fifth touching the parable
of the vineyard, was persecuted by the Jews, and then especially even at that
hour they sought to lay hands upon him: Even so these my accusers, at the very
same time of my expounding this parable, and for choosing this Text, have now
hereupon done unto me this great wrong, by framing this accusatory writing
against me, such as I never met withal before, nor ever (to my remembrance)
heard of the like in my time by any that made profession of zeal in Religion.

Whereas they do here again renew their complaint, and in 3 articles together
do accuse me of bitterness in teaching against the godly, in the former, in
this, and in the Section following, my answer is,

1. Ruth 1.20. Esa. 38.17. Ier. 9.15. Lam. 3.15.
It is the will of God and his counsel to do special good unto men, even
unto godly men, by things that are specially bitter: In the works of his
providence, by sundry afflictions he gives them much bitterness; in stead of
peace they have bitter bitterness; he feeds them with wormwood, and gives them
waters of gall to drink; he filles them with bitterness, and makes them drunken
with wormwood. Deuteronomy. 2^. Lev. 26.
In his word also, and in all the threats of the Law, the bitterness of sin, and
the bitterness of Gods wrath against sinners, is largely propounded unto us: and
how can that holy Law be preached for the humbling of sinners, except these
bitter things be declared unto them? Who knows not that the principal
preservatives of bodily health are the bitterest receipts, and that in time of
pestilence for avoiding of infection, men do willingly use wormwood, and Rue,
Angelica, and like bitter herbs and roots? And if for health of body men
refuse not bitter compositions, such as Hiera picra, or Holy bitter, how much
more for the eternal salvation of the soul ought men to receave those
rebukes, and reproves of sin, which for the present are bitter to the flesh,
Prove. 1.25-30. and 5.12. and 12.1. etc. Exodus 12.8 Number. 9.11
but procure pleasures for evermore? The Lord tells us, the cause why men
perish, is, because they will not endure reproof. The reason why men contemn
the Gospel, is because they have not learned to know and feel the bitterness
of sin. As God ordained that the Paschall Lamb should be eaten with bitter
herbs; so to procure appetite and spiritual hunger after Christ, and his
righteousness, and to enjoy the fruit both of the Law and Gospel, these
reproves of sin, esteemed so bitter, are yet most necessary.

2. There is a great error in some to account that bitter, which others
account sweet: for as unto a corrupt stomach, even the most wholesome and
pleasant meats, are unsavory and bitter; even so unto some corrupt minds,
even the consolations of God seem strange and unsavory. Therefore ought every
one to beware of error, Esa. 5.20.
and corrupt judgment in discerning of these things: for woe be unto them that
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

3. Of all other those in special are most guilty of this sin, that are wise
in their own eyes, and think themselves full and rich in knowledge: Prove. 27.7
for he that is full despises an honey comb, and feels a bitterness and
loathsomnes even in the sweetest things; whereas on the contrary unto the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. Seeing diverse of these complaynants
hold themselves so full, that they have set up themselves for Prophets and
Preachers, without any due trial or allowance of their gifts by the Church,
what marvel if through this fullnes they count sweet and wholesome things to
be slight, unsavory and bitter? Numb. 11.5.6. with Exodus 16.31. and Psalm.
78.24.25.
Israel being full loathed Manna, though it was a sweet and pleasant food, of
easy digestion, and the taste of it like unto the taste of wafers made with
honey; they complained that their soul was dried away with that light meat;
and they preferred the leekes, onyons and garlic of Egypt, before the wheat of
heaven, before Angels food.

It is to be observed, that though in sundry other articles of their complaint,
they have alleged (though mis-alledged) particular instances: yet in this
complaint of bitterness, they have not brought any particular instances: though
they pretend there be many, yet have they not specifyed one passage, either in
regard of matter, or harsh phrase to manifest the bitterness of my doctrine.
Unto such general complaints, I can give no other then general answers.

5. Against this unjust complaint of theirs, I may justly oppose the testimony
of a great number of our Congregation, who can and do testify, that such
bitterness has not been used by me in my doctrine, but that I have rather been
too remiss in reproof of such great disorders as have of late crept in among
us. It is observed according to the variety of gifts, that some Ministers do
exceed others in the sharp rebuke of sin, and some in the ministering of
consolation: and I do not know that I have been reputed among the first sort.
And for my self, I can with good conscience testify, that I am not privy to my
self of wronging them with any bitter or hard speeches in any particular
passages in my Sermons. Have I offended in any part of my ministry, I judge it
to be in the too much lenity that has been used by me.

6. It least of all becomes these men to complain of bitterness, whiles they
themselves are so notoriously guilty of bitter contention and strife. As David
said once of his enemies, Psalm. 64.3.
so may I of this their writing, they have bent it as their bow, and shoot out
their arrows even bitter words. This writing shows a root of bitterness in
them, which has sprung up and spread it self into so many articles of
complaint and reproach, to the defiling of many: And though it be true of all
men by nature, that they are a generation of serpents; Ps. 140.3. and 10.7.
with Romans 3.9-13.14. Ephesians. 4.31.
and that which is said by the Psalmist of some men, that they have the gall of
aspes or adders poison under their lips, is by the Apostle applied unto all
men, as being naturally guilty of such bitterness; yet when the same has in
special manner broken forth in some, there is then special reason to admonish
them, to put away bitterness, clamor and reproach.

Whereas they say, I make them vile before the whole Congregation, and to be
insulted over by unworthy terms from those of my side, etc. I answer,

1. My labor and study is that sin may be made vile in the eyes of Gods
people, and (...) godliness magnifyed. If their own inordinate courses do not
make them vile, and to be disliked of the whole Congregation, then can my
doctrine be no offense unto them, but is far from making them vile. The word of
the Lord spoken by me is good unto them to walk uprightly, and I am ready to
manifest the same in the particulars thereof.

2. For such as shall insult over them by unworthy terms, I do not approove
any such insultations and vain boastings, but judge them worthy to be
reprooved. I exhort and desire with the Apostle, that all men would learn not
to think of men above that which is written, 1. Cor. 4.6.
and that no man be puffed up or swell against another for any man's cause.

3. As for insultations, let the intelligent Reader judge, and let those that
know the state of this place judge, whether ever the like occasion of insulting
against our Church was given to all sorts of adversaryes, as is now given by
these complaynants. Did ever the Brownists, or had they ever such color of
insultation as now they have, when they see these members of our Church so
complaining of our government and discipline, and of the undue power of the
Classis? The title of these their complaints, printed and prefixed by the
Brownists, and the conclusion affixed by a Brownist, what are they else but
notable insultations over the pretended miserable slavery and bondage of our
Church? What can their talk be otherwise? Have not all other adversaryes of
discipline, yea and of our faith and religion, occasion of insulting against us
by unworthy terms, when they see the writings of Mr. Davenport, and of these
complaynants?

4. Whereas they speak again of those of my side, it is a testimony of their
siding against me, and making a faction in the Church. Besides the warrant of
Scripture before noted, and acknowledged by S^^ph. Of^. I have also the
practice and example of the Reformed Churches of Scotland, France, Geneva, and
the Netherlands, all on my side against them. Yea what one Church of note in
all Europe that is on their sides in these complaints? Why are they not then
ashamed through my side to wound all these?

In the end of this exception, they do yet further blame my doctrine, and say
that I strayned the fifth verse, which tells what God will do to his vineyard,
and spoke altogether of men's disorders in the Ch^^^, etc. Hereunto I answer,

^. It is a very ignorant evil, and a carping at that which is very lawful,
and oftentimes meet and necessary to be done, in such manner as I did in
expounding that verse. For when God tells what he will do to sinners, seeing
in the execution of that judgment he often uses the disorder, error and
malice of men, to correct them by their own folly, and to make their very sins
themselves to be their punishments; therefore in the explication of such
judgments, which God threatens to do, it is meet to show the disorders and
sins of men, by which he fulfilles his threatenings. So when God tells what he
would do to his people, in cutting asunder his staff that was called bands,
Zach. 11.14.
and dissolving the brotherhood between Judah and Israel, what could be more
fit for explication thereof, then to show the disorders, schisms and
contentions of those people, and how he used the perversenes of their wills for
the performance of his own will? Esa. 9.19.20.21.
When God tells what he will do in his wrath against the wicked, he shows
withal how he uses their own wrath mutually to consume one another. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
When the Apostle shows what God will do, in sending strong delusions unto
men to believe lies, etc. How can that text more fitly be explaned, then by
declaring the Antichristian disorders, errors and confusions of men? Esa. 5.5.
And even so when God tells what he would do, in taking away the hedge and wall
of his vineyard, there was just cause for me to tell how that plague is
executed, when men by their own disorders break down the wall of government
many ways to the desolation of the Church, and therefore to give warning of
those disorders to avoyde them.

2. It is untrue which they say, that I spoke altogether of m^ns disorders in
the Church: for both in the second branch of the doctrine, and in the use
thereof, I spoke also of the work of God, that inflicted that judgment of
taking away the wall of government, and of his hand, that was to be observed
and looked unto in such judgments: and for the declaration of this, I then
alleged these testimonies of Scripture, Esa. 3.1.2.3.4. Esa. 10.5.6. Esa.
19.14. Ezech. 14.4.10. Esa. 7.18. as may appear more fully by the notes of my
Sermon, which I then preached: And therefore this cavil against my doctrine is
doubly unjust.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XXXIX.
THirdly, he has preached very bitterly and provokingly against private
meetings, not only long since, but of late has done very unjustly and
manifest injury to Mr. Davenport, whom he (plainly enough) reproached in his
Pulpit, about the meeting of diverse to hear him open the grounds of Religion,
in a Catechizing the family where he lived, every Lord's Day after the Sermons
were ended at 5 a clock at night, where many received much edification, which
he has injuriously now deprived us off, to the great grief of many godly
souls.

ANSWER.
1. THe private meetings, or rather the public meetings in private houses,
which I preached against, were such where private men do preach ordinarily at
set times and places; where diverse members of sundry families do meet together
to hear, and this without allowance of the Church. This is such a disorder, as
even the Brownists themselves do dislike and would not tolerate among them. If
I have offended hereabout, it is that I have not preached oftener against the
same, there being such occasion given thereunto. If this doctrine be bitter
unto them, it arises from the root of bitterness in themselves, that cannot
endure a just reproof of such a disordred practice. Would these accusers make
good their accusation, why have they not brought some warrant from the
Scripture to justify their own way, or to refute my doctrine? How shameless a
thing is it, to accuse me of obstinacy, and not to convince me by the word of
God? to testify before all men, that howsoever I bear the name, and fill up
the place of a Pastor, yet I do not the duty of a Pastor, neither in
government nor in doctrine, and yet not to manifest my doctrine to be repugnant
to the Scriptures? As for other private conferences and godly exhortations and
consolations, and mutual duties of Christians, I have ever exhorted and
encouraged thereunto.

2. Whereas they complain of manifest injury done of late to Mr. Davenport,
etc. This is that which was done by me. Having occasion to expound the
institution of the Sacrament of Baptism, from those words of our Savior to
the Apostles, Mat. 28.^9.
Go ye and teach all nations, etc. I showed from thence what calling the
Apostles had; and likewise what calling they ought to have, which take upon
(...) public ^^^^^^ery of the word and Sacraments; that they ought not to
preach before Christ send them, and bid them Go, according to the order he
has appointed in his Church; and this I confirmed by sundry evidences of
Scripture. If the practice of Mr. Davenport was lawful and unblameable, what
reason is there either for him, or any of his friends, to be offended at this
most necessary doctrine thus generally delivered, and in good manner from so
pregnant a text? But if the practice of Mr. Davenport was inordinate and
unlawful; there was no reason that I should refuse to speak of such wholesome
doctrine, either for fear or favor, either of Mr. Davenport, or these
complaynants his friends. And what is this their complaint but to mis-call the
manifest truth of God, and to make it a manifest injury? If the publishing of
this word shall thus be accounted a reproaching; then may I say with the
Prophet, Ier. 20.8.
The word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me.

3. When they say, I reproached him in my Pulpit, though there seems to be
some kind of scorn in this their speech, yet it serves to show that what I
taught it was in the place whereunto I was lawfully called. And even this
shows, that it was the greater insolency in that person, who when as I had in
this place in the forenoone taught against the preaching of private men, that
he in the afternoon of the same day, in the same place, should oppugn this
doctrine they speak of, to the offense of many.

4. To excuse the preaching of Mr. Davenport, without a calling, they give it
the name of catechizing a family, as if it had been but a family exercise. What
is this but a mockery to deceave and bleare the eyes of such as might read
their writing, when as the members of 30 or 40 families or more have been
reckoned to assemble together in that place? If such a course were lawful, any
sectary under pretense of a family exercise, might set open his doors and
gather a multitude of people unto them. And further to open the grounds of
Religion (as they speak) in such a catechizing as he used, may as well be
counted preaching as any other. And Catecheticall Sermons made without a
calling or due allowance, may prove as dangerous as any other; whether
preached at 3 or at 5 a clock; whether before or after other Sermons ended.

5. It is false they say, that I have injuriously deprived them of those
meetings: for not I, but the Classis has deprived them thereof. Neither did
(...) Classis, as I lawfully might have (...) I use my liberty of having a
voice therein, a^ I might: but the same of this their meeting, and of the
concourse of people (...) hear Mr. Davenport, being noysed and spread abroad
through the City, and so coming also to the ears of the Classis, they deputed
two Ministers from among them, to enquire the truth concerning this their
meeting, which being done, and they finding the thing to be offensive, after
deliberation they appointed two Ministers to go unto Mr. Davenport and Mr. Wh.
in whose house this meeting was, and to admonish them in the name of the
Classis, to show them the danger of this meeting and exercise, to the end that
they might desist from the same. Mr. Davenport being absent, the message was
delivered unto Mr. Wh. This being so, how partial and unjust are these
accusers thus to complain of me, and of me alone? Are they deprived of their
edification? Why do they not direct their complaint against the Ministers of
the Classis? The truth is, how ever they color their complaints, they do
indeed defame the Classis through my name, and condemn the lawful order of
these Reformed Churches, to justify their own disordred courses.

6. Whereas they say further, that this is done to the grief of many godly
souls; though I will not rashly enter into the judgment of many such as came
unto that meeting, nor pronounce sentence touching their godliness, yet this is
well known, that some of them were such as had dealt very offensively and
ungodlily in schisming from the Dutch Church, and leaving their communion,
where they might freely and plenteously have enjoyed the means of edification,
to the joy and comfort of their souls, and even at the same time of their
meeting, there being a sermon hard by in the Wester-Kerck, at the same hour
when Mr. Davenport preached in Mr. Wh. his house.

7. If that exercise of Mr. Davenport was no more then a lawful family
exercise, (...) by the word of God; why then did they leave it of at the (...)?
Deuteronomy. 6. Genesis 1^.
God requires every Master of a family, to instruct his household in the
knowledge and fear of God, and that commandment of God is to be observed,
though any company of (...) or Class^s whatsoever should forbid the same. But
it (...) consciences told them, it was not right which they did, in that they
were content to dissolve that great meeting* and to alter their course.
Otherwise they themselves should be guilty of that which they unjustly impute
unto me: for if it was agreeable to the will of God, then they which for the
will of man did abandon and forsake the will of God, are guilty of depriving so
many of their edification, and of procuring so great grief to so many godly
souls.

8. It is to be observed from this complaint as also from sundry other before,
that these complaynants did not without some reason in their preamble, testify
these things (as themselves speak) principally to the Elders of this Church,
and as it were dedicate this their slanderous writing unto them: for seeing the
most of our Elders have given their approbation, and allowance of this
disordred meeting, and by their example encouraged others to frequent the same;
they might well think that without doubt they would be earnest patrones of
this their own practice, and not lightly be drawn to condemn the same. But
yet notwithstanding this, their reason is no sound reason; for had they wisely
considered withal that these Elders had by this their practice made themselves
parties in the business, and so fitter to be judged themselves, then to be
judges of others: had they also considered, that the Classis being a superior
judicatory, had declared their judgment touching this exercise, they might well
have marked how unreasonable it would be to make these Elders the Arbiters of
this complaint.

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XL.
FOurthly, about the question between him and Mr. Davenport, for the baptising
of all children that were brought, though the parents were altogether
unknown, he very reproachfully upbrayded Mr. Davenport of error, and gave out
that he would answer him in the Pulpit: And when the day came, wherein we
exspected the performance of his promise, he avoydes the question between
them, and fell upon the Anabaptists and Brownists, from both which Mr.
Davenport differed in that point, as he had told him formerly, and offered him
to declare in public, how far he differed therein; Is this brotherly dealing
thus to use a Minister, who has so lovingly assisted him and us in our
necessity, and to traduce him falsely and injuriously in this manner, and all to
the end to justify, his keeping of him out of the Church, wh^^ the Church has
so much desired and bewaileth that they are deprived of him, which the Classis
at first consented unto, though they kn^w the difference, till Mr. Paget
brought it again to them by force, to have them make an order to condemn
their own practice, and therefore (...) ^^^tive Mr. Paget the only cause we
are deprived of such heavenly means for our edification.

ANSWER.
FIrst concerning the question which has been between Mr. Davenport and the
Classis, about the baptising of such children, whose parents though no members
of the Church, yet made themselves known to be Christians by their public
profession of the same faith with us, by answering to the questions propounded
in the administration of Baptism; although upon occasion I have and still do
say, that it is the error of Mr. Davenport to deny baptism unto such; yet is
this no reproachful upbrayding of him, unles these complaynants could convince
me of error for so speaking. When Mr. Davenport signified unto me, that he was
not of Mr. Hookers opinion in sundry points; that he was of the same opinion
with me, this was in effect as much as if he had said in express words, that
Mr. Hooker was in error: was this a reproachful upbraiding of him, while he
spoke but the truth? And as little reproach was there in my speech touching Mr.
Davenport. But had I spoken in the rude language of these complaynants, who (as
I noted before) say of that writing which was framed for accommodation of Mr.
Davenport, and subscribed first by 5. Ministers, and after confirmed by the
Classis, that they think no godly man will absolutely be bound unto it, this
had been indeed a reproachful and unchristian censure, seeing many godly men
have their errors, whereunto they suffer themselves to be bound by an absolute
subscription, and promise to observe and maintain the same by a further degree
of approbation, then was required of Mr. Davenport.

Secondly, as for my promise, whereof they make a confused and unjust relation,
thus it was. Having spoken in my Sermon of diverse errors, and beside others
making special mention of Arrians, that degrade the Son of God from his
dignity; of Anabaptists that degrade all infants from their dignity; of
Brownists who degrade such infants from their dignity, whose parents are no
members of a particular Church with us, though otherwise of the same Religion
and profession with us: hereupon for conclusion, I uttered these words
verbatim, as of purpose I writ them down before to prevent the perverting of
them; viz. of this error of the Brownists I purpose (if the Lord permit) to
speak more hereafter, and ere long, when I come to that part of the Catechism
that concerns the Baptism of infants. This was all the promise that I made in
public, of which there was so much exspectation before hand, and so much talk
after. Now had I spoken only of the Brownists error about Baptism; yet had I
fulfilled my word, that I spoke in public. But furthermore whereas upon
occasion I had elsewhere in private spoken to this purpose, that I would also
deal against the opinion of Mr. Davenport, in my Sermon at that time which I
had nominated; this promise was also performed by me. For the opinion of Mr.
Davenport is or was (according to his own words and writings) that Baptism is
to be denied to such infants, whose parents being no members of a particular
Church, did refuse to submit unto private examination, although they made
public profession of faith in answering to those questions, demanded of them
at the baptism of their children. Now against this opinion I dealt in every
argument, that I brought against the opinion of the Anabaptists and Brownists,
and made express mention thereof, at least 4 or 5 times; and besides this,
those answers which I then gave to the several objections and allegations of
the Brownists, touching the baptism of these infants, were such as did also
serve to clear the question betwixt Mr. Davenport and us, as may further
appear by the notes of my Sermon, which I then wrote more largely then at
other times I was wont, fearing such wrong as these complaynants do unto me;
and the testimony of others can likewise serve for confirmation hereof. And
therefore most false and injurious is the assertion of these men, that
complain I avoided the question between us.

Thirdly, whereas they tell of Mr. Davenports offer unto me, to declare in
public, how far he differed from the Brownists, it is true indeed, that upon
my motion he made such an offer, but therein he neither satisfied my desire,
nor performed his own promise, though he had time enough to have done it long
before he left his public preaching with us. And had he done this, and withal
showed his reasons why he did so far differ, as he says from the Brownists in
this point; had he reprooved and refuted their opinions, and answered their
objections, it would soon have appeared, that (...) had no such warrant to
stand so much upon his own opinion. For there is such a near affinity betwixt
their opinions, that the error of the Brownists could not be refuted by him,
but that his own opinion must fall together. Their opinions are like twins
that must live and dye together.

Fourthly, for their exclamation, Is this brotherly dealing thus to use a
Minister, who has so lovingly assisted him and (...) in our necessity, etc. It
is not strange to hear these complaynants thus to write, and thus to exclame,
when they have Mr. Davenport going before them in his writing, where he in like
manner complains, saying, Book of complaints page 12.
though I have deserved better usage at Mr. Pagets hands for almost 6 months
assistance of him, and have done and suffered so much to preserve his peace and
the Churches, etc. My answer unto them both is, first unto Mr. Davenport.

1. Against his almost 6 months assistance, he may set that other 6 months
time mentioned by himself in his Protestation, wherein by his own confession
he had secretly given out a writing against me, that could not but incense the
minds of our people against me. Let him consider what good usage this was thus
to traduce me in the dark, 6 months together before the publisher thereof did
bring it to the press, and so to the light.

2. For his almost 6 months assistance, let it be considered, that more then 6
years resistance is by Mr. Davenport procured unto us, by the grounds of
contention, which he has left behind him in opposition, to the order and
practice of these Reformed Churches in diverse points before mentioned.

3. For his almost 6 months assistance, if it had been better, yet had Mr.
Davenport no cause to upbrayde me with it, and to boast of it before others,
seeing for his labor in that time he received a larger recompense, by the
collection that was made for him, then some other godly Ministers have elsewhere
received for twice 6 months assistance and labor in the ministry.

Beside this, I answer unto these complaynants, and wish them to consider
further.

1. Before the coming of Mr. Davenport, had be dealt prudently, and meant to
be a faithful and loving assistant unto me, he would first have known whether
he could have accorded with us, before (...) presented himself here as a
champion for my oppos^et.

^. When he was come, had he lo^ingly assisted me, be would have labored to
take occasion, to have showed his consent with me in opposing such opinions and
practices, as tend unto schism, whereby both our Church is most endangered,
and I most troubled. This he did not, though the present necessity of our
Church did urgently (...) for it at his hand.

3. After his desistance from preaching, had he dealt faithfully and sincerely,
as becomes a Minister of Christ, it is not probable that this slanderous
writing had ever been made by these complaynants his especial friends, to the
great disturbance of our Church, and scandal of so many.

Neither helps it to say, he rebuked some of them privately, or that in Mr. Wh.
his house, he preached against some that begun to schism: for their dealing
began to be so gross and shameful, that though there was no love of me yet if
he loved himself and his own credit, for the purging of himself, he must
needs declare that he would not justify the dealing of some of these
complaynants. Who knows not that they which are of one confederacy, may
sometimes sharply rebuke some of their confederates for their rash and
unadvised proceedings in some particulars, and yet whet them and strengthen
them in their opposition and contention otherwise, for maintenance of their
common opinions.

Fifthly, it is not enough for these complaynants to burden me with a false
relation of things done, unless they lay upon me also a burden of false
imaginations, touching my thoughts and intents, which they surmise against me,
as though I had not only done wrong, but all to the end to justify my keeping
of him out of the Church; as if I had no other thought of preserving the
Church, and avoiding of scandal and faction, and doing right to the infants;
but all for mine own ends, as they spoke before, all for carnal respects,
without regard of truth or right, without conscience of the commandment and
will of God. While thus they seek to aggravate my fault, they do but
aggravate their own presumptuous slander in their rash judging of my heart,
with the ends and intents thereof.

Sixthly, to that (...) say of the Church so much desiring him, and bewayling
that they are deprived of him; I answer, the Church desired him more at first
before they knew his opposition to the Classis, (...) they do. Yea and many
do (...) by his occasion are sprung up in the Church, wishing that he had
never (...) among us.

Seventhly, it is also false and makes the heap of their false assertions to
be the greater, when as they say of having Mr. Davenport; which the Classis at
first consented unto, though they knew the difference. For when the Classis
consented, they knew no other, but that the difference was taken away, and that
he consented to the judgment and counsel given him by writing, and that
which we had done for his accommodation. When his consent was testified and
known, thereupon our Eldership resolved for him; thereupon some Ministers
consented to seek approbation of the Magistrates; thereupon the Magistrates
consented, and thereupon the Classis consented, not knowing that the difference
remained. And for the proof hereof, there is testimony of Magistrates and
Ministers, of Classis and Eldership to confirm the same.

Eighthly, they complain that I brought the matter again to the Classis by
force. I answer,

1. How do these complaynants know in what manner I brought this matter to the
Classis? which of the Elders has told them, or what other witnesses have they
of this force that was used.

2. The matter being formerly brought unto the Classis, that had given consent
for his calling: the ease so depending they ought in all reason to know the
issue thereof.

3. That might rather have been called an act of force and intrusion, if our
Eldership without consent of the Classis, should have set up Mr. Davenport for
a lecturer or assistant.

4. Mr. Davenport having contrary to exspectation refused the calling, which
was given unto him by consent of the Classis, it was my duty to acquaint them
therewith. If these men would convince me of an offense herein, they must first
prove that the discipline and government of these Churches is unlawful, and
that their authority in these affairs is not to be regarded or looked after.

Ninthly, where they say, that I brought the matter unto the Classis, to have
them make an order to condemn their own practice; I had not well understood
the meaning, but that Mr. Davenport, from whose writing (as it seems) they
have taken these words, does speak more plainly thereof, as being a thing
unlike or not to be (...); if it were unlike or unreasonable that they should
make an order to condemn their own practice, then is it not likely or
reasonable that they would allow us to make an order for condemning of their
practice: Then also was it not reasonable, that we in favor of Mr. Davenport
should make an order to condemn our own practice, and to justify the practice
of the Brownists.

Lastly, to make the measure of their slanderous conceits yet the greater, they
conceave that Mr. Paget is the only cause they are deprived of such heavenly
means for their edification. To this I answer,

1. The special cause that has deprived them of Mr. Davenport, is Mr.
Davenports own denial to administer the Sacrament of Baptism, according to
the order of these Churches; and if any of these complaynants, being of the
same judgment, have confirmed Mr. Davenport in this opinion, then are they
also causes of this deprivation. And if Mr. Davenport be of the same mind with
these complaynants in this their writing, touching the undue power of the
Classis, then is there much more cause in himself, why they should be deprived
of him, least he should harden them in the conceit of that new form of
government, that appears to be in their heads.

2. Seeing the Classis required of Mr. Davenport, a consent unto that advise
given by writing unto him, which he refused; seeing the Magistrates also
required our Elders to surceasse from seeking him, either as Pastor or
assistant: Seeing Mr. Davenport himself in his complaint against the Classis,
does lay blame upon them also, and says, What remained now to be done, Book of
complaints page 9.
but either voluntary desistance on my part, or violent rejection on theirs?
with what forehead can it be said, that I am the only cause of depriving them
of him? Or will they have all both Magistrates and Ministers to pervert justice
only for my sake without respect of right? How far does this their
contumelious slander extend it self?

3. As for the heavenly means of edification (whereof they speak) they are
the doctrine of salvation, the publishing of the Covenant, and the seals
thereof: and seeing these have been and may be found in such as Mr. Ainsworth,
Mr. Johnson, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Jacob and the like as well as in Mr. Davenport,
who yet in regard of other errors, concerning discipline and government of the
Church, were unfit and unworthy to be called or admitted for Pastors in a well
established (...); why (...) Mr. Davenport also in some (...), though not so
deep in (...) as they especially in such places, where there (...) danger
ready to arise thereby.

The like may be observed also for the preaching and prophesying of Ia. Cr.
Tho. Flat. and such like. Their preaching and their doctrine was either
heavenly means for edification, or else they were earthly and carnal: M^^.
21.25.
for our Savior makes but two kinds, either from heaven or of men. If they
say unto us, that their exercises were divine and heavenly means for
edification, we may then well say unto them, that it is no hurt unto the Church
of God to be deprived of some heavenly means 1. Cor. 14 33.40.
used in disorder.

The PROTESTATION of the COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XLI.
NOw we pray you our Elders, in the fear of God, to take these our complaints
to heart, and to give your judgment, whether it b^^^^ fit and more then time,
that some lawful course be taken for the redress of these grievances, and to
consult which way it may best be done. That so in that great day of the Lord,
you may give up your account, for the discharge of this trust committed unto
you with joy, which if yet you shall upon this our solemn complaint neglect to
do, (...) do protest before the Lord and his Church, to be wholly guiltles of
all these evilles having done our utmost endeavor for the redress of the
same, and the sin thereof to lay upon Mr. John Paget our present. (...), at
the principal cause of all these evilles, and next upon your selves, who have
the chiefest authority in the Church for the redress (...) evilles.

ANSWER.
IN the matter of this PROTESTATION observe two special parts; whereof the
first is a justification of themselves; the second a condemnation of me.

The justification of themselves is mavelous full and peremptory, amplifyed
with swelling words of great and vain boasting, whiles they do protest that
they are guiltles or innocent; that they are guiltles of all those evilles;
that they are wholly guiltles; that they have done their utmost endeavor for
the redress of the same. But (...) their protestation, in regard of (...)
justification of themselves, may appear diverse ways:

1. They are defiled with the guilt of those manifold slanders, which I have
noted in their complaints before, whereunto they have reference in this
protestation, in saying all those evilles, wherein they can never, while the
world stands, justify themselves by due proof thereof. Protestations made upon
false grounds, are double pollutions. And therefore though by this protestation
they seek to cloth themselves with a white stool and robe of righteousness, as
being wholly guiltles, and spotles in all these matters of complaint; yet let
them not think that for such a protestation as this, their subscribed names
shall be written among those names that have not defiled their garments, and
therefore are said to walk with Christ in white. Rev. 3.4. Gal. 6.7.
This vain Protestation is a meare delusion and mockery, whereby they deceave
themselves; but God is not mocked.

2. They protest falsely, and are no good Protestants in this their
Protestation, when as they boast of having done their utmost endeavor for
redress of evilles; seeing they have not with their utmost care boured to
bring the Word of God and good warrant from the Scriptures, to manifest that to
be evil, which they complain of. Only in their first complaint, they allege
two testimonies of Scripture, which they do not well understand, as I have
showed before: but for all the rest of their complaints following, touching the
weighty controversies of the discipline and government of the Church, they
bring no one testimony from the book of God. Psalm. 19.9. 2. Tim. 3.16. Esa.
8.20.
It is the word of God, which is the divine instrument for the redress of
evils, for the correcting of error, and reforming of disorders; and while
they have not laid these testimonies of the Lord before us, they have not used
that godly endeavor requisite in such cases.

3. They have not done their utmost endeavor for the redress of evilles;
because they have not brought their complaints unto the Classis, under which
they stand, to hear both their counsel and their sentence touching the same.
They have not endeavored to make a clear Remonstrance from the Scriptures,
and to show it unto the Classis, and upon want of redress there unto the Synod
also.

4. They have not done their utmost endeavor for the redress of evilles, so
long as they have not with their utmost care and labor sought the help (...)
the redress of evils, and for the suppo^^ of those that are oppressed. That
this ought to be done, is professed by themselves: Tho. Fa. Tho. Flet. Tho. Ad.
Ios. Ph. and others have testified in the Consistory, Anno 1631 Nov. 10.
that rather then they would loose the liberty of the Church, they would
appeal unto the Christian Magistrate. Now in this complaint it is said, that I
have deprived the Church of that liberty and power, that Christ has given it
in the free choice of their Pastor; that I have deprived the Elders of their
power in government, etc. If the liberty of the Church be thus lost, then by
their own confession, the authority of the Magistrates is to be sought.
Therefore they that have made this Protestation of their innocence, and of
being wholly guiltles, even for their utmost endeavor for redress, is not
just and upright.

5. They are not wholly guiltles, neither have they used their utmost endeavor
for redress of evilles, if they have not at least used the private counsel of
godly and learned men in these Countries near unto them, for their better
information and direction in such a bold enterprise as this. And of all the
Dutch, French, English, or Scottish Ministers their neighbors here, who is it
that has given them any counsel or encouragement for this their writing and
Protestation? If happily Mr. Davenports advise be alleged, they ought to
consider that be being but one, and such a one as is many ways a party joining
in the same complaints, his judgment ought to have been suspected, and not
suddenly or easily rested in; seeing the holy Ghost tells us, that in the
multitude of Counselors is health, as I have formerly noted. If his hand be
with them in this business, it may sooner defile himself, then make them
guiltless. But if they have not so much as his counsel and approbation, then
where is their utmost endeavor, and where is that godly care that ought to
have been used for avoiding of offense?

6. Their complaints of the Churches slavery and bondage, and of the undue
power of the Classis, and this their Protestation thereupon, are repugnant to
the former profession of the Elders and Deacons, with 30 or 40 members of the
Church, among whom were the chief of these complaynants, who in the question
about Mr. Hooker, did acknowledge the authority of the Classis, by promising
(as appears in the record Sect. 3.
before mentioned) that if (...) ^^^selfe ^o acknowledge (...) the Classis,
they would not present him at all, etc.

7. (...) Prote^^ers themselves, though they here justify themselves, yet can
they not justify one another. Those 9 first subscribers that separated
themselves from the communion, and refused formerly to partake in the Lords
Supper with us, and thought it their duty so to do, for the keeping of
themselves guiltles* how can they protest before the Lord, that the other 12
which followed not their example, are wholly guiltless, as having done their
utmost endeavor for the redress of evilles? Those 12 again that thought it
enough to complain, and durst not refuse communion; how can they protest, that
such separatours are innocent, whom they condemned by their example? These
complaynants that have been of so different carriage, must needs impute some
guiltines one to another, and cannot believe this Protestation of their
fellows to be true and just.

The second part of their Protestation, is a condemnation of me: They protest
before God, that the sin lies upon Mr. John Pages, as the principal cause of
all those evill^; and next upon the Elders conditionally, if they do not t^^ke
their complaint to heart, etc. As for Mr. John Davenport, and themselves, that
the sin should lie upon him or them; that either he or they should be
principal causes of these evilles, herein it seems they be as blind as
^olles. Having first a^ayed themselves in white and shining apparel of ^^gine^
innocence; they seek in the next place to clothe me with the black to be of
confusion. This their dealing with me calls to my remembrance the cruel usage,
Io. Fox, Act. and M^n. p. 573 Edit. 1610.
which the Romanists in the Council of Constance did heretofore show unto John
Huss the Bohemian, that faithful Martyr of Christ. Having condemned him to be
burned at a stake; they caused a crown of paper to be made, and set upon his
head, whereon were painted three Devilles of wonderful ougly shape, with this
title over their heads, The Arch-Heretick: for this also do these
complaynants. Having kindled a fire of contention to burn me, in so many false
accusations; they make this Protestation like a paper-crowne for my head, with
black figures upon it, and this title above, The Arch-sinner, or as they
entitle me in their own express words, The principal cause of all those
evilles. But as we heard before, how vain they have been in the justification
of themselves; (...) For

1. It (...) sentence of ^tion against me, before they have heard my answer to
their complaints. Had they deser^ed the^^ ^^ld prote^^tion, until I had be^ne
p^^^itted to speak for my self, and to make mine Apology against their (...),
then had there been more show (...) in th^^ which now in ^^^ing. They first
protest and (...) sentence against me, and then wait for answer.

2. As they wanted the warrant of holy Scripture for their own justification,
so do they also for the condemnation of me. When they can prove by the Word
of God, that this form of government in these Reformed Churches, which
stands in the authority of Classi^ and Synods, as well as of Consistoryes, is
unlawful; and when they can demonstrate from the Scriptures that new
discipline, whereby every particular Congregation is prescribed to be
independent, and not subject to any other Ecclesiastical power out of it self,
etc. then may they have some color of condemning every Minister of these
Reformed Churches, and me with them, but not before: and yet neither then also
can they justify this Protestation, unless according to their former
complaints, they could prove me both obstinate in such error, and an author
of bringing the pretended slavery and bondage into our Church.

3. It is to be observed how these complaynants, though they know diverse of the
Elders to be of the same mind with themselves in sundry of the differences
betwixt them and the Classis; yet they scorn to protest against them also, as
causes of all these evilles next unto me, conditionally if they do not take
their complaint to heart, etc. Hereby they furnish those Elders with some
colorable cause, if they attempt any thing, which these men call a lawful
course, though by others otherwise judged of: for here is show of answer
affoorded unto these Elders, namely that they are complained of; that they are
protested against; that they are accused as causes of all these evilles, if
they do not so and so as is exspected from them.

4. If we consider the matter according to the judgment and opinion of th^se
complaynants, it will appear that they have overs^^^ (...) in accusing the
Elders as causes of these pretended (...) call (...) desires (...) they have
(...) for Mr. D^^^^port, etc. then ought they not to have complained of them
no^^ unto me. But if they have conscience of the m^^ters complained off, they
must rather complain of Magistrates and Ministers of the Class^s, and of a
great number of the members of our Church, who are more opposite unto their
opinions and desires, then are these Elders protested against. And therefore it
is against all equity, that they should so injuriously, so partially and so
ungrateful deal with their friends, in placing them next unto me, as the
causes of evil; when according to their opinion, others more blame worthy
should rather come betwixt.

From the matter of their PROTESTATION, come we now to consider the form of
it. They protest before the Lord and his Church. A protestation is more then a
simple affirmation, and more then an earnest asseveration. In protestations
witnesses are alleged and called for; and the word which in Scripture is
sometimes translated to protest, the very same is sometimes also well
translated to Deu. 4.26 and 30.19.
call for witnesses, according to the just and right signification thereof. The
witnesses which these complaynants call for, are of two sorts; The Lord from
heaven, and his Church upon earth.

For the first witness; To protest before the Lord, is more then common
Protestations; to call him for a witness in our protests, does participate of
the nature of an oath, in one special part thereof. And hereby may appear the
fearful sin of these presumptuous Protestants, who call the Lord for a
witness of their double falsehood; of their justification of themselves as
wholly guiltles; of their condemnation of me, as a principal and obstinate
offender, as ^ath been showed before. The Lord is witness of every idle word,
though he be not called for, but being called for a witness in such a bold
Protestation, so void of truth, as if men would make the God of truth accessory
unto their false assertions, this cannot but kindle the wrath of God, and his
jealousye against those that do so take his Reverend and Glorious Name in
vain, neither will he hold them guiltless, though they boastingly hold
themselves wholly guiltless. Prove. 6.16. etc.
The soul of the Lord does abhor falsehood, and he will be a swift (...)

For their second witness, which is the Church of God: I answer,

1. The Reformed Churches in these Low Countries, in Scotland, in France,
(...), cannot be witnesses of their innocence, nor hold them wholly guiltless,
seeing they use such a government by Classical and Syno^^ll assemblies, as
these complaynants do count a burden, oppression and reproach as an undue
power.

2. This particular Church, whereof these men are members, does not (so far
as I can discern) justify their Protestation, but complains of these
complaynants for their scandalous writing, in reproach of the government and
doctrine taught by me in the same.

3. Even these complaynants being so different as is before noted, cannot be
witnesses for the truth of this protestation. Yea I assure my self, that if
they were severally examined, they neither understood what they have subscribed
unto; neither yet would agree one with another, touching the meaning of these
complaints. And therefore though they have called Heaven and Earth to record
against me, and for themselves yet can they not be cleared by either of them in
such manner as they have protested. Their own witnesses are against themselves.

Whereas in fine they tell the Elders, that they have the chiefest authority in
the Church, etc. I answer,

1. The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor. Their principal
dignity is to be examples of the flock in all godliness, and to use their power
aright. But to exercise authority, according to the conceits of these men,
noted in their complaints, in opposition unto the superior power, that is in
Classes and Synods, the Elders might thereby justly make themselves unworthy of
any authority, honor or office at all in the Church of God.

2. If the Elders have the chiefest authority in the Church, how comes it to
pass that some of these complaynants do usurp and arrogate an authority
above them, in preaching and expounding the Scriptures, so as these Elders dare
not attempt?

COMPLAYNANTS. SECT. XLII.
SO beseeching the Lord to bless our endeavors, and desiring you to cause
these our complaints to rest upon Record in the Register of this Church, that
after times may see how these evilles have been witnessed against, we subscribe
our names as follows, desiring also that place may be left in the Register
for all others that hearing hereof, shall desire to have their names
underwritten, for the more full witness of these things: because we have not
gathered many names, as we could have done of many (because you might have
nothing to take offense at that way) which we conceive would gladly have joined
with us herein, not only of men, but of many godly women also that are of the
same mind with us.

W.B. N.I. I.C. I.Po. I.S. L.C. A.H. H.P. T.Fl.
We who last time, did not with our brethren above written abstain from the
Lords Supper, yet desire to join as one with them in these complaints and
grievances, and therefore have underwritten our names as follows, S.Of. T.Fa.
T.Ad. D.B. E.P. G.B. H.D. E.S. F.D. P.L. I.H. R.P.


It is here to be noted, that I.H. P.L. and F.D. having acknowledged their
faults for this unwarrantable subscription, are to be exempted from the number
of them.

ANSWER.
IN the conclusion of these complaynants observe this heap of offenses, partly
in the writing, and partly in their deeds attending the same.

1. After so many reproachful complaints, to conclude and seal up all with
such a vehement Protestion, was a great boldness in sin.

2. Not to co^ent themselves with words, but with pen and incke to write down
their reproaches, was another boldness in evill-doing.

3. After writing to gather hands and subscription of names, was a further
strengthening of themselves in wrong-doing, and a snare unto others.

4. To boast they could have done more; and in such offense to pretend avoiding
of offense as here they do, is so much the more offensive.

5. Besides their own writing, to require a public record in the Register of
the Church, is a great insolency.

6. Besides public record, to require a space left for subscription of more
names, is a strange impudency.

7. To be so eager in the pursuit hereof, as 5 several times to come unto the
Consistory, in seeking to be registered there, as was done by some of them, is a
strange importunity.

8. To be thus importunate and urgent at such time, when I was weak and sickly
that I could not come abroad, sometimes to see what they did, was a great
inhumanity.

9. To leave their subscribed complaints in the hands of such as without their
knowledge might either give copies thereof in writing, as was first done, or
might also print the same, as now by one of them it is printed, this was a
great unadvisednes, and folly in them.

10. To take the name of God in vain, by beseeching the Lord to bless these
their unlawful endeavors, (eve^ as some of them also had a remarkable day of
fasting, and Mr. Davenport with them, about the same time or a little before
they delivered up this writing, as if they did fast to strife and debate, Esa.
58.4.
to smite with the fist of wickedness, and to make their voice to be heard on
high,) this is more offensive and a just cause of new humiliation unto them.

Now if these complaynants had their desire fulfilled, what else could be
exspected but faction and schism, and all manner of confusion in the Church? If
their writing against me be recorded in the Register of the Church, it is
reason that my answer be recorded also. If their writing have names subscribed,
and place left for whosoever will, to join their names with them; it is equal
that under my answer a place be left also for whosoever will to underwrite
their names therein. If any new members of the Church be taken on, the like
liberty may as well be claymed by them, to subscribe their names as they
please, either in the one or other void place left for subscription, etc. But
who sees not what an intolerable and pernicious fancy these men have hatched
in their brains?

This their practice represents unto us as in a glass, the lively image of a
deadly war, wherein the ordering of the battle is already thus described, or
rather prescribed by them:

The 9 first Subscribers being more forward in separating then the rest, are
not without reason set foremost by themselves, in the Vant-garde of this
subscription.

The other 12 that join in the complaint, but were not so hasty to leave
communion in the Lords Supper, are placed in the middle-ward, with some
distinction after the former.

Those that come after, whose names they would have to be written in the empty
space, that is left for them in their desire, they must then bring up the rere
of this Army, and so make the Rere-ward. Yea it is noted in the end of their
printed book, that now already,

After these grievances were given unto the Consistory, diverse members more
hearing thereof, desired to join in the same, and subscribed their names also.

These unknown adversaries, whose names though they be subscribed, are yet
hidden from me, are like unto the troops of reserve, which for the present
lurcke in secret and ly in ambuscado, ready to break out, and to make an
assault and to fall on, as opportunity shall serve.

This army of complaynants being thus set in array, and armed for the battle,
what contention and strife; what scandal and offense do they occasion hereby?
How ill does it become these men with prayers and protestations, to require
others to think upon some lawful course to be taken for the redress of
evilles; and yet at the same time to devise and desire, and that so
importunately, such an unlawful, disordred and dangerous course for the
increase of evils, as that the like at any time has scarsely been heard of?
The lawful course for redress of evilles, is that plain highway, and that
approoved order, wherein we are established with these Reformed Churches,
namely if any be wronged or unsatisfyed in the Eldership, to go for refuge
unto the Classis, and from thence, if need be, to the Synod; unless by the
Word of God this way be prooved unlawful.

To conclude, for all the evident wrongs, which these complaynants have done
unto me, how many and how great so ever they be; though they have sought to
blot my name with reproach; though their complaints be now recorded, and their
names registered in many hundred of W. B. his books; yet my prayer unto God for
them is, that their offense herein may be blotted out of that record and book
of remembrance that lies open before the Lord, and that by their unfeigned
repentance, they obtain grace and favor from God.

And as for me, my hope and confidence is in the Lord, who through his rich
grace has covered all mine iniquities in Christ; and notwithstanding these
accusations, in the mids of my weakness, I can truly say with his reproached
servants, according to the measure of the gift of God, Job 31.35.36.37.
Though mine adversary should write a book against me, I will take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me. I will declare unto him the number
of my steps, etc. The Lord is my light and my salvation, Psalm. 27.1.
whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid? Though an host encampe against me; though war rise up against me, yet
will I wait for the promise of the Lord made unto his servants, namely, that
the righteousness of God in Christ being made mine, Esa. 58.8.
shall go before me, and be as the vantgard for my salvation, and that the
glory of the Lord shall be my rereward. To this God of glory be praise and
honor by Jesus Christ for evermore. AMEN.

An Answer to the Allegations of Scripture brought by Mr. Davenport, against
the baptising of such infants, whose parents appear to be Christians, in such
manner as is declared in the writing of the 5 Ministers Page 44.45.
above mentioned.
Mr. DAVENPORT.
FIrst I neither did nor do deny to baptize their infants who are members of
this Church, which seeing it is so, I desire to understand by what right the
Pastor of any particular Church, can be bound to exercise his ministry in any
act of it, toward those who are no members of his Church, seeing the Apostle
Paul required no more of the Pastors of Ephesus, then to take heed to
themselves, and to all the flock, whereof the Holy Ghost has made them
overseers. Act. 20.28.

ANSWER.
FIrst, by what right Mr. Davenport himself being no member of our Church, did
communicate with us in the Lords Supper, by the same right may the Pastor of
any particular Church upon occasion exercise his ministry in some act thereof,
toward those who are no members of his Church. Had Mr. Davenport looked well
upon himself and his own practice, he might have found reason to bethink
himself better, unless he think that I was not bound to exercise any act of my
ministry toward him, when as he desired the same.

Secondly, suppose Paul in the place alleged had required no more of the
Pastors of Ephesus, then that which Mr. Davenport intends, yet might a
further duty have been laid upon them in some other place of Scripture. It is
no good kind of disputing, to argue thus, No more is required of Ministers in
such and such a place, therefore in no other place at all.

Thirdly, and more particularly, whereas the solemn preaching of the Gospel
with public invocation of the name of God, are ministerial acts; seeing
Pastors and teachers, the maidens of wisdom, are not only bound to admit,
but also to invite and call others even those that are without, Heathens, Turks
or Jews, understanding the language to come and hear them, thereby to pluck
them out of the pit of destruction, Prove. 9.3.4.5. Mat. 28.19.20. Therefore are
they bound to exercise some acts of their ministry toward those who are no
members of their Church.

Fourthly, for the Administration of the Sacraments, it is also a duty of the
ministry, to be performed by a Pastor to more then the members of his
particular congregation: and this not only by admission of the particular
members of an other Church to receave the Lords Supper with them in their
Church upon occasion, which the Sea Arrow against separ. p. 96. 97.
Brownists themselves do allow; but also when need requires to administer the
Sacraments, both of Baptism and the Lords Supper in neighbor Churches that
are destitute, being required thereunto. This I have Ibid. p. 17. 18. and
again from page 109. to 114.
heretofore already prooved against Mr. Ainsworth; and it is the error of
those Separatists, to deprive themselves of such help. Hereupon it followed,
that after the death of Mr. Ainsworth for many years together, they were
without Sacraments, and had neither Lords Supper nor Baptism administered in
their Church, their children for many years remaining unbaptised, and sundry
dying unbaptised: for which neglect and delay of baptism, they had just cause
to fear that the Lord might have met them, Exodus 4.24.
as he did Moses in the Inn, for neglecting to circumcise his son.

And it is observable how Mr. Davenport stumbleth at the same stone, and
misalledgeth the very same place of Scripture, Act. 20.28. as Mr. Ainsworth had
done before to the same purpose, to restrain Pastors from executing any duty
or act of their ministry toward such as are no members of their own
particular congregation.

Fifthly, for the government of the Church, and for administration of
discipline, which is an other work of the ministry; this also belongs unto
Pastors, not only for the members of the particular Church specially
committed unto them, but for the members of many other particular congregations
combined in Classes and Synods, where the causes and controversies of many
people are decided and determined by the joint authority of many Ministers,
meeting together for that end, as we see in that exemple, Act. 15.2. etc.

Sixthly, to come nearer unto this place Act. 20.28. men do then attend unto
their own flock, whereof the H. Ghost has made them overseers, when they
labor that their flock may be increased, that more souls may daily be added
to the flock, and that the number of the faithful may grow; for thereby the
mutual edification, comfort and spiritual joy of all is increased, according
to that blessing that is often noted in the Esa. 49.20.21. Act. 4.4. and 5.14.
Scriptures. This blessing is obtained by the labors of faithful Ministers,
with those which at first are no members of the Church, in seeking to bring
them into the fold. And thus the Pastors of Ephesus living among the great
multitude of infidels and heathnish Idolatours in that City, had not attended
unto the flock committed unto them, unless they had labored to increase their
flock by their labors toward those Ephesians that were without.

Seventhly, men do then attend unto their own flock, when they labor that
the same may be preserved in the truth, and defended against the manifold and
dangerous errors, such as the Pastors of Ephesus were warned of Act.
20.29.30. In such dangers if either the faithful Pastors were taken away by
death; or if through weakness of gifts they were not able to stop the mouths of
adversaries, what remained then to be done, 1. Cor. 12.25.26.27.
but to seek the help of neighbor Ministers for their assistance, the Lord
requiring that members of the body of Christ, should take care of one an other
in their necessities to help them? Now this convincing of erroneous persons
judicially in the Church, being a ministerial duty, Tit. 1.9.10.11. 1. Tim.
5.20. it follows that upon the performance hereof in such cases, men may
exercise some acts of their ministry toward such as are no members of their
own particular congregation.

Eighthly, whereas Mr. Davenport does afterward acknowledge, that in regard of
the communion of particular Churches amongst themselves, he neither did nor
does refuse to baptize their infants, who are not members of this Church: so
that he may be satisfied by some precedent examination, if otherwise they be
unknown unto him, that they are Christians indeed: hereby he does plainly
refute himself, and that diverse ways; for, 1. If the communion of particular
Churches amongst themselves do warrant him to baptize their infants, who are
no members of his Church, then is it an error to think that a Pastor may not
exercise his ministry in some act of it, toward those who are no members of
his Church; and all his allegations to that and are vain and idle. 2. How
vain is it to call into question, whether they be Christians indeed, viz. in
regard of their external profession, who are confessed to be members of an
other true Christian Church, that is in communion with us? 3. Seeing Mr.
Davenport professes, that he neither did nor does deny to baptize their
infants who are members of this Church, what reason has he to require a
precedent examination of the members of an other Church more then of the
members of this Church? If the members of this Church may be baptized upon this
warrant, because they are members of it, why may not the members of an other
true Church be also baptized upon the same ground? 4. Why does Mr. Davenport
only mention his regard of the communion of particular Churches amongst
themselves for baptising their infants? Why does he not as well regard the
communion of particular persons, members of the ^atholick or universal Church,
seeing they also may have their i^^^^s baptized, though not joined unto a
particular visible Church? 5. Whereas Mr. Davenport has resigned his Pastoral
or Ministerial charge in London, and is now no established Minister of any
particular Congregation, having no calling elsewhere, and does yet upon occasion
preach sometimes for others, as for Mr. Balmf. and Mr. Pet. etc. it were worthy
to be known, upon what ground he does administer the word unto them. If he do
it by virtue of that communion, which is betwixt particular Churches, when as
he himself is no Minister of any particular Church, how much more may they that
are established Ministers, perform some acts of their ministry to those that
are no members of their Churches, when as upon occasion they are required so to
do? If he do it not as a Minister, 1. Cor. 14.40.
nor countes it any Ministerial act, but does it as a Prophet, and as in an
exercise of prophesy, yet seeing this also ought not to be done, but according
to order, and not without consent of such as have authority to dispose and
govern such actions; if now their calling, request or allowance can warrant
him to do that which otherwise would be unlawful, why may not also the
request of the same persons warrant him that is an established Minister to
perform some Ministerial act in a neighbor Church, or to some members
thereof, though otherwise unlawful, if he were not so required? Or if he have
any other ground whereon he rests, the knowledge and consideration thereof
might happily give some further light unto this controversy.

Mr. DAVENPORT.
THe same is required of Archipp^^, to take heed to the ministry which he had
received of the Lord, (viz. amongst the Colossians) that he fulfill it. Col.
4.17.

ANSWER.
THe answer made unto the former allegation, may serve for answer of this: Yet
from hence also diverse things are to be observed.

1. If the ministry ought to be fulfilled, then not to be lightly forsaken
without lawful and orderly dimission upon a just calling to serve the Church
of Christ elsewhere, or unless by necessity men be deposed by such authority as
is not to be resisted. They that otherwise forsake the flock, do not fulfill
their ministry. Men may flee or hide themselves in time of danger, yet without
resignation of their callings.

2. If the ministry ought to be fulfilled, then are the Ministers to declare
the whole will and counsel of God, so far as it is revealed unto them, for
the good of Gods people, Act. 20.20.27. especially before they depart from
their Churches, to show the equity of their cause, to manifest the danger of
those errors, for which they leave their flocks, that their people also may
witness the truth for which their Ministers suffer; otherwise they are guilty
of double desertion of their flock.

3. If that be a right ministry which is received in the Lord, which is
obtained by a lawful calling, then may no man without intrusion take upon him
solemnly to preach and minister the Gospel of Christ at set times and places,
where the members of many families do ordinarily meet together, without due
warrant and allowance of the Church, where such things are practiced.

As Paul thought it needful to have these things said unto Archippus; so let
every godly Minister consider, whether it be not meat that each of these things
should be duly regarded of them.

Mr. DAVENPORT.
PEter also exhorts the Elders, saying, feed the flock that is amongst you.
1. Pet. 5.2.

ANSWER.
THe strength of that objectio^ which is employed in these words, has been
already taken away in answer unto the former allegation, Act. 20.28. and we may
yet further observe touching this place.

1. The similitude taken from Sheepheards feeding their flocks, does not
restrain Ministers from exercising some act of their ministry, toward those
who are no members of their particular congregation: seeing even sheepheards
for the defense and benefit of their flocks, and for their mutual assistance,
have reason to combine themselves together for the performance of some works of
their calling toward the endangered sheep of other flocks, as appears Esa.
31.4. Luke 2.8. Genesis 29.7.8.

(...).
2. The word here translated feeding, does also signify to rule and govern, as
Rev. 12.5. and 19.15. If this kind of feeding be restrained unto one
congregation only, then is all the authority and government of Churches by
Classes and Synods overthrown thereby: then is it unlawful for assemblies of
Ministers, to exercise any act of power, or to give their voices for the
decision of controversies in any congregation beside their own, contrary unto
the use of this word of feeding, applied unto such in Israel, as exercised some
acts of their ministry, for the help and benefit of diverse congregations, as
Ezekiel. 34.2. etc.

3. If we consider the persons to whom Peter wrote this Epistle, namely, to the
elect strangers dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
Bithynia, 1. Pet. 1.1.2. If withal we consider the manifold necessities
whereunto these Christians were subject in their scattred habitations in those
times of persecution, what an unreasonable thing is it to imagine that the
Ministers of those Countries might not exercise some act of their ministry for
baptising an infant of those dispersed strangers, which were no members of
their own congregation?

Arrow against separ. p. 97.
4. It is also to be observed, how this allegation 1. Pet. 5.2. has been
formerly brought against me by Mr. Ainsworth, and to like purpose as Mr.
Davenport here uses it. And indeed, such application of it does better serve
the turn of the Brownists, that rend the Church of God by their schism, then
those that desire to preserve the communion of Christian congregations by this
bond of combination observed among them.

Mr. DAVENPORT.
Mr. Davenport speaking of himself, says, The Pastor of the English Church can
not satisfy his conscience, that it is lawful for him so to do; yea he
greatly fears, least Christ will judge him guilty, if he suffer himself to be
in bondage under such a custom, which is contrary to the canon of the Apostle,
let every man be persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14.5. and whatsoever is not
of faith is sin, verse. 23.

ANSWER.
1. THe Apostle here speaks of doubting about things indifferent, as the use
of meats and observation of days, Romans 14.2-6. which observation does not
commend us to God; seeing neither they that did eat were the better, nor they
that eat not, were the worse, 1. Cor. 8.8. The kingdom of God consisted not in
such things, Romans 14.17. But the matter in controversy betwixt us, is neither
in it self, nor in the estimation of either part, a thing indifferent. You
judge it a sin to baptize the infants of such parents; we judge it a sin to
deny baptism unto them. Therefore though the Apostle do allow a toleration of
things indifferent, this is no warrant for toleration of that which is held
sinful and simply unlawful.

2. The Apostle here speaks of such a toleration, whereby men were received as
brethren and members of Christ, such as might be saved, being received of God,
Romans 14.3. Our question is not of such receaving, but of receaving to an office
and public ministry with us in the Church. Now many may be received for
Christians, which can not lawfully be admitted for Ministers, in regard of
their dissension and differences from the Church of God.

3. The doubting and wavering in matters of Religion, being a distraction and
suspension of the mind betwixt truth and error, and being repugnant to faith,
is a very dangerous and great evil to be taken heed of. It brings men
oftentimes into a very miserable condition, and to a necessity of sinning to
their great woe and hurt: for in many duties that are to be done, the doubting
person is condemned and sins, whether he do them or do them not. For
example, it being a duty to hear the word of God in true Churches; he that
begins to decline unto schism and doubts, it is a sin, that person sins both
ways; If he (...) ^^^^tingly, it is a sin not being of faith, Tit. 1.15. Romans
14.23. If he refuse to hear, it is a sin and schism, condemned Heb. 10.25. in
forsaking the assembly of the Saint. So for one declining to Anabaptisme,
doubting whether his child should be baptized or not: If he bring it to
baptism doubtingly, it is a sin for want of faith. If he refuse to bring it,
he sins many ways against his child, and against the Church of God. And so in
many other cases. Therefore let men take heed, how they excuse themselves by
their doubting, and how they please themselves therein.

4. For Mr. Davenport, seeing he heard of our controversies before his coming
over the Seas unto us, and of this particular about baptism, if he doubted
hereof, and could not satisfy his conscience, that it was lawful for him to
join with us in the baptising of such infants as we speak of; then ought he
rather not to have offered himself unto us, to disturb our Churches peace by
the doubts which he brought with him, and by the contentions likely to arise
thereupon. Then might our Church have been edifyed by the more speedy calling
of some other faithful Minister, who being free from this doubting and
irresolution of mind, could then have better accorded with us.

Mr. DAVENPORT.
I Take the name of Christians (in this question) in the same sense wherein the
multitude of believers in Antiochia, were called Christians, Act. 11.21.26. So
that I account them to be Christians children, whose parents, at least one of
them, in external profession, is within the covenant. Genesis 17.10. Faithful,
Romans 4.11. Called, Act. 2.39.

ANSWER.
I Also take the name of Christians, as I conceave it is taken Act. 11.26. and
in the judgment of charity do account them to be Christians, that are by
their external profession within the covenant, faithful and called. In the
writing of the 5 Ministers, where the state of the question is set down, it is
expressed, that they would have the children of such parents to be baptized,
quos constat esse Christianos, who are manifested to be Christians.

But against this Mr. Davenport in his writing to the Classis, excepteth and
complayneth, that it was required of him that he should conform unto a
particular custom of the Dutch Church, Book of complaints page 2.
for the unli^^^d baptising of all infants, which were presented in the Church,
of (...) nation or sect soever, although that either of the parents were
Christians, was no otherwise manifest then by their answering Yea, at the (...)
of the ^iturgy of Baptism publicly, or by nodding their head, or s^^^ other
gesture, they secured to be willing. Page 5.
The same thing he does afterward again repeat in the same writing. For
answer hereunto consider,

1. It is utterly untrue, that such an unlimited baptising of all in^^^^, of
what nation or sect soever, was required of him. For besides the limitation
above specifyed, there is also an other express limitation plainly set down
in the writing of the 5 Ministers, approoved also by the Classis, viz. If yet
any other case fall out, whereby it may seem that the infant presented should
not be baptized, that then the judgment of the whole English Presbytery, or
also if need be and conveniently it may be done, that the judgment of the
Classis of Amsterdam be obtained and heard, and rested in. A man that reads Mr.
Davenport his writing, might easily be brought to doubt, whether Turks or
Jews, Mahometists or Heathens, or infidelles of what nation or sect soever,
did sometime present their children to baptism, and that it was the custom of
the Dutch Church to baptize such being presented, seeing he shows his fear in
conforming to the particular custom of the Dutch Church, in the unlimited
baptising of all infants presented of what nation or sect soever, etc. But such
practices are not allowed in the Dutch Church: and if any such case, or any
other apparent cause of scruple had fallen out, then by this writing of the
Ministers, it was permitted to Mr. Davenport to have referred the baptism of
such infants to further deliberation and judgment of the Eldership or Classis.
Preface and p. 6. and 16. and 19.
And hereby it may appear how unjustly in this question, both Mr. Davenport
and the complaynants do use that phrase of promiscuous baptising of all
infants without difference etc.

2. That men might be reputed in the covenant by testification of their faith
and repentance, though it were by a word or gesture of the body, witnessing
their consent thereunto, so far as to procure the admission of their infants,
to have the seal of circumcision or baptism, it appears from the holy
records. Because even this word Yea, is noted by Christ, and accepted by him as
a testimony of the will (...) truth and promise of God, and as a (...) of the
(...) for the act of faith and love. Mat. 5.37. and 9.28. and 13.52. Job.
21.15. Rev. 22.20. And so the word An^on is ^^^^d by the H. Ghost as (...)
actual profession of Religious worship, and as an external expression of
faith, love and thankfullnes accepted of God, Psalm. 106.48. 1. Cor. 14.16. Rev.
1.7. and 19.4. with 2. Cor. 1.19.20. Hence it is also, that the people of God
in Israel did enter into the Covenant, and renewed and confirmed the Covenant,
and professed the Lord to be their God, and themselves to be his people, vowing
his service and obedience by the words of Amen, or So be it, or the like short
speeches, briefly expressed at propounding of the Covenant: neither could it
well be done otherwise, when hundred thousands of them at once did make such
Covenant with him, as appears from Exodus 19.8. and 24.3.7. Deuteronomy. 27.14.15.
and 29.1-10-15. Josh. 24.24.25. with Number. 1.45.46. etc.

So for beckning or nodding with the head, it is observed in common use, to
show the consent or dissent of the will in any matter: And the Annuo. Innuo.
Abnuo. Renuo.
Latin words in their diverse composition do import the same. The (...).
Greek words also used by the holy Ghost, to declare how men signified their
meanings and their wills, Ioh. 13.24. Luke 1.22.62. and 5.7. do import that
this was done by a beckning or nod of the head. And more plainly, the (...).
word that signifyes so to nod the head, is sometimes in our English
translation expressed by the word of consent, Act. 18.20. Now seeing the
consent of the will is thus declared by this gesture of the body; and seeing as
the Apostle shows, where there is a willing mind, there men are accepted of
God; 2. Cor. 8.
it is therefore no marvel if the worship of God be so often expressed by this
external gesture of bowing the head or body, as we read, Exodus 4.31. 1. Chron.
29.20. and 2. Chron. 20.18.

Besides this, other the most weighty and solemn Covenants and professions of
special persons in the Church, are ordinarily celebrated and confirmed by
answering briefly Yea, with bowing of the head or body; as the stipulation of
Ministers, Elders and Deacons, when they are publicly received into office
before the Congregation; the profession of public repentance, either before or
after excommunication by such as have committed special offense; the (...) of
^^^ges, etc. All these in the (...) are (...) accomplished, when persons that
under^^^^ the (...) do present themselves before the Congregation, answering
Yea unto the questions propounded unto them.

3. To come more particularly unto the places of Scripture here alleged by Mr.
Davenport. For those multitude of believers that are called Disciples and
Christians, Act. 11.21.26. though it be said, that they believed and turned
unto the Lord, yet is it not specifyed by what words or signs, more or less,
they professed their faith and conversion unto God. How can it be prooved from
hence that such as consented unto the doctrine of the Gospel propounded unto
them, by answering Yea unto it, and bowing their heads or bodies, in testimony
of their approbation and liking thereof, might not thereupon be admitted unto
baptism both they and their infants?

For Genesis 17.10. when as in old time circumcised parents brought their infants
to be circumcised also, it cannot thence be showed, that more questions were
propounded in the examination of them, then are now in the administration of
Baptism propounded unto such baptized parents, as do now bring their children
to be baptized: or that the children of such had circumcision denied unto them,
who showed their consent and willingness in embracing the covenant, by such
brief answers and gestures as we speak of.

For Romans 4.11. Abraham is there called the father of all them that believe,
whether they were members of a particular visible Church or not. And for ought
we find in the holy story, there might be some believers even in Abraham's own
time, that were neither members of Abraams family, nor yet under the government
or guidance of any particular Church. If a son or bond-servant of Ephron the
Hittite, or of any other Amorite or Canaanite were then brought unto the
knowledge of the true God, and to wait for the promise, why might not the
infant of such an one have then been circumcised, though not living in a
visible Church?

And for Act. 2.39. though the promise be made unto such as are called, yet who
can show that such are not to be accounted outwardly called, and in some
measure within the privilege of the covenant, who being themselves already
baptized, and withdrawing themselves from other sects and Churches, do bring
their infants (...) a public profession of their (...) the whole Congregation

Mr. DAVENPORT.
BEside the former (...) of a Christian (...), Mr. D^ alleges this further;
that they must be such as (...) joy^^^ (...) some true Church. 1. Cor. 5.12.

ANSWER.
THe words of the Apostle here alleged are these, For what have I to do to
judge them also that are without? do ye not judge them that are within? How
Mr. Davenport applies this sentence to the question in hand, it is not plainly
described by him. It had been good, if he had showed how he had drawn his
argument from hence, that the answer might have been framed accordingly. In the
mean time let this suffice for answer unto that which is obscurely objected
from this place:

1. Of 3 sorts of persons, which may be said to be without, those offer
themselves first unto our consideration, that being members of a visible
Church, are yet without true faith, and therefore are no members of the
invisible Church: Of such Christ speaks, unto them that are without, all
things are done in parables, Mark. 4.11. But such the Apostle in this place
does not speak of: for such being in regard of their external profession
within the Covenant, and within the visible Church, might be judged by the
same, and censured as occasion required. Such were many in Israel, and are in
other Christian Churches.

2. Those in special are without, that are no way Christians, neither in deed
nor in profession; such as were the open Infidelles and Heathens that lived in
Corinth, of such it is said, Walk honestly toward them without, 1 Thessalonians.
4.12. These though they were judged by the word preached, when sometimes they
heard it, 1. Cor. 14.24. or by the admonitions and examples of the godly whom
they despised, Genesis 19.7.9. Heb. 11.7. yet before they submitted themselves
unto the Church, were not to be judged and censured by Ecclesiastical
discipline, nor to be avoided as excommunicates, for then must men go out of
the world, as the Apostle here shows, 1. Cor. 5.10.12.

3. Those that for the present live not under the discipline and (...)
particular Church, and yet makes profession of (...) Religion with the true
visible Churches, and bring their children (...) them to be baptized, making
solemn promise to bring (...) their children in the faith that is professed in
those Churches; of which sort there are a great number in these Low Countries,
because none here are compelled to the Sacraments, nor to subjection under the
discipline: These in special are the persons that in our question are without.
These parents, though in regard of that Church where they received their own
baptism, and in regard of that Church whereunto they bring their infants to be
baptized, they profess and practice some imperfect communion therewith, and
therefore in some sense may be said to be of such Churches; yet because for the
present they live not within the pale of any Ecclesiastical government,
neither are subject unto the discipline, either of one or other Church, in this
regard are such here commonly said to be without. Now how Mr. Davenport will
deduct and infer from the place alleged, that these kind of parents are not
to have the privilege of Christians, so far that their infants may be
baptized, that cannot I comprehend: this remaynes to be manifested by him.

Those only, according to the order of these Reformed Churches, are admitted
for complete members of the Church, who bringing testimony of their good
conversation, after examination and profession of their agreement with us in
the same faith and Religion, and after solemn covenant and promise of
submission unto that discipline and government exercised amongst them, have
their names published before the whole congregation the Lord's Day following,
and when no just exception comes against them, are then receyved and confirmed
for members of such particular Churches. But that the Children of these only
are to be baptized, that is not made to appear from the sentence of Paul 1.
Cor. 5.12.

For this third sort of persons without, though their fault be great in not
joining unto some particular Church, when opportunity permits; though some
through ignorance and error, and some for their carnal case and other
sinister respects, do absteyne from joining themselves unto the Church: yet
even among these also some have more knowledge of the truth, and are more
frequent in attending upon the public worship of God, and are otherwise more
unblamable in their conversation, then some of those that are members of (...)
members of the Church (...) of some other Christian Cong^^g^^^^^, (...) so long
as he remained at (...) of our Church, was to be rekoned among this (...) that
(...) said to be without. For (though I make no comparison in respect of
personal gifts and graces, yet) in respect of his Church Estate, having left
that particular Parish Church in London, whereof he was a member, and having
withdrawn himself from under the government of the Church of England, and not
standing under the government of any other particular Church Dutch or English
here, he was then no complete member of any visible Church, otherwise then
those are, about the baptism of whose infants our present question is.

Besides these allegations of Scripture, Mr. Davenport alleges for himself
the consent of Divines of the Dutch Churches in their Confessions, and of all
Reformed Churches in the harmony of their Confessions, and further he says, to
conclude, all Divines agree in this. Now although there be a great deal of
vain confidence and mis-taking in him to apply the testimonies of learned men
to the justification of his opinion, wherein he dissenteth from us; yet is not
my purpose for this present to enter into a dispute about the diverse judgments
of learned men concerning this question. It shall suffice for this time to have
answered that which he now objecteth from the Scripture; I being but defendant,
and he opponent. He tells in his preamble, how little he has said in
comparison of that which he has to say, and I do believe it to be so. Yet as
occasion shall require (if the Lord permit and assist) my purpose also is, to
add something more according to my weakness, for the clearing of this point,
hoping that some other more able will be stirred up hereby, to make a more full
defense of the truth.

Observations touching the PROTESTATION of Mr. DAVENPORT.
UPon the coming forth of the Book of Complaints against me, Mr. Davenport
immediately sends out a Protestation against it, and signifyes he could have no
rest in his spirit until he had resolved upon this Protestation. The special
matters contained therein are a threefold Protestation, a threefold Quaere, a
threefold Confession, and a threefold Request.

The sum of his threefold Protestation is; 1. That he knew not the Publisher;
2. that he gave no consent to this Publishing of it; 3. that the Publisher to
make satisfaction for his great injury, ought either to revoke his books and
burn the whole impression, or print an other for the public acknowledgment of
his fault therein.

For these 3 Protestations: 1. There be diverse reasons why men should believe
Mr. Davenport herein; and therefore do I also give credit unto him in each of
them.

2. Could he also have made Protestation, that he had not first given out these
things by writing, and so filled the hand of him that published them again in
print, it had been more honor to him, and more peace to our Church.

3. Observe the just reward of the inordinate affection which this Publisher
showed in contending for Mr. Davenport. By Mr. Davenport himself sentence is
pronounced against him unknown, that he ought to bear his shame before the
world in a printed book, to be monument of his injury done in printing.

4. Observe what little conscience this Publisher makes of Mr. Davenport his
counsel and exhortation, to procure the peace of his soul, in refusing to
make such Public Satisfaction in the acknowledgement of his fault, as Mr.
Davenport requires of him. The Publisher in his complaint against me, Sect. 40.
complayneth of me for depriving him of such heavenly means of edification as
he had by Mr. Davenport. But lo, how he wilfully now depriveth himself of the
fruit of that heavenly means, choosing rather to continue in the guilt of his
sin without due repentance, then to give glory unto God, by humbling of himself
in the confession of his sin, according to the advice of Mr. Davenport.

5. Obser^^ (...) spirits, and not to (...) of (...) the first. Mr. Davenport
a^ first gave way and opened a do^e of opp^^^^^^ty (...) the Publisher, to
spread abroad matter of co^^titution, (...) he c^^^^ded his writings either to
him or others. (...) to whose hands be committed them, but he knew not to whose
hands they should come. He gave consent for making the matter of his writing
known one way, and that produced another way of Publication beyond his
consent. So he could not shut the door which he had opened.

THe sum of his threefold confession is; 1. He confesses that about 6
months since, having been often provoked by injurious reports, etc. and having
been much solicited by particular friends etc. upon such necessity and much
importunity, he was constrained to set down those particulars in writing, etc.
2. He professes that no man has the original copy but himself, and that for
ought he knows he never gave it to more then two to peruse, etc. only to
enable them to give private satisfaction to those that should require it of
them, and so to enable those to satisfy others in a private way, etc. 3. He
professes that from hence it will follow, that he is altogether innocent in
this matter, which as he knew not of it, till it was brought unto him in print,
so he utterly dislikes both for the unseasonablenes of the work, and for the
unreasonable and uncharitable bitterness of the Publisher.

Touching this threefold confession or profession, observe 1. The complaints of
Mr. Davenport, touching such injurious reports as are by him mentioned in his
writing, are already showed to be unjust.

2. If provocation by injurious reports had prevayled with me, as far as it did
with Mr. Davenport, then should I also have made answer in writing to such
reports, as were often brought unto me, and communicated the same with others,
to enable them to satisfy others also. This I did not, but rather suffered much
wrong.

3. Observe how solicitation by particular friends prevayled with Mr.
Davenport, to do that which has caused so great offense: Let men beware of
importunity of friends provoking unto strife. If Mr. Davenport should tell who
these friends were, it would happily appear more plainly what little reason he
had so to have been carried away by them.

4. Though Mr. Davenport never gave his writing to more then ^wo to peruse;
that might be as much as if he had given it to 20; wh^^^ those two might spread
it abroad to as many and (...); as (...) also come to pass.

5. Though no man has the original copy but himself; this excuses Mr.
Davenport no more, then if he that has made a libel, and given the same to
others, which have transcribed copies thereof, and spread them abroad, first by
writing and then by printing, should say with Mr. Davenport, yet mine own was
returned unto me again, and I have it in my keeping: no man has the original
copy but my self. What helps this, when 500 copies thereof be printed and
dispersed abroad?

6. Whereas Mr. Davenport professes his intent to give private satisfaction;
in a private way: Let it be observed how private this way was, when as in the
postscript after his letter to the Classis, he uses this manner of speech, Let
the Reader judge what I could say less or more mildely, etc. For is not this
the phrase and style of books published for readers? And were it not absurd so
to speak of a writing which is not intended for the view of readers? Says he
not also in his new preamble to that letter, that he translated it for the
satisfaction of the members of the English Church? And could that be kept
private, which he intended should be made known to so many persons? And even
herein this part of his Protestation, does he not show his intent was to
satisfy the Dutch in that City, viz. of Amsterdam, and some of the members of
that Church, and many of our nation in other parts of these Countries, who (as
he says) he was informed, that they were by mis-reports prejudiced against
him? Does not this also accord with the practice of his special friend the
Publisher, who has also caused this writing to be translated into Dutch for
their satisfaction? Could all this be done, and not be counted a public work?
Who knows not that matters are published abroad, not only by printing, but by
writing also, when one is appointed to satisfy an other, and they others again?

This dealing of Mr. Davenport suites well with the Emblem or Picture printed
in the Title Page of his Protestation, where Flying Fame is printed, and
pourtrayed as a woman with her wings spread abroad, mounting aloft in the
air, her Trumpet in her mouth, and her cheeks swollen with blowing of it. For
even this kind of communicating his writing, was enough to raise up and to carry
forth the same of these actions: Those two selected instruments for
satisfaction, (...) to publish (...) the printing thereof.

7. This kind of Pri^^^^ay, (...) Mr. Davenport calls it, hidden to me, and
made known to (...), the ^^^e pri^^^e and secret it was, the greater was the
injury unto me, so ^o spread (...) complaints against me. Hereby I was accused,
and could not co^^ to answer: hereby it came to pass, that I might justly
complain with David and Jeremy: Psalm. 35.15 Ier. 11.19.
They assembled themselves against me, and I know not: they tare me and ceased
not. I was like a lamb or a bullock that is brought to the slaughter, and I
knew not that they had devised thus against me. Though I heard of reproach
enough, yet I knew not of this devise by underhand-writings to propagate
reproach, and to fill the mouths of slanderers against me. Would Mr. Davenport
have dealt ingenuously and Christianly with me, he should first have sent his
writing unto me; and those his two instruments, whom he sought to enable that
they again might enable others, to give satisfaction in a private way, ought
to have acquainted me with it, to have seen whether I could not by an other
writing have satisfied them. This their private way, this underhand-practise;
which by his confession continued about some 6 months before the printed book
came forth, and might have continued longer, if this Publisher had not beyond
his exspectation brought it to light; what was this else but an indirect and
disordred course, to undermine me secretly and in the dark?

8. Let Mr. Davenport consider whether there be not partiality in his
proceedings. For if he thought it needful to make these writings for the
satisfaction of the members of the English Church here, whereof he is neither
member nor Minister, how much more ought he to have done it for satisfying of
the members of his Parish Church in England for the leaving of it; to give a
reason of his proceedings there, which he knows are disliked by many? Why has
he not under his hand in writing given copy of the passages therein, and
appointed some to propagate the knowledge thereof as well as here; that so (as
he speaks of this) the Reader might judge the better of the whole business?

9. Observe how in the midst of these practices, tending so manifestly (...),
Mr. Davenport yet (...) a profession of (...) have and (...), ^^^ling us how he
did a^pect when God would s^^^ly ^^der and dispose the spirits of Pastor and
people in that Church, to ^^ity and concord between themselves, etc. and that
he does still hope and pray for it. But is this the word of a peacemaker, or
peace-seeker, to spread abroad matter of dissension? Had he any just ground to
hope for unity by such reports, serving to dis-unite the hearts of people? Is
this a sweet order to dispose the spirits of Pastor and people to concord, by
making complaints unto the people against their Pastor? Yea what else has he
done in this writing, but played the part of an evil instrument, coming
betwixt Pastor and People, to irritate their minds, and to provoke unto
further contention by a vain discourse, of seeking to prove that he was not
desired by me; by teaching the people to complain after his example, and so
^^rcing their Pastor for his own defense, to publish an Apology against
unjust complaints?

10. Whereas Mr. Davenport in this speech for unity and concord, talks
indefinitely of some conclusions and ways of advancing our mutual good and
comfort, agreeable to the Gospel and rule which Christ has left for his
Churches to walk by: What Mr. Davenport means by these conclusions and ways,
I know not. But this I know, that Mr. Davenport his way can never advance our
mutual good, nor procure our comfort, being so directly opposite and contrary
to the Gospel, and to the rule which Christ has left us to walk by: for in
his forenamed private way of satisfaction, in stead of admonition of the
supposed offender, either alone or with witnesses, according to the Mat.
18.15.16.
rule of Christ, he substitutes two tale-bearers, not to admonish the offender,
nor to help to convince him, but by a writing communicated to them to satisfy
others, as he pretends in a private way. In stead of telling the Church
according to the rule of Christ, Ibi. verse. 17.
his way is to have the Church to be informed by certain whisperers from one
to an other, for many months together, without knowledge of the offender, or
any due proceeding according to the Gospel. His obscure and dark speeches are
such, as may lightly be drawn to strengthen the discontented persons among us
in their opposition against me, and against the Classis, and against the
government and discipline of these Churches, with whom we are united. For what
are these Conclusions and ways of advancement he aims (...) for our help and
(...) that the Conclusions of the (...), touching the (...) among us, to be the
way of unity and conc^^d, not repugnant to the Gospel: ^^d Mr. Davenport and
the complaynants ^^^^od therein, our unity (...) concord had been established
and confirmed. Though these conclusions did not serve for the admittance of Mr.
Davenport as a Pastor among (...), yet they s^^^ed to conclude our Peace,
without any new project of his.

Lastly, observe how Mr. Davenport, although he confess touching the Title of
the book and the publishing thereof, that he utterly dislikes it, both for the
unseasonablenes of the work, and for the unreasonable and uncharitable
bitterness of the Publisher; yet he speaks not the least word against the
matter of the book, nor against the authors thereof, nor against those many
false and slanderous assertions of the complaynants. He might as safely and
without rebuke unto himself, have spoken all this that is here confessed by
him, though he himself had written the whole book, and subscribed his name
with the rest of the Complaynants unto the second part of the book, as well as
he did unto the first. For first as for the unseasonablenes of the work, it is
well known that some great adversaries of the truth have complained sometimes
of their own fellows, for printing and publishing their own opinions
unseasonably, before matters were ripe, and the way prepared for the receaving
of them. And further for the unreasonable and uncharitable bitterness of the
Publisher, as he here speaks; and for the harsh and unsavory language used by
the Publisher, as he speaks in the preamble to his Protestation, though the
Publisher be many ways guilty therein, yet is Mr. Davenport guilty of great
partiality in reprooving of him alone, when as the other subscribers also are
guilty and partakers in the transgression as well as he. Why then does Will.
Be. alone bear the rebuke from Mr. Davenport? Why are not Law. Co. Tho. Fl.
Ia. Cr. Io. Pol. and the rest rebuked by him also? Though Will. Be. the
Publisher have been more rude then the rest, yet for the matter of the book,
the other are as deep in the guilt of those unreasonable and uncharitable
slanders contained therein. If their complaints be just, then is the Title
just: If the Title be vile, then are their assertio^s vile that justify the
Title. Had Mr. Davenport (...) conscience, then as he had (...) had resolved
upon this his Protestation, so he (...) also have had no rest nor full
contentement therein, unless (...) entirely and sincerely protested against
the book it self, the write (...) the underwriters thereof, as well as against
the Title and the publishe^ of this Pamphlet.

FOr his threefold Quaere, wherein he wishes the Publisher to inform himself
of these 3 things; 1. Whether he be not an injurious one, etc. 2. Whether he be
not a sower of discord among brethren, etc. 3. Whether he be not a buisy body,
one that busieth himself in other men^ matters, etc.


Observe, 1. how confused and indistinct these 3 Quaeres are, each one of them
being confounded with the other two. For the first, under the T^^^ of injurious
one, are comprehended both he that s^^th discord, and he that is a buisy body.
For the second, by ^^^og discord among brethren, men are both injurious and
buisy bodies. For the third to be a buisy body in such manner as Mr. Davenport
here specifyes, what is it else but to be both injurious and sowers of discord?
But let us follow the order propounded.

2. Observe more particularly wherein the Publisher of this book has been
injurious. He was injurious

To Mr. Davenport, in printing that which he wrote, without his consent.

To some of his fellow-complaynants, to publish their writing. For though all
of them be guilty in subscribing to the writing: yet diverse of them profess
themselves to be highly offended at the printing thereof.

To all of them, in having the Brownists to print it with such a schismatic
addition in the end.

To me, in spreading abroad so many untruthes against me, as are before noted.

To our whole Congregation, to blot the same with report of infamous
contention, faction, etc.

To the Classis, in defaming their government and proceedings.

To the Magistrates of this City, in publishing an unjust complaint against
that which was done by them.

To all Reformed Churches, in publishing complaints against (...).

(...) all that (...), and desire the same discipline that is ^^^sed in these
Churches, this their book being a stumbling block (...) in the way.

To all that are gr^eved for the offense arising by this fact, he being cause
of their grief.

To all that take pleasure in these offenses, he being a means to harden them
in sin.

3. Observe, that as the Publisher has been injurious many ways, so Mr.
Davenport has been injurious many ways, both unto the Publisher himself, and
to others also: and this according to his threefold Quaere propounded unto the
Publisher; for

1. For injuriousnes; As he that puts a sharp knife into the hand of a little
child, is thereby injurious unto that child: so was Mr. Davenport that framed a
writing like a sharp pointed knife, and put it into the hand of this rude
Publisher, either mediately or immediately, giving him thereby occasion and
opportunity to publish the same, and so to wound himself and others thereby.
Whereas Mr. Davenport desires the Publisher seriously to consider, whether some
by respect or secret distemper, had not biassed his spirit a wrong way, or
imbittred it too much: it is apparent that Mr. Davenport his writing was a
biasse set upon the spirit of the Publisher, to make it run that way it did in
the reproach of me; and whatsoever secret or open distemper was in him before,
this example of Mr. Davenport in all reason must needs both imbitter and
embolden him the more unto this exployt.

2. For sowing of discord among brethren which is so hateful, which Mr.
Davenport amplifyes by similitudes of fire and water, by the danger of opening
fluses in these Netherlands; what were those two persons, to whom he
communicated his writing for satisfaction of the members of the English Church
and others, but as two Sluses opened by him, from which the waters of strife
might flow forth with danger of drowning many? What else but two sowers of
discord appointed by Mr. Davenport, each of them furnished with coals of fire
to inflame many against me? For fire works, has not Mr. Davenport first digd
the trenches, and made mines under the ground, and scattered gunpowder therein
by his underhand writing, whereunto W. Be. gave fire by publishing the same,
and so blown up the mine? Mr. Davenport prays here that the (...) but had he
been careful to resist Satan at the first, he would not (...) done him such a
service, by filling the mouths of these pe^^ with such store of complaints as
he did.

3. For being a buisy body, Mr. Davenport asks the Publisher, what calling he
has to interpose himself thus publicly, etc. And yet who more then Mr.
Davenport has given him a calling (such an one as it is) to interpose himself
in spreading abroad the writing, which he communicated unto his two buisy
bodies, to the end they might upon occasion divulge the same? Yea in this very
Quaere does not Mr. Davenport give a kind of warrant for publishing these
complaints, brought to the Consistory, when as he disallowes the publishing
thereof, with this limitation only, before matters have been there discussed
and determined, or at least, before the issue and conclusion, which there shall
be put to the question, has been sufficiently demanded and exspected. Does not
this imply, that though not before, yet after this done, there would be a
warrant to publish these matters? And seeing the complaynants have been so
importunate in their demandes about this business, as is before showed, and
think they have exspected and waited long enough; what wonder if such a speech
as this, should make them conceave that they had now some warrant to publish
their complaints unto the world? And further howsoever the matters published,
do not only concern our Church, and the special things contained in these
complaints, have been already judged and determined by the Classis; yet seeing
Mr. Davenport has been an instrument to publish some of them by writing, no
marvel if this Publisher thought that the example of Mr. Davenport was some
warrant unto him to publish them in print also.

HIs threefold Request is, 1. To me, that I would rest satisfied with his
ingenuous profession in this particular, etc. 2. To the Publisher, that he
would affix this sheet of paper [his Protestation] in stead of a Postscript to
his book, or disperse it among all persons to whose hands his book shall come,
or is come, etc. or make one good fire of both. 3. To all men to whose hands
the other book shall come, that they will speedily send this after it, or stich
this with it, etc.

Touching his Request to me, I do willingly yield thereunto, and do rest
satisfied for this particular, that he knew not of the printing (...) I should
easily have believed, that for h^^ (...) the would not have printed the book:
yet do I hold him (...), for th^^ underhand publishing of his written book,
by (...) ^^ed so great wrong.

(...) his requests to the Publisher, and to all other men to (...) the other
book shall come; what will or power they (...) accomplish them, I leave them to
answer as occasion (...).

TO conclude, this printed Protestation of Mr. Davenport conteyneth in it a
threefold Public Provocation of me, to answer his writings more then I had
before.

1. By avouching herein that he has written nothing in that, d^^^^ration but
the truth, which he is also ready (as he says) to confirm a^ occasion shall
require. This new asseveration and beating of the former reports into the head
of the Readers, I esteem as a new challenge binding me to answer that
declaration, and to show the untruth and injustice of those reports spread
abroad against me therein.

2. By intimating further matter that he has in store beside that which he
has already written against me, when as he tells how he concealed other
things which he might have added for his further clearing, unless more public
provocation should make it necessary to publish all together, which he has
hitherto forborne. A threatening insinuation like unto that which is in his
preamble to his letter unto the Classis, and like unto those that have elsewhere
been uttered by him.

3. Howsoever his repo^^ ^^d his complaints against the Classis, and against
me, were before spread abroad first by his writing, and then by the printed
book, yet this new printed Protestation make all more public, coming to the
hands of sundry persons that sa^ not the other book before, causing them to
enquire further after these things. This further spreading of the matter has
moved m^ the more to give answer unto him. My desire is that the truth might
be spread as far as the untrue and unjust reports that are gone out before. And
the God of truth grant this.

AMEN.
FINIS.
Page 71. for Section XXVI. read Section XXVII.


