MEDITATIONS OF DEATH, Wherein A Christian is taught How to Remember And
Prepare for his latter end: By the late able and faithful Minister of the
Gospel, JOHN PAGET.



To the most Illustrious and most Excellent Lady, ELIZABETH, Queen of Bohemia,
Countess Palatine of the Rhine, etc.
MOst Gracious Princess,
Albeit to many there is not a more unpleasing sight and unwelcome message,
then that which puts upon the thoughts of Death: yet your Majesty has not so
learned Christ in those large lessons which by Divine Providence have been
dispensed, to teach and affect with what may be helpful to Mortification.
These Meditations of my dear husband of blessed memory, I have much longed to
see clad in such wise as might be most serviceable, and that I my self might
hear him being dead yet speak unto me comfortable words, to solace my soul
in his absence, and to prepare me for the joys into which he is entered before
me. My desires herein being accomplished, I make bold to present the same in
the first place to your Majesty's view, use and Patronage. The gentle and
propitious respects your Majesty has at sundry times manifested unto the
Author and sometimes also to my self, give encouragement to presume that this
testimony of thankful acknowledgment and devoted affection (though but a
widows mite) shall obtain your Highnesses gracious acceptance. The Most High,
who rules in the kingdoms of men and gives them to whomsoever he will, He
raise and establish your throne, and confirm it unto your Princely Progeny,
that with His blessing the house of your Majesty may be blessed for ever. These
are the unfeigned and earnest suites of

The meanest of your Majesty's humble attendants at the throne of grace, BRIGET
PAGET.

The Publisher to the Reader.
I Shall do no more, Christian Reader, then is usually exspected, if in the
entrance unto the ensuing Meditations I give some brief advertisement touching
the Author, and the setting forth of this his Treatise which is here offered
unto thee. Concerning the Author, it may be expedient for thee to know somewhat
of his life who teaches thee to consider thine own end. Doubtless he had
learned to live well, and his good course of life may be also exemplary for
studious imitation, that could so well teach the art of dying. To say nothing
of his younger but towardly days, giving great content and comfort to his
pious parents and friends; to say nothing neither of his extraordinary piety
and progress in good learning, not only in the Grammar-schooles, but also in
the University of Cambridge, where he was esteemed for the most part to
surpass his contemporanies: that which I will only touch upon, shall be how he
approoved himself while he was employed in the Lords Vineyard, into which he
was timely sent. After some few years spent in places of less note, yet so as
the learnedest and godliest Preachers thereabout took notice of him and
embraced him with much love and true affection, he was called to the ministry
of the Church of Christ at Namptwich a famous town in Cheshire, about the
year 1598. The extraordinary diligence and pains he took there, both in
public and private, with persons of all sorts, and the blessed success, has
been already witnessed by the lively Epistles of Christ ministered by him, and
shall more evidently appear as a crown of rejoicing unto him in the presence
of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming. But when the times would not bear his
continuance in that place where his labors were so profitable, where he was
then so beloved, and since that time so earnestly desired again and longed
after, he followed the hand of Gods providence guiding him into the
Netherlands, in the year 1605 The two first years he attended the Army,
ministering the word of grace unto the Regiments of our nation: and took such
pains in catechizing the soldiers as well as preaching unto them, that their
benefit and his comfort therein became greater then is ordinarily found in such
places. Then the English living at Amsterdam conformably unto the Dutch
Reformed Church in the same city, whereof diverse of them stood members,
requesting him according to order to perform the office of a Pastor unto
them, he hearkened unto that call of God, and was his chief instrument for the
constituting and settling of that Church, wherein he did the work of a
faithful shepherd above thirty years, until age and the infirmities thereof
growing upon him the Magistrates of that city vouchsafed him the honor of an
Emeritus, the favor that is wont to be given unto soldiers from their Prince
in whose service they have spent the strength of their days. But shortly
after, the Lord of the harvest that had made him his labourer in that Vineyard
and crowned him with special blessings upon his endeavors in the course of
his pastoral performances, having prepared him by the message of a lingering
and languishing distemper, sometimes intermixed with grievous fits of the
colic and gravel, and ever accompanied with rheumes and catarrhes unto which
he had been long subject, did by the fiery chariot of a double tertia^
transport him unto the place of rest, where he enjoyes the crown of
righteousness, laid up for them that have fought a good fight, finished their
course and kept the faith. Among other graces and virtuous courses adorning the
hearts and lives of Christians, these two did most eminently shine in this
faithful servant of Christ; the one respecting his converse with God, the
other his communion with the Saints. The first was his exceeding delight in the
Law of the Lord, apparent not only in his ordinary practice of those duties
whereby the same is usually manifested; but more especially, first by his
committing unto memory diverse select portions of H. Scripture, as most of the
Psalms and sundry of the Epistles, in the original languages; wherein he took
such pleasing pains, that sometimes in the night season also when he had any
spare time from his natural rest he would employ it this way: secondly by his
practice of that course which he does more the^ once commend in the ensuing
Treatise, in singling out sundry of the choycest passages in the word of God,
reducing them to their several heads, having them ever about him and most
constantly feeding upon the comforts thereof. The second sort of Christian
duties wherein he excelled, was that which is noted to be the sum of the
second Table his love and charity unto the fellow members of Christ. The
largenes of his dispensing to others in this kind, proportionably to his
estate, will not easily be matched. I spare to mention the particulars, whereof
the places of his abode and the bowels of the poor Saints by him refreshed (he
withal drawing out his heart unto them as lovingly as men are wont to do unto
their familiars) are lively witnesses. His ordinary discourse, seasoned with
grace, always profitable and pleasing, in special manner did affect the
hearers, insisting much upon these two themes; first the wonderful wisdom,
power and goodness of God shining in his creatures, even the least of them, and
the many profitable lessons which may be learned from them, whereabout he had
many singular observations: and secondly the blessed condition of the Saints
glorified, touching which he had many divine and heavenly speculations; and
toward his end spoke so effectually of these things and what appertains
thereunto, that to them that were with him he seemed to be in heaven already,
insomuch as they wished themselves in the same way wherein he was carried on so
cheerfully. His sufficiency and abilities for the work of the ministry,
wherein he labored above forty years; how mighty he was in the Scriptures,
how skilfully profound in expounding difficult places, and applying them to the
benefit of souls; with what evidence and power his preaching wrought into the
consciences of his hearers; how clearly and fully he could refute and convince
an adversary of the truth; how prudent and judicious he was in mannaging
Church affairs, and giving counsel and advise in weighty businesses; these and
the like pearls shining in that crown of pastoral endowments wherewith he
was qualifyed above many others, are abundantly testified by those that have
been most interessed therein, do in great measure appear in what is here and
elsewhere published, and may be in like manner further manifested as occasion
serves, and if need were could be confirmed by the testimonies of the
learnedest of our age. For other maine helps whereby men are fitted for the
ministry, his skill was rare in the languages that conduce unto the
understanding of the Original text of the Scriptures and the several
interpreters thereof. Besides what is ordinarily required in this kind, he
could to good purpose and with much ease make use of the Chaldean, Syriack,
Rabbinicall, Thalmudicall, Arabic and Persian versions and commentaries. Now
whereas the station which God had appointed unto him was for the chief and
latter part of his time at Amsterdam; yet (as the godly learned have professed)
none has more soundly oppugned that insolent sect for which that place has
been so much reproached by many in our native country. Witness his Arrow
against the Separation of the Brownists, which yet sticks in the sides and
heart of their cause, though some impenite^t of their Schism, gnaw their
tongues and cease not to blaspheme the Churches of Christ. If he had been as
forward to send forth what he had done in those controversies, as they are to
trouble the press with their pamphlets; the world had seen at least thrice so
much as it has already of his pains in this kind. As for the unhappy
differences raised of later years in and about the Church committed to his
charge, what ever some have deemed, they that have been rightly informed and
impartially weighed what has been done, have approoved his wisdom,
faithfulness and uprightnes in the whole carriage of those businesses. We that
have in great part been privy to his retiredest thoughts and demeanor at those
times, have had assured evidence of the integrity of his heart therein, which
he has also witnessed unto the end. For the controversies themselves, God has
therein, greatly pleaded his cause sundry ways, both at the very time of their
rising and since especially. And as opportunity shall require, others may in
due time behold what he has done in defense of himself and the truth against
that which is published by others.

But of those and the like his pains in their season: now somewhat must be
said of this Treatise which is here put into thy hands. It contains the sum
of that which was delivered in diverse sermons to his own flock in the year
1628. At the same time it was penned in such manner as we found it after his
decease. Diverse passages, especially toward the end, were reserved for second
thoughts, when he might return to a further survey. Though he had been often
importuned by others to publish these his Meditations; yet partly by his own
slownes to come abroad in that manner and partly by the urgency of other
occasions their desires could not then take place. But being moved again when
his end drew near and his weakness would not suffer him to review it and
perfect what was wanting, he was content I should set it forth in such manner
as I could. Albeit I have had some trouble in bringing together what was
scatteredly set down, and in some places extending into plain words what was
left in concise notes and short intimations; yet I have purposely avoided the
adding of any thing that was not in the Authors Manuscripts, though I should
leave some abruptnes in the discourse and harshnes in the phrase. I have only
adventured to set down the contents at the beginning of every Chapter, so as
thou may with ease possess thy mind with the whole matter of it, and
readily turn unto what thou desire. I need not here discourse of the
excellency and usefulnes of this Treatise. When thou have read it attentively
and without prejudice, then judge whether the matter intended be not carried
along with all soundnes of judgment and demonstration of the spirit of life
and power; whether here be not pithily comprised the sum of what the
Scriptures afford of life and death; whether most points of Christian Religion
be not here illustrated with some singular observations; and in a word, whether
the whole do not argue that he was a Scribe excellently instructed unto the
kingdom of God. The God of all grace and glory make thee wise in closing thy
thoughts with these Meditations, and happy in the enjoyment of that blessed end
unto which they give directions.

Thine in the Lord, R. PAGET.

The order observed in this Treatise.
The first part declares
How God calls men to Remember Death in general, by the memorials of it in
Gods shortening the days of man. Cha. I. pa. 1 Persons, times and places of
all sorts. Cha. II. pa. 18 Man himself and what appertains to him. Cha. III.
pa. 44 The approach of death and about the dead. Cha IV. pa. 72
Particularly, the death and latter end of the Godly, the happiness of their
condition: Cha. V. pa. 93 compared with the primitive estate of the old world.
Cha. VI. pa. 112
Ungodly, their woeful and wretched end: Cha. VII. pa. 154 beheld in the
visible memorials of Hell. Cha. VIII. pa. 188


The second part prepares for death by
General instructions touching Life and happiness, the Well and fountain of it
in God. Cha. I. pa. 229 Sure and only way unto it, by Christ. Cha. II. pa. 269
The motions of grace in the exercise of Mortification, the Nature, acts and
enemies of it. Cha. III. pa. 303 Means, whereby it is wrought, Inward, the
Spirit of grace. Cha. IV. pa. 326 Outward, the Ordinances and Works of God.
Cha. V. pa. 349

Vivificatio^, the nature and working of it. Cha. VI. pa. 377
Particular directions concerning Peculiar preparatives unto death. Cha. VII.
pa. 395 The fear of death and helps against it. Cha. VIII. pa. 413


Meditations of Death. THE FIRST PART. Of the remembrance of Death.
CHAP. I. How God calls men to remember Death.
How God is said to wish, and the efficacy of this wish. (a) Three Songs of
Moses, and the arguments of them to reach men their end. (b) in Paradise man
called to remember death, before, in, and after the fall. (c) The days of man
shortened by halves at four several times. (d) Why since Moses his time they
continue at a stay. (e) The multitude of violent and untimely deaths in the old
world, the middle world, and this last age of the world.

O That they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end! Deu. 32.29. O what love and tender mercies does the blessed
God declare in this affectionate speech concerning miserable man! Though to
speak properly, God be without affections and passions; for whatsorver he
wills in heaven or in earth, that he does, and that he has, Psalm. 115.3. 1.
Chro. 29. 11. he needs not wish for any thing he wants: yet to show us what we
most want, what we should chiefly wish for, and what most pleases him in us;
he speaks as men, according to their sense and capacity. He uses a passionate
phrase of longing and wishing, which in propriety of speech agrees not with the
Deity; to show there is an unspeakable matter in it, which proper words cannot
express to our understanding: and therefore stooping down unto us, and as it
were putting on our humanity, speaks after the manner of men and propoundes
his wish, to show thereby what is principally to be wished for, and what men
would desire if they had the mind of God.

Look what respect God shows for the keeping of all his Commandments, by
wishing men had a heart to observe them always, Deuteronomy. 5.29. such respect he
shows, and by the like wish expresses for the remembrance of their latter
end, as being the way and means to bring them to a more diligent observation
of them all.

He says not simply, Oh that they would think on their end: but withal he
shows their wisdom and happiness if they hearken, by wishing that they were
wise to do it. And by such an argument of coming to be accounted wise in the
sight of God and men, he labors to draw his people even unto all obedience,
Deuteronomy. 4.6.7.8.

Neither is the Lord content to speak once, but doubling and trebling his
words, with a loud voice he calls them, to be wise, to understand, to
consider; as if he had said, be wise, be wise, be wise; remember, remember,
remember your latter end. As the sheet was thrice let down from heaven to show
the vision more plainly, and to imprint it more deeply in the mind of Peter,
Act. 10 16. so is the call of God inculcate upon Israel in this place. Neither
is the act only, but the object of this consideration is likewise repeated and
poynted at by the finger of God with a double demonstrative, even this, their
latter end.

(a) Three special Songs were written by Moses the man of God; The maine
argument of each of them is a remembrance of the latter end. The first at the
red sea and entering into the wilderness shows the latter end of their enemies,
both from whence they came, Pharaoh and the Egyptians perishing in the waters;
and to whom they went, the Canaanites and others melting away for fear; with
the latter end of Jsrael to be planted in the mountain of Gods inheritance.
Exodus 15. 1-20. And this triumphant Song was heard again from heaven, and sung
by them that had got the victory of the beast, whereunto the remembrance of our
end may bring us also, to rejoice among the^ that have the harpes of God. Rev.
15.1.2.3. The second Song shows the vain estate of all, the shortness of this
present life, how they hasten to their end, that all might number their days,
and apply their hearts to wisdom. Psalm. 90. This is probably supposed to have
been written when Israel being come to the borders of Canaan for their
murmuring were turned back again into the wilderness, till their carcasses were
fallen, and their days consumed by the wrath of God. Numb. 13. and 14. This
third and last was Moses Swan-song, spoken and written that self same day that
he was commanded to go up and dye in the mount Nebo, for his farewell when he
had one foot in the wilderness and an other in heaven. Deu. 32.48.49.^0. and is
by many arguments commended unto us, both before it was set down, Deuteronomy.
31.14-30. and in the preface, Chap. 32.1.2. and after at the conclusion of it,
verse. 46.47. And yet above all the sentences of this Song, this streyne
especially that calls us to the remembrance of our latter end, is commended
unto us by the most earnest wish of God himself. And therefore if either the
wish of God, and such a wish as is made for keeping all the commandments
together; or if the finding of true wisdom; or if so many repetitions like so
many knockes of the Lord upon our breast, be of any regard in our eyes, let us
hereby conceive our own blindenes and negligence in this point: let us awaken
at this loud call, and double and treble our care in the remembrance of our
latter end, to find that comfort, which the Lord sees is to be gotten thereby.

(b) If we had no other call, such a divine wish might suffice to make us
remember our end. And what godly heart would not answer to this call and say,
Lord it is enough: I will never cease to think of my end? Yet the Lord sees
it is not enough, and therefore besides this his wish, he calls again an
hundred ways by his word, his works, his ordinances, and proclaims this
lesson, Remember your latter end. And first of all, Man was called of God even
in paradise to remember his end before the fall. Death was set before his eyes
in the Tree of Death, as well as life in the Tree of life. Genesis 2.17. The first
day he was called to think on the last day. So soon as sin was forbidden,
death was showed before it was, to keep from sin; and the tree of death was
a visible frontlet hung before the eyes of man to preserve him in the fear of
God. Jf in the state of innocence, a law of mortality was made and a memorial
of death was needful before it came; how much more in the state of corruption
when death is come into the world, and walks on every side, have we need now
to remember it and to watch?

In the fall, while Evah yet stood she resisted the temptation by remembering of
the death that was threatened. Genesis 3.3. but when the serpent insisted and
removed the remembrance of death out of her mind then she fell. The voice of
the serpent was, Ye shall not surely dye, verse. 4. they remembered not their
latter end, and came down wonderfully. So the very fall it self being on this
manner, serves for an other Call to warn every one that would stand in the
evil day, never to forget their latter end.

After the fall, then God calls again by a Sentence of mortality which he
pronounced on man, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return, Genesis 3.19. to
make men with new care to think upon death. And this was a general day of
judgment in the beginning of the world, as there shall be an other General
judgment in the end of the world. Then were we all in Adam and Evah presented
before the Tribunal and judgment seat of God and receyved the sentence of the
first death universally pronounced upon all men, righteous or unrighteous,
elect or reprobate; as there shall be a sentence of second death pronounced on
the reprobate at last.

After this Sentence, the Lord calls again by the execution thereof from time
to time, while death being entered into the world reigns among men, devouring
all and bringing all to dust: yet so, that the execution of this Sentence is
revealed in manifold and diverse degrees, according to the great patience and
long (...) their language, but cut of their days from four or five hundred to
two hundred and od years. Genesis 11.18-32. And so with the ruin of Babel, the
life of man was ruinated. The lofty tower of man's age that before ascended to
so great an height by the steps of so many years, was now thrown down and
made lower by the half. The noise and crash of this downfall sounded through
many generations from Peleg to Terah, warning all to be more watchful because
the execution of this sentence of death with double speed was brought upon them.

After this in the time of Abraham and the generations following, from two
hundred and od we find the years of the Patriarchs brought to an hundred and
od. Genesis 25.7. and 35.28. and 47.28. etc. So was the reprive of man shortened
again. And when the Lord called Abraham and his seed into his covenant, he
withal called both him and the world by a new summo^s, as by sound of trumpet,
to repentance and amendment of life by remembrance of their latter end, which
now pressed upon them with double have to that it had done.

And lastly in the time of Moses the Lord being provoked by a new rebellion did
again half the age of man and reduced the number of his years to seventy or
eighty, Psalm. 90.10. Then was the execution of the Sentence of death hastened
more then ever before, and thereby the Lord called them and still calls us to
remember our end. Lord let thy call be effectual unto us: bring our hearts to
true wisdom; establish thou the work of our hands and fill us with thy mercy
in the morning that we may seek thee early and be glad in thee all our days.

(d) If God should once more have halfed the age of man as he did before, then
can we not conceive how the world should have subsisted. If our days upon a
new provocation had been shortened from seventy to five and thirty: if weakness
of old age had prevayled as much upon us at thirty, as now it does at sixty: if
at fifteen years men should have been at their full strength, and then have
begun to decline as now many do at thirty, being then in the height and vigor
of their age, how manifold defects in learning and practicing would the^ have
ensued? what wisdom and experience could men have learned in so short a time?
how could liberal or mechanical arts and sciences have been learned, or what
continuance of strength could have been to have wrought and exercised such
trades and sciences? what a world of children and old folks; yea what a world
of fools and impotent persons should we have had? though it be so already, yet
how much more then? But the Lord will not conte^d for ever, though he be now
provoked as much as ever before, for the spirit would fail before him, and the
souls that he has made. Esa. 57.16. Therefore has the term of man's age
continued at this stay from Moses to our time for about three thousand years
together, so as it was never settled in the former generations. And therefore
in special is this work of God to be considered of us, as being the last call
and warning of God in this kind, to make us remember our latter end.

Now though God do not again shorten and half the days of man by such
certain and determinate limits as formerly he has done; yet after another
manner he does not cease to cut them off and prevent the course of nature for
our warning as effectually as in the former judgeme^ts. For still the Lord
being provoked by the wicked cutts them off before their time, they are brought
down to the pit, and they live not out half their days, Psalm. 55.23. the
number of their months is cut off in the midst. Job, 21.21. as the vine
shakes off his unripe grape and the olive his flower, Job, 15.33. And not the
wicked alone, but the elect, the beloved of God (as Henoch, Genesis 5.23.24.) are
also taken away in the midst of their days: though sometime they live to
seventy or eighty years, and come to their grave in a full age, as a shock of
corn comes in, in his season, Job, 5.26: yet often they are taken away before,
Esa. 57.1. in infancy, childhood, youth, middle age, etc. Upon every step of
life death waits, and thousa^ds are daily translated on every year of man's
life, some the first year that they are borne, some in the second, some in the
third, and so forward, every year thousands and ten thousands even to the
last; and so a thousand calls hereby we receyve from God to remember our
latter end with greater have.

(e) The multitude and number of these uncertain and untimely deaths are
innumerable. We may observe it in three worlds. The old world perished all
together (...) strong men with their women and children were smitten with the
sword of Ioshuah, Ios. 11.4. How many did the sword of Gideon, of David, and
other Kings of Israel devour? Who can recount how much flesh those four
beasts or Monarchies devoured? Dan. 7.3. etc. Not to speak more of the
heathens, what untimely deaths did overtake Israel? their infants were drowned
in Egypt. Exo. 1.22. Six hundred thousand of their carcasses fell in the
wilderness. And as the children especially were before destroyed in Egypt; so
now in the wilderness the me^ especially. A decree was made, and a bound set
unto the murmurers, that they which were twenty years old should not live
longer then sixty years, and accordingly for the rest; whereas their children
might live to seve^ty or eighty years. Number. 14.29-33. How many were slain in
the time of their Judges and Kings? In Ahaz his time an hundred and twenty
thousand valiant men were slain in one day, and two hundred thousand captived.
2. Chron. 28.6.8. In Ieroboams time five hundred thousand chosen men fell down
slain at once. 2. Chro. 13.17. And by innumerable such examples has death
reigned and raged in those times. In this last age of the world violent and
bloody deaths seem to have abounded more then ever before, both on Jew and
Ge^tile, Paga^ and Christian. What destruction and massacre from the beginning
of the world unto that time might be compared with that of the Jews by the
Romans for the contempt of Christ and his Gospel? Mat. 24.21. How many rivers
of Christian blood have been shed by Roman authority of Heathenish Emperors,
and Antichristian Popes? The Harlot drunke^ with the blood of the Saints is
still blood-thirsty. Rev. 17.6. The Kings of the earth drunke^ with the wine of
her fornication, do give their strength and power unto her even to this day,
and are become her butchers to kill and slay for her. Rev. 17.2.13. Whereas
there are four beasts mentioned in Dan. 7.4.7. a lion, bear, leopard, monster
with ten horns; the beast, Rev. 13.1.2. is compounded of all four, and so
devoureth as many as all the former* what should we speak of Turks and
Tartares, and other Barbarous nations among whom and by whom death reigns so
strongly? Rev. 9.17 18. This all is well known, but not well regarded. In all
this we have a call from God to remember our latter end. But we have eyes and
see not, ears and yet hear not his call.

resist sinners, by threatening death and by executing death on malefactors,
Genesis 3.24. with Romans 13.4. The Princes and Judges of the earth are as Angels of
God, set to keep the garden and watch the city of God and to cut off the
workers of wickedness, Psalm. 101.8. and so become the messengers of death unto
wicked men. Prove. 16.14. Every Judgment Hall is the Tabernacle of death: there
Death dwelles; there he often shows his terrible countenance, and from thence
utters his voice and roares as a Lion. There be the monuments of death in many
already dead and in others threatened. Every such place is a pillar of
remembrance whereon Deaths name is engraven.

And if in time of peace the house of Justice be such a monument of Death, much
more is the Camp in time of War, as Hazarmaveth, the Court of Death. There
Death displayes his banner: the sound of Drum and Trumpet are the
proclamations of death: the Mounts, Bulwarks and Batteries are the scaffolds
where Death acts his part: the Trenches, Approches, Galleries and Mines are
the valleys of the shadow of death: and all the weapons and warlike Engines are
so many darts of death, whereby the dead are multiplied. And seeing by divine
providence, besides the many armies marching abroad in other countries; the
Camp is now presently so near unto us, in our borders, by s' Hertogen-Bosch,
our duty is to observe this Alarm of death from thence, and to hearken unto
the special calling of God for remembrance of our latter end. The Lords voice
cries unto the City, Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, Mic. 6.9. and
not only to the City beseeged, that it may shake off the yoke of Antichrist,
but unto us and our cities that are within the sound, that we may walk more
worthy of Christ and his Gospel which we profess. He that regards not this
call of God shall bear his iniquity.

(b) In the calling of Ministers we have an other Memorial of death, and that
many ways. Ministers are called of God to call others to remember their latter
end. And this is noted as a maine work of their calling, Esa. 40.6.7.8. A
voice said, Cry. And he said, what shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all
the goodlines thereof is as the flovver of the field. The grass withers, the
flovver fades: because the spirit of the Lord blovveth upon it: surely (...)
drawing out and shaking that sword against the breast of sinners: by making
life or death to be evermore the foot or burden of their song. and the effect
of all is, they are the savor of life or the savor of death to all that hear
them. 2. Cor. 2.16.

(c) And this which hitherto we have heard of Angels, Magistrates, and
Ministers, is spoken of the good: come we now to speak of the evil. The Lord
calls us as loud by them, to remember our end, that we may gather good out of
evil. Evil angels, what are they else but professed murderers, and murderers
from the beginning, going about as roaring lions, seeking whom they may
devour? Ioh. 8.44. 1. Pet. 5.8. They have power of death, Heb. 2.14. and daily
bring thousands to death of body and soul for ever. Wicked Magistrates and
persecuting rulers that compel men to Idolatry and false religion, and force
men to take the mark of the beast; as also the false teachers and blind
guides that bring in damnable errors, even both these are like the servants
that dance on the threshold, and fill their masters house with spoil and prey.
Zeph. 1 9. Both these are the bloodhounds of the Devil, by which he hunteth
souls. Hos. 5.1. Both these are as ranging bears and ravenous woolves that
wory young and old, and drive them into the slaughterhouse of Satan. Prove.
28.15. Mat. 7.15. These help him daily to thrust sinful men into the ditch,
into the bottomless pit of Hell. All these therefore are the Grand-champions and
standard-bearers of death, and have Death written in their foreheads. The sight
of these or the mention of them and their enterprises should cause men with
horror to think of death. And seeing the world is full of these, how many are
the calls and warnings that God by them gives us to think of death, and to
stand upon our watch?

(d) As for the times, several also are the warnings, which are thereby given
us to remember our end: sometimes by the red horse marching in our borders,
trotting, galloping, and rushing into battle; sometimes the pale horse ambling
up and down in our streets, Rev. 6.4.8. both war and pestilence bringing
massacre upon massacre, calamity upon calamity, Ier. 9.21. Ezekiel. 7.25.26. are
as so many proclamations of death in our ears, sounding at some times more
louder then other, according as these judgments are more grievous and
universal. Who does not see the axe laid unto the root of the tree in these
days? both the bloody axe of war, and black axe of pestilence, in some times
and places continued, in others threatened. Besides, time it self is a sithe,
an axe: Night and day are two axes at the root of our life, when one is up the
other is down, without rest: every day a chip flies away, and every night a
chip; and so our bones ly scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth or
heweth wood on the earth. Psalm 141.7.

Though every day giving us so manifold examples of death do thereby serve to
put us in mind thereof: yet in a special manner is the Sabbath Day set apart
by the ordinance of God, that on it we should consider the latter end of man.
That is the time especially, when the voice cries in the Congregation, All
flesh is grass, etc. And therefore in the Psalm, that is entitled, of the
Sabbath. Psa. 92. title. wherein the exercises of the Sabbath are described,
there God calls and teaches his people to remember the latter ends, both the
end of all the workers of iniquity, who though they spring as grass, and
flourish for a season, shall yet in the end be destroyed and perish for ever:
ibid. verse. 7.9. and again the latter end of the godly, whose horn, though it
be abased to the dust for a while, yet in the end shall be exalted like the
horn of an unicorne; their heads anointed with fresh oil, etc. verse. 10. etc.
On the Sabbath therefore are we called of God to sit down and consider and
talk, and sing of our latter end, and mutually to exhort and comfort ourselves
with the remembrance of it.

(e) Now for the place where we live, this whole world and every part thereof
does fitly represent unto us our transitory estate: for the fashion of this
world passes away, 1. Cor. 7.31. and we pass away with it. The mooveable
heavens that are above us are tossed and swong round about the world every day,
both the firmament of the fixed stars, and the spheres of the seve^ planets
one under another are rolled about with their manifold variety of motions. The
Sun in the midst of them goes forth as a giant to run his race from one
end of heaven to an other. Psa. 19.5.6. Eccl. 1.5. the circle of the earth
which he daily compasses

(f) And as the heavens, so all under the heavens runs on wheels also. The
comets and fiery meteores in the highest regio^s of the air are carried about
the earth according to the motion of the Sun. The wind whirleth about
continually, and returns according to his circuits. Eccl. 1.6. The waters of
sea and rivers run their courses as in a circle, from land to sea, and from sea
to their springs again: verse. 7. and the sea in it self is tossed up and
down, ebbing and flowing according to the course of the Moon, or violence of
the winds. The earth though it remain in her station and change not her
place, yet is it changed in estate more then the rest: insomuch that God has
made the sundry ranks of the creatures therein to be so many mappes of
mortality, pictures of our vanity, and similitudes of our transitory estate;
that by the sight of each of them he might call us to remember our latter end.
And which way so ever we turn us, the monuments of our vanity are presented
unto us of God.

(g) Stay we in the house and sit by the fire side, the sparks that fly up and
are presently extinct, Job, 18, 5. 2. Sam. 14 7. the smoke that goes out of the
chimney and suddenly vanishes, Hos. 13.3. the ashes that remain and are
streightway cast out on the dunghill, Job. 13.12. Genesis 18.27. are each of them
appointed of God, to show us what we are, and how soon we come to our end;
while he has compared our lives to each of these. The candle that is set upon
the table to give light unto them that are in the house, is also ordained of
God to represent our life, that shines for a time until it have consumed our
native moisture, and then goes out of it self. Job, 18.6. And as we see the
oil of this lamp decaying, the more are we to seek that oil of grace, that
will not decay before the coming of the Bridegroom. Matt. 25.4. The earthen
pots wherein our meat is sod and prepared at the fire; the earthe^ pots and
dishes out of which we eat and drink at the table for preservation of our life,
are noted by the holy Ghost to be types and similitudes of our brittle and
frail life, Ier, 19.1.11. Lam. 4.2. that so often as we use them and eat and
drink out of the^ we might remember our end. The shelfs or benches whereon women
for ornament of their kitchen do set up these pots and dishes are like fair
pourtraiturs of humane fragility, the whole household it self and all the
persons (...) Esa. 37.27. has thereby bound them as in a bundle for a
wholesome posie or nosegay, that from thence we might learn to smell our
mortality.

Go we forth again from the garden into the corne-fields, look upon the corn
and every part of it; by the root that comes of seed, which is not quickened
except it dye, God teaches us to think of death, and to look for death
before true life be found. 1. Cor. 15.36. Ioh, 12.14. By the top of the ears
of corn cut down with sickles, the Lord calls us to consider of Death, by
whose sickle we are all cut down in like manner. Job, 24.24. Rev. 14.15 By the
stubble, which is the middle of the stalk betwixt the root and the ear of
corn, as being a most vain thing, easily scattered by the wind, Ier. 13.24.
Esa. 40.24. and devoured by fire, whereunto it is reserved, Joel. 2.5. Esa.
5.24. the vanity of man perishing as stubble is often described unto us. And
above the rest, when the Lord calls sinners to think of their end, he takes
the light chafe upon the grains of corn in the ear, and shows that unto
the^, affirming that they also are but as chafe before the whirlewind or the
fire; Psa. 1.4. Job, 21.18. Esa. 17.13. yea and the multitude of them and their
princes as the chafe of the summer threshing-floores, where it most abou^deth.
Da. 2.35.

(i) From the lesser plants let us go to the greater; from herbs to trees. The
trees of the orchyard, and those in special, that were in election above
others to reign as kings over the rest, Judge. 9.8. etc. are called of God to
call us to think of our latter end. In them and by them the Lord teaches us
how we pass away: as the vine shakes of his unripe grape; as the olive casts
of his flower, Job, 15.33. as the figtree casts her untimely figs, being
shaken of a mighty wind, Rev. 6, 13. as the bramble or thorns in the hedge of
the orchyard, green or dry are taken away by force, Psa. 58.9. as the
crackling of thorns under the pot, a flash and presently out, Eccl. 7.6. Psa.
118.12. so is the life and glory of sinners suddenly at an end: and these
plants are memorialles thereof unto us. From the trees of the orchyard proceed
we on to the trees of the forest: and by the way consider the mists and
morning clouds above our heads, and the morning dew under our feet, both
suddenly vanishing away; Hose. 13.3. by them the (...) swift when she hastes
to the prey, serves by the counsel of God herein to represe^t the swiftnes of
our days, and how we have to our end, to be a prey for the grave. Job, 9.26.
The Moth as little and weak as the Eagle is great and strong, serves yet to
teach us the same lesson as well as the king of birds. Though the moth be so
frail that by touching it is consumed, and the substance left behind upon the
fingers, yet mortal me^ are crushed before the moth, Job 4.19. even their
beauty consumes away like the moth. Psa. 39.11. the moth of consumptio^ eats
them up. Esa. 50.9. and 51.8. Hos. 5.12 As the Lord rides upon the Cherubims
and flies abroad upon the wings of the wind: so upon the wings of the moth
used for his service and made his Ambassador to deliver unto man a message of
his mortality, that he might remember his end.

(l) Thus do all kind of creatures made for man, serve to warn him of his
vanity: And it is not simply the mere volubility of the heavens and instability
of the earth, that give us this warning; but this whole globe of heaven and
earth is created and give^ unto us of God for a Watch or Clock, whereby we
might learn to number our times, and our passing away in them. The several
lights of the firmament are ordained of God, for signs and for seasons, for
days and for years, Genesis 1.14. The Sun by his height and motion does
plainly declare the time of the day, being looked on to that end; and by the
variation of his shadow in the degrees of the dial, as in that of Ahaz, Esa.
38.8. does more exactly distinguish and determine the hours unto us. Yea the
window in every man's house standing against the Sun, serves for a dial to
show the hour of the day more or less: and to them that are abroad in the
streets or field in the sunshine; eve^ the shadow of their own persons, the
stature of their own body serving for the gnomon of a dial, does show the
difference of hours according to the variety of the shadow stretched out and
declining in diverse degrees, Ier. 6.4. Men that have been a while intent unto
their work and eftsoons look up and see the declining of the shadow, the
sight of this declination is as the sound of a voice unto them, saying, The
Time passes; The end draws on; Man walks in a shadow; and sleeth away as a
shadow: Job, 14.2. Psa. 109.23. and so gives him occasion to try himself and
his ways, what good he has been doing that while. And as plainly do the
stars also by sundry ways declare the hour of the night unto us, and teach
us the same lessons.

Neither do the lights of heaven declare unto us the hours of the day and
night only, in regard of their diurnall motions; but the planets by an other
oblique motion entering into the signs of the Zodiak successively, and
finishing that course some in a month, some in a year, and of the superior
planets the highest in thirty years, the next in twelve, and the next in two
years, do hereby very plainly distinguish both the months of the year and
the years of longer periods of time, for which we have no proper names. As the
Greeks of old had their Olympiads with other reckonings; and as the Prophets
described their stories not only from the reign of their Kings after one
reckoning, but from many different points and terms of time in respect of Gods
judgments or mercies, or men's defection or repentance. Exodus 12.41.1. Kin. 6.1.
Ier. 25.1. Ezekiel. 1.1. and 4.5. Amos. 1.1. Hag. 2.18.19. so the Lord in his
unsearchable wisdom has given unto us many heavenly dialles and instruments
of numbering our days; all of them witnesses how our time passes: and God
calls us by so many, that if one or two signs would not prevail with us,
yet more might, Exo. 4.9. one coming into our sight after another, and
teaching us to examine our selves and our estate both for shorter and longer
times, and to be prepared for the work of God, as the Angels, for an hour,
and a day, and a year. Rev. 9.15.

But that which is yet more wonderful, these celestial bodies do not only
declare and sign out the times unto us; but they alter and change the times
and make the seasons to differ one from another. As the cartwheeles on the
earth where they go, leave a track or furrow behind the^; so the wheels of
these planets and stars in their conversions make a deep impression upon the
earth, according to the diversity of their motions: and some of them bring the
spring, some the summer, some autumn, and some duly draw on winter as with
bands and cords. Job. 38.31.32. and 9.9. This their operation is manifested in
great variety, and in such manner that thereby they produce many new real
dialles upon the earth. And from hence in diverse flowers we have a plain
distinction of the hours in the day; while some still turn their face unto
the Sun, from the rising to the setting, as Heliotropium or Turnsol; some
declare the approach of the evening by shutting their flowers before, as the
Daysies, Marigold, Dandelion and others; some are so strangely affected that
they show it to be high noone by closing up themselves just at that time, as we
see daily in the flower that is called Goates-beard or the star of Jerusalem.
Others again distinguish the months of the year, some springing and
flourishing in one month and some in others successively in order, as we see
in the Primerose, Violet, Rose, Gilloflower and others which follow even unto
the winter months. Thus the pla^ts of the earth together with the planets of
heaven become monitors of the time passing away.

Neither is this to be observed in the plants only, but in the sensitive
creatures also, the fowls, fishes, and fourefooted beasts: the birds show us
the time of the day; some sing at a certain hour of the night before day;
Mar, 13.35. some little birds at the daybreak; Eccl. 12.4. some at noone, and
some nightbirds in the evening. They distinguish also the times of the year;
sometimes revived, sometimes drooping and decaying again in great variety.
They know the times of their coming and going, some in one month and some in
another, as the Stork, the Turtle, the Crane, and the Swallow. Iere. 8.7. and
the fishes likewise have their appointed seasons, as is daily observed by the
fishmongers. All these shall rise up in judgment against them that know not
the acceptable time, nor learn to redeem it, though the Lord call them so many
ways, and show them the time passing by so many devises.

CHAP. III. Monitors of Death in and about a man's own self.
His Breath. (a) Pulse. (b) Daily food, the necessity, and preparation of it,
in the earth; (c) by the death of the creatures. (d) Apparel, the original,
matter and necessity of it. (e) Labor in general, and sundry vocations in
particular. (f) Sleep, a lively image of death. (g) Sin, the cause of death,
feared of some, desired of others. (h) Extreme dangers threatening death. (i)
Age and the changes thereof manifested by the face, and stature. (k) Old age
described by the decay of strength, (l) of sense, (m) and of health.

HItherto we have heard the call of God sounded out unto us in and by other
creatures, by heaven and earth and the things therein that were made for man;
now we are to consider how God comes nearer unto man, and from the state of
man's own person, calling, and condition, calls him by the sight of himself
to remember his latter end. And first, the Lord having made man of the dust of
the earth, Genesis 2.7. and thereupon after his fall showed him his readiness to
return to dust, Genesis 3.19. Eccl. 12.7. does yet further call us to consider our
frailety by ordaining that this house of clay is to be held upright by a puff
of the air continually breathed in and out, and that this being stopped the
house must presently fall down. Hereby our life hangs as it were loose before
us, going in and out every moment: therefore is it called the breath of life,
Genesis 2.7. and 7.15.22. our life being carried in and out upon the breath, and
depending upon it. And as God tied life to our body by such a slender and weak
thread, so he calls us often to mark it and think on it and to remember our
mortal estate by the breath of our nostrils so easily departing. Esa. 2.22.
Psa. 146.4. and 104.29.

(a) An other frail band of life, like unto our breathing, is the pulse, which
arises from the heart and the arteries or beating veins, and this by a double
motion of contraction and dilatation, whereby they are drawn in and out, both
for the expelling of noxious fumes through the insensible pores of the flesh,
and for the drawing in of cool air to refresh the heart and to feed the
vital spirits. From the variety of the pulse are taken many signs of health
and sickness, life and death: it is the character of our strength or weakness,
and (...) are we provoked to watchfulnes.

And as in the necessity of food, so in the quality thereof is our corruptible
estate made evident unto us. Our food before it come into the body is diversely
prepared; and the principal fruits for nourishment of man and comfort of his
life, as corn, and wine, and figs, and the like, are ripened and made to
grow more abundantly by the dung and excrements of beasts cast upon them: Luke.
13.8. from the juice of the dung is the fatnes and sweetness of the fruits
increased. And from hence is the strength of our corruptible life: hence we may
say to corruption, Thou art my father. As once the meat of the miserable Jews
in their distress was prepared with dung; Ezekiel. 4.12, 13.15. so is our food
daily in the growth of it, as it were seasoned, baked, and concocted with dung.
The earth accursed for our sin is brought to this base condition that the
fattest increase thereof is from excrements, and it yields fruit unto the
mouth of man from the tail of the beasts. After it is in the body a great part
of it by the alteration there, is turned into corruption, and receyved into
diverse loathsome sinkes and channels within the body till it be again expelled.
By this perishing food, Ioh. 6.27. God does admonish us of our perishing
estate; and shows unto us, that meats are for the belly and the belly for
meats, that he wlll destroy both it and them. 1. Cor. 6.13. Thus the staff of
our strength and the very pillars of our life do carry in them the remembrance
of destruction and corruption for our warning.

(c) But this is not all: Our food is not only of corruption, but we feed even
of death it self, and that by the allowance of God, Genesis 9.3. in taking away
the life of other creatures to maintain our own; especially in these last
times when he has said unto us of them all, Rise, kill and eat, Act. 10.13.
Whatsoever is sold in the sha^bles, that eat, asking no question for conscience
sake. 1 Cor. 10.25. herein we see death daily presented to us and set before us
on our tables. This is seriously to be thought upon as a wonderful work of
God: by the death of other creatures our life is preserved: our living bodies
are sustaind by their dead carcasses: in their blood swimmes our life; and from
their pangs of death spring the pleasures of our life, our feasts and ordinary
food. As the savage Ca^niballes eat the flesh of men; so we eat the flesh of
beasts that (...) that which any creature may serve to be a witness of for
convincing of sinners, that does the Lord declare to be their cry and a
denunciation of woe from them. Habac. 2.11. Job. 31.38. Iam. 5.2.3. and in like
manner that misery which the creature enthralled by sin does endure for man,
that does the Apostle expressly call their groaning and traveling together in
pain with us, etc. Romans 8.22. These groans and cries are then especially to
sound in our ears, while we are eating of them: as the Hare newly taken cries
in the mouth of the greyhound; so should we be affected as if the same cry were
made when we eat thereof, and have their flesh betwixt our teeth. The Gentleman
that sits at his table above in his dining chamber, and was not present in the
kitchen or butchery, to see the execution, the convulsions of death, the
sprinting and gasping of the slaughtered creatures, is yet by remembrance to
represent the same and to make it present again in his eating: for eating and
burying of them in our bellies is more then killing of them, and a further
means to strike the heart with thought of death, procured for the eater. Our
stupidity and blockishnes must needs be very great, if we consider not this
fearful and wonderful providence of God: and we shall be worse then the
beasts themselves, if we hearken not unto the call which God by them gives us,
to awaken us out of our security, and to make us remember our frail condition.

(d) An other help to preserve our frail bodies is our raiment and apparel
which God has given to cover and defend the body without, as food within. And
from hence we have a double or treble memorial of Death; considering that our
apparel was then first given unto us, when by our sin we first came into the
state of death, and not before, Genesis 2.25. with c. 3.7. And then when God first
gave our garments unto us, he took them out of Deaths wardrobe, they being
made with the death of the creatures from whence they were taken. God made
coats of skins for Adam and his wife and his posterity: Genesis 3.21. Heb.
11.37. The skins of the poor creatures were plucked over their ears and torn
from their backs to cover the shame of our skins, and to hide the nakedness
of our hydes. And what was said of Ioab in another case, (...) are swifter then
a post, Job. 9.25. that we ride post as on dromedaries that run by the way in
all have to their journeyes end. And the travel that men have by sea in the
most swift ships is mentioned of God to represent the swiftnes of our time that
carries us night and day, sleeping or waking to the haven of death. Job 9.26.
And according to this wisdom of God and his example should men make right use
of other trades and their labors therein, to set their latter end continually
before their eyes thereby.

(f) As labor and toil in the day, so sleep and rest from labor in the night
season, is also a necessary help to preserve this mortal life. This sleep is a
lively image of death. For in sleep men ly down as dead men, without sense and
motion, ceassing from their works and taking no knowledge of the things that
are done by others: and therefore the holy Ghost often describes death by the
name of sleep, or lying down to sleep. Genes. 47.30. Deuter. 31.16. 1. King.
2.10. Job. 3.13. and chapter 14.12. Psalm. 76.5. Matt. 27.52. John. 11.11. Acts.
7.60. 1. Corinthians. 11.30. 1. Thessal. 4.13. By this mavelous work of God in
breaking off the course of life, and making Sleep like an Half-death to invade
us continually, to come upon us like an unresistable Giant every day and to
throw us down; and then by his manner of speech in calling death a Sleep, he
calls us by consideration of our sleep to consider our death; and by the
sight of our bed to remember our grave, to look upon it as a Tomb or
Sepulcher, and every night before we go into it to labor for reconciliation
with God, and at the end of the day to seek new sense of his love in Christ as
we would do at the end of our life, that so we may lie down and sleep safely.
Had any man some special disease, as of the falling sickness, Apoplexy,
Palsy, Lethargy, or the like terrible passion, whereby at a certain time of
the day he should duly fall down like a dead man, and ly snorting at the
gates of death for an hour or two, until the malignant humor were discussed
and the force of the fit were over; would we not think that man warned of God,
thereby to remember his end (...) 7.8.9. but with the faithful there is
another remembrance of death by occasion of sins, as comfortable to them, as
the former is terrible to the wicked. For in sight of sins that greeve them
they call to mind what shall quite free them from those sins; and what is that
but death? Thereupon they set death before their eyes, and are taught of God so
to do, longing for their redemption, and desiring to remoove out of the body,
which is by death. Romans 8.23. 2. Cor. 5.8. And how many ways then is death
propounded unto us? which way can we look on the right hand or on the left,
before us or behind us, but every way the memorialles of death are before us?
Transgressions past, sins present, fears of the wicked, desires of the godly,
all lead to the thought of death, and to the remembrance of our latter end.

(h) Again the afflictions, sicknesses and dangers, wherein death is threatened
unto men, are likewise means of death, and by them also we are called of God
to remember our latter end. It pleases God for the warning of secure men, to
bring men to the gates of death before they enter: Psalm. 19.13. and though he
bring them back again, yet is this done of God for a memorial of death. God
brings men into such extremity that they make full account to die, they receive
the sentence of death in themselves, and despair of life, 2. Cor. 1.8.9. and
are free among the dead in their own and others judgment; Psalm. 88.4.5. and
this many times, they are in deaths often: 2. Corint. 11.23. and such things
God works oftentimes, that men might renounce the world, Job. 33.22-29. and
set their house in order, and their heart in order to die, that being delivered
they might then remember what thoughts and desires, what prayers and purposes
they had in their souls, and recall them often, for their preparation against
the time of their final departure out of this world. Esa. 38.1.15. etc. As
Iehosaphat having cried out in the danger of death, 2. Chron. 18.31. was bound
to remember that very cry and disposition of his heart afterward: so forasmuch
as there is almost no man which has not seen the face of Death and his dart
shaken against him in (...) being pale, withered and wrinckled, and the shadow
of death sitting upon their eyelids; and some in diverse degrees betwixt both:
and especially in the sight of friends long absent and changed in that time, we
are called to think how the fashion of this world passes away.

As the face so the stature of man growing up as a plant, according to the
diverse measures and degrees of his growth appointed of God, Psalm. 144. 12.
Luke 1.80. and 2.52. is another testimony of his changeable estate, even from
the child of a span long unto those that have their full growth. Lam. 2.20.
Though some be of low stature, as Zaccheus Luke. 19.3. and some again higher
then the common sort by the head, as was Saul; 1. Sam. 10.23.24. yet even in
these compared with themselves the proportion of their growth is an evidence of
their age to such as know them. Though men being come to their full stature
stand at a stay, and loose not their stature by such degrees as they attained
unto it in their youth; yet many times we see in experience that crooked old
age bowing down their heads more and more to the earthward, they do hereby
after a sort loose their stature by degrees, and grow into the ground again.
And thus the wheel of man's age visibly and sensibly turning about according to
the variation of his stature is another admonition to remember the latter end
approaching.

(k) Beside the face and stature, the Lord has set sundry other marks upon
the bodies of young and old, for memorials of their time passing away at the
changes of their age. The younger people have the time of love described of God
by diverse marks and tokens thereof: Ezech. 16.7.8. but especially old age has
the tokens of neere-approching death imprinted upon them, whereby they are
warned of God to prepare for it. The decay of strength, the decay of sense, the
decay of health, are all forerunners of death, and summon them to their end.
Through decay of strength the arms and hands, the keepers of the house,
begin to tremble. Ecclesi. 12.3. and the legs that are as pillars thereof
do bow themselves; and the help of a staff as a third leg to rest on, is
sought of the aged person, Zach. 8.4. and with that wooden leg at every step
he goes, he strikes upon the earth and raps at the gate of the grave, until it
be opened unto him. By this weakness death comes and puts his manicles upon
their hands, and his shackels upon their legs, for remembrance of their end.
This weakness is further signified by the ceassing of the grinders in the mill,
Eccles. 12.3. both the upper and the nether millstone, which are called the life
of man; Deuteronomy. 24.6. These teeth failing, life begins to fail. From this
weakness the doors of the lips are shut without, the sound of the grinding is
low, and the voice hoarse: and so whether the old persons work with their
hands, or walk with their feet, or eat with their teeth, or speak with their
lips, the memorial of death is in each of these set before them. And as in the
outward parts of the body, so the like weakness and decay of strength is to be
observed in the inward parts, and as a cause of that which is in the outward.
The silver coards of the sinews, which carry the faculty of sense and motion
from the head, in old age are loosed: Eccles. 12.6. that cable of the marrow in
the backbone, which was wont so firmly to hold and stay the frail bark of
our body tossed with so many motions, and by those many conjugations of nerves
like so many pair of oars on each side did row the gally up and down, begins
now to dissolve. The head which is the golden bowl, wherein is emboxed the
brain that ministers that faculty of sense and motion, through age is broken
and becomes crazie. The many pitchers of the veins, which carry the nourishing
blood from the well of the liver unto each part of the body, become like unto
broken vessels. And the wheel of the arteries, which by the reciprocal
motions and pulses do convey the vital spirits from the cisterne of the heart
into the furthest coasts of the little world, for the quickening of the whole
flesh, even to the toes and fingers ends, through languishing age begins to
turn and return slowly and weakly. And all these faint operations are so
many memorials of death, and do plainly portend the approach of our latter
end, and every one of them admonishes us to watch. Again from this weakness
and decay of strength both in the outward and inward parts, arises an other
memorial of death, to be seen in that which is esteemed no (...) taste what
he eats, or what he drinks: 2. Sam. 19.35. old Isaac by his touch cannot
feel the difference betwixt the hands of his son and the skin of a beast:
Genesis 27.16.21.22.23. old David is covered with clothes, and feels no heat: 1.
Kings. 1.1. concupiscence departs; Eccle. 11.5. Abishag the fair virgin lies
in his bosom and he knows her not. 1. Kin. 1.4. Yea the inward senses begin
to fail also; memory decays; the understanding is diminished, and old men
some times in their decrepite age come to be little children again, not able
to discern betwixt good and evil. 2. Sam. 19.35. How inexcusable are they
that live securely, and think not of death, whereof they have so many warnings
before hand?

(m) With decay of strength and sense comes the decay of health. Old age is
many times a continual sickness, and when the days of man are multiplied, they
are but labor and sorrow, even the strength of them. Psa. 90.10. Then is the
time when the evil days approach, and the years of which man says, I have no
pleasure in them. Eccle. 12.1. Then is the light of Sun, Moon, and stars
obscured: and then the clouds return after the rain; one infirmity after
another. v. 2. Through decay of natural heat arises indigestion and crudity
of stomach, and thereupon follow rheumes, and catarrhes; and from thence comes
ach in the bones, and manifold pains and diseases, whereby the Lord as with an
iron pen writes our lesson, and engraveth this sentence deep in our flesh and
bones, Remember your latter end approaching. In all the pains of old age the
finger of God nippeth and pincheth men, to make them think of his call and
prepare for death.

upon. God shows that then he exspects a special act of humiliation, when at
our end he visites us with such pains; that we are to mourn for sins
committed in the world before we depart out of it, when he sends such sorrow
unto us at that time especially. Then are we called to stir up the grace of
God within us, and to raise up our spirits with all love and reverence to meet
the Lord, that we may receyve his blessing, and enter into his gates with joy
and into his courts with thanksgiving.

(a) Again this pain prevayling at the approach of death, causes men to ly
down and to fall flat along upon their beds, Job. 33.19. Act. 5.15. and to let
all the affairs of the world alone, with the works of their calling. Through
infirmity of the body God forces them to stoop, and calls them to remember
their frailety and their end; as if he should command them to couch down
before him, and require them to prostrate their souls at his footstool in
seeking his favor and mercy in Chirst, even as their bodies are prostrate by
his hand. This very position of the body represents unto us how the grass
withers and the flower falls, and admonishes us in our souls to worship and
fall down before the Lord our maker; and by faith to enforce our bodies also
leaning on our staff, to worship upon the beds head, Heb. 11.21. Genesis 47.31.
and 48.2. that he may straightway lift us up for ever. As Jacob bowed himself
to the ground seven times, at the approach of his brother Esaw: Genesis 33.3. so
the Lord himself by sickness thrusts us down seven times; we are often up and
down; we lift up our selves, but cannot hold up our heads: God teaches us
there by to come submissively creeping into his presence, and humbling
ourselves under the mighty hand of God that he may exalt us. 1. Pet. 5.6.

(b) An other warning to think of the end at hand, is that distaste of meat and
want of appetite in sick persons; when their life abhors bread, and their
soul dainty meat. Job. 33.20. When the staff of bread fails and the stay of
natural life is withdrawn, then God calls the sick persons to remember their
end, to double their care for eternal life, to seek the hidden manna, unknown
and unregarded of the world, Rev. 2.17. to feed upon the bread of God which
comes down (...) for their end. This iron sleep is a black cloud of death, a
nightshade and a particular darkness, of which in its measure is verifyed that
more general saying of our Savior, The night comes, when no man can work:
Ioh. 9.4. and therefore while there is light and liberty of mind in the time
of health, the end is to be remembered and provided for, before the hours of
oppression do come upon the mind.

(e) Sometimes in sickness, though sleep oppress not, there is a kind of
raving distraction, caused by frenzy, or melancholy, or other
distemperatures, which does overwhelme the mind, as Nebuchadnezzars once was
by the stroke of God, Dan. 4. so that it is unfit to think of death, or to
seek any comfort against the danger thereof. And from hence therefore it does
likewise appear how unwise they are that defer the time of their repentance
unto the time of death, when it is uncertain whether they shall be masters of
their own wits, and natural understanding, not to speak of supernatural
grace which is further above the reach of man, and yet necessary to salvation.

(f) Sometimes the very vehemence and extremity of pain does trouble and
disturb the mind, and disables it that it cannot orderly and quietly dispose
it self unto godly and comfortable meditations; but being overcome with
impatie^ce frets and murmures and is tossed up and down without fruit.
Therefore are these extremities of anguish compared to a cup of intoxicating
wine, making men as it were drunken with grief, Esa. 51.17. 21.22. Lam 4.21.
and even mad with woe and sorrow, that they know not what to do. Deuteronomy. 28.34.
Ier. 25.16. Eccles. 7.7. And what folly is it then for men to be unprepared
through forgetfulness of their latter end, and to remain drunken with security
all their life till they be drowned in a gulf of misery? Perplexity and
extreme anguish may justly come as a snare upon them that abuse their present
peace and ease, promising themselves liberty and power to dispatch all that is
needful for their salvation in one moment of their last distress.

(g) And commonly when death approaches, our adversary the devil, that prince
of darkness, that has gone about as a roaring lion watching to devour us at
all opportunities before, does the^ especially rage, knowing that his time is
short, Rev. 12. 12. and withal seeks to take advantage by the present
infirmity of the sick persons, insinuating himself into each of the former
troubles, adding fearful dreams to their slumbers, strong fancies to their
distraction, aggravating their pains with diverse terrors. Experience shows
what great temptations many have undergone upon their deathbed. And therefore
the consideration of this last great combat should warn every one betimes to
arm themselves, to gather strength every day against the last day, to furnish
themselves with grace, to seek truth and righteousness, faith and patience,
store of comfortable promises out of the word of God laid up in their hearts
and kept in readiness, to nourish themselves in hope, to watch and pray
uncessantly; that having concluded this last combat and obtained the victory,
they may then be translated from a state militant to a state triumphant for
ever.

(h)

THese forewarnings are such as serve chiefly for the instruction of those that
feel them, and on whose persons they are inflicted: but beside these
forewarnings the dead leave unto the living many afterwarnings of their
mortality, which admonish the succeeding generation that they must follow their
praedecessours. And here first of all observe, how it is ordered by divine
providence, that in death the soul and body be separated one from the other.
In this separation the Soul is carried away invisibly; no man knows how nor
whither. No humane sense ca^ discern the spirit of man ascending. Ecc. 3.21.
The Lord in his unsearchable counsel would have the opening of the gates of
the second world to be kept secret and close from us. If godly parents should
see the souls of their children carried away to destruction in the claws of
an hellish dragon, and crying unto them with a lamentable and desperate voice,
what horror and woe would this be unto them, to make their days more
uncomfortable so long as they should live on earth? God in great mercy
conceales it from them. If wicked and ungodly men should see their children or
companions souls haled away by evil spirits after they were separated from
their bodies, and withal should hear the^ shrike and cry and curse their
company, what a stroke of terror might this be unto them? but God in justice
hides these things from the^ and will not satisfy the curiosity of profane men,
that despise his Gospel and the means of life revealed therein. This secret
manner of translating the separated souls in carrying some close prisoners to
Hell, and transporting others in covered wagons and invisible chariots unto
Glory, serves to warn and admonish us by the very form thereof, so much the
more to remember the other evident monuments of our frailety. When secret
things are restrained to the Lord, the things revealed are immediately
thereupon the more enforced upon us to observe the same. Deuteronomy. 29.29. When the
Spirit records how some persons, men or angels, have vanished out of the sight
of those they had spoken withal, we are to observe how they were occasioned
thereby to think the more of that which they had seen and heard from such,
and not to prye into that which was withdrawn from them. Luke, 24.31.32. Act.
8.39. Judge. 6.21.22. etc. Yea the Lord appointed that they should not be
suffered to live, which went about to talk with the dead soul or to raise the
spirits. Levit. 20.27. 1. Sam. 28.8 9. etc. But by all this we are so much the
more led to observe the common visible memorials of mortality showed unto us in
them that die before us.

(i) It is further to be observed, that when the spirit is carried away
presently to God that gave it, yet the body remains behind and returns to
dust from whence it came. Eccles. 12.7. If God by death had taken away both the
soul and the body together at the same time; if it had pleased God to take
away all men as Henoch and Elias were; Heb. 11.5. Genesis 5.24. 2. Kin. 2.11.17.
or to bury all men so as Moses was, Deuteronomy. 34.6. namely so that their bodies
should be seen no more among men; yet even then, there were cause enough to
remember that wonderful great and final translation: but now seeing every man
departing this life leaves a piece of himself among his friends on earth, yea
the one half of his person, and that half which is the visible part, even the
body that was best known among men; the Lord by this fragment of man that is
left, gives us occasion to think what is done with the rest, and to keep in
memory the death past, to prepare us for death to come. As Elias ascending to
heaven let his mantle fall, for a remembrance (...) so much care for our bodies
as we do for the souls; according to this example of God, who shows more
love and respect to the souls, taking them first into his heavenly Kingdom
and glory, when as he suffers the body so long a time after, to lodge in
dishonor, and to remain in the pit of corruption. 1. Cor. 15.43.

(l) The sequestration of the body from the place where the soul is, and the
corruption of it being separate, are memorialles wrought immediately by Gods
own hand: beside these there are other after-warnings of death effected by the
providence of God mediately by the services of men, that seek the honor of
the dead and comfort of the living. For honor of the dead, holy men of old
have showed great care to provide sepulchers, tombs, and monuments for them.
Such were the cave of Machpelah purchased by Abraham; Genesis 40.30.31. and 23.
the pillar on Rachels grave that Iaakob set up, Genesis 35.20. that continued so
many generations to Samuels time; 1. Sam. 10.2. the title on the sepulcher of
the man of God, that prophesied of Josias; 2. Kin. 23.17.18. the sepulcher of
David, that continued twice fourteen generations, from David to the Apostles
time, Act. 2.29. having been preserved in the time of the Babylonian captivity,
even then when both city and temple were destroyed, with many the like. These
monuments are in Scripture called Memorialles, Mnemeia, Matthew. 23.29. John.
11.38. and 19.41. and 20 1. by which (whatsoever others intended) the godly are
taught to remember their latter end. The garnished tombs and the sumptuous
sepulchers are but so many scaffolds, stages and theaters of humane frailety,
and so many pulpits out of which our mortality is preached: and all the common
graves of the people are the coffers of death, the sight whereof should teach
us to lay up our treasure in heaven. And thus, though the touch of a grave
defiled the body with a ceremonial pollution in the time of the Law; Numb.
19.16. yet the sight of a grave may serve to cleanse the soul by a spiritual
consideration of our end, even as the sight of the Leviathan raised up, did
bring men to purify themselves, fearing lest the whale might be their grave.
Job. 41.25. with Job, 3.8.

(m) The grave being prepared for the dead corpse, then men proceed with their
(...) may obtain.

(n) Having been at the grave and performed the last duty to the person of the
dead, we then return and come from the dead to the living, to the friends of
the dead, to mourn with them, to comfort them, and (as the kindred and special
friends of old used) to eat and drink with them and give them the cup of
consolation: Romans 12.15. Ier. 16.7.8. Genesis 37.35. 1. Chro. 7.22. Ioh. 11.19.
and in this action we have an other call to remember our end. While we minister
consolation to others, we are to take an exhortation to our selves. The house
of mourning is the school of mortification; and therefore better to enter into
it then into the house of feasting: for there is the end of all men, which the
living will lay unto his heart, and so be made better in his heart by the
consideration of the dead and by the sadness of the countenances waiting on that
consideration. Eccles. 7.2.3.4.

(o) When the comforters of them that mourn are departed from the mourning
house and gone every one to his own; yet still the friends of the dead, even
while they live on earth, so often as they miss their friends departed, and
want the help and benefit which they were wont to enjoy from them, so often are
they called to remember death, that makes such separatio^s. La. 4.18-20. The
widows, orphans, desolate parents, oppressed subjects, and scattered sheep,
that are deprived of their loving husbands, parents, children, rulers,
pastors, or any friend and neighbor that misseth the company of an other, are
by this want called to remember both that death past which took away their
friends, and that death to come which shall again restore them and bring them
together. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.14. 2. Sam. 12.23. And in this remembrance they are
withal warned to make themselves ready for death, and not to be glewed unto
this world from whence their comforts are taken away. When the shepherd takes
up the young lamb, the ewe follows him of her self, and needs no more calling
or driving: when the great shepherd of the sheep takes away the souls of
young and old, and of dearest friends from one another, it is to make them
run after the Lord and to long after his presence, in whom they shall find
all and more then all that ever they lost in this world. So often as we think
of a mother, a father, or other entire (...) serve to make a deeper impressio^
into the soul, and to keep the memory of it self in the mind more then a
thousand other memorials beside. A strange thing it were, if a man that were to
be judged the next day of life and death, and to receive sentence eitheir of a
most cruel and shameful death or of a rich and honorable estate during his
life; if this man could not keep in mind the judgment approaching until the
next morrow, without tying stringes about his fingers for remembrance, or
writing some caveats upon the posts of the prison, or procuring some watchmen
to come every hour whispering in his ear to tell him of the danger imminent,
of life or death: And as strange or more is it, that these great and maine
matters of Eternal Salvation or Eternal Condemnation should not by their own
greatness press the heart of man with the weight thereof unto a continual
remembrance of them, without other warnings; when as we know not whether we
shall have one days respite before they come.

(a) The last end of the godly is eternal life. This life consists especially
in fellowship with God and the Saints. By fellowship with God men come to see
God; Matt. 5.8. even to see him as he is; 1. Ioh. 3.2. to see his face which
living man was never able to see on earth; Exo. 33.20. to see him, before whom
the glorious Seraphims do cover their faces with their wings; Esa. 6.2. to see
the holy Trinity, the blessed Father, Son, and H. Ghost, clothed with the
sacred robes of their several beauty and majesty, shining distinctly as the
pure Jasper, the carnation Sardine, and the green Emerald. Rev. 4.3. Then the
Son will show himself unto his elect, Ioh. 14.21. and they shall see his
glory; Ioh. 17.24. and the Father shall be seen in him; Ioh. 14.9.10. and with
them both the seven Spirits which are before the throne even that one and the
same Spirit enlightening with his sevenfold graces and gifts that bright
sevenfold lamp of his Church. Rev. 1.4. with. 4.5. 1. Cor. 12.11. With this
vision shall the soul be satisfied when they awake Psalm. 17.15. The pleasure
of this surmounts the joy of all pleasant things seen by any eye. If all the
pleasure that all the most ardent lovers receyved at any or at all times from
all the most beauteous and amiable countenances of their dearest spouses and
fairest loves in (...) and the like promises. Therefore is that end ever to be
remembered and longed after. The^ especially shall it appear how the elect
remain as lambs in the bosom of the Lord their shepherd. Esa. 40.11. The^
will it be further revealed how God dwells in the^ and they in him; 1. Ioh.
4.15.16. and therefore need not fear being kept far off, as me^ on earth that
were kept from the bodily presence of Christ being in the house, because of the
thro^g at the door. Mar. 2.2.4. The incomprehensible Lord filling heaven and
earth, Ier. 23.24. is himself a house where they shall dwell, and they a mansio^
wherein he will make his abode: Ioh. 14.23. By this heavenly conjunction and
cohabitation with God shall the elect be one, even as the Father and the Son
are one; Christ in them and the Father in him, that they may be perfect in one.
Ioh. 17.22.23. This thrice blessed and most glorious union is that green bed
of Christ and his Spouse, Sol. song. 1.16. an eternal paradise of comfort and
garden of pure delights. Oh what madness is it to forsake that green bed for
any bed of pleasure in the world! By this communion the Lord embraces his
elect with both arms of his love, and puts them in his bosom; Sol. song.
2.6. and 8.3. and in this divine embracement there is felt more happiness and
heavenly joy, then all the love and fruits of love, or whatsoever went under
the name of the te^drest and stro^gest affection in this world, could ever
yield unto the heart of man. For if the first fruits of spiritual joy now at
this present, in the mids of tribulation, be an hundred fold more then all
the pleasure of houses and lands, fathers and mothers, wife and children, the
most desirable things of this world; Mark. 10.29.30. then how can it be but
more then an hundred thousand fold pleasure to enjoy the beauty and face of God
in heaven, to inherit the fulness of joy in his presence, and pleasures for
evermore at his right hand? If the infinite blessedness of the glorious persons
in the holy Trinity does appear in their mutual union, so that they were an
allsufficient and eternal delight unto themselves, in enjoying one an other
continually before the world was, before men or angels were made; Prove. 8.30.
then may we well think, how our vessels shall be filled and overflow with
heavenly comfort, 1. Ioh. 1.4. when we come to drink of that divine fountain,
and enter into our Masters (...) able to bring to pass. And therefore as in
the transfiguration of Christ, his face did shine as the Sun; Matt. 17.2.
even so shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father. Matt. 13.43. As the raiment of Christ through the brightness of his
body, did shine as the transparent light; Matt. 17.2. and was exceeding white
as snow; Mark. 9.3. and withal white and glistering: Luke 9.29. so the whole
person of the elect made whiter then snow in their transfiguration, shall shine
and glister and sparkle with a radiant beauty and heavenly brightness: yea then
shall the Moon be abashed and the Sun ashamed before the Lord and his
ancients, when the Lord shall reign in Zion; Esa. 24.23. when he shall be
glorified in the Saints, and made mavelous in all them that believe. 2. These.
1.10. If the face of Moses, while he was yet clothed with corruption, when he
had seen but the back parts of the Lord, and that but for a moment in one
vision, did yet shine so gloriously, that men fled away amazed from him and
durst not behold the brightness of his countenance; Exo. 34.30. with c. 33.23.
what then shall be the glory of the faithful, when being clothed with
immortality, they shall see God face to face, and that in a perpetual vision
for evermore?

(d) From this transfiguration of the Saints made so glorious by the sight of
God and fellowship with him, arises the glory of their fellowship one with
another, which is also an unspeakable felicity of the second life; to enjoy all
the beauty and all the love of all the glorified souls and bodies in heaven.
As Jonathan seeing the grace of God in David, and his worthiness, was knit unto
him and loved him as his own soul; 1. Sam. 18.1. so here the Saints beholding
the glory of God revealed in each other, shall be linked together in the
nearest bonds of entire affection. They that first give themselves to God, do
then give themselves unto one an other by the will of God. 2. Cor. 8.5. They
are all one in Christ Jesus. Gal. 3.28. There is one body and one spirit: Ephesians.
4.4. all are gathered together in one, under one head, whether things in heaven
or in earth, men and Angels, whether they be thrones, or principalities, or
powers. Ephesians. 1.10.22. All things are the Saints; whether it be Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, (...)
of her and embraced in her arms for ever! The loving society of godly men even
in their present weakness, is magnifyed as a good and pleasant thing, as a
precious ointment, as the dew of Hermon and Zion: Psalm. 133.1.2.3. how good and
pleasant then is the heavenly conversation and cohabitation of the Saints? even
as the dew of Paradise, where God has appointed the blessing for ever to make
those beauteous blossoms therein to flourish eternally. As ointment and
perfume rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty
counsel; Prove. 27.9. and what then is the sweetness and joy of that communion,
where every heart is a several closet replenished with all store and variety of
divine ointments and perfumes for the mutual delight of the Saints? The
consolation of Christ is there most perfect, the comfort of love and fellowship
of the spirit are complete and full; and so the joy of every one is fulfilled
in being like minded, having the same love, being of one accord and of one
judgment: Phil. 2. 1.2. there is no crying nor complaining; Rev. 21.4. no
curse, no angry word; no countenance of dislike or disdain; no evil, no
occasion of evil, no appearance of evil, no suspicion of evil; no want of
good in themselves, no envy of good in others; but every man's joy doubled for
another salvation, and glorified in another glory. The principal delight is
that God is found in them all; each being the temple of God, and his love the
fire burning upon the altar of every heart: in each of them there is a vision
of God and an image of his glory: he is seen in each and shines in them, and
so at every turn they meet with God who is all in all and in every one of
them. 1. Cor. 15.28. And they never power out their hearts to one another, but
withal they power out praise unto God with streams of pleasure to themselves.
And how infinitely manifold are their pleasures, where there are so many
spirits of just and perfect men, Heb. 12.22.23. so many millions of Angels,
thousand thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand standing before the
Lord? Dan. 7.10. Rev. 5.11. If Peter thought it so good to be there where but
two of the Saints, Moses and Elias appeared in glory with Christ; Luke 9.30-33.
how good is it to be there where all appear together in glory with Christ,
where the glory of every one shall appear more clearly and be better
discerned, where every one shall be the precious jewel and treasure of
another? O who are they which remembering this end, will not be content to make
an end of their sinful courses to enjoy this communion? How unworthy a thing
is it that the thoughts of vanity should thrust out of our minds these
pleasant remembrances of our latter end and the comforts therein? If I forget
thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget it self: if I do not remember
thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem
above my chief joy. Psalm. 137.5.6.

(e) It is further to be considered that in all the maine parts and acts of
Christian life we are taught every day continually to remember this our latter
end. All duties both of doing good through faith, hope and love, or of
suffering evil for doing good through patience, are so many memorials thereof.
The end of faith is the salvation of our souls, which it believes 1. Pet.
1.9. the object of hope is life eternal, which it embraces: Tit. 1.2 and 3.7.
and 2.13. the comfort of love is translation from death unto life, whereof it
assures us: 1. Ioh. 3.14.18.19. the reward of patience is rest in the kingdom
of heaven and an eternal weight of glory, which it looks for. Matthew.
5.10-12. 2. Cor. 4.17. And thus the comfort of this blessed end is ever carried
in the eye of faith, in the arms of hope, in the bosom of love, and borne as
it were upon the shoulders of patience. And as all that is done by me^ being
well considered, should bring this latter end to their remembrance; so all the
works of special grace that are wrought by God for his children, before this
world, in this world, or after this world, if we look upon them with a right
eye, they do every one carry in them a remembrance of this glorious end and
provoke us to think thereof. We cannot be assured of our election, but we see
it as a book of life wherein we read our happy end, Phil. 4.3. and behold the
kingdom prepared for us before the foundation of the world. Mat. 25.34. We
cannot rightly think of our calling, unles we behold that mavelous light and
glory where unto we are called. 1. Pet. 2.9. and 5.10. 2. Pet. 1.3. We do not
conceive sufficiently the comfort of our justificatio^ by faith, u^les (...)
eye on this end, and for the joy that was set before him endured the cross,
and finished his course and the work committed unto him. Heb. 12.2. Oh let us
not break the band that drew on Christ himself. Oh forgive us Lord that we
have been so profane and carnal to forget this end so often: from henceforth
keep it in our minds and fix it in our memories that it never slip away.

CHAP. VI. The latter end of the faithful compared with the primitive estate
of the old world.
Of the communion which man had with God, being created after his likeness.
(a) The image of God in the soul, though perfectly beautiful and excellent,
(b) yet inferior to the image of Christ in the faithful, the perfection and
perpetuity thereof in the world to come. (c) The body at first though naked,
yet without shame and pain, erect and upright, in all the senses fitted for
communion with God; (d) but hereafter endued with more noble and heavenly
qualities, spiritual, transparent, light, agile, ever vigilant in feeing and
communicating with God. (e) The dominion over the creatures given at first,
illustrated by the remnants thereof yet apparent. (f) not to be compared with
that which shall be, in regard of heaven and earth and all that is therein.

Of their mutual fellowship with one another. (g) Marriage the first band of
society and ground of all other, and to that end instituted and honored of God
for their mutual comfort: (h) yet nothing like the glorious bands of communion
with Saints and Angels in heaven. (i) What blessed communion Adam and Evah
might have had with their posterity living to this day, if neither had sinned:
(k) In a right line descendent viewing the long race of their progeny, with
great joy to themselves, (l) and no less happiness to their children, who
though living at greatest distance, might then with ease, and abundance of
comfort have visited them and communicated with them: (m) In the collateral
line extended on each side to brethren and sisters, all rejoicing in one
another, in their loving, easy and pleasant visitations: (n) Yet all this comes
short of the heavenly communion in the world to come, the love of Christ, the
manifold rivolets of sweet fellowship, the free and glorious motions in the
kingdom of heaven.

THat we may the better comprehend that happy communion, wherewith the latter
end of the faithful shall be glorified, let us somewhile leave our speech of
the world to come, as also of this present world, and let us look back into
the world that is gone and past; let us behold the glory that is lost, that by
the greatness thereof first considered in it self and then compared with this
to come, the glory hereof may more evidently appear. That we may the better
observe the difference, we are to set ourselves as it were in a middle gate
betwixt two worlds, the old and the new, where we may have an open and free
prospect into them both; and from thence we are to cast a look first into the
old world, then into the new; with one eye to behold the first paradise in
Eden, and with another the second paradise in the third heavens; with one look
to view the first Adam, his gifts and his children, and with an other look to
behold the second Adam, Christ Jesus, his gifts and his children, and so to
compare the glory of their estates together. In such a middle gate or tower of
prospect into these two worlds, the Prophets and Apostles did often set
themselves when they compared them together, as appears in those texts, Old
things are past away, behold all things are become new. 2. Cor. 5.17. Behold I
create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor
come into my mind. Esa. 65.17. The first man Adam was made a living soul,
the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. 1. Cor. 15.45. so v. 49. etc.

(a) The glory of the old world in the primitive estate thereof, consisted also
in a blessed fellowship with God and fellowship with men. This blessed
fellowship of God with man appeared first in that he communicated his image and
similitude with man, the beauty of which image shined especially in that
wisdom holiness and righteousness, which God imprinted in the soul. Genesis
1.26.27. with Ephesians. 4.24. Coll. 3.10. Eccl. 7.29. By that wisdom he knew God
and saw his glory, by that holiness he did cleave unto him and embrace him with
love, reverence and confidence, and so in both communicated with God. At the
bestowing of this image, each Person in the holy Trinity did work together, and
each gave precious and excellent gifts unto man, for the beautifying of his
soul with variety of graces, such as might make him a lovely creature, in whom
the Lord himself might take delight: Rev. 4.10.11. with Ioh. 1.3. Coll. 1.16.
Job, 33.4. and therefore is the Trinity described consulting about this work,
Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; all are noted with the title
of creatours or makers, Eccl. 12.1. boreecha. Job. 35.10. ghnosai. As upon the
loss of this image, when Adam begat a son in his own likeness, Genesis 5.3.
all hateful and ugly deformity of sin succeeded and every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually: Genesis 6.5. so had he retained
the image of God, every imagination of the thoughts of his heart should have
been only good and gracious continually, without any inclination to evil or
the least looking awry to any thing that might have been displeasant in the
sight of God. And this image of God had been such a beauty as the eye of man
never saw in this corrupt world; such a perfect beauty, such a symmetry and
harmony of grace as that Gods own judicious eye should have found no fault or
dislike in it.

(b) And yet even this perfect beauty given at the first creation, was far
inferior and not to be compared with the glory of the world to come: even that
which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of that which
excels. 2. Cor. 3.10. The first man is of the earth earthly, though made
perfect, yet in a lower degree of perfection: the second man is the Lord from
heaven. As is the earthly, such are they that be earthly; and as is the
heavenly, such are they that be heavenly. As we have borne the image of the
earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15.47.48.49.
and shall be made conform to the image of the Son of God: Romans 8.29. and
that pleasant image of Christ is the highest degree of perfection, the sweetest
mirror of beauty in heaven or earth, stayning the glory of the former image.
The innocence of Adam was a white robe and a glorious ornament unto him; but
the righteousness of God in Christ is a white robe more pure and precious, of a
finer thread, of a brighter white, of a more divine fashion to adorn the
soul; and by that righteousness put on, the Lord himself becomes a diadem of
beauty unto his people, Esa. 28.5. and 62.3. Kings use to give gifts according
to the state of kings, great, and royal; Esth. 2.18. and so did the heavenly
King at the first creation: but the (...) have been no distemperature of the
air as is felt now adays, no afflicting storms or tempests, no excess of
cold or heat, but that the naked body unclothed without any pain or trouble
might well have endured the same. Now both the shame and pain of nakedness is
very great; Esa. 20.4. 2. Sam. 10.4.5. Reu. 3.18. and 16.15. 1. Cor. 4.11. 2.
Cor. 11.27. and such that men strive to cover the whole body so far as
necessity will permit, the hands and face being therefore excepted; the face
left uncovered, lest the eyes should be blindfold and the breath stopped; and the
hands lest the manifold works of man in his diverse callings should be hindered;
and yet even they also so muffled sometimes with maskes and muffes and mittens,
that with great cumber and trouble they are often in the day covered and
uncovered and covered again to avoid the injury of the weather. A great
freedom it was to have been without care what to put on; when as they needed
no such exhortations as are since given to us thereabout. Matthew. 6.25.31.
Again the special form of man's body erect and upright with his face upward,
whereas other creatures are made with their heads hanging downward and with
their faces prone to the earth, does show that man is called to fellowship with
the Lord dwelling on high. As the Lord when he still exhorts us to lift up our
eyes and look up toward God, does in that phrase call us to communion with
him, to trust in him, to love him and to aspire unto him: Psalm. 123.2. Esa.
17.7. and 45.22. so when he made Adam in such a form with his head and eyes
lift up, even in that manner of work the Lord called him to look to his
Creator, and to embrace him the author of all his good. Besides this what are
all the senses of the body but so many instruments of our communion with God,
or so many doors of the soul by which both the Lord enters in to show
himself, and the soul goes out to behold him? By them his praise is heard,
his glory is seen, his goodness and gifts are tasted, his sweetness smelled, yea
and groaped or handled of us. Acts. 17.27. By them both faith and love and
fear of God is learned. As by the senses of the body God communicated his
goodness with Adam, so by the members of his body he was to communicate his
heart with God, to serve the Lord, to render thanks unto him, and to glorify
him; (...) at first, could not without a change have inherited the kingdom of
God, 1. Cor. 15.50.51. His eyes had never seen nor could have seen that face
of God which is in the light unapproachable. 1. Tim. 6.16. with Exo. 33.20. If
the eyes of holy men have failed in waiting for the comforts and deliverances
promised in this life; Psa. 119.82.123. how much more should our eyes wait and
our flesh long for that end, where even in our flesh we shall see God, so as
Adam in paradise could not do? Job. 19.26.27. Oh that the remembrance of this
end were printed deeply in our hearts! that it might ever be retained, as the
words that are written or plowed and the furrows engraven with an iron pen
filled with lead in stead of ink, and in the stony rock in stead of paper,
all firm to endure; so as Job wished that his hope of this same glorious end
might be recorded. Job. 19.23.24. etc.

(e) Look we back again into the old world, and behold how God further
communicated his image with the whole person of man, in that dominion and
lordship which he gave unto man over the earth and all the creatures in it.
Genesis 1.28. Thereby Adam was crowned with honor and dignity; set over the works
of Gods hand, all things being put under his feet, sheep and oxen, beasts of
the field, fowls of the air, and fish of the sea. Psalm. 8.5.6.7.8. God
brought them all before Adam, as it were to do homage unto him as unto their
king, and in sign of subjection to receive their names from him. Genesis 2.19.20.
Even after the fall and since the rebellion of the creatures thereupon, the
service which they yet perform unto man is very great. The ox knows his
owner and the ass his masters crib. Esa. 1.3. The husbandman has taught the
strong horse to be obedient unto him; to draw his plow and his cart, if he say
go, he goes; if he say come, he comes; at one word the horse goes right
forward, at another he stands still and stirrs not; at one word he turns to
the right hand, at another he turns to the left hand. The silly sheep are
taught to know the voice of their own shepherd, to follow him and to
distinguish betwixt his voice and the voice of a stranger which they will not
follow. John. 10.3.4.5. Experience shows how the doves are taught to carry
letters for men. The birds great and small are tamed and taught to come at the
call of man; eve^ the ravenous hawks at the voice and call of the faulconer.
The dogs are taught many arts of hunting in diverse kinds. It is strange to
hear and see how the waterfoules in Freeseland, Waterland and elsewhere are
taught to entise other wild fowls and bring them into the snare, and then to
give a watchword unto their master to sease upon them. If thus far they be
subdued unto man, eve^ after the fall, what is that service which they should
have performed before the fall, when both man should have had more
understanding to teach and govern them and they a more inclinable and
tractable disposition to have obeyed? As Iehosaphat witnessed his fellowship
with the kings of Israel, when he professed, My people are as thy people, and
my horses as thy horses; 1. Kings 22.4. and 2. Kings 3.7. so has the Lord
hereby declared his communion with man by making his creatures our servants,
his horses our horses, etc.

It cannot be conceived or known of us how great pleasure and delight man
should have had in this dignity communicated unto him of God. The earth it
self and all the increase thereof was also subjected unto man: Genesis 1.28.
paradise and all the pleasant fruits thereof; Genesis 2.8.16. whereas otherwise
every one might have been as dangerous and pernicious to be eaten and tasted of
as was the forbidden fruit: the green grass diversifyed with sweet flowers of
sundry colors and shapes was spread as a pleasant carpet for man to tread
upon; and by a special providence the ground was green, a color wholesomest
for the eyesight of man: the firmament above beautifyed with so many spangles
of shining stars was spread out as a canopie over the head of man where ever
he goes, Esa. 40.22. more glorious then those carried over the heads of Popes
or Emperors. Even those heavenly bodies are communicated and distributed unto
man for his benefit and comfort, Deu. 4.19.

(f) And yet notwithstanding all this, if we cast our eye into the world to
come the glory thereof will be found far to surmount all this. That which is
now above our heads shall then be found to be under our feet. The visible
heavens that now are, are not thought good enough nor pleasant enough for the
elect: but they shall pass away with a noise; 2. Pet. 3.10. (...) into
singing; Esa. 44.23. the sea shall roar and the floods clap their hands, the
field shall be joyful and all that is therein. Psalm. 96.11.12. and 98.7.8. And
yet all this is not enough; if every twigge of all the trees in the world were
a flute or sapwhistle; if every stalk of corn in the field or reed by the
waters side were all pipes, blown by the wind; yet all would be too little to
resound this incomprehensible glory. And in the mean time until this glory be
revealed, until the sons of God be manifested, they wait and hold up their
heads in exspectation, they groan and travel in pain, longing for this
blessed end: Romans 8.19.22. and so do they that have the first fruits of the
Spirit, groan and sigh within themselves, waiting for the adoption, the
redemption of their bodies. verse. 23. This is the desired end which God calls
us so often to remember; how can men think of it without desiring it? how can
they desire it aright without praying for it? how can men think they pray
aright for it, unless they prepare themselves thereunto by denying the world?
What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness,
whiles we look for this end? with what care and diligence should we labor to
be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless? 2. Pet. 3.11.14.

(g)

BEsides the fellowship with God in the old world, if we again look back into
it, we may behold an other happiness of men in their mutual fellowship one with
another. The first conjugation of humane society was that of man and wife by
marriage; this was the original and ground of all other societies: from hence
sprung the names and estates of father and mother, with their sons and
daughters: out of this society in family sprung all the societies in Church and
commonwealth. When God could have made men of new clods of the earth so as
Adam was made at first, Genesis 2.7. and so have multiplied them abundantly,
according to the abundance of spirit that was in him; Mal. 2.15. yet he thought
it good to create not only one woman for one man, which he might have done in
many couples of them, but also to make only one couple of them, and from them
to draw all the lines of consanguinity and affinity, which should be so many
bands of love to unite and bind all mankind (...) new. Cast we our eye that
way again, and behold how in the resurrection they neither marry nor give in
marriage but are as the angels of God in heaven. Matt. 22.30. All the comforts
of marriage shall be as it were swallowed up and overwhelmed of that heavenly
glory, and vanish away in the sight of it. There shall be more glorious bands
of communion with Saints and Angels, then is the matrimonial covenant; sweeter
knots of loving fellowship, and faster then the knot of marriage; the bond of
the Spirit uniting hearts and minds in one more then all the cords of
consanguinity or affinity. All the faithful souls shall be presented unto
Christ as pure virgins: 2. Cor, 11.2. they are and shall be ever his loves,
his doves, his undefiled: Cant. 5.2. and he shall be their bridegroom, Matt.
25.1. fayrer then the children of men; Psalm. 45.2. white and ruddy, the
chiefest of ten thousand, wholly delectable and lovely: Cant. 5.10. etc. far
above the first Adam. The heavenly paradise shall be an eternal
wedding-chamber, and all the Angels of God shall rejoice for them to whom such
honor is vouchsafed. Luke 15.10. What remains to be done of us until we
come to that immortal and undefiled inheritance, but that we aspire unto it
daily, that we have this end before us as the loadstarre of our comfort and
direction, that we be carried forward amain toward this price of our heavenly
calling? one would think this should be a spur sharp enough, to make us
run the race of godliness set before us, while we have such glory propounded
and the call of our Bridegroom inciting us.

(i) From Adam and Evah come we to their children, and look into the old world
again. Had not sin come into the world by the transgression of Adam; had he
and his posterity continued until this time in their uprightnes, in the image
of God wherein they were created; what a glorious and blessed communion should
man have then enjoyed even upon the earth? If sin had been kept out of the
world, then had not death entered: Romans 5.12. with Genesis 2.17. and 3.17.19. then
might Adam and Evah have been alive to this day, and seen their childrens
children, not unto the third and fourth, but to the thirtieth and fourtieth or
hundredth generation, and all of them fair and without blemish either of soul
or body, without any (...) had thirty renowned sons that rode on thirty ass
colts and ruled over thirty cities; Judge. 10 3.4. of Ibzan having twice as many
children, thirty sons and thirty daughters, living to see them all married;
Judge. 12.8.9. of Abdon that had forty sons and thirty nephews, all
honorable, riding on seventy ass colts; verse. 14. ibid. then what must the
honor of Adam and Evah have been in all their innumerable sons and
daughters, being all Lords and rulers of the earth and all the creatures
therein subdued unto them; to have seen all these come about them by course,
and that with bowed knees to honor them; with stretched out arms to embrace
them; with loving and cheerful countenances to rejoice them; with obedient
hearts to serve them; such children as had never offended them nor any besides
such as never had give^ any occasion of grief to them or of complaint to
others? According to the proportion of the cause both in respect of their
number and of their excellent graces, their joy must have been a thousand times
greater then the joy of other parents, that yet have counted themselves happy
in their children. Their days without decay should have been lengthened, and
their years drawn out with comfort; their eyes never dimmed with age like
Isaac that could not know one son from another: Genesis 27.1. etc. but their
youth should have been renewed more then the Eagles, by eating the tree of life
in the midst of the garden, and so with a quick sense and fresh memory ever
have enjoyed a deligtfull conversation with their posterity.

(l) To come from the joy of parents to mark the childrens happiness; consider
we again the love ascendent, by which the posterity of Adam should have had
comfortable communion with their elders from the next parents upward for an
hundred generations unto Adam: for according to the phrase of Scripture a man
that lives an hundred year is said to see his children unto the third and
fourth generation: and so according to this speech we may well reckon an
hundred generations and more from Adam to our time.

Now as childrens children are the crown of old men; so the glory of children
are their fathers: Prove. 17.6. and every one of the last generation having had
an hundred fathers, one older then another to Adam, and all living together and
all of them holy patriarchs, the oracles of God unto their children, full of
wise counsel, holy instructions and divine consolations, and as full of love
and tender affection, which could not but have yielded pleasant words, like the
honey comb, sweetness to the soul and health to the bones: Prove. 16.24. what
joy then in this state of innocence should have been to the children in such a
communion; where every one should have had an hundred crowns of glory and more;
every one of their fathers being better unto them then any crown of the finest
gold of Ophir or Vphaz? That we may the better conceive of this, let us suppose
that which might have been according to the first foundation of the world, and
let us set before our eyes Adam dwelling in paradise in Eden as in the center
of the habitable world, and all his children placed round about him; in this
order that the next succeeding generations should inhabit in the next circle or
climate, a little more remote from him, and the next ensuing generations should
be planted yet a little further off, and so the next following still further
and further unto the hundredth generation, reaching to the ends of the earth.
And to speak now even of those that were furthest off, of the last
generations, when they at any time should have desired to visit their first
parent Adam and to have communicated with him; oh what comfort, what pleasant
recreation and refreshing of their soul might that have been unto them!
Suppose it had been an hundred days journey and more, yet no labor before the
fall was painful; no travel should have been wearisome; no danger should
have molested them in the way: in passing through an hundred countries a man
should have met with no barbarian, while there was no confusion of languages in
the world; every one they met should have blessed them in the name of the Lord,
and have been ready to go with them a mile or more, and brought them on their
way if they would. Matt. 5.41. Under every tongue there should have been honey
and milk of gracious speech and of pleasant discourse, and their lips should
have dropped as an honey comb. Cant. 4.11. At the end of every days journey a
man might have come to lodge at the mansion place of his own natural father
or grandfather, though every day still with him that should be by one
generation older then the former. Every harbor in each country should have
been a delightful paradise, and their dear parents, their noble progenitors
should there have entertained them with all the pleasantest fruits of their
garden, rejoicing over the^, putting them into their bosom, and pouring out
their hearts unto them; and above all material food, their sweet conferences,
according to the work of Gods Spirit in his children; Psalm. 44.1. and 78.3.4.
their stories of old matters which they had seen, works of divine providence,
the years of Gods right hand, and all of mercy and benefits, while no sin
had been in the world; their narrations of divine visions, and their talk with
God, according to that course which God had begun with Adam before the fall;
these conferences should have been a spiritual banquet and their best cheer,
more pleasant then the juice of the pomegranate and above any spiced wine to
rejoice the heart. And thus as they proceeded in their journey they might still
at every harbor have drunk older, sweeter and mellower wine of consolation,
and still have been entertained by their more ancient fathers, which could tell
them of things done before that patriark was borne with whom they had lodged
the night before. And when they had thus in order passed on along by an hundred
patriarks, their own fathers, and in every station from day to day had been
filled with more and more comfort; then at last coming to their first parent,
old Adam, the patriark of patriarks, to his garden in Eden, and finding him
there in his integrity without any decay of Gods image in him strong in body
and mind, flourishing as a green olive tree, and increased abundantly in
wisdom and in all the gifts of holiness and righteousness; oh what joy should
it have been to have come before him, and seen him eye to eye, to have been
heartily welcomed by him, and with all joy to be owned by him as his children,
to have had him laid his hands upon them and blessed them; and in like manner
to have saluted their most dear mother Evah, and to have been embraced and
kissed by her! But especially it would then have been a principal comfort to
have receyved the Sacrament with him; to have gone into the midst of the garden
with him, whiles (...) air: as God brought these to Adam to see how he would
name them; Ge. 2.19.20. so might Adam show them to his children, and according
to the wisdom given him at the first, co^ferre again of their natures and
the reason of their names with those his children created in the same image of
God with him and taught of God, that he might rejoice in them also as they with
him. Though Solomon spoke of trees, from the cedar in Lebanon to the hyssope on
the wall; also of beasts and fouls, creeping things and fishes, and was wiser
the^ all the philosophers in the degenerate and corrupt world: 1. Kin. 4.29-34.
yet was his wisdom but ignorance in comparison of that primitive estate and
the wisdom given to Adam at the first. After this and a multitude of other
pleasures they might have returned laden with blessings, and filled with
comfort as much as their heart could hold. And if at any time Adam and Evah
would in like manner have gone abroad on progress to have visited their
children, what comfort should this have been unto their children to have
entertained that most royal and honorable person above all others, that right
Catholic King or universal Monarch and father of the whole world, with Evah
their Queenemother, and therefore to have been reverenced, loved and obeyed by
all? How would they have receyved him as an angel of God to the unspeakable joy
both of him and them mutually?

(m) And as the glory of this communion might thus be observed in the persons
allied in a right line, both descende^t and ascendent; so also in the
collateral line extended on each side both far and near to brethren and
sisters, and an hundred other degrees of kindred further off: among all which
(if man had continued in his estate wherein the Lord placed him) there should
then have been a most loving and pleasant conversation, more then can be
imagined. It had been as easy for these to have traveled a thousand miles to
embrace their friends, as it is now for us to go one small dayes-journey.
While there was no evil of sin, there should have been no evil of pain or
trouble in any of their labors. And besides in the state of innocence, great
help and comfort should have been afforded unto man by the service of other
creatures, as has been showed before. Even in this corrupt and degenerate
estate of man and beast, all kind (...) 2. Cor. 6.18. behold my spouse, my
wife, my bride. Ioh. 3.29. Rev. 19.7. and 21.2. All the special bands of love
and union, whether in the root of marriage, or in the branches of kindred,
whether in the degrees ascending, descending, or any way extending themselves,
either in the right line or in the side line, they are all found in Christ, all
meet together and are combined in him. He alone, the new Adam is instead of all
the fathers and mothers, brethren or sisters, sons or daughters; the comfort
of all and more fruits of love then all the kindred of the old world could have
afforded unto us, is to be enjoyed in the kingdom of Christ. And look how
Christ esteems of his elect, so shall they be esteemed and loved of all others
there where his word requiring it must needs be performed. Ioh. 13.34. and
15.12.13. And therefore look how many Saints and Angels there be in heaven, so
many sweet fountains of loving communion there be for every soul to drink
at, far passing all the love of friends ever tasted in the lower world. From
every one shall flow rivers of water of life, Ioh. 7.38. Christ Jesus being the
headspring of all; for then shall that and all the rest of his promises be
fullfilled in the highest degree. It is matter of more joy even now to sit at
the table of the Lord, to receive the Sacrament of the New Testament, then it
was to pluck apples from the tree of life in paradise; greater benefits are
sealed, even Christ is herein exhibited unto us, a gift more excellent then all
those that were confirmed unto Adam by the tree of life: but then especially
shall the difference appear, when the faithful shall partake in the marriage
supper of the Lamb in heaven; when they shall be brought before the Lord, the
ancient of days, the everlasting God, before whom Adam, though alive at this
day, should be as a child of yesterday, a thousand years being but as one day
in his sight; when they shall hear him speak and tell of his eternal love of
us before the world, in his decrees of election and predestination so often
poynted at in Scripture, and the like precious thoughts of his grace to us
ward, this shall be the fullnes of joy infinitely exceeding all the supposed
delights of the old world. As for the pleasant journeys and motions, we may not
think that the godly shall be there as in a prison. (...) together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2.6.

CHAP. VII. How God calls men to remember the latter end of Reprobates.
The fearfulnes and greevousnes of the second death set forth by (a) The
deserving cause, Sin, which is especially aggravated by the wisdom,
authority, goodness, and other attributes of God: (b) The inflicting cause, the
wrath of God, from which the whole misery and all the circumstances of the
second death have their denominations; (c) compared unto fire, yet different
from common fire, unquenchable, most piercing, largely extending it self, and
taking hold on the greatest in the world: (d) This fire and the fiercenes of it
made plain by the observation of sundry fires already kindled in the bowels of
the earth, in vegetative and sensitive creatures, in the body of man, in the
air and firmament, in the angels, (e) but chiefly in the course of Gods just
indignation against sinners, seriously to be considered of all that desire to
escape it. (f) The effects, doleful cries and lamentations of the tormented,
of the Devils themselves, yea even of our blessed Savior in his sufferings.
(g) Particular manifestations of Gods wrath against particular sins and
transgressions of every commandment, both of the first and second table.

THe end of all flesh has been represented unto us of God by a basket of
summer fruit, ripe for the harvest, ready to be gathered. The blessed end of
the godly has been showed in the basket of good figs, very good: there
remains yet the basket of rotten figs, very naught, to be marked of us; for
that sight is also propounded unto us of God and he calls us to remember the
end of the wicked thereby, whiles that basket was in vision also set before the
Temple of the Lord. Ier. 24.1. It is an hideous and fearful sight to open the
graves where the green carcases of dead men do lie, to behold the grieslines
and lothsomnes of death in them, and who does not fly from it? But much more
horror it is to look upon the dead souls in Hell, their torment and loathsome
estate being an hundred times more and worse to be endured then the sight of
any rotten carcasses in the grave: Yet are we called of God to remember (...)
same offenses of striking or cursing committed against others were not so,
though some children might happily have as much wisdom as their father and
mother, yet their authority alone being despised, brought such woe. Now the
authority of God the heavenly father over his creature being infinitely greater
then the authority of any earthly father over his children; the contempt
thereof does accordingly procure an infinite woe unto those that disobey God,
that reject his Law and make their own lust their law, and prefer the doing of
their own vile wills before the obedience of his holy and heavenly will.

So in like manner the infinite evil of sin appears distinctly in this,
that it is committed against the infinite goodness and mercy of God. There are
in creatures manifold degrees of love and kindness: and the love of one does an
hundred times exceed the love of some other, both in tenderness of affection and
in multitude of benefits. And in such case the treachery of such as deal
falsely and wickedly against their cheifest friends, becomes an hundredfold
greater evil then the sin of some others. Now the Lord is love it self; 1.
Ioh. 4.8.16. and herein is love, not that we love God, but that he loved us:
verse. 10. his grace and the gifts of his eternal and free grace do infinitely
exceed all other love; he gave himself to be our God and portion, his Son to
be our ransom. And therefore to sin against this high and immeasurable grace;
to conte^ne this love and to love that which is vanity of vanities more then
God, does make the sin of such to be out of measure sinful, and deserves an
infinite hatred and misery to ensue thereupon.

And thus the greevousnes of sin is to be considered and conceived in respect
of the other divine attributes; whereby we may see as it were, ten infinites in
one and behold many windows of contemplation opened before us, through which
we may have a huge and vast prospect of the endless and unsearchable woe of
sin, that is to be felt in the second death. Though there be many other
aggravations of sin, yet this so far exceeds the rest as if they all were
nothing in comparison of this: therefore does the Spirit often urge this
consideration upon men, saying to the sinners, Ye have lied, not unto men but
unto God: Act. 5.4. and he that despises, despises not man, but God, who
has also given us his holy Spirit, 1. These. (...) and it contains more then a
world of books can express.

(c) This fierce wrath of God is often in Scripture compared unto burning and
devouring fire; Deuteronomy. 32.22. Ier. 15.14. and 17.4. Ezekiel. 21.31. and 22.21. and
36.5. Zeph. 1.18. and accordingly is the torment in hell described unto us by
the name of hellfire. Matt. 5.22. and 18.9. The smarting pain caused by fire
is well known by the common use thereof among us: And yet above the nature of
common fire, which is made for the comfort of man, to cheer him and to make
him laugh, Esa. 44.16. this doleful fire of hell is propounded unto us of God
by many strange descriptions. It is a fire not like unto ours that may be
quenched, but an unquenchable fire; Esa. 66.24. Mark. 9.44 Rev. 14.11. an
everlasting fire, Matt. 18.8. and 25.41. which so burns the wicked as that it
does not consume them, but keeps them alive in death, that they may burn for
ever and ever. It is a fire that will not only burn stones, melt iron and
brass, but a subtle, piercing fire, that burns even the spirits and souls
of men; being a fire prepared for the devil and his angels, which are spirits,
Matt. 25.41. Rev. 20.10. and therefore far more terrible then our fire by
which tyrants burn the bodies of martyrs, but cannot burn their souls. Mat.
10.28. For the greatness of it, it is a bottomless pit; Rev. 9.1.2. deep and
large; Esa. 30.33. a lake or sea of fire, Rev. 20.14.15. for the names of lake
or sea are sometimes in Scripture indifferently put one for another: Matt.
8.24. with Luke 8.23. and this burning sea is withal called a lake of
brimstone, Rev. 19.20. and 20.10. which makes the fire to burn more cruelly,
to choke and strangle such as are plunged into this lake. And for the form of
it, it is sometimes compared to an oven, or furnace of fire, Mal. 4.1. Mat.
13.42.50. in which the fire being kept close and strait, may be made seven
times more hot and fierce then it was before. Dan. 3.19. To make this fire yet
more abominable, it is compared unto Tophet, Esa. 30.33. where children were
burnt in horrible and loathsome manner, being sacrificed unto devils: Ier. 7.31.
with Psa. 106.37. and so and more horrible would it be to see the souls
sacrificed in Hellfire. Were there now but a witch to be burned at a stake,
how many thousands would flock together to behold the sight? how many would
loose a days work and be content to miss their dinners, rather then to miss
the sight of it? But if it were to see a King or an Emperor burnt; to see a
Pope or a Cardinal, which having burnt many martyrs should at length have
their own flesh burnt with fire; how many far and near would run and ride
and spare no cost or labor to become spectatours of such a judgment? how long,
how often, how earnestly would men talk of it afterward? And yet this fire of
the second death is for such: by faith we see it; faith makes us spectatours
thereof, if we believe the Scriptures, which show us how Tophet is prepared for
kings; Esa. 30.33. how the beast and the false prophet, the Popes, are to be
cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone; Rev. 19.20. and 20.10. and with
them the multitude of their idolaters and other abominable persons Rev. 21.8.
And how are men bewitched that they forget this latter end of sinners; that
they more regard the light and momentany judgments of men, then the eternal
and severe judgments of the everlasting God? This lake of fire is so forgotten
and contemned of many which stand daily at the brink of the pit, ready to sink
down into it for their sins, as if that fire were already quenched: yea the
very common knowledge and confession thereof by all sorts, has quenched the
thought of it and extinguished the memory and mention of it with many, as if it
were so well known, that it needed no more to be spoken of. And for this cause
are many tumbled into it and overwhelmed in the depth of it before they be
aware of it.

(d) The power of Gods wrath in kindling this fire may further be perceived, if
we behold the great variety of strange fires which God in his works of creation
and providence has already kindled and set before us, to show what he is able
to do. In the bowels of the earth below, the Lord has as it were, sown the
seeds of fire in the diverse minerals thereof, as in the mines of coals, in the
veins of vitrioll, of saltpeter, of lime, and diverse other things whereby
from under the earth is turned up as it were fire: Job. 28.5. and to show a
most woeful burning it is said, The people shall be as the burnings of lime.
Esa. 33.12. Above upon the face of the earth the Lord has planted diverse
growing fires in sundry hot herbs; some burning and blistering the skin
outwardly by the very touch thereof, as the nettle with some other kind of
thistles and venomous thorns, whose innumerable pricks show the infinite
power of God to curse the wicked; some other herbs being taken inwardly, as
Hellebore, Coloquintida (or the wild gourd that brought death into the pot, 2.
Kin. 4.39.40.) Euphorbium and the like do cast the body into miserable pain
and distress, burning, exulcerating, gnawing, grating and tearing the intrals,
tossing and tormenting the body with vomits, purges, with swooning and
fainting, with violent convulsions and fearful symptoms. In the sensitive
creatures God has kindled many kinds of living and going fire, walking to and
fro in the earth, in the diverse poisons of sundry serpe^ts, some creeping under
our feet, some flying over our heads, as in the hornet, the snake, adder, aspe,
cockatrice, and those fiery flying serpents that sting and burn men to the
death. Number. 21.6. Esa. 14.29. To come nearer ourselves, in the body of man God
kindles many strange fires in the sundry diseases thereof, both by painful
inflammations of particular parts, both outward and inward, and especially by
that universal fire of the burning fevers flaming out of the heart into the
whole body: Deuteronomy. 28.22. and this in great variety, some inflaming the spirits
only; some the blood also; and some consuming the very substance of the solid
parts also: some burning with a simple excess of heat; others consisting in
rotten and corrupt humors do burn the body more cruelly: and of these again
some burning continually, night and day without intermission, as the fire in
glass houses and the furnaces where iron is melted; others by fitts coming at
appointed seasons and after certain periods of time, either every day, or each
second or third day, like fire raked under ashes and kindled again upon
occasion: some others again consisting of a malignant and poisonous fire, as
in the pestilentiall fevers that burn more cruelly and deadly then the rest,
these are like going or running fires through their contagion spreading abroad,
walking in darkness, destroying at noone, and flying as poisoned arrows by
their infection, and breaking out in boyles and carbuncles like so many fiery
furnaces or ovens coming up in the flesh. Psa. 91.3.6. Esa. 38 21. And by
these with their compounds the Lord kindles a burning lake within the body,
makes the veins which contain the inflamed blood and humors to be like so
many rivers of pitch and brimstone, and so causes an unquenchable thirst and
an intolerable pain that follows it. In the air and clouds above our heads
God kindles terrible fires by thu^der and lightnings, divides the flames and
shoots abroad his fiery darts to consume his enemies. Psa. 18.12.13.14. Above
the clouds in the firmament, God kindles another fire by the Sun and some
other stars, and smites the earth and her inhabitants with the beams
thereof, so that they are scorched with heat and faint in themselves. Psalm.
121.6. with Rev. 7.16. and 16.8.9. Ion. 4.8. To go higher into the third
heavens God has there also kindled many fires; he makes his Angels to be
flames of fire; Heb 1.7. to be horses and charets of fire; 2. Kin. 6.17. and
2.11. to be burning Seraphims, Esa. 6.2. expressed by the same name that is
before given to the fiery serpents. Numb. 21.6. he makes his Cherubims like
coals of fire, as the appearance of lamps and as the flashes of lightning;
and from them are scattered coals of fire over countries and cities for their
punishment. Ezekiel. 1.13.14. with cha. 10.2.7.

(e) But above all these, the Lord himself is a consuming fire; Deuteronomy. 4.24.
and 9.3. Heb. 12.29. and an everlasting burning: Esa. 33.14. when he rises up
to judge the world and to plead with secure sinners, how can they stand before
his angry face? His throne is a fiery flame, his wheels as burning fire; and a
fiery stream issues and comes forth from before him, and consumes round
about: Dan. 7.9.10. Psa. 97.3. his face is burning; Esa. 30.27. his eyes
flaming; Rev. 1.14. his nostrils smoking; Psa. 18.8. his tongue a devouring
fire; his breath an overflowing stream, and as a river of brimstone to kindle
Tophet: Esa. 30.27.28.33. from his loins upward and from his loins downward
all as the appearance of fire: Ezekiel. 1.27. and when he shall be revealed from
heaven, he is to come in flaming fire with his mighty angels round about him,
all of them like so many shining beams of his glory, pointed with indignation
and sparkling with wrath against the sinners that are frozen in their dreggs.
2. These. 1.7.8. Jude. 14. And yet further to show the greatness of this wrath,
we are to remember that each person in the H. Trinity burns with a distinct
flame of wrath against the wicked: The Lord from the Lord raines fire and
brimstone; Genesis 19.24. The Son comes in the glory of his Father; Matt. 16.27.
The holy Spirit is a spirit of judgment and a spirit of burning: Esa. 4 4. as
the Spirit moved upon the waters in the beginning of the world, Genesis 1.2. so
shall it moove upon the fire of Gods judgments in the end of the world for the
consuming of sinners. All other fires in the creature are but sparkles and
less then nothing in respect of this infinite wrath of God.

This is the latter end of wicked men, never to be forgotten. When the Lord
warned the Jews of their destruction and of their end that was coming, it is
wonderful to consider how earnestly he cries unto them, and how many
repetitions he uses, worthy to be numbered and counted exactly of every one,
whiles he calls upon them, An end, an end is come; the end is come: An evil,
an only evil, behold it is come: An end is come, the end is come, it
watches for thee, behold it is come. The morning is come unto thee; the time
is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the echo of the mountains etc.
Behold the day, behold it is come, the morning is gone forth, the rod has
blossomed, pride has budded etc. The time is come, the day draws near etc.
Ezekiel. 7.2.3.5.6.7.10.12. Thus does the Lord spread out his hands unto sinners,
to warn them of their end: and they are worthy to feel the smart of that
eternal fire, that neither by the terror of his wrath propounded, nor by the
careful love of God in admonishing thereof, will be drawn to look in this
burning glass and to think upon this last end. Were we wise, we should run
oftener to warm our souls with this fire by the meditation of it, then we
bring our bodies to any other fire; to heat ourselves with zeal of the Lord,
and to drive away that lukewarmnes of our souls that is so abominable in the
sight of God. Rev. 3.16. The Apostle teaches us to make this use of the
aforesaid considerations, for the change of our conversatio^ unto all holiness
and godly life. 2. Pet. 3.11. And from hence may we learn patience in
suffering as well as obedience in doing the will of God, as the Spirit teaches
us: if the Lord be at hand; if the end of all things be at hand, and such an
end, why should not our patient mind, our moderation and sobriety be made
known unto all upon all occasions? Phil. 4.5. 1. Pet. 4.7. Though injuries be
done unto us, great and daily and in extraordinary manner, both unchristian and
inhumane dealing, yet seeing the coming of the Lord draws nigh, the Judge is
at the door, at the threshold and entrance of our house, and there is but a
step betwixt us and him, but an inch of time betwixt our sufferings and his
judgment, therefore he requires of us that we be patient and establish our
hearts in him. Iam. 5.8.9. Have we other losses and troubles in the world,
whether we win or loose it skilles not much; whether we purchase and buy with
increase of gain or whether we sell for necessity, whether we be rich or poor
it is no great matter, seeing the earth and all the works thereof are in a
moment to be burnt up; 2. Pet. 3.10. and seeing the end hasteneth and the world
passes away, let not the buyer rejoice nor the seller mourn. Ezekiel. 7.12. All
the happiness of man stands in being delivered from this everlasting fire,
kindled by the fierce wrath of God against sin. We have enough and may well
be content while we have our soul saved as a prey from this great destruction.

(f) If yet we be dull of hearing and cannot see the dreadfulnes of this death
in the causes thereof, the sin of man deserving it and the wrath of God
inflicting it; if yet we desire a plainer evidence thereof let us then look
upon the effects thereof and consider how the smart of this second death shall
make the children of hell to cry and wail and take up eternal lamentations
without any measure or end. By the effects of sorrow Jeremy thus describes the
affliction of Jerusalem in her captivity, that of a princess being become a
desolate widow, she did weep sore in the night, that her tears were on her
cheeks; that they ra^ down as a river night and day, the apple of her eye
never ceassing; that her elders and her infa^ts, young men and virgins, did
mourn together; that the priests and prophets did sigh, their eyes being
dimmed and failing with tears, their bowels troubled, their liver powered (...)
thus roar and faint in themselves under this burden of sorrow, how can any men
or Giants that are but flesh undergo the same? When the Lord shall plead
against the proud and covetous, and cause his wrath to smoke against
hypocrites and dissemblers, against profane men, drunkards, adulterers and
malicious men; how can their heart endure, or their hands be strong? Ezekiel.
22.14. Though they were as stout as the devils, they shall be crushed and
broken together with them. Now many skorners make a mock of religion: now the
epicures make a sport of sin: now the obstinate persons despise admonition
and hate to be reformed; they set their faces as Adamants in their obstinacy:
But though their bones were brass, and their strength of stones, and their
heart as hard as the nether millstone; yet shall they be ground to pieces with
this wrath of God that grindes the very Devils to powder and makes them to
howl and yell before him.

Above all other, the most terrible effect of Gods wrath, was that which was
showed upon Christ Jesus, the Lord of men and angels, when as he being become
our surety and bearing our sins; did groan under the burden; when he cried out
with strong cries and tears; Heb. 5.7. when in the trouble of his soul, with
great astonishment and fear he said, What shall I say? Ioh. 12.27. as if he
had felt a sorrow not to be uttered; when in the sense of Gods anger due unto
us he not only cried day and night, but even with words of roaring; Psa.
22.1.2. and finally uttered the most sorrowful voice that ever sounded in the
world, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46. If all the
doleful complaints and lamentations of all miserable men were laid together
upon the balance, they would be found lighter then this complaint of Christ;
because the iniquities of us all were laid together upon him; Esa. 53.6. and he
bore the curse of them. Gal. 3.13. If we could see into the bowels of Hell, or
could lay our ear to any low vault to hear the howling of the spirits in that
prison; yet no woeful voice ought to moove us so much, as these cries of our
Savior in his agony. No weeping and gnashing of teeth by those reprobates can
so express the power and fiercenes of Gods wrath, as this weeping and
sorrowful tears of the (...) in the second commandment, the Lord threatens
such a change that they shall be most ashamed of that which they adored; and
shall cast their Idols to the Moles and to the Bats, Esa. 2.20. creatures that
love darkness, the one for place living under the earth, the other for time
coming abroad in the night. The Idolaters shall wish their idols were hidden
in utter darkness for ever. But as Moses once despited the Idolaters by burning
their Idol, grinding it to powder, strowing it on the waters and making them
drink thereof to their further shame: Exodus 32.20. so shall the Lord force the
Idolaters by remorsefull remembrance evermore to drink the powder of their
images and of their own inventions. The Lord through a secret antipathy of
nature does sometimes work such a strange terror in some men (as experience
shows) that at the sight of some creatures or dishes of meat set before them
on the table, though the creatures be good in themselves and lawful for use
and to other men comfortable; yet these men quake and tremble, and sit
astonished with ghastly countenances, full of perplexity and anguish, gaping and
sweating at the sight; their hair standing upright on their head, their
spirits appalled, not able to speak a word nor to stir out of their place,
but like men confounded remain bound in the chains of amazement, as terribly
affrighted as was Belshazzar when he saw the palm of a hand writing his
destruction upon the wall. Dan. 5.5.6. And hereby we may conceive the power of
Gods wrath for the torment of idolaters by representing unto their minds those
unlawful images which they worshipped, to their eternal affright and horror.
The Lord knows how to engrave all the sins of men with the point of a
diamond upon the table of their heart, for their vexation and woe; and so in
special to pourtray their images and idols upon the broad plate of their
consciences, and to hang them as in a map before their eyes upon the wall of
their memory, for an everlasting confusion and torment unto them. The name of
God that is fearful, Deuteronomy. 28.58. shall in the end be fearful to them that
have taken it in vain by swearing, blaspheming, or light usage of it.

Though in their desperate torment (...) before all by their evil words and
actions, the fruits of their envy. And if the sight of so small good either
outward or inward as is to be seen in this life, do yet stir up such a
painful envy; what then shall be the pain of that envy in the wicked, when
they shall behold the eternal glory and good things enjoyed by others in
heaven? Look how much the heavenly prosperity exceeds the earthly; so much
shall the pain of the hellish envy exceed all that ever has been on earth.
When the godly are exalted, their enemies shall see it; Rev. 11.12. the world
shall know how God loves them; Ioh. 17.23. the wicked shall see and greeve and
gnash with their teeth and pine away; Psalm. 112.10. they shall be mad for the
sight of their eyes; Deuteronomy. 28.34. yea their eyes shall consume in their holes
and their tongue in their mouth; Zac. 14.12. and the^ shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, when they see others in the kingdom of God and themselves
thrust out. Luke 13.28. There is a bitter end threatened unto them that follow
harlots; Prove. 5.3.4.5. their doleful song at last shall be, How have I hated
instruction, and my heart despised reproof? etc. verse. 12. etc. and the like
woeful ditty is for them that follow wine or strong drink, whereby they are
inflamed unto more sin: Esa. 5.11.22. their unlawful pleasure in the midst of
their ungodly company shall at last bite like a serpent and sting like a
cockatrice. Prove. 23.32. Then shall be woe to the mighty oppressors that
oppress a man and his heritage, whereby they spoil themselves of their
inheritance with God: they join house to house on earth, till they leave no
place for the poor on earth, nor any place for themselves in heaven. Mic.
2.1.2. Esa. 5.8. and the like woe is due to the unmercifull rich men, who as
they would not give a crumme; so they shall not obtain one drop of water from
the tip of any finger to refresh them being tormented in the flame. Luke
16.24.25. The false witness shall not then go unpunished; Prove. 19.5.9. the
railers and slanderers shall then be excluded out of the kingdom of God: 1.
Cor. 6.10. the lips of the flatterers and backbiters shall be cut off, Psa. 12.3.
and their own words shall be a snare for their soul: Prove. 18.7. they shall
then reap that which they have sown, they have

CHAP. VIII. Of the visible signs and memorials of Hell, whereby God calls
men to remember the end of the ungodly.
The vain curiosity of the^ that desire to be informed of Hell Torments
otherwise then by the word and works of God, which compared together afford us
sundry Memorials of Hell, (a) In each of the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water,
Earth: (b) In the country of Eden: (c) In the land of Canaan, both in the four
borders of it, (d) and within the land on both sides of the river Jordan; (e)
In the Jews themselves, in the state of their rejection: (f) In the country of
Italy: (g) In the Torrid or hot Zone of the world, the condition and actions
of the inhabitants: (h) In the frozen Zones, the extremity of cold and other
occurrences in those parts: (i) In the temperate Zones, in the public state of
Antichristian and Romish religion with the appurtenances thereof; (k) In
private houses, haunted with evil spirits, inhabited by witches; disordered
innes and tavernes: (l) In particular persons, possessed, excommunicate,
terrifyed in conscience: (m) In particular sins, in thoughts, words, and
actions.

IT may be some will say or think in themselves, we hear many fearful things
touching Hell Torments; if we might see the same and take a view thereof it
would do us more good. To such I answer, they know not what they desire. When
the bottomless pit was once at a certain time in especial manner opened very
wide, there arose such a smoke out of the pit as had almost choked the whole
world: the Sun and the air were darkened therewith; poisonous locusts came
out of that smoke and tormented men that they were weary of their lives and
sought death that fled from them. Rev. 9.1.2.3. etc. It were not safe for
curious men to look with their carnal eyes into that bottomless pit, nor to
wish that hell and destruction were naked and open unto them for their warning;
neither should it be for their edification so much as the due remembrance and
spiritual meditation thereof by help of the Scriptures. They that will not
believe Moses and the Prophets would not be persuaded though one rose from the
dead. Luke 16.30.31. If Abraham or Noah, the ancient preachers of righteousness
should come again into this world, clothed with angelical glory, and with a
heavenly voice should call men to repentance; or if Angels should come and
preach the kingdom of God: yet could we not (...) world, do every one of them
contain a vast gulf of destruction within them, insomuch that each of them
has seemed unto some to lay claim unto Hell, as having that prison within
their bounds. The Fire by which Hell is so often described, is of a consuming
and devouring nature: this operation of it is often compared to eating, and the
fuel put unto it is the meat thereof; Esa. 9.19. the more it has, the more
hungrily it eats, by burning more fiercely: it has an insatiable belly and
never says, It is enough. Prove. 30.15.16. And so it is like unto Hell, which
enlarges herself and opens her mouth wide and without measure to devour
the wicked. Esa. 5.14. Whether we conceive it as the highest and greatest
element, encompassing the air on every side, as in the proper place that is
commonly assigned unto it, or whether we look upon it in the daily effects
thereof on the earth, in those few sparkles and coals thereof scattered among
us here below for our use, it carries in it both ways a resemblance of Hell,
to make us remember the end of the wicked in the sight of it.

The Air is noted as the seat or station of wicked spirits, where they soar
over our heads as the ravenous fowls over the chickens, still ready to seize
upon us. Therefore is the Devil called the prince of the power of the air,
Ephesians. 2.2. and his angels are spiritual wickednesses in high places; Ephesians. 6.12.
and Satan is said to fall down like lightning from heaven when his works are
loosed. Luke 10.18. So often as we look out into the air, so often do we pass
by the gates of Hell, by the Castles and Towers of the enemy from whence he
shootes his fiery darts, from whence he watches his advantage to oppugn us
and to make a prey of our souls. 1. Pet. 5.8. Wheresoever the Devil and his
angels be there is an Hell; they being still at our right hand, Hell is in a
manner always about us. Zacch. 3.1. So long as me^ converse and walk in this
air, so long do they remain in that park or chase where the Devil with his
hellhounds is continually hunting of souls to bring them to a miserable end
for ever; which end therefore is daily to be thought on that they may prevent
the enemy and escape the snares of the hunter, by putting on the whole armor
of God and praying incessantly. Ephesians. 6.13. 1. Pet. 5.8.

The Watery Element and Sea is another gulf of destruction, wherein multitudes
have been and are daily drowned and swallowed up. The dragons of the deep and
the manifold uncouth monsters of the sea do well declare what hell is there:
and the great Leviathan according to that strange description of him, Job 41.
may well appear as Beelzebub, the prince of the devils in that hell. And if
Jonas being swallowed up of one of them did account himself in the belly of
hell, Ion. 2.2. then must there be many hells in one sea. Yea the very torments
of Hell which our Savior endured for us are represented by the deep whereinto
he was plunged, and by the waters that entered into his soul: Psa. 69.1.2.15.
and further the Abyss or bottomless pit, whereby Hell is named, Rev. 9.1. and
20.1. is the same word whereby the deep sea is commonly expressed. And thus is
Hell resembled and set before the eyes of men both in the name and nature of
this destroying element of the water.

The Earth also being the common grave of all mankind, while they are daily
resolved and turned unto dust, becomes another insatiable gulf to represent
Hell. As in Corahs time the earth opened her mouth and swallowed many at once;
Number. 16.31.32.33. so does it still every day; the difference is only in the
manner, that there it opened of it self, here it is opened by the grave-maker.
Yea and further the deep pits of mire and clay in the earth are likewise chosen
by the holy Ghost to express the descending of our Redeemer into Hell, and the
sorrows of the second death that he endured therein: Psa. 40.2. and 69.2.
insomuch that many do conte^d that the proper place of Hell is within the
earth; which though we neither affirm nor deny, but reprove their presumption
which without warrant will peremptorily maintain the same; yet in the pits of
this earth we have an hell resembled unto us even by the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures. And thus in every one of the elements there is a mouth of Hell
gaping upon sinners to make them remember and consider what shall be the latter
end of the wicked.

(b) After the material parts of the world we are now to consider of the
diverse places thereof in respect of their different situation and estate. And
here again the memorials of Hell and of the latter end of the ungodly are
either such as be more peculiar for some particular nations, among whom he has
set his signs and wonders, as in Egypt, in Israel, in diverse others; Ier.
32.20. or such as be more common to the world and to many nations therein.
Among other particular nations and countries and above them all as the head and
crown of the earth, let us in the first place look upon Eden and the paradise
therein, from whence man was banished for his sin. The Lord as he had at
first even in the state of innocence, planted a tree of forbidden fruit within
the garden, as a memorial of death, eve^ of the second death, and consequently
of an Hell provided for transgressors; Genesis 2.9.17. so after the fall, without
the garden in the border thereof he placed there on the East side a flaming
sword which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life. Genesis 3.24.
This flame of destruction was like another visible Hell in the eyes of Adam and
his posterity, by the daily sight whereof they were warned not to presume
against the commandment of God as they had done. This present fire was unto
them a monument of that eternal fire which should consume the transgressors.
As David was afraid when he saw the Angel of the Lord stand between the earth
and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem.
1. Chron. 21.16.30. so the children of Adam here seeing the fiery chariot of the
Cherubims, Ezekiel. 1.13.14. and the flaming sword brandished and shaken about the
garden, were taught to fear and remember the latter end threatened to the
presumptuous offenders, over all whose heads there hangs continually a sword
of vengeance ready to fall upon them, Job, 19.29. Ezekiel. 21.9.10.

(c) From the country of Eden, let us come to the land of Canaan, another Eden,
the pleasant land, Dan. 8.9. where God planted another paradise, and set the
second Adam to dress the same, for his Church is the garden of God. Cant.
4.12.16. And here in like manner God gave special warnings to Israel, and set
his marks in the holy land more then in others, both round about in the
borders thereof and within the land also. In the borders on the East side along
the coast of the tribe of Judah God placed as it were, a visible (...) on
sinners, whose latter end was set before their eyes for a warning to avoid the
sins that kindle such wrath. From the East border come we to the South, which
was the border of Edom. Josh. 15.1. Number. 34.3. and this land of Edom or Idumea
is propounded by the H. Ghost, as another Hell visible to the eye of faith,
being considered in the curse which God denounced against the same, that the
rivers thereof should be turned into pitch, not to be quenched night nor day,
the smoke ascending for ever; that it should be an habitation of dragons and
Satyrs, and scritch-owles, Zijm and Jijm, etc. Esa. 34.5.9.10.13.14. etc. In
that South coast was also the wilderness of Zin, and Maaleh-hacrabbim, or the
ascent of the Scorpions, and Kadesh-barnea, Ios. 15.1.3. Number. 34.3.4. by the
sight of which places they were called to the remembrance of Gods judgments
both by the fiery serpents and scorpions in the great and terrible wilderness,
Deuteronomy. 8.15. and by their turning back from Kadesh when they were ready to have
entered into the land. Numb. 14.25. Deuteronomy. 2.1. Their Western border was the
great Sea, the storehouse of Gods judgments, compared unto the great deep.
Psalm. 36.6. Their North coast was Lebanon and Hermon: Josh. 1.4. with 11.17.
and 12.7. and 13.5.6. and there were the dens of the lions, and the mountains
of the Leopards. Sol. song. 4.8. which creatures the Lord uses as instruments
of his wrath, Ier. 5.6. with Dan. 7.3.4.6. and by them the Lord describes his
own anger against sinners: Hos. 13.7. and so from every coast roared upon
them, and by a flaming sword on every side called them to remember his
judgme^ts.

(d) From the outward borders of the holy land teturne we to the inward parts;
and these on both sides of the river Jordan. On this side, above many other
places Jerusalem the city of the great king offers it self to our
consideration, which though it were a type of heaven, Gal. 4.26. Heb. 12.22.
yet round about it there were signs set of the fearful judgme^ts of God, and
of the last end of the wicked. And first of all by the entry of the Eastgate,
they had the vallie of Hinnom, and the high places of Tophet therein, as it
were a visible Hell, Ier. 19.2. with Josh. 15.8. They there burned their
children in the fire unto Baal and Moloch with great impiety against God and
cruelty to (...) horns, their hoofes and their hair: and well might that lake
be this same pit. As by the descent of an Angel into the poole of Bethesda,
those that first entered after the stirring of the waters, were made whole of
what disease soever they had: Ioh. 5.4. so no wonder if after the stirring of
these waters in Gadara by a legion of unclean spirits together, they were made
unwholesome and caused disease to those that drank thereof. So often as men
beheld or thought upon this devilish lake they had a spectacle of Hell before
them, and they took the name of God in vain if they did not learn hereby to
watch and fight against the wicked spirits, to seek the help of Christ that
conquers them and not to love their swine more then Christ, nor to become as
swine by wallowing in the mire of sin; 2. Pet. 2.22. left they also by the
Devils should be carried headlong into the lake of brimstone prepared for those
that hearke^ not unto the call of God.

(e) These were the marks and tokens given to the Jews; but the Jews
themselves are given for signs and warnings unto us: for when these and many
other memorials of the latter end were give^ unto the Jews and despised of
them, then at last they themselves by the righteous judgment of God were made
as signs and wonders unto the believing Gentiles called into their place, and
to this day they remain as memorials of Hell, under the power of darkness,
their hearts being hardened, their eyes darkened, and covered with the spirit
of slumber. Romans 11.7.8.10. Their state of rejection wherein they presently
are, is described in such phrase as the estate of those in Hell: they are now
in utter darkness, while they are without Christ; and if they knew the misery of
their estate, then should they weep and gnash their teeth. Matt. 8.12. In this
hell of utter darkness have they continued now these sixteen hundred years, and
are scattered abroad among all nations for a warning unto them. So often as we
meet these obdurate Jews in our streets, and consider how they are broken off
from their olive, the kingdom of God being taken from them and given to
others; Matt. 21.43. so often are we to be moved with compassion to the^ as if
they did weep and howl before us: and as we are to pray for the day of their
visitation; so are we to work (...) the whole earth and turning round about it
continually, even as the first flaming sword was about the garden of God in
Eden. This middle Zone though in comparison of Tophet it be an heaven, yet in
respect of other temperate Zones inhabited by us, it is in many things like
unto Hell. As Hell is described by the burning heat that is therein: Esa.
30.33. Matt. 25.41. so in this Torrid Zone men are grievously afflicted and
tormented with heat; men dwelling there under the Aequinoctiall line and the
climates on each side near the same, the Sun burns them by day and the
beams thereof beating directly upon their heads do strike them with a
vehement heat round about the world, even from the East unto the Western
India, and in Aethiopia betwixt them both, insomuch that some of them curse the
Sun every morning that it rises. As Hell is described by the blaknes of
darkness that is there reserved for reprobates; 2. Pet. 2.17. black being the
color of sorrow and fear, Psa. 38.6. in the orig. which make all faces to
gather blacknes: Joel. 2.6. so under the hot Zone there dwell the black
Moors, the Aethiopians or burnt-faces, as the word which the holy Ghost uses
for them does signify. Act. 8.27. Their bodies and visages are blacker then a
coal, and some have been frighted at the fight of them as if they had come out
of Hell. As in Hell men are under the vexation of the Devil that is called the
prince of darkness, Ephesians. 6.12. and has the power of death: Heb. 2.14. so it is
generally testified that the Indians both East and West, and the Guineans
between both in this hot Zone do both worship the Devil that often appears
personally unto them, and are often beaten and tormented by the immediate hand
of the Devil in those visible apparitions, with many other vexations to their
unspeakable misery: and therefore in this regard there is not so much a shadow
of Hell, as a very Hell it self and a kingdom of darkness. As the state of
those in Hell is described by a worm that torments them and never dies: Esa.
66.24. Mark. 9.44.46.48. so those that live in this Torrid Zone in Guinea have
often and ordinarily a worm of strange and incredible length that breeds in
their flesh, as those that travel thither have both seen and felt, and in
their flesh have brought home (...) apparitions are imagined to ascend up out
of the earth: 1. Sam. 28.13. even so a man that should see these all-black
naked impes come swarming up out of their holes from under ground, each of them
both at mouth and nostrils breathing out the smoke of that Indian herb which
is a part of their ordinary diet, it were no wonder if he thought the picture
of Hell to be before him. In fine as many for Ma^mon or riches do sell
themselves and loose their souls and go down to Hell for ever: 1. Kin.
21.20. even so many for the love of that treasure that is to be found in this
hot Zone, are content to adventure their lives in traveling thither, and in
this journey there be multitudes that from time to time do loose their mortal
and temporary lives; and so in this regard also there is some consimilitude
betwixt these two places. And now if we do well observe this strange work of
God, we shall therein perceive how unsearchable his judgments are and his
ways past finding out, in permitting this forlorn people that are so black in
their bodies and more black in their souls through their worship of the
Devil, to lie so long enthralled under the dominion of Satan and that for so
great a compass round about the whole earth under the Aequinoctiall circle.
Seeing the Lord has made this visible Hell like a broad black belt or girdle to
environ the very heart and middle of the world; how ought this to warn all the
inhabitants of the earth on every side to tremble at this judgment, to awake
out of the snares of the devil and to seek a redeemer by whom the works of
the devil may be loosed, and they delivered from the tyranny of these wicked
spirits in the everlasting Hell? If in this life there be such torments for
sinners then what is that woeful distress and anguish which in the world to
come waits for them? In this Torrid Zone though their miseries be great, yet
have they many comforts: for the body they have sweet springs of water to
refresh them, goodly rivers to bath in, great and pleasant trees for shade,
fruitful trees that yield both meat and drink, they have spices and
sugarcanes, the cordial joyce of limons to quench their thirst, and the
coolest fruits in the hottest countries; and for their souls their case is not
desperate, while there is a time of repentance afforded, yea (...) seas they
have huge mountains of ice which dashing together make a fearful noise like
the roaring of an hell to the astonishment of strangers that hear the same. As
the black Zone abounds with serpents; so these snow-white regions do abound
with horrible and fierce white bears that roar about the country for their
prey; and for a shield against the cold the inhabitants covering their skins
with the beare-skinnes and muffled with other furs, do appear as if they
were all Bears. The Sun every year hides it self from them for diverse
months together, and then have they no day but continual night; their land is
like that which Job speaks of, a land of darkness and of the shadow of death, a
land of darkness as darkness it self. Job, 10.21.2^. But that which darkens it
most of all and makes it to be a more lively image of Hell, is the great
rudenes and ignorance of God that is among them, and in special their
familiarity with the Devils and abundance of witches and wizards that by
general testimony are said to be among them. Oh that those which are frozen in
the dregs of their sin, Zeph. 1.12. could duly consider the unsearchable
judgments of God in this frozen Zone. Extremity of cold does sometimes rotte
off the flesh and outer parts of the body and extinguish the sparkle of
natural life as well as fire. As in Island the mount Hecla and Helga are at
the same time often covered with frost and snow on the outside, and yet burn
within casting out cynders and flames of fire many miles from the place: or as
in the same Ague God sometimes afflicts men both with a cold fit that
crusheth the bones and makes the teeth to gnash, that first makes the body to
quake and shiver, and then kindles a burning heat therein; that first makes the
lips and the fingers ends to be blew with cold and afterward red with an hot
inflammation: so God can as well torment sinners with an intolerable cold,
with a freezing Hell, as with a hot frying Hell. It is no more wonder to see
men live a painful life being frozen in the midst of an ice, then to see men
live ever in the midst of a flaming fire. If Hell be described by the gnashing
of teeth, Matt. 13.42.50. then this frozen climate where there is such
continual cause of the teeth hacking in the head for cold may well serve for
remembrance of the latter end of reprobates (...) Devils and the cup of Devils;
1. Cor. 10.21. and seeing every habitation of the Devil is a kind of Hell, it
follows that their Churches and Temples are mere Helles and houses of Devils.
As it is with the places of their worship; so is it with the places of their
jurisdiction and government; the spiritual courts of their Popes, Cardinals,
Bishops, Deanes, Chancellours, Commissaries and Officials, with their Doctors
and Proctours, being so many swarms of locusts that oppress, persecute, vex
and sting men to make them weary of their lives. Rev. 9.3.5.6. And when the
power of the seduced civil Magistrate is assumed unto them, like Pilate joined
with Cajaphas, then their authority becomes as the Throne of Satan, Rev. 2.13.
who by these instruments casts me^ into prison and kills them. verse. 10.
Hereby the Harlot becomes drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: Rev. 17.6. and thus their glorious Cathedral
Churches and holy places, Courts and Consistories are made Hellish
Slaughter-houses of Satan, and Babylon becomes the habitation of Devils, the
hold of every foul spirit and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird; Rev.
18.2. and so are to be esteemed of all that pass by and look upon them. Thus
also are all the assemblies and meeting houses of Mahometists, Arrians,
Anabaptists, and other Heretics to be accounted of in respect of their
pernicious errors, and that by the verdict of Christ himself, who pronounces
such to be the Synagogue of Satan. Rev. 2.9. Hence may we conceive how many
thousand intemperate Helles are to be found in this our Temperate Zone.

(k) After these more public Helles, if we search into private houses, we may
there find many habitations of Devils. Some houses, as experience shows and
the Lord has threatened, are haunted with evil spirits that affright those
that dwell therein: Ohim and Zijm do lodge there and the Satyrs or devils do
dance there. Esa. 13.21.22. with Lev. 17.7. orig. Hereby God calls men to
think of the future Hell and of the terrors that shall come upon the wicked
in their end. Another worse Hell then this is to be observed in the houses of
witches and wisards which have familiar spirits, and do willingly entertayne
them, call for them and make a covenant with them. Levit. 20.27. 1. Sam. 28.7.
etc. for whereas the other were haunted with them against their will and to
their great greef; these voluntarily and eagerly seek them and keep them, and
so their houses become like the Oracles of the Devil that men sought unto in
old time. 2. Kin. 1.2.4. Such houses were and are wheresoever they be like so
many porches and portalles of Hell, or mouths of the infernal pit, which how
abominable soever they be, yet do they serve for a conviction of atheists and
desperate wretches, which either think or live as if they did think there
were no Devil, no Hell.

With these devilish houses are to be joined the disordered Innes and Tavernes,
that are the nurseries of all impiety and wickedness, the very stairs and
trappes by which men descend into Hell. For though there be a lawful use of
Innes for the commodity of strangers and passengers, and for the necessity of
some others: yet the disordered Harbors and inordinate ordinaries, which are
the ordinary Rendevouz of drunkards, of blasphemers and swearers, receptacles
of skorners and mockers, of gamesters, of riotours, of wantons, of idle persons
and unthrifts, of theevish robbers of their own families, and the like; of
these is verifyed the common saying, that Alehouses are Hell-houses. There
haunt the clamorous Ohim and Zijm, and there do the lascivious Satyrs dance
together; thither do the Gobbelines resort, the schrich-owles, the
night-rave^s and night-walkers together; and make a cage of unclean birds.
When men pass by such houses they are to look upon them as the very Types of
Hell and the dens of destruction where many are daily overthrown. They are
as deep pits that swallow up soul and body, goods and good name of their
bewitched guests; both health of body and wealth of estate, credit of name and
salvation of soul do there consume and perish together. And therefore with
many pluckes does the Lord seek to divert men from such places, Enter not into
the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men: Avoid it, pass
not by it, turn from it, and pass away. Prove. 4.14.15.

(l) From private houses come we to private and particular persons, to see how
many Helles may be found among them. If we look upon Gods judgments for sin,
we see some possessed with Devils (...) persons that procure these judgments
of God, in them also there are many Hells to be seen. Their thoughts, their
words, their deeds and practices do represent the same unto us. The large
heart of man and his capacious thoughts are like unto a huge vessel, wide and
deep, greater the^ the whole Globe of the earth, which cannot fill the same.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. Eccles.
1.8. Though a moate in the eye do trouble it; yet the world cannot fill it.
The reason is, because the mind of man is an immeasurable gulf; and the
outward senses are but tunnels or conduits leading into it. Immoderate desire,
whether it be the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, or the pride of
life, is an insatiable whirlpoole that is still gaping and devouring, but never
satisfied. Eccles. 5.9.10. Hab. 2.5. Esa. 56.11. The ignorance that is in the
mind makes it to be as dark a dungeon as it is deep, Ephesians 4.18. Matt. 6.23.
wherein the thoughts do blindely range and roame up and down with pernicious
wanderings. The violence and fervency of inordinate lust inflames the heart and
makes it to burn, Romans 1.27. like the bakers oven that is overheated, till it
burn as a flaming fire. Hos. 7.6.7. And to show that the wicked heart is a
more complete Hell, it is said that Satan enters into it, Ioh. 13.27. and
filles the heart, Act. 5.3. and dwelles in it, Matt. 12.45. and reigns in it
as a prince over his subjects, Ioh. 14.30. or as a God over his people. 2. Cor.
4.4. The mouth of a wicked man is like the mouth of Hell, whiles the envy,
hatred and lust that is kindled in the heart does break out in the words, and
as it were, flame out at the mouth. The slanderous and evil tongue is a fire,
and is set on fire of Hell, and sets on fire the whole course of nature.
Iam. 3.6. The body and the whole person of wicked men is as it were the shop
and workhouse of Satan, wherein the unclean spirits do work in the children
of disobedience; Ephesians. 2.2. and all their members are the instruments and tools
of the devils to work all manner of sin and unrighteousnes therewith. Romans
6.13.19.

And now seeing the Lord has set so many visions of Hell before us in this
life, whereby he calls men to remember the latter end; let him that has an
ear to hear, hearken to the call of God: let him that has an eye to see,
come and open his

(...)the godly would sometimes have him to be more severe: He is more desirous
of the salvation of them that are saved then they themselves.

AS God calls us many ways to remember our latter end; so the due remembrance
of our end calls us to remember God: and the thought of death serves to urge
and admonish us of seeking the way of life. True life is to be found with God
alone. He is the living God. Josh. 3.10. Ier. 10.10. Hos. 1.10. He gives unto
all life and breath and all things. Act. 17.25. With him is the well of life.
Psa. 36.9. From this well do flow a thousand rivers of life; of life natural;
of life spiritual, of life eternal in the heavens.

(a) With him is the fountain of natural vegetation, and the rivers of
vegetative life are all propagated from him. In every pla^t and in every least
seed of tree or herb, God has planted a vital juice and dug a welspring of
life, from which spring life flows out and flourishes and is spread abroad;
Genesis 1.11.12. Psa. 104.14. and the living things are multiplied according to
their kind in such unspeakable abundance, that the increase thereof throughout
the world might in few years serve to replenish an hundred worlds. The seeds
that one garden in one year affords are so many as might in short time serve
to fill an hundred garden-plots, while some one herb often yields more then a
thousand seeds at once. So a thousand akehornes that fall from one Oak, might
serve to plant a whole grove of oaks. The apples of some one tree yield more
then a thousand kirnels: and therefore the kirnels, together with the roots and
graffes or shootes that one orchard affords in one year, might well serve to
be the seminary of an hundred more. Thus have we yearly the matter of many
worlds laid before us: though more new worlds be not daily formed, yet the
living God shows us hereby how easily he could do it.

The glory of this well of life is to be considered not only in the abundance
of life which gusheth out and flows from it, but likewise in the excellency
thereof, while the living things, the herbs and fruits that are thence
produced, do not only live themselves, but serve to sustain and uphold the
life of other creatures, both man and beast, both in the maine and daily (...)
Genesis 1.22.28. as by a seed of seeds has multiplied life, and as from a well of
life has made the streams of natural life to flow forth and with a
continual current of succession to run freshly from the beginning of the
world unto this day. Hereby we see how the Lord powers life out of his
treasure: at his word life swimmes in the waters; flies in the air; walks on
the earth, and scralles in the dust turned into living creatures at his
command. Exo. ^.16.17.

A clear vision of this power of life that is in God, is showed unto us even
in the least sort of creatures, in the Bees, the Flies, and in special in the
manifold swarms of innumerable Gnattes in summertime suddenly produced in
some countries, as if they were so many drops of life flying abroad round about
us, as if the whole air were dissolved into living creatures: and not only
living, but all endued with a most lively life, all nimble and active, mounting
above our heads, and every one of them carrying with them a Trumpet wherewith
they humme aloud and sound an Alarm to us, to awaken us unto the praise of
their Creator, the living God. And because we are so blind and dull to
discern and acknowledge the living God, the author of this life, therefore
they approach near unto us and bite us; though it cost them their life for it,
they will have us by the face or hands, sleeping or waking, night and day; and
they will taste of our blood: and this by divine providence, that by these
little monitors we might be rowsed up out of our senseles behavior, to look
unto that welspring of life from whence they come. Though these creatures be
small and contemptible in the eyes of many, yet do these small things carry in
them the glorious evidences of the living God and as effectual for our
instruction as are to be found in the great Ox, Elephant or Leviathan. Psa.
104.25. Exo. 8.18.19. He that rayseth these living souls out of the ditches
and rotten ground, and sometimes makes many of these lives to spring from one
dead carcass; how easily can he raise our dead bodies out of the grave, and
restore one life to one body, yea quicke^ the soul from the mire of sin? He
that longs after life let him look to this fountain.

(c) Besides this ordinary flood of life flowing from that general word and
com- (...) mall spirits, and with them the faculty both of sense and motion
over all. To preserve our being, he has made the liver a fountain of blood
and from thence drawn the veins, and dispersed them over the whole body to
carry abroad the blood and the natural spirits therein to the nourishment of
every part. With these living threeds more precious then any golden wires, the^
fine twined linen, blue, purple and scarlet, the ornaments of the Tabernacle,
has God beautifyed the body of man, which is also compared to a Tabernacle. 2.
Cor. 5.1.4. 2. Pet. 1.13.14. With these feeling, mooving and nourishing strings
has the Lord covered and embroydered and curiously wrought the veil of our
flesh. Psalm. 139.15. Job, 10.11. And each of these life-strings does the living
God still hold in his hand, maintaining their faculties and inspiring life and
quickening virtue into them. And besides this, in the very tunicles or coats
of each of these hollow strings has the Lord wrought a curious network and
woven together another sort of subtle threeds and thousands of them, more fine
and small then hairs; some of them drawn right along, of an attractive power;
some round and circular crossing the other with right angles, of an expulsive
virtue, others drawn athwart both the other with oblique angles, of a
retentive faculty, and all for the service of life in great variety: some draw,
some hold, some drive out superfluities of nature; and all these held and
upheld in their several functions by the finger of God, extending his
quickening power unto every one of the^. Neither are these particular streams
and waves of the river of life flowing from God to be neglected of us, the
works of God are to be sought out of all them that have pleasure therein.
Psalm. 111.2. Distinct knowledge and consideration hereof brings clearer
comfort: and it is great sin, unthankfulnes and contempt of Gods glorious
wisdom to look co^fusedly over those things that God propounds distinctly in
many several forms and particular acts.

To proceed therefore from these faculties and functions of life sensitive
common to the brute creatures with man, we are to behold another well of life
in that reasonable soul which God has placed in men, when as he formed the
spirit of man within him. Zacch. 12.1. The stirrings, motions and acts of life
flowing (...) with verse. 30. the Lord even then offered unto him to have opened
his well of life as wide for him, and to have made of him a greater and
mightier nation then Israel was. Number. 14.12. Oh how great are the treasures of
life which God has in store for them that love him! even worlds of life to
give to every one of them. Well might the Psalmist say of this God, With him is
the well of life: and in his light we shall see light: Psa. 36.9. In which
words David points at two glorious works and gifts of God specially noted in
the six days of the creation. In three days God beautifyed the world with
light: the first day he created light; the second day he created a pure and
transparent firmament, or an expansion through which the beams of the heavenly
light being diffused and spread forth might so come to us; and without such a
mean or middle passage our sight and the light could not have met together:
the fourth day God created heavenly lights, the Sun, Moon and stars
gathering abundance of light into them and by their motion distributed that
light unto the diverse parts of the world successively for the greater benefit
thereof. Genesis 1.3.6. etc. In three other days God created life in the diverse
degrees thereof: the third day God opened a box of life and powered out that
vegetative life which appears in the growing plants, herbs and trees; the
fifth day God opened another box and powered out a stream of sensitive life,
such as appeared in the fowls and fishes; the sixth day God opened again
another box, and beside the sensitive life in the beasts and cattle, powered
out the treasure of an intellectual life which appeared in the reasonable
soul of man which he then created. Genesis 1.11.12.20. etc. And from that first
week unto this day both the beams of light and the streams of life have
flowed out incessantly to his praise and the comfort of man.

(f) And yet all this is but the little finger of God in respect of his mighty
arm: all this is but the power of life natural vouchsafed even to his
enemies, to the reprobats. There is a new life, a more high and precious life
to be found in God; even a well of spiritual life, opened by him immediately
after the fall. Then was made the promise of this life and of victory over
death by breaking the serpents head: Genesis 3.15. that word was the Gospel of
Salvation preached instantly to Adam upon (...) the kinds of life natural are
made to serve as shadows of the life spiritual which God gives to his elect.
See it in the plants that do live a vegetative life. As the earth brings
forth her bud, and as the garden causes the things that are sown therein to
spring forth: so the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise to spring
forth before all the nations. Esa. 61.11. The Lord does as easily make men to
be trees of righteousness, as he makes thorns or briers to grow. Esa. 61.3.
with chapter 55.13. Yea the plants that exceed others in growth, the tall cedars,
the flourishing palm, Psa. 92.12. the green olive, the fruitful lillies,
Hos. 14.5, 6. the willowes by the watercourse, Esa. 44.4. the flowing
spices, Sol. song. 4.16. and the trees that bring forth new fruit according to
their months, Ezekiel. 47.12. are all but shadows of this grace of life flowing
from the Lord. See it in the creatures that live a sensitive life: The sheep
that are said to bring forth thousands in our streets, Psa. 144.13. and do
cloth the pastures with their multitude, Psa. 65.13. are made types of the
flock of God that multiply by his blessing, Ezekiel. 34.11.31. and do every one
bring forth twins, none being barren among them. Sol. song. 4.2. They are
also likened to the doves that bring forth almost every month, and come by
flights unto their windows. Esa. 60.8. See this also in the shadow of mankind
endued with a reasonable life: As the fathers and mothers are called the
fountains of life from whence the children do flow: Psa. 68.26. Esa. 48.1. so
the Lord communicating spiritual life to his children is said to beget them
again, Iam. 1.18. and they are the dew of his youth; Psa. 110.3. and he is the
living father of many children. Ioh. 6.57. Heb. 2.10. Yea God is able even of
stones to raise up children to Abraham; Matt. 3.9. as once of old and at first
he hewed them out of the dry and hard rock of Abraham's decayed body and Sarahs
dead womb, Esa. 51.1.2. Romans 4.18.19. and after that again took the stony
heart out of their bodies; Ezekiel. 11.19. and as in time to come he is yet once
more of the stony-hearted and obstinate Jews to raise up a new and holy
generation. Romans 11.7.8 24.25.26. And hereby it is evident what a power of life
is in God and that the well of life is not elsewhere to be sought or found then
in him alone.

be with men, and he will dwell with them, and God himself shall be with them
and be their God. Rev. 21.3. He will rejoice over them with joy and quiet or
rest himself in his love; he will joy over them with singing or shouting, as
the word also signifies. Zeph. 3.17. And what cause have they to sing and shout
and clap their hands for joy eternally, for whom the Lord does sing and shout
joyfully? Esa. 12.6. Psa. 47.1. how honorable are they whom the Father does
honor, Ioh. 12.26. whom the Son does confess before the Angels for ever?
Luke 12.8. And if these promises have their beginning here and be made unto men
in their pilgrimage and be in part enjoyed in this life, what shall their
complement and full performance be when they come to the wel-head of all this
life and glory hereafter, which for the present is hidden with God? Coll. 3.3.

(i)

What then remains for us to be done and what does the Lord require of us, but
that we come to this well of life? It is therefore showed unto us that we might
desire it and in desiring seek it and in seeking find it to our everlasting
happiness. And before we come unto it, even in the mean time by daily and
comfortable meditation, we may behold and look upon it, yea taste it, walking
upon the banks of this river of life and sometimes as it were sailing upon
these waters, being carried with the Spirit of God blowing upon us by faith. If
any despise this call of God and contemn the infinite felicity that is herein
revealed unto them: if any will forsake the Lord, the fountain of living
waters, and dig unto themselves cisternes, even broken cisternes that can hold
no water; if they will rather run to the stinking puddles of sinful
pleasures: mark what the Lord says concerning their madness, O ye heavens be
astonished at this and be horribly afraid and utterly confounded or very
desolate, says the Lord. Ier. 2.12.13. And what then is that unspeakable
astonishment, horror and confusion that shall come upon the despisers of this
grace, when heaven and earth together shall be so affected at the sight of
their miserable folly?

And if any fearful hearts do either despair or doubt they can never
obtain such a divine and glorious estate in respect of their baseness and
unworthines; if they

(k) If any fainting spirits be still afraid, and though they will not speak
it out, yet think thus within themselves: Not our poor and mean estate, but
our wickedness and our sins that are both great and many, do deprive us of
hope and take away our heart that we cannot look for a portion in that grace
of life that is so great for many others: Let these consider how great and
pernicious an error has ensnared them; and let them labor with all care and
speedy diligence to have this black cloud of death and infidelity hanging over
their heads, remooved from them. It is indeed the uncomfortable estate of the
greatest part of the world, and even of those licentious persons that seem to
boast often of the mercy of God, yet not to believe his mercy; Esa. 53.1. Luke
18.8. Psa. 78.22.32.35.36. they feel it not in their hearts when they glory
outwardly of it: for had they faith, it would soon have purifyed their hearts
and changed there lives and filled them with peace and joy unspeakable and
glorious. Act. 15.9. Romans 5.1. 1. Pet. 1.8. Let such consider that through
unbeleefe men are broken off from God; Romans 11.20. and they do him the
greatest dishonor that may be in not believing: 1. Ioh. 5.10. and for the
healing of this sore, let them set before them the rich and precious promises
of God, by the meditation whereof they may be quickened and have faith wrought
in their hearts. Psa. 119.25.28.49.50.93. Though their sins be many, that they
cannot answer for one of a thousand, Job, 9.3. there is mercy with God to blot
out their sins as a thick cloud, and to take away their transgressions as a
mist. Esa. 44.22. When the Lord proclaimed his glorious name, he manifested
himself by this mercy, and used twice so many titles to express it rather
then his justice, saying, The Lord, the Lord God merciful, and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity and transgression, and sin; that surely will not clear
the wicked, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children and upon the
childrens children unto the third and fourth generation. Exodus 34.5.6.7. For
though the Lord in regard of himself be equally infinite in respect of all his
attributes, yet is it harder for men to believe his mercy then his justice; and
as the event shows, it is a work more above the power of nature by true faith
to apply the mercy of God (...) with spiritual fornication, being carried away
to dumb Idols; 1. Cor. 12.2. when they turned from Idols to serve the living
God, 1. These. 1. 9, presently of most foul harlots they became the fairest
among women, even the Churches of God and his most beauteous spouses: Sol.
song. 5.9. They found mercy for all their sins which they confessed, and being
baptized into the name of the Lord they arose up out of the water, and looked
forth as the morning, fair as the Moon and pure as the Sun; Sol. song,
6.9.10. they shone in glory as the great wonder in heaven, like the woman
clothed with the Sun and treading upon the Moon with her feet and crowned
upon her head with the twelve stars. Rev. 12.1. Manasses that was not only
an idolater but in the grossest manner, worshipping all the host of heaven,
and setting their altars and his graven image in the house of the Lord; that
was not only a witch but defiled with many kinds of witchcraft, leaving the
Lord and flying to the devil, leaving the Prophets and running to wizards;
that was not only a murderer but abounding in murders and filling Jerusalem
with innocent blood which he shed from one end thereof unto another; and all
this after the education under his godly father Hezekias with contempt of many
admonitions and godly examples; yet when he was humbled in his affliction and
sought the Lord, he was not barred from the well of life, but he found mercy
with God, who was entreated of him and forgave his sins. 2. Chro. 33.12-16. And
so also those that committed yet a more horrible murder in killing and
crucifying the Lord of life and embruing their wicked hands in his precious
blood, Act. 2. 23. and 3.15. when they were pricked in their hearts and sought
grace, they found that which they sought, and obtained remission of sins and
the gift of the holy Ghost, being united unto the Church of God, and were
filled with unspeakable joy and glory. Act. 2.37-47. And as the Lord dealt with
these when they turned unto him: so has he promised to deal with the
wickedest alive whosoever do seek him. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn
ye unto me says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord
of hosts. Zacch. 1. 3. In this divine and comfortable promise the Lord does
three times interpose and pawn the authority of his name to confirm his word,
that it might (...) 1.1. 2. and 2.20. etc, and 2. Sam. 7.15. Our Savior tells
Peter that he is to forgive his brother not seven times, but seventy times
seven. Matt. 18. 21.22. And immediately after in the parable next following he
shows how far the mercy of God exceeds the mercy of men, and how many times
the Lord forgiveth us more then we forgive men. And this he does, by comparing
our sins or debts unto God to ten thousand Talents, verse. 24. and the
offenses of others against us to an hundred pence. v. 28. Now that we may the
better conceive the love of God in the pardon of many sins for the comfort of
sinners taught in this parable, these two sums and the difference that is
betwixt them is duly to be considered of us. And to this end it is to be
observed that our Savior speaks of the Roman coin, such as was then in use
among the Jews at that time subject to the Romans, as appears in that penny
which Christ required the Herodians to show unto him, having upon it the image
and superscription of Caesar the Roman Emperor. Matt. 22.19.20.21. And though
our Savior spoke in the Jews language, and the Evangelists wrote in the
Greek tongue, then most common in the world, yet the word that is here used
for a penny, (denarion, Matt. 18.28. and 22.19.) is the Roman or Latin word,
to show that he spoke of Roman coin. The Roman Talent (as our writers
witness) contained seven hundred and fifty ounces of silver, and the Roman
penny was but the eight part of one ounce. Hereupon it follows by just
computatio^, 750. being multiplied by 8. that one Talent contained precisely
six thousand pence, and consequently te^ thousand Talents contained six
thousand times ten thousand pence, which is the great sum representing the
many sins that God forgiveth unto men. And though our Savior by a definite
number intends an indefinite, yet is the proportion to be observed and while he
has chosen so exceeding great a number, he would thereby have us to conceive
the infinite grace of God in pardoning innumerable sins and millions of
transgressions, which the elect and faithful do daily commit, even after their
conversion. The Lord is still ready to forgive the repentant, and will
abundantly pardon, or as the words in the text are, will multiply to pardon.
Esa. 55.7. His mercies fail not but are renewed (...) sired they might be
consumed with fire from heaven. Luke 10.54.55.56. The spirit that is in man
lusts after envy, and even Joshua repined at the mercy and grace of God, and
the gifts of his Spirit upon Eldad and Medad. Number. 11.27.28.2^. Jonas in
special was strangely vexed and fretted with an exceeding displeasure, being
angry even to the death, and was therefore so hasty and swift to anger because
God was so slow to anger and so merciful in sparing the Ninevites. Ion.
4.1.2.3. And though this seem strange to those that read it, yet is the same
passion common among men. What godly man is there at this day which does not in
some measure overrunne the Lord to judgment in wishing the destruction of
Antichrist, as though the Lord were too slow to anger? If they might have had
their will, the Lord should not have waited with so great patience in calling
them to repentance.

But further, God is more merciful to men then men would have him to be even
toward themselves. For all those that are saved, God is more willing to save
them, then they themselves are to be saved. His willingness to give does exceed
ours in receyving by many degrees. First he had a will to save us, when we had
no will, nor being at all; he loved us first and ordained us unto eternal life
before the foundation of the world. 1. Ioh. 4.19. Act. 13.48. Ephesians. 1.4.5.
Again when we came into this world being borne in sin, and had a will indeed
but no will unto that which is good, a will only unto evil, Genesis 6.5. the
Lord prevented us and called us and of unwilling made us willing, and gave us a
mind and will to know him and seek him, as he did unto Paul in the mids of
his wickedness. Acts. 9.1. 3. etc. And we should never have had a will to come
unto the well of life except we had been drawn by him. Ioh. 6.44. And again,
being called and made willing, it is he that of willing does make us more
willing and constantly willing, and daily gives unto his elect both the will
and the deed of his good pleasure. Phil. 2.13. Our will and wish is bent unto
evil, and we desire we know not what: Matt. 20.22. Our will is often eagerly
set upon that which would wound our souls and be an hinderance to our
salvation and comfort; Iam. 4.3. but the Lord by his gracious will keeps away
the evil we feign would have, and gives the good that we had no will unto. He
bears up and supporteth our will in good, which else presently declines unto
evil: He holds our souls in life and suffers not our feet to be moved.
Psa. 66.9. And therefore his will is better to us then our own. Unto this
living God that is so good and so far exceeds our desires with his good will,
let us ever run and fly unto him and we shall surely find the well of life
with him and drink of the river of his pleasures. To him be praise for evermore.

CHAP. II. Of the sure and only way to the Well of life.
No way to life but only by Christ. In the knowledge of Christ we are to
consider (a) His calling unto the whole work of Redemption, and the gifts
wherewith he was abundantly furnished for this calling: (b) The offices laid
upon him for this work, when he became our Prophet, to teach and instruct, both
in his own person and by his ministers; (c) Our Priest, in his sufferings and
obedience on earth, and intercession for us in heaven; (d) Our King, to bring
us unto the possession of life, subduing all his and our enemies: (e) The
visible signs and seals of his grace, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord:
(f) The dignity of his person, being both very God and true man, requisite unto
the discharge of each of his three offices. (g) The comforts arising from these
considerations, specially when men thirst after life, and are careful to have
in store a select number of the promises of salvation. (h) A direction how to
apply the promises unto ourselves by the due consideration of Christ his
natures and offices.

I Am the way, the truth and the life; no man comes unto the Father but by
me, says Christ, Ioh. 14.6. He is the Lamb that leads unto the living
fountains, Rev. 7.17. and the good shepherd that gathers the lambs with his
arm, and carries (...) was called thereunto of his Father. Christ is the
signet of his Fathers right hand, and him has God the Father sealed by
designing and appointing him to be the Mediator* Ioh. 6.27. He is the elect of
God, Esa. 42.1. fore ordained before the foundation of the world, 1. Pet. 1.20.
and again manifestly called in time, chiefly at his Baptism and
Transfiguration, when that glorious voice came from heaven, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Matt. 3.17. and 17.5. This calling
of Christ is especially noted in the Gospel of John and more the^ forty times
in exact number, under the phrase of sending him; Ioh. 5.23.24.30.^6.37.38.
etc. and yet forty times again in other equivalent phrases of being sealed,
and given, and coming down from heaven, and come in the Fathers name and the
like. Our Savior himself does ever and anon repeat this calling and rejoice
in it and teach others to comfort themselves in it; and therefore the afflicted
conscience that seeks to be strengthened in faith should often remember this
calling of Christ: yea forty and forty times to run unto it and after the
example of Christ never to have done with it, that so the meditation thereof
may lead them to the well of life.

Christ being thus called of his Father is thereupon also furnished with all
gifts meet for his calling, anointed with the oil of joy and gladness above his
fellows, H^b. 1.9. with the spirit above measure, Ioh. 3.34. that of his
fullnes we all might receive, even grace for grace, or grace over against
grace, grace renewed in us according to his image; grace according to our need
of grace and according to his abundance able to supply all our wants. Ioh.
1.16. All his garments smell of myrrh, aloes and cassia out of his yvory
palaces whereby they have made him glad and whereby he has made us glad,
giving the oil of joy for mourning and the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness. Psa. 45.8. Esa. 61.3. His name is an ointment powered out; therefore
the virgins love him: Sol. song. 1.3. and they sing lovesongs of him and their
heart boyleth out his praise. Psalm. 45. title, and verse. 1. Being thus anointed
and called of his Father, he comes promptly at his call, Lo I come to do thy
will O God; Heb. 10.7. with Psa. 40.7.8. and he is as willing as he is able, to
be a (...) ver have found the well of life, for there is none that
understands, Psa. 53.1.2. but he is the light of them that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death, he makes the eyes of the blind to see out of
obscurity and darkness. Esa. 29.18. In his breast is that Vrim and Thummim by
which the counsel of God was made known unto men: Exodus 28.30. Number. 27.21.
for he is the substance of the shadows that went before. Coll. 2.17. As from
the Oracle; (debir, 1. Kin. 6.19.20.) the inmost place of the Sanctuary, God
was wont to speak of old and to send forth a voice; Exo. 25.22. Number. 7.8.9. so
now has he spoken unto us in his Son, that is in his bosom. Heb. 1.1. Ioh.
1.18. There is no labyrinth of error but he gives a thread of direction to
come out of it. There is no perplexity or difficult case of conscience but he
resolves it. God has given him the tongue of the learned to know how to speak
a word in season to him that is weary. Esa. 50.4. He leads the simple in a way
that the fools shall not err therein. Esa. 35.8. Many complain of the many
religions and opinions in the world, and that they know not which to take; but
such are not acquainted with this Prophet, who teaches the humble and
reveals his secret to them that fear him. Psalm. 25.9.14. Christ is not like
a stern austere master, of whom the poor scholars dare not ask a question:
but he is gentle and loving and calls them to learn of him and persuades them
to come to him because he is meek and lowly, and shows them how to find rest
unto their souls in all their doubts and difficulties. Matt. 11.29.

And further as in the days of his flesh he was a minister of the
circumcision, Romans 15.8. going about all Galilee teaching in their Synagogues
and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom; Matt. 4.23. so now by his ministers
and servants, Ephesians. 4.11.12. the maidens of his wisdom, Prove. 9.3.4. he calls
all nations to the knowledge and fellowship of his grace. Mat. 28.19. As of old
he preached to the spirits now in prison by Noah a preacher of righteousness; 1.
Pet. 3.19. so still at this day he preaches peace to the^ that are afar of.
Ephesians. 2.17. Hereby his voice is as the sound of many waters, Rev. 1.15. a souud
that is gone out into all the earth unto the ends of the world* Romans 10.18. And
thus the spirit (...) even in the waters of the great deep: Exodus 14. Esa.
51.10. so there being a burning lake and a red sea of wrath prepared for
sinners, our holy high Priest has made a way for us, he wading first through
the same and the waters thereof entering into his soul and overwhelming him that
we might be delivered. Psalm. 69.1. 2. His suffering and satisfaction is become
a strong bridge of translation to carry us out of the state of wrath and
condemnation into the state of grace and salvation, and to transport us safely
over this gulf of destruction and curse in which for our sins we had
deserved to have been plunged and drowned for ever. Gal. 3.13. Col. 1.13.14. To
bring us on in this journey to the well of life when we like wandering sheep had
gone astray perniciously, he sought us and found us and laid us on his
shoulders: 1. Pet. 2.25. Luke 15.4. He has borne our griefs and carried our
sorrows, Esa. 53.4. he bore our sins in his body on the tree, 1. Pet. 2.24.
and under the burden of our iniquities he was bruised, Esa. 53.5.10. he was
sore amazed, he groaned, Mark. 14.38. and cried out with strong cries and
supplications, Matt. 27.46. Heb. 5.7. he did sweat great drops of blood that
trickled down to the ground: Luke 22.44. and there was no remedy but that to
save others he must go down to the gates of death, he was abased unto the
death of the cross; and as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so was
our Mediator lift up; Ioh. 3.14.15. and as men deal with a toad or serpent so
they hanged him upon a stake (stauros) and set him upon a pole and he became as
it were a monster unto many, Psa. 71.7. and 22.13. that he might make us
glorious by deliverance and bring us unto life.

He was further abased when he was left for a time under the condition of
death, free among the dead, Psa. 88.5. while he made his grave with the wicked,
Esa. 53.9. and hereby was as it were swallowed up of the whale in the heart of
the earth. Matt. 12.40. And yet above all this and before his burial he
descended into Hell, to the gates of the second death, into the deepest degree
of humiliation, in his agony both in the garden and upon the cross: Matt.
27.46. Psalm. 88.6. there the sorrows of hell compassed him about, there he
drunk the cup of the red wine of the wrath of God, Matt. 20.22. and
26.39.42.44. a cup whereinto all our vile and deadly sins were grated, God
laying upon him the iniquities of us all. Esa. 53.6. At the tasting of this cup
his strength was powered out like water, his heart did melt like wax in the
mids of his bowels; Psa. 22.14. a greater matter then if the whole world
beside had melted away to nothing for ever. The very thought of this filled the
heart of our Mediator with perplexity and fear long before it came, I have a
baptism (says he) to be baptized withal; and how am I pained until it be
ended? Luke 12.50. And how was he then pained in the finishing of it? But
hereby are many sons brought unto God and delivered from the bondage and fear
of death for ever. Heb. 2.9.10.14.15.

Having passed himself and led us through the first gate of justice by
suffering, there remained a second by fulfilling the law for us, and this also
necessary for our entrance into life; and therefore besides the sacrifice of
his death, he also offered up himself in a holy life unto God, and sanctified
himself for us. Ioh. 17.19. For being made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. he
fulfilled all righteousness, Matt. 3.15. and was an immaculate lamb, 1. Pet.
1.19. holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26. whom no man could convince of
sin: Ioh. 8.46. and even in the midst of his sufferings his active obedience
and willing subjection to the will of his Father, Phi. 2.8.9. Ioh. 10.17.18.
and 18.6.11. was for us a sacrifice of sweet odor, as well as the suffering it
self, and so led us through the second gate of Gods justice. Thus by the
obedience and righteousness of one many are made righteous, eve^ partakers of
the righteousness of God in Christ. Romans 5.17.18.19. 1. Pet. 1.2. 2. Cor. 5.21.

And further, as all that he did then on earth was for our comfort; so all that
he now does in heaven is also for the increase of our comfort: for he is still
a priest and sacrificer in heaven. As Aaron bore the names of the children of
Israel both upon his two shoulders engraven in two Onix stones set in ouches of
gold, Exodus 28.9-12. and likewise in the breastplate of judgment upon his
heart, in twelve other precious stones, when he went into the holy place for a
memorial continually before the Lord: verse* 17-29. so our Mediator has not
only carried us on his (...) of the promised inheritance in Canaan, we see
what enemies in the way rose up against them to hinder them and to destroy
them. Pharaoh and his host with charets and horsemen pursues after them to bring
them back again into bondage or to destroy them utterly, Exodus 14.5.9 and
15.9. Then Amalek when Israel was faint and weary in the way, came out and
smote the feeblest and hinmost of them. Deuteronomy. 25.17.18. Exodus 17.8. Edom their
brother denied them passage. Number. 20.21. King Arad took some of them
prisoners. Numb. 21.1. Balak the King of Moab calls Balaam the southsayer to
curse Israel. Numb. 22.4. and 23.13. The Midianites vexed them with their wiles
and brought thousands of them to destruction. Number. 25.4.9.17.18. Sihon and Og
the giant with all their forces came out to stop them in their way. Deuteronomy. 2.32.
and 3.1. And the Kings of Canaan with an host like the sand upon the sea shore
in multitude, were gathered together to fight against Israel and to keep them
from their inheritance promised. Josh. 11.4.5. And in like manner to stop and
hinder the faithful in the way of life armies of enemies rise up on every
side. The world generally hates them. Ioh. 15.19. Matt. 24.9. The nations rage
and the princes conspire against the Lord and his anointed. Psalm. 2.1.2. The
mighty men, the Giants of our time cease not to war against them. The Romish
Balaam much worse then the old southsayer curses them incessantly. The
Babilonian harlot is drunken with the blood of the Saints. Rev. 17.6. The
manyheaded Beast blasphemes God and his Tabernacle; Rev. 13.6. and the second
Beast forces men for fear to receyve his mark. verse. 16. The Dragon and his
angels fight. Rev. 12.3.7. The Devil goes about like a roaring lion seeking
whom he may devour and cast out from the inheritance of the Lord. 1. Pet. 5.8.
And our own flesh like a serpent in the bosom lusts and fights against
the soul. Gal. 5.17. 1. Pet. 2.11. Now for the resisting and conquering of all
these Christ is given unto us as a victorious King and Prince of peace: He is
exalted above every name that is named in this world or in the world to come*
Ephesians. 1.21. He has overcome the world; Ioh. 16.33. cast out the wicked spirit
(...) confirm his afflicted people in their exspectation of future glory and
dignity by Christ the Branch, God appointed his Prophet to take silver and gold
from them of the captivity and to make Crowns, to set them first upon the head
of Jehoshua, and then to keep them for a memorial in the Temple of the Lord:
Zach. 6.9-15. so in the use of these ordinances of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper given to his Church and left for memorials of our glory in Christ,
we ought to be affected as if there were two golden crowns hung up in the
congregation before our eyes, and sometimes set upon our heads as witnesses and
pledges of the glorious kingdom to be enjoyed hereafter. In Baptism is
represented both the washing away of our sins, Act. 2.38. and our fellowship
with the holy Trinity, whose names are put upon us: Matt. 28.19. The names of
the Father, Son, and H. Ghost are set like three pearls shining in our
crown of glory set upon our heads. Esa. 28.5. In the Supper of the Lord being
called unto his Table and to the participation of the body and blood of Christ,
we are thereby set together in heavenly places with him, Ephesians. 2, 6. like olive
plants round about his Table, as a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord,
Esa. 62.3. even a crown about our head Christ in the mids of his Church. As
the children of Israel in the wilderness to guide and support them in the way
were led by a pillar of cloud, and fed with manna and water out of the rock; so
by a like favor for the same spiritual use has Christ our King given us the
Sacraments of the new Testament: 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3.4. and therefore look what
joy and comfort the most faithful in Jsrael had, when they saw the cloud of
the Tabernacle going before them; such joy and comfort ought we to be filled
withal at the administration of Baptism: and look with what joy and
thankfulness they went forth to gather Manna, with as great ought we to be
affected in going to the Table of the Lord, giving thanks unto Christ for such
a staff of comfort to quicken and strengthen us in our journey and way unto
the Kingdom of Heaven.

(f) But for a further view of this unspeakable grace and comfort exhibited in
these three offices of Christ, we are to look upon the dignity of his person
whereupon depends the virtue, power and (...) 33.15.16. When for sin the Lord
threatened a departure of this presence, and yet offered to send an Angel with
them to destroy their enemies; Exodus 33.2.3. that would not content him* no
presence of prophets or angels would serve the turn without this divine
presence united to the Tabernacle for their guidance. And even so according to
this type, when the word was made flesh, he dwelt among us as in a Tabernacle,
as the word signifyes: Ioh. 1.14. escenose. His body, was the true Tabernacle
which the Lord pight and not man. Heb. 8.2. In him dwelt all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily. Coll. 2.9. Out of this Tabernacle he spoke; Heb. 1.1. and
wrought miracles; Matt. 4.23. Act. 10.38. and remooved up and down, and
conversing among men led his sheep in the way of life. Ioh. 10.27.28. No man
nor angel had been sufficient for this work: but he being very God as well as
man, and bearing up all things by his mighty word, Heb. 1.3. caries along his
sheep unresistably and safely unto the glory exspected. He is Lord of all, and
at his right hand we may see all his blessed angels attending, to whom he has
given charge to watch over his sheep in this way and to carry them in their
hands that they dash not their feet against a stone. Psalm. 91.11.12. At his
left hand he has the Devil and his angels in a chain and binds them at his
pleasure, Rev. 20.1.2. 2. Pet. 2.4. so that they cannot hurt a swine or any
unclean beast without his permission, Matthew. 8.31. and much less can they
hurt them that are washed in his blood: and he having given commandment to
prepare the way of his people, to cast up an high way, to gather out the
stones, and to remoove the stumbling blocks; Esa. 62.10. and 57.14. they shall
go in the way of life, as Israel marched out of Egypt, with an high hand;
Exodus 14.8. a dog shall not moove his tongue against them, Exodus 11.7. further
then is for their good: Romans 8.28. and in due season they shall come to the
Lord the wel-spring of all glory, life and comfort in heaven.

(g) The comfort which arises from this consideration of Christ is mavelous
great for all the faithful and in special for afflicted consciences that
desire to be established and confirmed in faith. (...) fort out of his
fulness. Thus the souls that come daily to Christ as their Prophet may daily
be refreshed by him.

(h) If any through weakness of faith cannot lay hold on the promises of God
touching the pardon of sin and the free gift of salvation set before us, let
them bring these promises to the ground of them even to Christ, applying them
first to Christ and then to themselves: for in him all the promises of God are
Yea and in him they are Amen; 2. Cor. 1.20. not only in their own nature and
truth, but also in respect of our apprehension. He that cannot assent unto the
promise, looking on the promise only, may better assent and sooner believe,
when he looks on Christ the ground of the promise: for example, God promises
unto the repentant that their crimson and skarlet sins shall be taken away,
and they made white as snow and wool: Esa. 1.18. now the troubled soul that
cannot say Yea to this promise by particular application, let the same look
upon the sacrifice of Christ bearing their sins, satisfying the justice of God,
and behold his blood powered out to wash them, and so they shall sooner conceive
and apprehend their sins to be done away and their souls to be cleansed and
made white as snow.

There is a promise, that where sin abounds, there grace abounds much more:
Romans 5.20. The perplexed consciences that feign would but cannot say Amen unto
this promise by applying it unto themselves; let the same look upon Christ,
and behold the dignity of his person, his deity and divine majesty, being the
brightness of glory, the character or engraven form of his Fathers person, his
equal and his fellow; Heb. 1.3. Phil. 2.6. Zach. 13.7. when they see his
eternal Godhead and almighty power, to whom nothing is hard or impossible, and
withal consider how he stoops down to help and puts his hand to this work, to
give worth and price unto the sacrifice for sin, to make the blood of
redemption more precious and meritorious to redeem the vilest sinners; then
shall they more easily receive the promise of abundant grace, and with more
faith say Amen unto it.

There is a promise that God will be merciful to the sins of his people,
Heb. 8.12. and receive them with everlasting kindenes, Esa. 54.8. and pity the^
as a father (...) merit of life to justify us; v. 54. the spirit of life for
our sanctification, Romans 8.10. and the crown of life for our glorification.
Rev. 2.10. He is all in all; Coll. 3.11. and therefore we are to be nothing in
ourselves but all in him, and wholly renouncing ourselves and our own
righteousness we are to cast ourselves altogether upon him for the hope of
eternal life. To him be praise for ever. Amen.

CHAP. III. Of Mortification or the death of sin.
The nature and necessity thereof in general. (a) Six special degrees of
mortification: 1. In several passions of the mind troubled at the
apprehension of sin; 2. In resisting and refraining of sinful actions, 3. of
wicked purposes, 4. tickling desires, 5. wandering imaginations, 6. habitual
concupiscence. (b) The said acts of mortification like so many battles in our
spiritual warfare, and as many parts of that contrition which is acceptable
unto God and has the promises. (c) The example of David mortifying sin in
each of the particulars before named. (d) The chief evils of sin that are to
be mortifyed, The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of
life. (e) By these Satan works his temptations, and by the mortifying of these
he is conquered, as it is showed in the examples of Adam, (f) Christ, (g)
Antichrist.

HAving heard of the love of God, which is the spring of life, and of the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the way unto that life; it remains that we
seek the communion of the H. Spirit, as the conclusion of our comfort for the
assurance of that life. 2. Cor. 13.14. Hereby we know that we have fellowship
with God, that he abides in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. 1.
Ioh. 3.24. (...) shall be comforted. Matt. 5.4.

II. After this follows an other degree of Mortification, whereby the
faithful according to the measure of grace given, do turn from the practice
of sin which they have bewailed. They do not live any longer therein, Romans
6.2. they cease to do evil, Esa. 1.16. and eschew evil: Job 1.1.8. they
forsake their own ways and courses, and break of their sins, Esa. 55.7.
and refrain their feet from every evil way. Psalm. 119.101. By this resisting
of wicked actions men are said to mortify or kill the deeds of the body and
thereupon is life promised unto them. Romans 8.13. They therefore that love life
everlasting must every day die this death also in casting off the works of
darkness. Though it be a death to the flesh to leave them, yet must this death
also be undergone; else is there no hope of life, no assurance that God dwells
in us by his Spirit.

III. An other death of the old man is when not only the outward act of sin,
but the will and purpose of sinning is mortifyed. The will of the flesh and the
will of man is noted as a thing opposite to God and his Spirit, procuring his
wrath and making men the children of wrath; Ioh. 1.13. Ephesians. 2.3. 1. Pet. 4.
2.3. and many that want the power to perform many evils, do not yet want the
will thereunto; and therefore this will is to be mortifyed. If he that had no
stain in his will, could yet say unto his Father, Not as I will but as thou
vvilt; Not my will but thy will be done: Matt. 26.39. Luke 22.42. and again, I
seek not mine own will, but the will of him that sent me; John. 5.30. and
6.38. how much more should we make it our daily exercise to break our own
corrupt wills, to cast away our own purposes and to wait on God all the day
long, saying and praying continually, Not my will but thy will be done? At the
first act of Paul's conversion, so soon as Christ was made known unto him, we
see this mortification of his will which he renounced, and resigning himself
to the will of God said, Lord what vvilt thou that I do? Act. 9.6. When the
will is thus mortifyed, though men do sometimes the things that they would
not; yet then is this comfort afforded; it is no more they that do it but
sin that dwells in them. Romans 7.15.16.17.19-20. It shall not be imputed
unto them.

IV. Besides this it comes to pass many times that when the will is subdued
and restrained from some evil, yet the affections are not mortifyed: though a
sinner in the purpose of his will, will not consent to the practice of some
evil, yet the heart is tickled with delight therein, and could wish it were
lawful, and it is a pain unto them that they may not consent to seek it. This
evil concupiscence and lust of the heart, these affections of the flesh are
distinctly condemned, and we are commanded to mortify and to avoid such
inordinate passions; even as they are lusts, though consent of the will be not
with them. Gal. 5.24. Coll. 3.5. Romans 7.5. Exo. 20.17. In the killing and
abandoning of these lusts the faithful endure many deaths from day to day,
and the acts of Mortification are multiplied according to the strength of the
spirit ministered unto them.

V. Again the mind of man is daily annoyed and pestred with evil thoughts
and wandering imaginations arising partly from the flesh and partly from the
suggestion of Satan; and these though they neither be delighted in nor
approoved of, yet the very entertainment of them and their residence in the
mind though for a short while, does pollute the soul with sin. For God
requires the whole soul and the whole mind with all the strength thereof;
Deuteronomy. 6.5. Luke 10.27 he requires a pure heart, free from all straggling
conceits. Matt. 5.8. Our eyes should ever be toward the Lord and his glory:
Psalm. 25.15. Lots wife for looking backward was smitten of God and turned into
a pillar of salt; Genesis 19.17.26. and though more evil might be in her mind,
yet that very look alone being forbidden of God made her culpable: and so for a
side look unto vanity, when the eye of the mind rolls up and down we become
guilty of condemnation. These idle thoughts take up the place in the soul,
even the seat wherein God should sit; and while they keep out the thought of
God, though but for a moment, they are in that respect condemnable. And
therefore these motions of the mind are to be resisted, repelled and
mortifyed. As Abraham hushed away the fowls that came down upon his
sacrifice; Genesis 15.11. so are these flying thoughts to be dispelled and driven
away from our minds. God requires that the wicked should forsake his
imaginations; Esa. 55.7. God would have his children to cast down imaginations
and to bring every thought captive unto the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10.5.
which cannot fully and perfectly be done without this mortification of them. By
mortification of them the heart is purged, and then the promise of mercy
multiplied. Iam. 4.8.

VI. Lastly the faithful do yet in a further degree die unto sin, when as
that habitual concupiscence which is the seedplot and root of all other sins
is mortifyed and subdued within them. For besides all the motions, affections
and other fruits of sin before noted, there is in man a corrupt disposition,
whereby he is inclined to all evil. This disposition and pronenes to sin,
considered apart from the fruits thereof, is condemned in the Scripture, and is
called the old man, the body of sin, the law of sin and the law of the members;
Romans 6.6. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.2. Romans 7.23. it is called the flesh which lusts
against the spirit, and therefore is to be crucified as well as the lusts and
affections thereof. Gal. 5.17.24. This is that hateful and poisonous
Cockatrice egg, to be crushed before serpents creep out of it. The godly
therefore knowing this their own corrupt disposition must labor to have it
changed and weakened daily within them: and to this end they are to watch their
heart with all diligence, Prover. 4.23. and even before they feel any stirring
or motion of the flesh, to be exercising of themselves in all godliness and in
all holy meditations and prayer, to keep under their rebellious nature, and by
the help of the Spirit to bring it into subjection, 1. Corint. 9.27. to bind
the very stumpe of this tree with an iron band of mortification, that the
forbidden fruits do not bud forth.

(b) The life of a Christian in this world is a continual warfare, in which
they fight the battles of the Lord every day and hour. 2. Cor. 10.4. 1. Tim.
6.12. These spiritual combats according to the acts and degrees before
named, are six in special. First they conquer the Adamantine Rock, Zach. 7.12.
when their hard hearts are softened to (...) again by the banishment of
wandering thoughts and motions; and most of all broken when the sinful
disposition of the flesh is broken and mortifyed. All these contritions and
breakings are so many pleasant sacrifices of sweet odor unto God: and to them
that undergo so many deaths he has made many precious promises; that he will
revive the spirit of the humble, and give life unto the contrite ones; that he
who is high and excellent, inhabiting eternity on high will dwell here below
with him that is lowly; that he whose name is the Holy One, will dwell with the
contrite sinner: Esa. 57.15. and 66.1.2. and therefore if the presence and
conversation of God with us be of any regard with us, if the glory and life
that God gives be of any account in our eyes, let us give ourselves daily to
these works of mortification, that by these foregoing deaths we may be made
ready to leave this world, and may in the end find him and with comfort come
before him that is the well of life.

(c) For the illustration of this point, to omit others, consider we the
example of David alone, how he was exercised in all these acts of contrition
and thereby dyed unto sin. The diverse degrees of mortification were so many
steps of the stairs by which he descended into the death of sin, dying as
it were a several death upon each one of them. 1. After knowledge and
conviction of sin committed, as for the numbering of the people, his heart
smote him for it, 2. Sam. 24.10. and that was a blow or stroke of mortification
which the spirit gave unto the flesh; he mourned exceedingly, and in a
revengefull indignation against his own sin was content and desired that the
hand of God might be against him and against his fathers house, that he might
bear the smart of his own transgression. verse. 17. this was a death of sin
in him. And so it was also with the sin he conmitted in the matter of Vrias,
for which his bones were broken, Psalm. 51.8. and for which he made himself a
public example, by the confession of his sin and making a doleful song
thereof to the shaming of himself and warning of others. The title of Psalm.
51.11. David went a step lower, when he mortifyed and resisted the act of
sin, though occasion and opportunity of revenge was given unto him, though
counsel was given him by others to that (...) If I say, I will judge thus:
Behold I should offend against the generation of thy children. verse. 15. VI.
Lastly David came down to the lowest step of the stairs, when in the
mortification of his sin he stroke upon the root thereof, by bewailing his
original corruption and seeking to subdue that sinful disposition received
from his parents, while he complains, Behold I was borne in iniquity and in
sin has my mother conceived me. Psalm. 51.5. This old nature he labors to
mortify, when he desires to be renewed in the spirit of his mind; verse. 10.
for as the Apostle reasoned in respect of the covenant, Heb. 8.13. in that he
mentions a new estate he desires the abolishing and decay of the old. Thus
true mortification never cease till it bring men from and by the hatred of
actual sins to find out the original, the cause and mother of all, by which
all men together are become unprofitable and filthy; Psalm. 53.3. with Romans
3.12. that they may kill and crucifye the same. This mortification of the old
man is also comprehended in that speech of David when he says, I kept me from
mine iniquity: Psalm. 18.23. for though it be true that he kept himself from
his wickedness and from his sin that dwelt in him by bewailing sins already
committed, by resisting the present actions, by breaking his will, by
renouncing his affections, by casting down his imaginations; yet in special
manner he kept himself from his wickedness, by mortifying his very disposition
to evil, while he labored to change his nature and to have a new disposition
created within him. These are the deaths that David dyed; and these are the
deaths to be undergone of all that would not dye eternally. This daily dying
unto sin by so many lesser deaths, is a maine preparative unto the great day
of our translation out of this world which ought evermore to be remembered of us.

(d) After the acts of mortification and the diverse degrees thereof, it is
expedient that we consider the special enemies or evils of sin that are to
be mortifyed. These the holy Ghost informs us to be the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; 1. Ioh. 2.16. that is to say,
voluptuousnes, covetousnes, and ambition or vainglory. To these three may be
reduced the principal works of the flesh or old man, considering that for
these and from these do arise the contentions, hatred, envy, lying, slandering
and manifold other iniquities, Iam. 4.1.2. which are therefore noted and
described as companions waiting upon the forenamed lusts, which are the three
seditious captains and leaders unto all mischief. Gal. 5.19.20.21. Col.
3.5.8.9. Ephesians. 5.22.31. These lusts are the root of all evil, not only of all
wrong, injustice and cruel dealing toward men, but of all irreligion and
impiety against God. The cares of this world the deceitfulnes of riches, and
the lusts of other things as the pleasures of this life, choke the word of God
and make it unfruitful: Mark. 4.19. Luke 8.14. the fruits of holiness and
righteousness are blasted and destroyed thereby. And some through these lusts
have erred from the faith, being ensnared with foolish and absurd conceits,
noisome also and hurtful in respect of all graces weakened by them, piercing
the heart with present sorrows, and finally casting men into eternal
destruction and perdition. 1. Tim. 6.9.10. These are of the world and not of
God, and if any man be a lover of the world and of these things of the world,
then is not the love of the Father in him; 1. Ioh. 2.15.16. then is he made the
enemy of God, for his entertainment of these lusts and his amity with them;
Iam. 4.4. and consequently cannot look for the fruits of that blessed
friendship with God: but for such remains a fearful exspectation of
judgment and death in the day of Gods wrath. Therefore men die for ever because
they live after the flesh and do not die betimes to these sinful lusts. Romans
8.13.

(e) As the world, so the Devil also, by the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes and the pride of life both works his chief temptations and by the
mortifying of those he is conquered, and by men's yielding unto the^ he
overcommeth and devoureth them. This appears in three most memorable
examples, of Adam, Christ, and Antichrist. At the temptation of our first
parents the Devil used these three baits and thereby ensnared them. The
forbidden tree by his suggestion appeared good for meat, Genesis 3.6. to bring
them to covetousnes not content with all the other trees of paradise, as though
there had not been meat enough for the^ without this also; it appeared pleasant
to the eyes, to kindle the lust of false and vain pleasure in them; and by his
suggestion it appeared as a tree desirable (...) by which the Devil works so
effectually in him and in others by him, are those three forenamed lusts: for
by these three is Antichrist often described. In respect of the lust of the
flesh, the habitation and den of Antichrist is a spiriruall Sodom, Rev. 11.8.
abounding with lusts of monstrous uncleannes; the Romish city is compared to a
great Harlot and the mother of harlots, having in her hand a great cup full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication, Rev. 17.1.4.5. and living
deliciously in pleasures. Rev. 18.7. In respect of the lust of the eyes and
love of riches, she is decked with gold and precious stone and pearls: Rev.
17.4. and 18.16. and for increase and maintenance of that wealth her servants
and ministers through covetousnes and with fained words do make merchandise of
men. 2. Pet. 2.3. And as for the pride of life this man of sin does exalt
himself above all that is called God and shows himself that he is God; 2.
These. 2.4. and has a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and is
wondered at and worshipped throughout the world. Rev. 13.3.4.5. And when he is
crossed in any of his lusts then he makes war with the Saints and overcomes
them and is drunken with their blood. Rev. 13.7. and 17.6. and suffers them not
to buy or sell that will not receive his mark. Rev. 13.17. Hereby it appears
that the spirit of Antichrist and the breath of his life is lust: these worldly
lusts are as it were the bridle and saddle wherewith Satan rides upon him: with
the spurs of these lusts he drives him on to commit so great abominations.
By lust is the greatest sin wrought in the world; and therefore is every one
to be warned hereby to fight continually against these lusts that fight against
the soul and make it a slave to Satan. 1. Pet. 2.11. They must either mortify
these lusts of the old man, or else for ever be a spoil and prey unto the old
serpent that works by them.

Holy Ghost, they are again taught upon the new consideration of this honor
done unto them, and in reverence of this divine guest, to proceed unto a
further degree and care of their mortification, to cleanse themselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, to subdue the old man with his lusts and
affections, lest they grieve this Spirit that is come to dwell with them. 1.
Cor. 6.19.20. 2. Cor. 6.16. and 7.1. Ephesians. 4.30.

(a) The manner how the Spirit does mortify sin is by bringing the sinner
unto Christ and by him unto the Father. As the Father for communicating of life
unto men has sent his Son to merit life, Ioh. 7.16. and 3.16. and both the
Father and the Son have sent the Holy Spirit for our assurance of that life:
Ioh. 15.26. so the Spirit again bringes us both to Christ and to the Father
and first teaches us to embrace Christ; he testifies of Christ and glorifies
him and takes of his and shows it unto us. Ioh. 16.13.14.15. The manner how
the Spirit bringes us unto Christ is by working in us the graces of Faith, Hope
and Love of Christ. These are the most sweet breathings of the Holy Ghost: and
by each of these he works mortification in them that are so brought unto him.

I. Faith in Christ serves to kill sin in us many ways. First of all by the
death of Christ there is merited for us not only the pardon of our sin, but
also a power of subduing sin; by his death he has merited the gift of the
spirit, even of the spirit of sanctification. Of this gift we are made
partakers by faith, which engraffes us into Christ and into the fellowship of
his death and of all the merit thereof. Therefore is it said that we are
planted together with him into the likeness of his death; and hereupon we know
that the old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. Romans 6.5.6.7 8. Thus being
by faith united to Christ, the spirit of mortification as well as the gift of
reconciliation is bestowed upon us: and in this regard should we the more
earnestly seek that precious faith which procures so great grace unto us.
Therefore did Christ bear our sins in his body on the tree, that we might
become dead unto sins; 1. Pet. 2.24. that by the merit of his death sin
might be mortifyed in us. And hereupon we come to say with the Apostle that we
are crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20.

we may stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Gal. 5.1.

IV. Moreover as our Mortification depends upon that which Christ merited for
us; so that which Christ by his death obtained for himself does further lead
us thereunto. For to this end Christ both dyed and rose again, that he might
be Lord both of the dead and living. Romans 14.9. And as we believe that he is
become our Lord, so we are to believe that we are become his servants, being
bought with a price, to wit by his blood; and therefore are not our own but
his, 1. Cor. 6..19.20 and 7.23. and therefore may not do our own wills nor
follow our own affections and lusts but are to mortify them that we may do
his will. Thus the faith of Christ's dominion over us purchased by his death,
does serve for an help of our mortification, while it apprehends that the
redeemed of Christ are redeemed from the earth, from among men to follow the
Lamb, being the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb. Rev. 14.3.4.

V. Again, being in part mortifyed and contrite for sin, by another act of
faith we do further apprehend that in Christ we shall be accepted
notwithstanding the weak measure of mortification that is in us. And this
faith of acceptance is a great encouragement for us to proceed further in the
subduing and mortifying of the flesh with the lusts thereof, and to abound
daily therein, when as we know that our weak labor in the Lord is not in
vain; 1. Cor. 15.58. when this persuasion abides within us, that the day of
small beginnings is not to be despised; Zech. 4.10. that the Lord does both
accept the willing mind notwithstanding many wants, 2. Cor. 8.12. and will
also in due season perfect and accomplish that which he has begun in us.
Philip. 1.6.

(b) That we may the better apprehend the comfort of this acceptance through
faith, there are diverse points to be observed touching the nature of true
Mortification which is yet acceptable to God.

1. First, that it is still imperfect in this life even in the most excellent
servants of Christ, who confess themselves wretched transgressors of the law
of God, feeling in themselves another law and power of sin rebelling against
the law of their mind, and leading them into captivity to the law of sin
that is in their members. Romans 7.23.24.

II. Secondly, true mortification of sin as it is imperfect, so it is
nnequall; every man having a portion of grace according to the measure of the
gift of Christ. Ephesians. 4.7. The same measure of the spirit is not to be exspected
in all. All have not the same measure of sorrow for their sins that some
others have; yet it may be true and unfeigned, and so accepted of God. The
fruits of repentance are in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundredfold.
Matt. 13.23. Though every true believer have the spirit of God, Romans 8.9. and
be a spiritual person; 1. Cor. 2.14.15. yet some truly spiritual are so
weak that in comparison of others they are not spiritual. 1. Cor. 3.1. And
therefore ought not any for this to be discouraged if they find themselves
inferior unto others.

III. Thirdly, true Mortification as it is unequal, so it is in some respects
unlike in the faithful: as there are diverse measures thereof, so are there
diverse manners of it. The gifts and graces of God are not only many but
manifold or diverse and of different kind in diverse persons: 1. Pet. 4.10. and
therefore some that have not mortifyed the outward actions of sin may have
striven more in the mortifying of their inward lusts and affections. Some that
have not mortifyed the more heinous sins, but have sometimes fallen into
notorious scandals, may yet in their ordinary course of life far exceed those
in true mortification which yet never fell into such gross outward offenses.
1. Kin. 15.5. 2. Sam. 24.3.4. etc. And some that proceed further unto daily
mortification of the actions of sin, may yet want that great contrition and
sorrow for sin which is in others that fall oftener and do less abstain
from the ordinary practice of sin. It is hard for any to determine whether it
was greater grace in Joseph a servant resisting the temptation and not
committing adultery with his mistress; or in David after his fall to humble
himself so far as being a glorious king to shame himself by public
confession of his adultery. Psa. 51. title. For as God magnifies his mercy by
sin in forgiving it, more then if no sin had been: Romans 3.4. and 5.20. so
the godly may sometime manifest their grace and godliness by open and effectual
repentance, more then if that special sin had not been committed by them. Luke
7.38-34.

IIII. Fourthly, that Mortification which arises from the liveliest faith and
feeling of Gods favor in Christ is most acceptable unto God; rather then that
which has the extremest grief, fear and terror joined with it, or then
that which has a greater restraint of sinful actions. For as by faith men
please God; Heb. 11. 5.6. so according to the measure of faith in any action
men do more or less please God therein. Though the degrees of mortification
be many; though the working of faith be sometimes revealed more at one degree
then at another; yet whatsoever is wrought at any degree, is still by faith;
whether it be at the change of the disposition, the motion, affection, will, or
action, or in contrition after the sinful action; whether it be in diverse men
according to their different measure of grace, or in the same men according to
their diverse assistance at several times, it is all by faith. Faith is the
root of other graces. Col. 2.7. and every act of mortification is a branch
springing from this root; and no branch may boast against the root that bears
it. Romans 11.18. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, eve^ our faith:
1. Ioh. 5.4. by it mortification is wrought; and by it each act of
mortification becomes most acceptable to God. And therefore above all things we
are to labor that this blessed grace of faith may be stirred up within us;
that though it have as it were slept at one assault of sin, it may yet be
awakened at another degree of mortification in the progress of our spiritual
combats. And seeing the spirit of God is the spirit of faith, 2. Cor. 4.13.
therefore should we seek to be filled with the spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. that by it we
may both become strong in the Lord and in the power of his might, and may
withal in the mids of our weaknesses be comforted and encouraged through
this faith of being made acceptable unto God in Christ.

(c) Furthermore besides this working of faith for the mortification of all
kind of sin in general, there is yet also a more particular consideration of
the power of faith for the mortification of some special sins against God
and man. By faith the spiritual pride of nature is subdued, and confidence in
a man's own self is overthrown: whiles such a way of salvation by free grace,
without our own works and merits is taught us by faith. Thus is humility and
utter denial of a man's self wrought in the soul, as the Spirit declares by
that threefold emphaticall interrogatio^ and the answer thereof, when as he
says, Where is boasting then? it is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay;
but by the law of faith. Romans 3.27. And so also in respect of men it may in
like manner be demanded. Where is hatred and revenge? it is excluded. By what
law? of works? Nay; but by the law of faith. Faith teaches men to be kind,
merciful, tender hearted, forbearing one another and forgiving one another, if
they believe the pardon of their own sins, and that God in Christ has
forgive^ them. Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13. Though the law of works require both
humility in respect of God and meekenes in respect of men, though it condemn
both boasting and revengefulnes; yet it is the law of faith that works these
graces required and mortifyes the contrary sins.

(d) Having heard how the Spirit by faith bringes us unto Christ for the
mortification of sin, it follows that we consider how the same is done by
Hope also, through the assured exspectation of the glory that is to come.
Christ is our Hope and the Hope of glory. 1. Tim. 1.1. Col. 1.27. And from this
Hope there arises a double act of mortification by two especial graces of
Sobriety and Patience that are exercised therein.

Sobriety is an act of mortification which consists in the subduing of
inordinate joy and delight of all earthly pleasures, honors and profits
wherewith so many are as it were drunken and overcome. By looking for that
blessed Hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, we are taught to deny ungodlines and worldly lusts, and to live soberly
and temperately in the moderate use of all outward comforts. Tit. 2.12.13. The
godly do know that when the Lord shall appear in glory they shall be made
like unto him, when they shall see him as he is. And every one that has this
Hope in him purifyeth himself as he is pure. 1. Ioh. 3.2.3. This purification
of the soul from unclean pleasures and lusts is the mortification of them. As
a greater light does obscure and dim the less, and both the stars in the
firmament and the candles lighted on earth below do cease to shine when the
light of the radiant Sun does arise upon them: so all the brightest lamps of
worldly pleasure are as it were extinguished (...) suffer with joy the spoiling
of their goods knowing in themselves that they have in heaven a better and an
enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

(e) After the consideration of Faith and Hope it remains that we proceed to
the third grace of Love, whereby the holy Spirit does work a further
mortification in the elect. And first of all, by the love of Christ men are
brought to the love of death, having a desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Phil. 1.23. This desire of death cannot be in a man until he be dead
unto the world, and until the love of the things that are in the world be
dissolved within him. Until a man be content to depart from all other vanities
he cannot desire to go unto Christ. And therefore ought the godly to labor to
find in themselves this desire of being translated out of the world to be with
Christ, that thereby they may find more assurance of their mortification. We
see how the tender and fervent love of some friends makes them willing and
desirous to die with their friends and does after a sort mortifye the world
unto them. Jacob having lost Joseph refused to be comforted and resolved to go
down mourning into the grave unto his son: Genesis 37.35. and fearing the loss
of Benjamin, both he and others thought he should die with him, his life being
bound up in his sons life. Genesis 42.38. and 44.22.30.31. It is recorded by
diverse historians touching the barbarous Indians in some parts both of the East
and the West, and some Black-Moores in Guinea in the midst betwixt them both;
that many of the subjects do willingly die with their kings and many women
with their husbands: that the Prince being drowned many of the people have
willingly drowned themselves with him: that some men give their wives, some
their children, some their servants to be buried alive in the grave with their
king, to serve him in another world: that some women do cheerfully and by the
encouragement of their friends cast themselves into the fire, wherein according
to their manner of burial in some places, the dead bodies of their husbands are
consumed together. If these so wickedly and resolutely leave this world before
they be called, and blindly cast away their lives for the love of a wretched
creature; what shame is it unto Christians if the love of their glorious prince
and heavenly bridegroom do not mortify them (...) declared, it remains yet
to be showed how the Spirit having brought us to Christ does bring us thereby
to the eternal Father: for in Christ through the Spirit we have access or
entrance to the Father; Ephesians. 2.18. and are reconciled to God and saved; and not
only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5.11. And
then all the attributes that are in God absolutely considered, besides the
other comforts to be had by them, do in special serve for our mortification
by the Spirit of Christ teaching us the right life of them. God is light: 1.
Ioh. 1.5. and all his glorious attributes are so many divine beams of light,
whereof every one of the^ by shining upon us does further our mortificatio^.
The eye of Gods infinite wisdom looking down upon us may well strike us with
shame of our vain behavior and forgetfulness of God, and make us mourn as
Peter, when at his third denial Christ turned and looked upon him. Luke
22.61.62. And therefore are wicked me^ the further from mortification, because
they say in their hearts, Tush, God sees not; Psalm. 10.11. Job 22.14. and the
eye of man restraines them more then the eye of God. Job 24.15.17. The sight of
Gods infinite power may well cast us down and make us seem less then
grasshoppers in our own eyes, when Israelites were so stricken with the sight
of the mighty and tall Anakims. Number. 13.33. His infinite goodness and mercy
communicated with us should affect us more then David's did Mephibosheth, and
cause us rather to say, What are we that the Lord should look upon such dead
dogs as we are? 2. Sam. 9.8. His infinite wrath against sin, before which the
mountains quake and melt, Nah. 1.5.6. may well strike us with godly sorrow for
the same sins which in the reprobate are punished with unrecoverable
destruction though they be pardoned in us. The incomprehensible majesty and
glorious beauty of his face cannot be looked upon by living men; Exodus 33.20.
and some sparkles thereof appearing have brought men to the fear of death.
Iud. 13.22. His unmeasurable eternity being duly thought upon may well mortify
the love of this transitory world that passes away; 1. Cor. 7.31. he alone
being unchangeable and abiding for ever the same. Iam. 1.17. Psa. 102.26.27.
His unconceivable ubiquity or presence in every place may well serve for an
hedge or wall of mortification, to keep us in awe of him and in the denial of
ourselves for him, seeing we can go no whither from his spirit and presence.
Psa. 139.7. etc. And thus all the rest of his attributes being reverently
thought upon, may serve to subdue the vanity of our minds and work a death of
sin within us by the help of his Holy Spirit. By this means we may be prepared
for our latter end, to leave this world with comfort. The Heremites and
Anachoretes that shut up themselves in walls or wildernesses, and do every
day with their own hands dig and with their fingers scratch and rake up the
mouldes, making their own grave aforehand and lying down therein, do not in
so right a manner think of their end, as those that thus do mortify their
sins; making their own spiritual meditations the graves wherein to bury their
lusts.

CHAP. V. Of the outward means of Mortification,
The ordinances and the works of God. (a) The primary ordinances, the Word,
Prayer, Sacraments and Discipline. (b) The secondary ordinances, Fasting and
Watching. (c) Ordinances of a third degree, Vows etc Covenants. (d) The
Sacraments and Sacrifices of the old Testament. (e) Legal purifications: there
was more pollution by the touching of an unclean or dead man then by the touch
of any unclean beast in seven respects. (f) The Law of the Nazarite. (g) The
works of Creation both in general and particular. (h) The works of
Providence: all the good that is done for us or performed by us: (i) all the
evils either of sin committed by ourselves or others; (k) or of punishment
suffered by our selves or others, (l) The due consideration of Death serves to
mortify all kinds of lust.

THe Spirit of God working inwardly is the principal means of our
mortification; yet ordinarily he chooses those times for this his work, when
as we observe the outward means which he has appointed to this purpose. These
means are either the use of his ordinances, or the consideration of his
works. The primary ordinances of God whereby the Spirit killes sin are his
Word, Prayer, Sacraments and Discipline that he has appointed. These are the
weapons of our warfare, not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down
strong holds. 2. Cor. 10.4.

(a) His Word is the Hammer of Mortification, that breaks the stony heart and
makes it contrite. Ier. 23.29. As he himself is, so is his word, lively and
mighty in operation, and sharper then any two-edged sword, that pierces deep
and cuts the soul and spirit, Heb. 4.12.13. and hewes the old man in pieces,
as Samuel once hewed king Agag in pieces before the Lord. 1. Sam. 15.33. This
sword of the Spirit is to be taken into the hands of every Christian, that
would obtain the victory over the world. Ephesians. 6.17. This word is to be heard
publickely, to be read privately, to be meditated upon continually: and out of
it a store of divine sentences, commandments, promises and threatenings is to
be gathered and kept in readiness, Col. 3.16. and according to every man's
necessity and special temptations so to be applied against the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life, for the mortification
thereof. These divine testimonies and words of God are like so many sharp
nails, Eccl. 12.11. to be fastened into the hands and feet of the old man,
that so he may be crucified. As it was the honor of Iael, and she was blessed
above women, because she put her hand to the nail and her right hand to the
hammer, and smote Sisera and stroke through his temples till the enemy of Gods
people was slain: Judge. 5.24.26.27. so shall they be blessed above other men
and women that having furnished themselves with store of divine oracles, do
then put their hands to the nails and hammer of the Spirit, and so strike
down every lust and sinful motion as soon as it begins to lift up the head
and to stir within them, by applying the counsel of God against the same.

By Prayer the spirit of mortification is obtained both when it is desired by
petition, according to the precept and promise, Luke 11.13. Matt. 26.41. as
also by the very act and exercise of prayer, though this grace in particular be
not desired but other things; in as much as the very coming into Gods presence
and the very presenting of the soul before him does strike down proud
thoughts and set the soul in a way of mortification. Genesis 18.27. Psa. 59.2-7.

The Sacraments being due ly administered and received serve also in special
manner to mortifye the old man. In Baptism there is as it were a grave of
mortification, when being baptized into the death of Christ we are buried with
him by baptism. Romans 6.3.4. Col. 2.12. 1. Cor. 15.29. The reverent and due
meditation of this ordinance and the beholding of the administration thereof is
more effectual for the mortifying of sin, then traveling to Jerusalem to
behold the sepulcher of Christ, as many have done. In the Supper of the Lord
the body and blood of Christ is so lively represented unto us, that with Thomas
we do put our fingers into the hands and side of Christ, into the print of the
nails and spear; Ioh. 20.27. and in the due consideration thereof we cannot
but crucifye our own flesh with the affections and lusts.

In the exercise of Discipline, by admonitions and rebukes for sin the heart is
humbled and broken; Psalm. 69.20. with Zech. 13.6. and the censures are
administered for the destruction of the flesh and shaming of the offendour, 1.
Cor. 5.5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. that by such means he might be truly mortifyed.
They serve also for the mortifying and humbling of the persons by whom they are
administered, giving them just cause of mourning and bewayling both their own
and others miseries by reason of sin: 1. Cor. 3.2. 2. Cor. 7.8. and 12.21.
even as under the Law he that did that which tended to the cleansing of others
became unclean himself. Number. 19.7.8.10.21.

(b) The secondary ordinances of God are such means of mortification as serve
to help and further us in the use of the former; as namely Fasting and
Watching, that we may be better prepared to pray, to meditate, to hear the
word, to receive the Sacraments, to perform other religious duties. By
fasting we understand either abstinence from meat altogether, for a shorter
time; as in David and others, 2. Sam. 1.12. and 3.35. or abstinence from
pleasant meat for a longer time; as in Daniel, Dan. 10.2.3. with verse.
11.12.13. The use of both is to humble the soul, that it may be better fitted
for the exercise of mortification: to this end are we called thereunto of God,
Joel 2.12. and for the same purpose are the examples of the Saints that have
been frequent therein, commended unto us in Scripture. Dan. 9.3. Psa. 35.13.
and 69.10. 2. Cor. 11.27. and (...) either to cast off their sins or themselves
to be cast out of the Church: they say in that covenant conditionally as Jonas
said when he offered himself to be cast into the sea, Ion. 1.12. binding
themselves at their entrance into the Church either to beware of offenses
disturbing the peace thereof, or to yield unto those courses whereby themselves
deserve to be troubled.

(d) Having considered the ordinances of the New Testament and the subordinate
helps whereby we are furthered in the exercise of mortification, let us now
see what may be observed to this purpose from the ordinances of the old
Testament. Though the practice of them cease in the ceremony, yet not the
meditation of the^, nor the practice of those duties which are signified by
the ceremonies. And all of them in special manner preach mortification unto us
and call us thereunto. The ordinary Sacraments of the old Testament were
Circumcision and the Passover. In circumcision there was a painful cutting
off of the foreskinne, and a mark for the mortification of the flesh printed
in the body of man, for a perpetual memorial of this duty: so that the Holy
Ghost under the phrase of circumcision does often describe our mortification unto
us, as Deu. 30.6. Ier. 4.3.4. Romans 2.28.29. Col. 2.11. Godly sorrow is a knife
of mortification to circumcise the heart, to cut off the foreskin and
superfluities of sinful lusts. In the passover, the separation of the lamb
from the tenth day unto the fourteenth day, the killing of it and sprinkling of
the blood, the rosting of it, and eating it with sour herbs and unleavened
bread, Exodus 12.4.6.7.8. etc. did represent the deadlines of sin purged in such
manner, even by the blood of Christ the undefiled lamb slain for us, and to
be applied unto us and sprinkled upon us, to be eaten with sour herbs of godly
sorrow for sin, and a purging out of the old leaven of maliciousnes and putting
off the old man and his works that we might be a new lump. 1. Cor. 5.7.8.

That which the Sacraments represented unto them was in like manner signified
by the Sacrifices of the old Testament; by laying hands upon the head of the
beast that was slain and burnt for sacrifice, Lev. 1.4.5. etc. and these of
many kinds and in great number every day, upon diverse occasions, and
especially upon their feast days, when many thousands were sometimes (...)
sprinkled him with water to make him clean; Number. 19.14.21.22. but a dead beast
did not defile all that came into the tent or stable where it was. IV. Not the
carcasses of all beasts, but only of those that were unclean beasts did
defile men: not the carcasses of sheep, oxen, goats, doves, hearts, hindes,
roes, etc. but the carcasses of swine, camels, vultures, etc. Lev. 11. but for
men the carcasses of all men whosoever, clean or unclean, good or bad, did
defile all that touched them. Number. 19.11. V. The bodies of unclean beasts did
not defile but only when they were dead; otherwise it was lawful to ride upon
horses, mules, camels and asses, as Christ did according to the prophesy: Zech.
9.9. with Matt. 21.2-7. but the bodies of unclean men, while they were living
did defile other men many ways; as we see in the lepers and such as were
defiled with other natural uncleanness: Levit. 13.46. and 15.5. etc. 2. Cor.
6.17. To have touched a venomous toad had less defiled then the touch of a
most glorious king, or the touch of the fairest woman, though but the hemme of
their garments, and without the least motion or lust of evil, when they were
but ceremonially polluted. VI. He that was defiled with the carcass of an
unclean beast was not required to wash more then his clothes: but he that was
defiled with the carcass of a dead man or some other unclean persons was
required to bathe himself in water also. Number. 19.19. Lev. 15.13. VII. Those
that touched the carcasses of unclean beasts were purged with common water:
Lev. 11.25.28. those that were defiled by touching of the dead were not to be
purged but by water and blood; to wit, by a special water of purification made
with the ashes of a red heifer. Number. 19.2-9.17. By all this it appears how
mavelous great the pollution of man's sin is, which God would have him so
many ways to be put in mind of, to avoid the tent and company of wicked men,
that by so many exercises of mortification he might learn to touch no unclean
thing. As David in detestation of himself said unto the Lord I was as a beast
before thee: Psalm. 73.22. so we are here taught to consider and confess that
we are worse then beasts, as it is also elsewhere noted for our mortification.
Esa. 1.3. Ier. 8.7. Prove. 6.6. etc.

(f) Moreover whereas it is a special (...) very sight of the creation which
way soever we turn us might serve to abase and humble men before the Creator.
To this end are they propounded by the Spirit of God unto us; the height of the
heavens, the depth of hell, the length of the earth and breadth of the sea. Job
11.8.9. The terror eve^ of some creatures is such, that man is ready to die
and perish at the sight of them. The sight of an Angel made the watchmen and
keepers of the grave to quake and become as dead men. Mat. 28.4. When the
Disciples thought they saw a spirit, they were troubled and cried out for
fear. Matt. 14.26. At the sight of the Leviathan men are cast down; and when
he rayseth up himself the mighty are afraid, and because of breakings and
terrors begin to purify themselves, to confess their sins, to pray for
the pardon of them and to seek reconciliation with God. Job 41.9.10.25. This
has God ordained for the mortificatio^ of sinners, that hereby they might
conceive how unable they are to stand before him. When the Lord would make Job
to be vile in his own sight and to abhor himself in dust and ashes, he sets
before him the glory of the creation and his majesty shining therein, and leads
him along in the spirit to behold the cheef of them ranked in order before him.
Job 38. and 39. and 40. and 41. chapter with chapter 41.4. and 42.6. And even unto this
day God does sometimes speak unto us as it were out of the whirlewind and by
the sight of the heavens, the earth and the seas does call us unto
mortification. The Lord sometime gives days of darkness and gloominesse, of
clouds and thick darkness; Zeph. 1.15. he clothes the heavens with blacknes
and makes sackcloth their covering, Esa. 50.3. and in their mournful
countenance they call us to think what cause of mourning we have. Yea in them
the wrathful countenance of God is as it were pourtrayed before us; a smoke is
said to come out of his nostrils and devouring fire out of his mouth, when he
thunders from heaven and sends forth his lightnings, for the terror of
sinners and for the mortification of their corrupt and wicked lusts. Psalm.
18.8-14. and 29.1. etc. and. 97.2.3.4. 1. Sam. 12.16.17.18. By the sight of the
raging and roaring sea bounded within the sands the Lord calls me^ to fear
before him and to tremble at his presence. Ier. 5.22. And whereto serve the
storms upon the sea, if not for the mortification and contrition of
heard-hearted (...) serve to humble them, and call to their mind their own
unworthines, which then especialy by comparison of Gods free love with their
contrary deserts does more appear unto them. So it was with David, humbling
himself before God in the consideration of his mercies, 2. Sam. 7.18.19. even
as Mephibosheth had done to him in another case; 2. Sam. 9.7.8. and so did
Elizabeth, Luke 1.43. If Abigail might say of her marriage with David, Let
thine handmaid be a servant to vvash the feet of the servants of my Lord: 1.
Sam. 25.41. and David himself of his marriage with Saul's daughter, Seems it
to you to be a light thing to be a kings son in law, seeing that I am a poor
man and lightly esteemed; 1. Sam. 18.23. then what may we say of our exaltation
and of the divine benefits bestowed upon us? All the mercies and blessings
which we receive from God, if we compare them with our sinful nature, are like
so many coals of mortification, coals of indignation heaped on our heads:
Romans 12.20. and therefore does God let us know how good he has been unto us
even when we were his enemies, that by that means we might be mortifyed, and
burn in just hatred and indignation against ourselves, Romans 5.10. with 2. Sam.
12.7.8. Esa. 5.1.2. Deuteronomy. 32.6-15. And in sum, even the least good done to us
should make us think how little we are, and ever less then the least of Gods
mercies, and far unworthy of them, Genesis 32.10. and so take occasion thereby
of being humbled before the Lord.

As all the good that by divine providence is done to us; so all the good done
by us should ever give us occasion of further mortification and of abasing
ourselves in the sight of God. Thus it was with David in his free offerings for
the Temple, 1. Chron. 29.14. and Solomon when the Temple was built. 1. Kin.
8.27. Such is the greatness of the Lord above our works, that in respect of the
infinite reward we may say as Barzillai to David, Thy servant will go a little
way with the King, and why should the King recompense it me with such a reward?
2. Sam. 19.36. All that we have and do for God, is of his own that he has
first given us, 1. Chron. 29.14.16. and these gifts of his in our best use of
them, in the best works we do are still so polluted, that we have ever cause
to acknowledge with shame the filthiness of our righteousnesses; Esa. 64.6. Phi.
3.8.9. and ever (...) have a gracious respect unto them that sigh and cry for
the abominations committed by other men. Ezekiel. 9.4. This was observed by Lot;
2. Pet. 2.7.8. by Moses; Exodus 32.19-32. Number. 16.4. and others with him; Number.
14.5.6. by David, Psalm. 119.136.139.158. by Ezra, chap. 9.2.3. by Nehemiah; chapter
13.7.8. by Paul; Romans 9.1.2.3. 2. Cor. 11.29 and 12.21. by Christ Jesus, Mark.
3.5. Luke 19.41.42. And the contrary is made a sign of a wicked man: no man is
truly greeved for his own sin, that is not touched with grief for the sins
of others; for seeing God is dishonored and our neighbor wounded thereby, it
must needs be a sign that such have neither love of God nor pity of their
neighbor. Ier. 36.23.24.25. Prove. 14.9.

(k) Thus do the evils of sin call for grief and sorrow: besides these the
evils of punishment, the afflictions, calamities and tribulations in the world
do also lead unto mortification. Thereby God breaks the pride of man and
withdraws him from his evil course: Job 33.16.17. by his chastisements God
humbles the heart of men and makes them submit unto his yoke: Ier. 31.18.19.
and the^ is the case most miserable when they are least regarded. Prove. 27.22.
Men are warned of God to mortify sin not only by greater afflictions but even
by the lesser sort also; for there are two kinds of them, a light touch and a
heavy hand. Esa. 9.1. There is a wonderful variety in Gods dealings this way:
sometimes the touch is so easy and gentle that it is scarce felt; men are
scarce able to say whether there be a pain in it or no; they have such light
aches of the head, the belly, the bones, such small reproaches and losses that
they are hardly sensible of them. As a loving mothersmites her child sometimes
so softly and gently, that it does not appear whether she be angry or not;
even so does our most loving God deal oftentimes with his children; Job
33.14.15. with chapter 7.14. Mat. 10.30. but though the stroke be most mild and
gentle, yet they that are wise will make use of it. Prove. 17.10. Though there
be an hundred degrees of difference in Gods visitations; some of them like a
fillop only, or a lifting up of the hand and yet no stroke; a striking but yet
no smart or easy to be borne, as it were with a rod of rushes: yet all of them
are a push or thrusting with the finger for our admonition, and at every such
thrusting or pinching we are called unto the acts of (...) pride of life? Look
upon death, see how it lays the heads of the proudest men in the world; they
that were before as stars the sons of the morning, have then the worms
spread under the^ and over them and become like broken vessels in the land of
oblivion. Esa. 14.11.12. What avails it to be praised a while by the stinking
breath of flatterers, when afterward their names shall rotte among men? Pro.
10.7. like those bones of the great me^ in Israel that should be for dung upon
the face of the earth: Ier. 8.1.2. or if they be praised by men after their
death in their writings and chronicles, what will this profit them when their
sins are written with a pen of iron and with the point of a diamond? Ier. 17.1.
when those books shall be opened in the second death? Rev. 20.12. what though
their sepulchers be painted and covered with golden letters, when at the second
death their souls shall be cast into the bottomless pit and into the oven of
hell, where the proud and they that do wickedly shall be burned up and
consumed? Mal. 4.1.

CHAP. VI. Touching Vivification or quickening of the new man.
The nature and necessity thereof in general. (a) Six degrees of vivification:
1. A new disposition or habit of quickening grace; 2. Motions of spiritual
life in the understanding, judgment and memory. 3. Affections of love, joy,
desire etc. 4. Renewing of the will; 5. Works of righteousness and true
holiness; 6. Joyful thanksgiving in the apprehension of all the former graces of
life. (b) The inward means of vivification: The Spirit of God bringing us unto
Christ and working in us the graces of Faith, Hope and Love. (c) The outward
means: The primary ordinances; the Word, Prayer, Sacraments and Discipline;
(d) The secondary; a holy Feast and a holy Watch; (e) Ordinances of a third
degree, Vows and Covenants. (f) The works of Creation and Providence.

FRom the Mortification of the old man come we now to the Vivification of the
new man. It is not possible that these two can be severed: if any man be in
Christ he must be a new creature, 2. Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. borne again of the
Spirit, and by this new birth made partaker of a new spiritual life. Ioh.
3.3.5. The Lord that is rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he
loves his elect, quickens them together in Christ. Ephesians. 2.4.5. The feeling
of this new life is a preparative unto death and a preservative against all the
terrors thereof, and leads men with comfort through the gates of death,
overcomes the pangs thereof, ferries and conveyes men over all the floods of
sorrows.

(a) This grace of Vivification is to be considered in six especial degrees,
answerable to those six degrees of Mortification before noted, and each of them
may better be understood when they are mutually compared together.

I. The first degree of Vivification is a new disposition or habit of
quickening grace infused by the Spirit of God, whereby they are inclined to
embrace Christ, to glory in his merit and to live unto him. This new
disposition is like a newborn babe, or at least as a babe newly conceived in
the womb of the soul, and is called the new creature, Gal. 6.15. the new man,
Ephesians. 4.24. the inward man, Rom 7.22. the law of their mind, verse. 23. the
newnes of spirit: verse. 6. and the consideration of this gift is cause of great
joy and thankesgiving unto the faithful, that do therefore break out into the
praise of God and bless him that has begotten them again. 1. Pet. 1.3. As it
is matter of joy unto a mother to have a living child borne, though for that
present it lie bound in swaddling clothes without stirring hand or foot; so it
is great joy unto the regenerate to have this new habit of life, though they
do not always feel it actually stirring within them. Yea this is a comfort
that supporteth the godly in the midst of manifold temptations, when
notwithstanding their great imperfections and present impotency unto good, they
yet can remember this habit of spiritual life formerly discerned in themselves
by sundry joyful apprehensions and fruits of faith in time past. This is that
seed of God which remains and abides ever in those hearts where it is once
sown. 1. Ioh. 3.9. This is that heavenly drop of divine grace which being once
distilled into the soul is never dried up, but becomes a fountain of living
water springing up into everlasting life, John. 4.14. This is that precious
spark of spiritual life, which though it be sometimes raked under the ashes of
worldly cares and fears, yet is it never extinguished, but upon occasion
breaks forth and burns more bright then before.

II. A second degree of vivification of the new man consists in the motions
of new life and in the stirrings of the spirit, which are a further comfort and
demonstration of spiritual life. As the mother that has conceived in her
womb and yet for a long time together feels not her child to stir within
her, does then begin to fear and to doubt of the life thereof: so the godly
having been long without the lively motions of the spirit begin to fear
sometimes and to doubt of their estate. But upon the new motions of the spirit
they are filled with comfort, and thereby feel their sweet babe, the new
creature as it were to spring in their womb again. These motions are divine
inspirations whereby the mind is illuminate to discern and know the will of
God, to give assent and approbation unto it when it is known and to remember
it also when it is approoved Ephesians. 1.17.18, Phil. 1.9.10. Col. 1.9. Without
these gracious operations of the spirit many having the truth propounded unto
them do not apprehend it; others apprehending the meaning thereof approove not
of it; others approoving of it do yet forget the same, and so it vanishes and
is lost. As the Spirit of God is said to moove Samson at certain times and to
ring in his ear like a bell, as the original word imports: Iud. 13.25. with
Exodus 28.33.34.35. so these motions and impulsions of the spirit in the godly
are as the sound of an heavenly bell ringing them many peales of consolation
and exhortation for their warning night and day. These are the counsels of God
and whisperings of the H. Spirit, like divine cymbals and high sounding cymbals
tinckling and ringing in the ears of the regenerate; Psalm. 16.7 and 51.6. Esa.
30.21. for which they give thanks to God that illuminateth and wakeneth their
dead and dark hearts thereby, when as of themselves they are not sufficient to
conceive or think any thing that is good and holy. 2. Cor. 3.5. Pro. 30.^.3. As
wicked motions are the messengers of Satan to buffet us; so these are the
messengers of God to quicken us, and therefore as welcome guests are to be
welcomed and entertained with all thankfulness.

III. Besides the motions of spiritual life in the understanding, judgment
and memory, there is a third degree of vivification to be observed, when as
this life is further spread abroad into the affections. (...) worship and care
for the poor Saints, harmless life and innocence in respect of all men and
bowels of compassion toward them in necessity. Esa. 5.2.4.7. Hereby men show
that they are not strangers from the life of God; but being rich in good
works, the works of spiritual life, they do hereby lay up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come that they may lay hold on
eternal life. 1. Tim. 6.18.19.

VI. Lastly, it is a further manifestation of spiritual life when after the
former degrees of vivification the new creature beholding this grace of God in
it self does with all joyful thanksgiving acknowledge the same continually.
As David and his people considering how God had opened their hearts and
quickened them to his service rejoiced with great joy because they had offered
willingly, and praised God because he had moved them to praise him: 1. Chron.
29.9.10.13.14.17.20. so the regenerate that are borne of God can rejoice in the
Lord and do know the joyful shout; they do therefore again rejoice because
they rejoice. Psalm. 89.15.16. And as one Rainebow by the reflection does often
beget another, and that other sometimes begets a third, so that three
Rainebowes have sometimes appeared at once: so in the new creature one joy
begets another, and one light begets another, and one grace is the seed of
another, Romans 5.4.5. When Paul saw the constancy of the Thessalonians it
quickened him; when he saw their faith and joy in the holy Ghost, it made him
give thanks for them and to conceive great joy; 1. These. 1.2.3.6. and when he
considered the comfort of his own joy for them, it made him give new thanks
again unto God for that joy. 1. These. 3.8.9. And thus is spiritual life
propagated and multiplied in the faithful when as both by the sense of
quickening grace in themselves, Coll. 1.12. and by the sight of it in others,
they take new occasion of glorifying God for his unspeakable gift. 2. Cor.
9.12-15.

(b) The means whereby this grace of vivification is wrought in the elect, is
principally the Spirit of God which quickens and gives life. Ioh. 3.5. Romans
8.10.11. 2. Cor. 3.6. By it we are brought unto Christ, Ioh. 16.14.15. and
15.26. and coming unto him as unto a living stone we also are made living
stones, full of life. 1. Pet. 2.4.5. We come unto him when we (...) quicken us
further by applying unto us the merit of his sufferings. Then as the child
neesed seven times, so the new creature, the converted soul does manifest the
truth of life received by several degrees; at the first neesing a new
disposition appears; at the second new motions; at the third new affections;
at the fourth new will and purpose; at the fifth new fruits and works; at the
sixth new thankesgiving and praise in joy of the holy Ghost and so much in this
life: at the seventh neesing the old man is utterly abolished, the flesh shaken
quite off, and the spirit carried into a heavenly kingdom, clothed with a white
robe of perfect righteousness in Christ the fullness of spiritual life.
Therefore all is to be sought principally in Christ.

(c) The outward means whereby the Spirit quickens, are the ordinances and
works of God. The primary ordinances of God are his Word, Prayer, Sacraments
and Discipline. The word of God is the word of life, Deuteronomy. 32.47. Ioh. 5.25.
and 6.63.68. Act. 5.20. a tree of life, Prove. 3.18. the immortal seed, 1. Pet.
1.23. that quickens the soul which cleaves unto the dust and melts for
heavines. Psa. 119.25.28. By prayer men find life for themselves, Joel. 2.32.
Romans 10.13. Esa. 38.2-5. and give life to others. 1. Ioh. 5.16. Baptism shows
us the laver of regeneration or new birth; Act. 2.38. with Tit. 3.5. Ioh. 3.5.
and the dead-harted are quickened by meditation of the grace represented and
sealed thereby. By the Table of the Lord the fainting spirits are relieved and
revived, through that spiritual food which is there exhibited. 1. Cor. 11.24.
The admonitious of Discipline are the corrections of life, Prove. 15.31. and
therein is consolation for those that are ready to be swallowed up of sorrw. 2.
Cor. 2.7. By these things men live, and in all these is the spirit of life and
vivification: Esa. 38.16. and therefore as we would have the life of the new
creature to be daily increased within us, so are we to attend upon that word of
life night and day; to pray incessantly and to watch thereunto with all
perseverance and thankesgiving; to sanctify ourselves for an holy use of the
Sacraments from time to time, to submit unto Discipline for mutual
edification, and so to wait for spiritual life thereby to be ministered unto us.

(d) The secondary ordinances of God for vivificatio^ of the new man, are an
holy Feast and a holy Watch unto the Lord. As (...) mirth is compared to the
song in the night when a holy solemnity was kept. Esa. 30.29. Paul and Silas
sang together at midnight: Act. 16.25. and till midnight did Paul continue his
speech unto the disciples at Troas Act. 20.7. And such means are the godly
still upon occasion to use for their quickening in their spiritual life,
sitting under the shadow of him that is the true vine, Ioh. 15.1. drinking the
wine of his promises and plucking the grapes of his consolation, co^forting the
poor and heavy hearted, communicating their joy one to another, and using his
gifts in all sobriety and thankfulness for their mutual support in this time of
their pilgrimage.

(e) After these, follow the tertian ordinances, so to speak, means of an
inferior order and rank, to wit, Vows and Covenants for the helps of
spiritual life. As a religious feast and watch serve for the quickening of the
soul in the use of the first and primary means; so these in the third degree
serve to bind us to the use of the secondary, each supporting an other. Vows
and promises to God serve to bind us to the observance of other godly
exercises at a certain time: and we see how the godly upon occasion vowed to
offer unto God a bullock, a ram, a lamb or goat, male or female, more or
less; insomuch that the sacrifices are sometimes called by the name of vows;
and the Lord accepted that vow of so small a matter. Lev. 7.16. and 22.18. and
23.38. Number. 15.3. and 18.14. and 29.39. Psa. 116.12-19. Mal. 1.14. with Act.
5.2.3. and chapter 21.23.24.26. And so now when men vow unto the Lord and bind
themselves unto any particular work of mercy toward the poor, or to keep a
love-feast, or any watch, or to perform any labor of love unto the Lord for
the quickening of themselves and others, the same is a sacrifice of sweet odor
unto the Lord. Phil. 4.18. 2. Cor. 8.4.5. Heb. 13.15.16. In like manner the
covenants and promises made unto me^, whereby they bind themselves to one
another for the performance of some duties of religion or mercy together, are
also approoved means of mutual comfort and vivification. David bound himself
by covenant to Jonathan; 1. Sam. 18.3. to the Elders of Israel; 1. Chro. 11.3.
and to other worthies. cap. 12.17.18. And what his covenant was with the man of
his covenant that profaned it, we see in the Psalm of his complaint, namely to
be as guides to one another, to take sweet (...) of this way and application of
the former truth, the Lord has in his word given further light and direction
by certain peculiar works which himself has commended unto us as having
pregnant and special reference to our latter end, to procure some more distinct
and certain comfort by the particular observatio^ and practice of the^. And
therefore whereas some godly and christian friends do mutually desire of one
another some direction and counsel for their preparation to their end: to
such, besides a general and resolute purpose to have respect unto all the
commandments of God and in all things to keep faith and a good conscience, I
would commend these duties following.

I. In the first place a daily invocation of the name of God for his help and
assistance in this particular point, that they may be prepared to die, to leave
this world and come with comfort into the presence of God and to stand
undismayed before the throne of his grace. The comfort of a happy end is worthy
a special prayer every day for that particular benefit. The maine blessing
that Paul could wish unto Onesiphorus that had so often refreshed him, was this,
that the Lord would grant unto him that he might find mercy of the Lord in
that day, 2. Tim. 1.18. And this he prays for the Thessalonians, that their
hearts might be stablished unblameable in holiness before God, eve^ our Father,
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with his Saints. 1. These. 3.13. and
again, that their whole spirit, soul and body might be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. These. 5.23. Now that which Paul
so earnestly desired for his dearest friends, that is also worthy to be desired
of us for ourselves every day. If Paul prayed night and day exceedingly to see
the faces of his godly friends, 1. The. 3.10.11. and that by any means he
might have a prosperous journey coming unto them, for their mutual comfort;
how much more cause have we to pray night and day with exceeding longing to see
the Lord face to face, to behold the glory of all his angels and to taste of the
pleasures of his right hand? If David prayed so often and so earnestly that he
might enjoy the presence of God in his earthly sanctuary, to behold the beauty
of his ordinances there; Psa. 27.4. and 42.1.2. and 84.1. etc. how much more
ought we to pray constantly for our entrance into his heavenly sanctuary, to
enjoy the glory that (...) 5.7. Lev. 5.16. Every man therefore that would have
comfort in death and peace in his conscience at his latter end, must labor
according to his utmost power to make clear with the world by restitution and
satisfaction for wrong done, for debts undischarged, for fraudulent bargains
and overreaching of his neigbour, for any other injuries by word or deed
against the person or credit of his neighbor. He that would find his soul
reconciled to God must labor betimes and without delay to see himself
reconciled with men.

III. As there is a needful Reconciliation, so there is a holy and zealous
Revenge necessary to be sought before death, that men may die with more
comfort. Neither let it seem strange that seeking of reve^ge should be
reckoned among the special preparatives unto death. Though to take the sword
for carnal revenge, to satisfy the private lust of the flesh, be often forbidden
of God; Rev. 13.10. Mat. 26.52. Romans 12.19.20. Pro. 25.21.22. and 24.17.18 and
20.22. yet is there a just and glorious revenge of sin commanded of God, both
upon others and upon ourselves. Moses a little before his death is commanded to
avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites, that then he might be gathered
unto his people. Number. 31.1.2. One of his last works was to be a work of
revenge: that being done he was to die with more comfort. The remembrance of
that revenge wrought by Phinehas could not but comfort him at his last hour.
Number. 25.11.12.13. Saul therefore had extreme anguish and discomfort in death,
for not executing a revenge upon Amalek; as it was told him of the Devil,
because he would not learn it of God. 1. Sam. 28.15-20. with chapter 15.1-35.
David on his deathbed could not die quietly, till he had co^me^ded that work
of revenge unto his son upon Ioab and Shimei, which himself had deferred and
omitted in his life time. 1. Kin. 2.1-9. And all Magistrates having the sword
committed unto them of God shall die with more comfort when according to their
power they have so used it, and besides common justice have on some special
occasions manifested some special zeal for the suppressing and rooting out of
the maine evils reigning in their times. They that have the sword of the Spirit
committed unto them of God are to have revenge in readiness against all
disobedience, by admonitions, rebukes and spiritual censures of sin, (...)
the^, Now I know that thou love me, because thou have not spared thy wealth
from me etc. And therefore besides daily and common works of mercy, the H.
Ghost comme^ds unto us some extraordinary works of mercy upon special
occasion either of mercy received by us or affliction laid upon others. When
the kingdom of heaven was opened after the ascension of Christ and the Spirit
powered out and many converted and spiritual joy abounded, the comfort thereof
produced extraordinary fruits of love, as when Ioses or Barnabas and others
that had lands and houses sold the^ and distributed to the poor Act. 4.34-37.
such gifts could not be give^ every day; yet though it were done but o^ce in
their life, the comfort thereof might well last so long as they lived. Zacheus
that in the day of his joyful conversion and calling stood forth and gave at
once the half of his goods to the poor, though he could not every week make
such distributions; yet the comfort of that one act approoved and accepted of
Christ as a fruit of his faith and token of his salvation could not but be a
perpetual consolation to be thought on even to death. For earthly blessings
received special offerings were to be made at solemn times appointed of God:
such were the feast in Abib, of the first fruits of barley harvest, the feast of
weeks, of the first fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of tabernacles or of
gathering in the fruits of the land in the end of the year: Exo. 23.16. and
34.22. Lev. 23. to teach us that new blessings call for new expressions of
thankfulness, that we may honor God with our substance and with the first
fruits of all our increase. Prove. 3.9. And as upon occasion of special
comforts we are to be moved unto the works of mercy, so also at the
consideration of the special afflictions and wants of others. In the time
after the captivity, when the necessity was great and the bondage heavy upon
the Jews, then did godly Nehemias forbear to take the bread of the Governor,
the stipend of former rulers, and showed extraordinary love and compassion, in
which he comforts himself, praying the Lord to think upon him for good
according to all the kindness that he had done for his people. Nehem.
5.14-18.19. When with extreme need there appear in persons lively tokens of
faith and godliness, the^ especially should take place the counsel of John
Baptist, that we should abridge ourselves of our food and rayme^t rather the^
see others want. Luke 3.10.11. Such good works cannot but follow the godly to
the grave and minister comfort at the last. Rev. 14.13. Act. 9.36.39. It is a
shame unto the disciples of Christ that so many and great purgatory-gifts have
proceeded from the false faith of merit-mongers; when the faith of his most
glorious Gospel does not work the like in true believers: a shame that an idle
dream and servile fear of imagined purgatory should do more then the assured
and certain persuasion of the love of God in Christ.

V. With the work of mercy is to be joined the work of humility and meeknes, as
a special preparative for a comfortable death and translation out of this
world. For as with those that are translated out of this world into heaven
there is no respect of persons; poor Lazarus is carried first in the bosom of
an Angel, and then in the bosom of Abraham the Father of the faithful: Luke
16.22. so those that would begin a heavenly life here and in the end with
comfort be translated, are in like manner to make themselves equal with them
of lower estate, Romans 12.16. to converse with the poor, to carry them in their
bosom; not only to give a few pence of silver, but to power out their heart
and their love unto them. Esa. 58.10. This was prophesyed of as a fruit of
Christ's kingdom; Esa. 11.6.7.8. and such correspondence with the poor Christ
commends unto us with promise of a large recompense, Luke 14.12.13.14. We are
to walk by faith and not by sight: 2. Cor. 5.7. now by faith we see the Angels
ministering unto them who shall be heirs of salvation; Heb. 1. l. Rev. 22.9.
and therefore if we perform the like offices of love and respect unto the
poor servants of Christ we shall be fitter to go with comfort into the society
of Angels. They that thus go out of the world beforehand by leaving the
fashions thereof and become children again, shall have a more comfortable
entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Matt. 18.3. As newborn babes here on
earth are first taken up by one and then by another, and are delivered from one
friends arms to another, every one striving to have them in their arms to
kiss them: so the souls that are borne into heaven, are translated by death
first into the bosom of Angels carrying the^, then into the bosom of Abraham
and the Saints receiving them, every one embracing them with kisses of heavenly
love, and above all into the bosom of the Lord of glory, there to be satisfied
with his love in fullness of joy for evermore. Esa. 40.11. Psalm. 16. l.

VI. Another work whereby men are prepared to die with comfort is the
visitatio^ of the sick and others that are in misery. For the promise is that
he that considers the poor or visits the afflicted shall himself be preserved
and delivered in time of trouble: the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of
languishing; he will make all his bed in his sickness. Psalm. 41.1.2.3. By
visiting the sick men both minister comfort unto others and receive comfort
themselves. First they give comfort and minister a blessing unto those that are
in distress. Thus to visit the fatherless and the widows in their affliction
is pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father. Iam. 1.27.
Onesiphorus is commended for this, and Paul prays heartily for him, because he
sought him out when he was in prison, refreshed him and ministered many things
unto him. 2. Tim. 1.16.17.18. Job notes the excellency of this when he joineth
him that comforts the mourners with a king, even in the army, when he uses
greatest authority. Job 29.25. Whatsoever is done unto the least member of
Christ in this kind, he takes it as done unto himself; and therefore such
shall be remembered and honored by him at the last day. Matt. 25.34-40.
Secondly by visiting those that stand in need of comfort men do also receive
instruction and comfort unto themselves. Eccl. 7.2.3.4. 2. Kin. 13.14.15. etc.
Though we may not inquire at the dead, Deuteronomy. 18.11. yet at the dying we may
learn many wholesome lessons, as of repentance from their complaints of their
sins bewailed, of faith from their joyful professions of their hope and the
examples of their constancy, and of our own mortality and frailety from their
strength languishing, their pale countenances, their dim eyes, their
faltering tongue, their rattling throat, their panting heart, their short
breaths, their painful convulsions, the last pangs and sneckes of death; all
the symptoms of death are so many warnings unto the living to watch and
prepare for their end. Whosoever would be well prepared for death, let them
often repair to such mourning houses, let them so visit others in these cases
that withal they see and learn themselves that which God does there so
plainly teach them. That which Elias said unto Elisha, when he had prayed for
a double portion of his spirit, If thou see me when I am taken from thee it
shall be so unto thee: 2. Kin. 2.9.10. may in some measure in another respect
be said unto us, when seeing others taken away, that very act with the
circumstances of their departure is a means to increase the spirit in us, yea
to double our care and comfort in looking for our end.

VII. Lastly, it is also a work preparatory unto death to have our testament
and Will in readiness, that we need not be troubled therewith at last. When the
message of death was sent unto Hezekias, he was called upon to set his house in
order. Esa. 38.1. Abraham was careful to settle the affairs of his house and
family before his death, as appears by his disposing of Isaak in marriage,
Genesis 24.1.2. etc. and his giving gifts to the sons of Keturah his second wife
and sending them away. Genesis 25.6. But the cheef part of testaments and legacies
are godly exhortations, charges and blessings which parents give unto their
children. This was Isaaks care long before his death though he forgot the
oracle that had assigned the blessing unto the younger. Genesis 27.1-4. Isaak was
then an hundred years old, Genesis 25.26. with chapter 26.34. and he lived in all an
hundred and fourscore years, Genesis 35.28. so that his testament, his blessing
was give^ fourscore years before he dyed. Jacob gave special charges and
blessings unto his sons before he died. Genesis 47.29. and 48. and 49. chapter Thus
did Moses with the children of Israel: Deuteronomy. 33.1. etc. and Joshua: Josh. 23.
and 24. chapter Thus David also in a solemn assembly exhorts the people and
especially his son Solomon to fear the Lord, and encourages him unto the
work that was to be done after him. 1. Chron. 28.1.8.9.10. Solomon had also
received instructions from his mother to the same purpose, which he himself
has recorded, Prove. 31. chapter In special the more to affect children and
friends by exhortations, promises and comforts, I would commend unto fathers
and friends the example of Elijah the Prophet, who in his life time made a
writing which he procured to be delivered unto Iehoram after his death: 2.
Chron. 21.12-15. with 2. King. 3.11. thus there may still be a prophesying
after death, though not by way of foretelling things to come, yet by charges,
admonitions and consolations, which being left with executours or special
friends together with other devises (...) noted in the Scriptures, together
with the grounds thereof, their faith, hope and love. Simeon rejoices at the
approach of his end* Luke 2.29.30. where we may observe the reasons before named
mooving him thereunto; his faith, in having seen the salvation of the Lord,
which was grounded upon the word of promise and produced peace of conscience;
his hope, when he calls death a departing or loosing from bonds, for it is
the same word that elsewhere signifyes to loose or release a prisoner; Mat.
27.15.17. his love of God when he calls himself his servant. Paul also had a
desire to depart upon these three grounds; his hope, Phil. 1.23. his faith and
love. 2. Tim. 4 6.7.8. And as these, so other faithful servants of Christ have
also for the same causes earnestly desired to be absent from the body and to be
present with the Lord. 2. Cor. 5.1.2.8. 2.. Tim. 4.8. with Rev. 22.20.17.

(a) Yet for the better understanding of this point somewhat must be further
considered to prevent a double danger, both of some that seem not to fear
death and of others that confess they fear it. The first sort are those that
despise their life and cast it away without being called of God. These deny the
Lordship of Christ, because that as no man should live to himself, so none
should die to himself but to the Lord, that whether we live or die we may be
the Lords. Romans 14.7.8.9. This murder of a ma^s self is a grievous sin, of
which are guilty not only such as lay violent hands on themselves, but even
those also that rashly expose themselves to unnecessary dangers; combatants,
rash adventurers, such as without a calling or any necessity go to infectious
places, which are as the shadow of death. As soldiers set to keep watch may
not leave their station till the time appointed of their Captain: no more may
we offer to depart hence until we be dismissed or called away of our
Commander. Every man is bound to preserve life so long as by good means he can
do it, or else he breaks the sixth commandment. In like manner do many
offend by impatience and vain wishes of death: Ion. 4.3.8.9. whether they do
it without sense having obdurate and feared consciences, or with extremity of
sense without faith, as in thoughts of despair.

(b) Secondly this point of doctrine touching the fear of death is wisely to
be considered in respect of many weak and infirm persons, which have true
faith, hope and love, and yet are not so ready to (...) selves, feeling some
present unpreparednes, and for the recovery of their strength, that they may in
better manner be fitted to appear before God. Psa. 39.13. As a faithful and
loving wife having had her husband long absent in a far country, or a spouse
her bridegroom, though she cannot but long for his return; yet if it should
so fall out that about the time of his return she should have the yellow
jaundies or some greevous sore and deformity in the face, would wish that her
bridegroom might stay a week or two longer, till her sores were healed and her
strength recovered; or as a Nobleman that unfainedly desires that his Prince
should come to his house, may yet in respect of some want of reparations in his
house desire and wish in his heart that the Kings coming might be deferred a
while till his house were repaired: even so the spouse of Christ and his
faithful servants though they love him dearly and desire nothing so much as
to enjoy his presence to the full; may yet sometimes wish that his coming
might be prolonged for some space of time, till they be in better plight to
entertain him. Secondly they may be loath to depart this life in respect of
others and for their benefit; insomuch that though for their own part they
have an unfeigned desire to be dissolved, yet for the good of others they are
content and desirous to live, as a parent for his childrens education, a Prince
for the reformation and a Minister for the instruction of the people in
dangerous times. Thus it was with Hezekiah, Esa. 38.18.19. and Paul. Phill.
1.21-24.

(d) And yet even in all these distresses, when death approaches and God calls
me^ away, there is comfort against every want: Christ makes supply of all; if
there be any blemish, sore or deformity, he is such a bridegroom as suddenly
heales all and presents us to himself without spot or wrinckle or any such
thing: Ephesians. 5.27. He is the father of the fatherless, the great Shepherd of
the sheep: Heb. 13.20. he will gather, feed and defend his flock, he has
abundance of spirit whereby to fulfill all his good pleasure, he is all in all.
Hezekias had great desire to live to see his children and to teach them: and
yet behold when God had prolonged his life and added unto his days fifteen
years, presently he offe^ds and hears a woeful threatening of judgment, Esa.
39.6.7. Yea Manasses his son whom he got three years after his recovery, and
who entered into the kingdom when he was twelve years old, Hezekias his
fiftee^ years being expired, became a most abominable Idolater, murderer,
witch, etc. 2. Kin. 21.1.2 etc. Had Hezekias known so much when he desird to
live longer to teach his children, it is not likely that he would have been so
desirous of life. Therefore if God call us away we must be content to depart,
whatsoever inconveniences be in the way: and consider how great a fault and sin
it is to be unwilling to go at his call.

(e) To this end it will be profitable to think often of the greatest
hindrances and encumbrances in death, yea to consider of them as if we were now
upon our deathbed and lay presently a dying and gasping for breath; that we
may learn to arm ourselves against all lets and difficulties that make men
unwilling to leave this world. For example:

Obj. I. Some are happily loath to leave the world because of their friends,
kindred, children, acquaintance etc. whose company they still desire to enjoy.

Ans. For one friend whom we leave here we find a thousand in heaven. For I.
Of men in this world we see but one, as it were, our own generation; and of
this generation not the thousandth person: we never saw all the countries of
the world, scarce heard of them, much less their cities, towns, particular
persons. II. Of those we have seen we know not one city, much less are we
acquainted with all the inhabitants; there are many from whom we receive no
love nor any fruits of love, yea some that prove our enemies and from whom
much evil is received. III. For that small number of those that are our true
friends indeed, how weak are they in comparison? not so amiable in soul or
body by an hundred degrees as those to whom we go. IV. If men on earth were as
gracious, virtuous and unblameable as in heaven; yet in this earthly condition
our communion with them is most imperfect defective and lame, in respect of
present necessities laid upon us, as 1. Our drossy nature, whereby we are like
snailes and cannot travel about the world in such swift and glorious motions
as in heaven. 2. Our many trades and vocations binding men like prisoners to
sit the whole week at their work, and confining them to their several
employments. The world is like a Rasp-house or Bridewell, where by the rod of
necessity men are made to work; the twigs or cords of this whip are hunger,
thirst, cold and nakedness; the smart and shame of these does scourge and force
men to labor: thus it is with men here in respect of heaven, where there is no
hindrance from continual making of acquaintance. 3. Our wearines and sleepy
nature making us spend our nights in the shadow of death, as dead men; whereas
in heaven there is no night, no shadow of the earth, which reaches little
further the^ the sphere of the Moon; and therefore is far from causing any
darkness in the third heave^s, in the paradise of God. What darkness or night can
approach thither, where all the righteous shine as the Sun for ever? Matt. 13.43.
4. The weakness of our senses and bodily communion, whereas here two souls
sitting together cannot impart their minds to one another without the outward
organs and instruments of sense; there the spirits without the body are like
angels, go without feet, embrace without hands, see without eyes, hear
without ears, and speak without tongues, for all these we leave in the grave.
But above all friends, we then see God face to face, whom here we could not
behold: Exodus 33.20. here we are as in a dungeon, then we begin to look about
us. Is there any loss in this change?

Ob. II. Others are troubled to think that they must leave house and lands.

Ans. He that teaches bees to make such cabines and closets for themselves,
will not suffer his own children to be destitute of comfortable mansio^s: nay
the Lord has promised and they know it to be so, that glorious pavilions and
chambers are provided for them. Ioh. 14.1.2. 2. Cor. 5.1 Every heart shall then
be a pavilion and chamber of rest and delight unto each other: yea the Lord
himself shall be their house and mansion for ever, 1. Ioh. 4.15.

Ob. III. Another says happily, I care not so much for any outward things, as
to see the good of Gods Church in the acco^plishment of his promises. Among
these there are three special things which a Christian might well desire above
all other things to be seen and enjoyed in this world: viz. 1. The fall of
Babylon and destruction of Antichrist; Rev. 18.20. 2. The destruction of Gog
and Magog, the Turkish monarchy; 3. The full conversion of the Jews, as a new
Jerusalem coming down from heaven, as a bride trimmed for her husband. It may
well be counted a happiness to wait and come unto the sight of such days. Dan.
12.12. (...) 1. Cor. 15.56.57. II. The freenes of Gods grace unto infants is
applied by the H. Ghost unto men of years, that they also may depend on the
same grace through faith. Romans 9.11.16.30. III. Many are called at the eleventh
hour, and God does by such means greatly set forth the freenes of his mercy
in pardoning sinners. Matthew. 20.6-9. Romans 5.20. The sight of Christ by faith
gives title unto all comfort and happiness. Luke 2.30-32. And therefore the
thief on the cross seeing Christ at last, was suddenly translated into glory.
Luke 23.43. Neither let any say, That is but one example; for in effect there
are many very like unto that even in the conversion of many thieves in prison,
in the hands of justice, yea after they have received the sentence of death;
when they die better and give more signs of true repentance then multitudes
that die in their beds. And besides, every man's conversion is in a certain
hour or moment, suddenly as well as the theefes on the cross, though it be
not marked: and it is as great a work and the same in substance, to be
translated out of the state of nature into the state of grace by true
conversion, as to be translated out of this world into heaven, the one
following infallibly upon the other. So Paul's sudden conversion from a
blasphemous persecutour of Christ to be a member and minister of Christ, was as
great as the theefes translation from the cross or gibbet to paradise, or
rather greater. The same may be said of those thousands of murderers of Christ,
suddenly converted at Peter's sermon: Act. 2. the conversion of each of these
was as great as that of the thief, and may as well serve for the comfort of
sinners. Christ is the door: whosoever knockes by faith and whenever, is
sure to enter.

Ob. VI. Besides this the pain and pangs of death are objected by many as a
cause of their fear and why they are loath to die.

Ans. I. We have commandments, comforts, and promises from Christ, to arm us
against such fears. John. 14.1. Revelat. 2.10. The fear of death is one of
the greatest pains in death and yet a fear not to be feared. II. If the pain
of death be sharp, yet it is quickly over: it is but one stride, and at one
leap it transports a man over the gulf of all sorrow into everlasting glory.
III. To (...) God. Our Samson tears this Lion as a kid, destroys death, and
out of the carcass of death brings life, honye and honey combs of eternal
comfort. Let us therefore be cheerful in the exspectation of this happy
conquest, and with comfort entertayne the signs of death drawing near unto
us, as dimnes of sight, deafnes of ears, weakness of limbs, whitenes of head
and hoare hairs: Oh how welcome should these and the like be unto the
faithful? As the children in our streets, when they first see the stork, the
messenger of the Spring, do welcome the same and testify their pleasure with
manifold and joyful acclamations: so should the godly congratulate themselves
when they see the forenamed messengers of their Winter past and Summer
approaching; or else both children and the very storkes in the air, knowing the
times of their coming, shall be witnesses against us. When the fig tree puts
forth his leaves the Summer is nigh: Matt. 24.32. when the almond-tree
flourishes, the^ it hastens the coming of other fruits: Eccl. 12.5. Ier.
1.11.12. when the heralds of death approach; then is it time for us to lift up
our heads, knowing that our redemption is near. When the eyes of the body, the
windows of our prospect into the world begin to be dark, then must we so
much the more open the eyes of our mind, the windows of the soul for our
prospect into heaven, to see things otherwise invisible. When the daughters of
singing are abased, then especially we should labor to open the ears of faith
that we may hear afar off the songs of the virgins that have the harpes of
God, ready to entertayne us into the fellowship of their sweet melodies. When
the grinders are flow and begin to cease, let us then be more frequent in
grinding the wheat of heaven, chewing the cudde and ruminating the manna of the
Evangelicall promises: that should be the old man's milk and the old man's wine,
sweeter then that of the muscadell grape, to warm his cold breast and to
revive his decayed spirits. Having thus entertained the messengers of death, we
shall be the readier to welcome death it self. The nearer we grow to our
journeys end, the greater will be our desire and longing to arrive at that
Rendevous of friends after a long march, that general meeting place after a
wearisome vvandring over hills and dales in this our pilgrimage. As the
diligent husbandman plowes and harrowes, sowes his seed and waits for the
first and latter rain, is glad when it begins to grow, when the blade, the
stalk, the ear appears, and gladder when it is full grown, when the regio^s
are white unto the harvest, when sith and sickle are taken into the hand; but
is then especially filled with joy when the last load of corn is brought home
with shouring and singing, like to the custom that seems to have been in
Israel in their harvest and vintage: Esa. 16.9.10. so in like manner they that
have broken up their fallow ground, have sowed in righteousness, have not been
weary in well doing, but steadfast and unmooveable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, shall then know and see that their labor has not been in
vain in the Lord, shall then have cause to shout and sing for joy, when the
Angels, that are called reapers, Matt. 13.39. shall gather these wheat sheaves
into the heave^ly barn, where the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in
the kingdom of their Father. O that we were wise, that we understood this; so
should we ever with comfort remember our latter END.

Printed at DORT. BY HENRY ASH. M.DCXXXIX.


