The second Tome of the Palace of Pleasure, containing store of goodly
Histories, Tragical matters, and other Moral argument, very requisite for
delighte and profit. Chosen and selected out of diverse good and commendable
Authors:

By William Painter, Clerk of the Ordinance and Armarie. ANNO. 1567.

Imprinted at London, in Pater Noster Row, by Henry Bynneman, for Nicholas
England.

To the right worshipful Sir George Howarde Knighte, Master of the Queen's
Majesty's Armarie.
Every Science having his peculiar commodity, and conducing to the trauailer
and diligent searcher, a due deserved benefit (bysides the exercise and
shunning the pestilent monster Idleness) discloseth the miraculous effect of
the Divinity and the excellency of his Creature: Who breathing life into that
senseless work, framed within the mould of humane Conception, forces in him
by Nature and timely institution, such capacity of Science, as not only by
that knowledge he glorifieth his Creator, but also besides himself, helps
and does good to other. For proof whereof, the Science of that surpassing and
delightsome pasture of Theology, is profitable to teach, argue, reprove, and
instruct, that by patience and consolation, we may conceue hope of Eternity.
The knowledge of Philosophy cures the mind, auoideth childish care, expels
fear, and shunneth fond desires. O Philosophy, the guide of life (exclameth
Tullie) the inquisitor of Virtue, and expeller of vice. Rhetorike (affirms
he) causes us to learn that we know not, and that we know, to teach to
other: By the same we exhort, with that we persuade, with that we comfort the
afflicted, by it we encourage the astonned, and appease the outrageous. Music
eases the troubled mind, lenifieth sorrow, comfort the heavy hearted, and
erecteth a contemplation of heavenly things. Astronomy reuealeth the nature of
the Stars and Planets, presageth days and times for the help and
maintenance of life. Poesy teaches amendment of manners, directs what
things be mete for imitation, and with what detriment wantonness anoyeth the
body of man. By means of it (Saint Augustine says) he learned many good
lessons to (...) fite himself, and do good to other. To be short, every (...)
so necessary, as the same taken away, Reason is deprived, (...) the Life of
man, of due order and (...) (...) Think (says a Greek Orator) the knowledge
of many (...) to be more precious and excellent, than a chest heaped up (...)
abundance of money: for the one quickly fails, and the (...) for ever
lasts. For, Scientia (affirms he) is the only (...) mortal storehouse of
all possessions: Amongs which troop (...) Sciences the knowledge and (...) of
History deserves (...) place in the chiefest rank, and is for example of
humane (...) faires, a Crystal light to show the paths of our (...). The
same displayeth the counsels, aduises, policies, acts, (...) and ends of Kings,
Princes, and great men, with the order and description of time and place, And
like a lively image represents before our eyes the beginning, end and
circumstaunce of each attempt. The same (like a Mistress of our life) by
probable examples, stirs up our sluggishe minds, to aspire the eternal
glory of praise and fame, and terrifieth the (...) and adue^turous, from
enterprise of things unseemly. The same is a passing picture of Verity, and an
absolute Pattern, framing the matter, greater nor less than it is. And because
I am not ignorant what Encomia innumerable Authors in time paste, and writers
of our time do attribute unto that Science, and with what titles the Prince
of them all decketh the praise of Historical knowledge, I only refer the
worthiness, to the practisers, and the singularity of Histories travel and
delight, to each willing mind that employ their leisure and time therein. And I
for my part (...) confess (that by reading of Histories) I find the saying
which Tullie aduoucheth of Publius Scipio to be true: That he was never less
idle, than when he was idle, and never less alone than when he was alone:
Meaning thereby, that when he was at best leisure, he was (...) idle, nor when
he was alone, unoccupied. For when Labor rests him self in me, and Leisure
refreshes other affairs, nothing delights more that vacant time, than reading
of Histories in such vulgar speech, wherein my small knowledge takes repast.
And for that my private reding might not delight and pleasure me alone, to
avoid the nature of that cancred chorle and foe of humane company, Timon of
Athenes, that lived but for him self, I have (after my skill) culled some
flowers and fruits from that pleasant store of those my readings to impart for
universal gain and (...), choosing rather hereby to follow the liberality of
Cimon a Gentleman of that City, who knowing himself to be borne to profit
other, and for the enriching of his country, not only achieved marueious
matters for furthera^ce of Common wealth, but left his Gardens and Orchardes
open for all men to participate the fruits of his pleasure and travel. Whereby
(so well as I can) I follow the tracte and practice of other, by whose means,
so manifold sciences in our known tongue, and translation of Histories be
frequent and rife amongs us. All which be done for our commodity, pleasure,
solace, preservation and comfort, and without the which we can not be long
sustained in this miserable life, but shall become not much unlike the
barbarous, (...) discrepant from the savage sort. The inuestigatours and
bringers to light whereof, direct their eyes and mening to none other end, but
for the benefit of us and our posterity, and that our faces be not tainted
with the blushing color, to see the passing diligence of other Countries, by
curious imbelishing of their states, with the troublous travail of their
brain, and laborsome course of pen, Who altogether imploye those pains, that
no Science lurk in corner, that no Knowledge be shut up in cloisters, that no
History remain under the mask and unknown attire of other tongues. Amo^gs
which crew (I say) I crave an inferior place, and have undertaken the unfolding
of sundry Histories, from the couerture of foren language, for none other
purpose and intent but to universal benefit. Part whereof, two years past
(almost) were made commune in a former book, now succedeth a second, furnished
with like ornaments that the other was. The first (by duties challenge) was
addressed to the right honorable the Earl of Warwike, for respect of his honor,
and my calling. This the second, by like band, your worship may justly claim
as a just tribute, now this month of Nouembre, payable. Or if your Courtesy
would not deal so roughly with your bounden creditour, yet for duty sake I
must acquit and content that which has so long ben due. The Same I offer now,
not with such usury and gain as your benevolence and singular bounty, by
long for bearing has deserved, but with such affected will and desire of
recompense, as any man alive can owe to so rare a friend. Your worship I have
chosen for the first person of this book, and the protector of the same (the
matter most specially therein comprised, treting of courtly fashions and manners,
and of the customs of loves galantise, and the good or ill success thereof)
because you be an ancient Courtier, and one of the eldest Train, and such as
has been employed by sundry our Princes, in their affairs of greatest weight
and importance: and for that your self in your lustiest time, (ever bred and
brought up in Court) have not been unacquainted with those occurrents. If I
should stand particularly to touch the original of your noble Ancestrie, the
succession of that renoumed line, their fidelity for grave advise and
counsel, your honorable education, the marriage of a mighty King with one of
your sisters, the valiant exploites of your parents against the French and
Scots, the worthy service of your self in field, whereby you deservedly wanne
the order of Knighthode, the trust which her Majesty reposeth in you, by
disposing under your charge the Store of her Armure, and your worthy
preferment to be Master of her Armarie general. If I should make recital of
your careful industry and painful travel, sustained for answering her
Majesty's expectation, your noble cherishing of the skillful in that Science,
your good advancement of the best, to supply the vacant romes, your refusal
of the unworthy: and finally of your modest and courteous dealings in that
office, I fear lack of ability (and not of matter) would want grace and
order by further circumstaunce, to add sufficient praise: Yea although my self
do say nothing (but reserve the same in silence to avoid suspect of adulation)
the very Armure and their furnitures do speak, universal testimony does
wonder, and the Readiness of the same for time of service does aduouche. Which
care of things continually resting in your breast, has achieved such a
timely diligence and success, as when her Majesty's adversary shall be ready
to molest, she shall be pressed (by Gods assistance) to defend and march. But not
to hold your worship long by length of preamble, or to discourse what I might
further say, either in favor of this Book, or commendation of your self, I
mean (for this instant) to leave the one to general judgment, and the other
to the particular sentence of each of your acquaintance. Humbly making this
only suit, that my good will may supply the imperfection of mine ability.

And so with my hearty prayer for your preservation, to him that is the Author
of life and health. I take my leave.

From my poor house besides the Toure of London, the fourth of November 1567.

Your most bounden William Painter.

A Summarie of the Nouels ensuing.
The Hardiness and conquestes of diverse stout and aduenturous Women called
Amazones, the beginning, continuance and end of their reign, and of the great
journey of one of their Queens called Thalestris to visit Alexander the great,
and the cause of her travail. Nouel. j. Fol. 1. The great piety and
continency of Alexander the great, and his loving interteinement of
Sisigambis, the Wife of the great Monarch Darius after he was vanquished.
Nouel. ij. Fol. 5. Thimoclia, a Gentlewoman of Thebes, understanding the
couefous desire of a Thracian Knight, that had abused her and promised her
marriage rather for her goods than Love, well acquitted hirselfe from his
falsehode. Nouel. iij. Fol. 9. Ariobarzanes great Steward to Artaxerxes King
of Persia, goes about to exceed his sovereign Lord and master in Courtesy:
wherein are contained many notable and pleasant chances, besides the great
patience and loyalty naturally planted in the said Ariobarzanes. Nouel. iiij.
Fol. 11. Lucius one of the Guard to Aristotimus the Tyranne of the City of
Elis, fell in love with a fair Maiden called Micca, the daughter of one
Philodemus, and his cruelty done upon her. The stoutness also of a noble
Matrone named Megistona, in defense of her husband and the Common wealth from
the tyranny of the said Aristotimus: and of other acts done by the subjects,
upon that tyrant. Nouel. v. Fol. 32. The marvelous courage and ambition of a
gentlewoman called Tanaquil, yt Queen and wife of Tarquinus Priscus the fifth
Roman King, with her persuasions and policy to her husband, for his
advancement to the kingdom: her like encouragement of Seruius Tullius: wherein
also is described the ambition of one of the two daughters of Seruius Tullius,
the sixth Roman King, and her cruelty toward her own natural father: with
other accidents chanced in the new erected Common wealth of Rome, specially of
the last Roman King Tarquinus Superbus, who with murder attained the
kingdom, with murder maintained it, and by the murder and insolent life of his
son, was with all his progeny banished. Nouel. vj. Fol. 40. The unhappy end
and success of the love of King Massinissa, and of Queen Sophonis ba his
Wife. Nouel. vij. Fol. 49. The cruelty of a King of Macedon, who forced a
Gentlewoma^ called Theoxena, to persuade her children to kill and poison
themselves: after which fact, she and her husband Poris, ended their life by
drowning. Nouel. viij. Fol. 59. A strange and marvelous use, which in old
time was observed in Hidrusa: where it was lawful (with the license of a
Magistrate ordained for that purpose) for every man and woman that list, to
kill them selves. Nouel. ix. Fol. 62. The dishonest love of Faustina the
Empress, and with what remedy the same was removed and taken away. Nouel. x.
Fol. 65. Chera hid a treasure, Elisa going about to hang her self, and sying
the halter about a (...), found that treasure, and in place thereof left the
halter. Philene, the daughter of Chera, going for that treasure, and busily
searching for the same, sound the halter, where with all for despair shae
would have hanged her self: but forbidden by Elisa, who by chance espied
her, she was restored to part of her loss, leading afterward a happy and
prosperous life. Nouel. xj. Fol. 67. Letters of the Philosopher Plutarch, to
the noble and (...) Emperor Traiane, and from the said Emperor so Plutarch,
the like also from the said Emperor to the Senate of Rome. In all which be
contained Godly rules for government of Princes, obedience of Subjects, and
their duties to Common wealth. Nouel. xij. Fol. 76. A notable history of
three amorous Gentlewomen, called Lamia, Flora, and Lais: co^teining the suits
of noble Princes, and other great personages made unto them, with their
answers to diverse demands: and the manner of their death and funerals. Nouel.
xiij. Fol. 123. The life and gestes of the most famous Queen Zenobia, with the
Letters of the Emperor Aurchanus, to the said Queen, and her stout
answer thereunto. Nouel. xiiij. Fol. 89. Euphimia the King of Corinths
daughter, fell in love with Acharisto, the servant of her father, and besides
others which required her to marriage, she (...) Philon, the King of Pelponesus,
that loved her very fervently. Acharisto conspiring against the King, was
discovered, tormented, and put in prison, and by means of Euphimia delivered:
The King promised his daughter and kingdom to him that presented the head of
Acharisto. Euphimia so wrought, as he was presented to the King: The King gave
him his daughter to Wife: and when he died, made him his heir: Acharisto began
to hate his wife, and condemned her to death as an adulteress. Philon
delivered her: and upon the suit of her Subjects, she is contented to marie
him, and thereby he is made King of Corinth. Nouel xv. Fol. 101. The
Marchioness of Monferrato, with a bankette of Hens, and certain pleasant
words, repressed the fond love of Philip, the French King. Nouel. xvj. Fol.
112. Mistress Dianora demanded of Master Ansaldo, a Garden so fair in
Januarie, as in the Month of May. Master Ansaldo (by means of an obligation
which he made to a Necromancer) caused the same to be done: The husband
agreed with the Gentlewoman that she should do the pleasure which master Ansaldo
required: who hearing the liberality of the husband, acquitted her of her
promise, and the Necromancer likewise discharged master Ansaldo. Nouel. xvij.
Fol. 114. Mithridanes, envious of the liberality of Nathan, and going about to
kill him, spoke unto him unknown, and being informed by himself by what
means he might do the same, he found him in a little woodde accordingly as
he had told him, who knowing him, was ashamed, and became his friend. Nouel.
xviij. Fol. 118. Master Gentil of Carisendi, being come from Modena, took a
woman out of her grave, that was buried for dead, who after she was come
again, brought forth a son, which Master Gentil rendered afterward with
the mother to master Nicholas Chasenemie her husband. Nouel. xix. Fol. 123.
Saladine, in the habit of a merchant, was honorably received into the house of
Master Thorello, who went over the sea, in company of the Christians, and
assigned a term to his wife, when she should marie again. He was taken, and
carried to the Souldan to be his falconer, who knowing him, and suffering him
self to be known, did him great honor. Master Thorello fell sick, and by
Magike art, was carried in a night to Pauie, where he found his wife about to
marie again, who knowing him, returned home with him to his own house. Nouel.
xx. Fol. 128. A Gentleman of mean calling and reputation, both fall in love
with Anne, the Queen of Hungary, who^ (...) very royally and liberally
requited. Nouel xxj. Fol. 140. The gentle and just act of Alexander de Medices,
the first Duke of Florence, upon a Gentleman, whom he favored, who having
ravished the daughter of a poor Miller, caused him to marie her, for the
greater honor and celebration whereof, he appointed her a rich and honorable
dowry. Nouel. xxij. Fol. 155. The Unfortunate marriage of a Gentleman, called
Antonie Bologna, with the Duchess of Malfi, and the pitiful death of them
both. Nouel. xxiij. Fol. 169. The disordred life of the Countess of Celant,
and how she (causing the Count of Massino to be murdered) was beheaded at
Milan. Nouel. xxiiij. Fol. 195. The goodly history of the true and constant
love between Rhomeo and Iulietta: the one of whom died of poison, and the
other of sorrow and heaviness: wherein be comprised many adventures of love,
and other devises touching the same. Nouel. xxv. Fol. 218. Two Gentlemen of
Venice, were honorably decetued of their wives, whose notable practices, and
secret conference for atchieuing their desire, occasioned diverse accidents,
and engendered double benefit, wherein also is recited an eloquent oration made
by one of them, pronounced before the Duke and state of that City: with other
chances and acts concerning the same. Nouel. xxvj. Fol. 247. The Lord of
Virle, by the commandment of a fair young Widow called Zilia, and for her
promise made, the better to attain her love, was contented to remain dumb
the space of three years: and by what means he was revenged and obtained his
suit. Nouel. xxvij. Fol. 268. Two Barons of Hungary assuring them selves to
obtain their suit made to a fair Lady of Boeme, received of her a strange
and marvelous repulse, to their shame and infamy, curssing the time that ever
they adventured an enterprise so foolish. Nouel. xxviij. Fol. 292. Dom Diego,
a Gentleman of Spain, fell in love with fair Gineura, and she with (...) their
love by means of one that envied Dom Diego his happy choice, was by the
default of light credit on her part interrupted. He constant of mind, fell
into despair, and abandonyng all his friends and living, repaired to the
Pyrene Mountains, where he led a savage life for certain Months, (...)
afterward (known by one of his friends) was by marvelous circumstance
reconciled to his froward mistress, and married. Nouel. xxx. Fol. 309. A
Gentleman of Siena, called Anselmo Salimbene, courteously and gently delivers
his enemy from death. The condemned party seeing the kind part of
Salimbene, renders into his hands his sister Angelica, with whom he was in
love: which gratitude and Eurtesie Salimbene well markyng, moved in conscience
would not abuse her, but for recompense took her to wife. Nouel. xxx. Fol.
350. A Widow called Mistress Helena, with whom a Scholar was in Love (she
loving an other) made the same Scholar to stand a whole Wynters night in the
Snow to wait for her, who afterward by a sleyghte and policy, made her in
July, to stand upon a Toure stark naked, amongs Flies, and Gnattes, and in the
Sun. Nouel. xxxj. Fol. 376. A Gentlewoman, and Wydowe, called Camiola, of her
own mind raunsomed Rolande, the Kings son of Sicilia, of purpose to have
him to her husband, who when he was redeemed, unkindly denied her, against
whom very eloquentely she inueyed, and although the law proved him to be
her husband, yet for his unkindness, she utterly refused him. Nouel. xxxij.
Fol. 391. Great cruelties chanced to the lords of Nocera, for adultery by
one of them committed with the Captains wife of the Fort of that City, with an
enterprise moved by the Captain to the Citizens of the same, for rebellion,
and the good and and duetiful answer of them: with other pitiful events,
rising of that notable and outrageous vice of whooredome. Nouel. xxxiij. Fol.
297. The great Courtesy of the King of Marocco, a City in Barbary, toward a
poor Fisherman, one of his subjects, that had lodged the King, being stolen
from his company in hunting. Nouel. xxxiiij. Fol. 410.

To the Reader.
AS shevved courtesy deserves grateful acquitall, and friendly favor forces
mutual merit, So for gentle acceptance of my other book, I render to thy
delight and profit a Second Tome. For which I crave but like report: albeit
neither worthy of any: or other, than the rude (...) gayneth by trial of his
art. Who having committed to his skill and workmanship, some substance of
gold or other precious matter, fashioneth the same with such (...) shape and
order, as (besides dispraise) it carries the unableness of the workman.
Howsoever (then) the ableness or perfection hereof (...) shall content or
particularly displease: the Book craves mild construction, for employed
pains. And yet the same (liking or lothing the licorous diet and curious
expectation of some) shall bear regard with those, that more delight in
wholesome viandes (void of variety) than in the confused mixture of foren
drugges fetched far of. Who no dout will supply with favorable brute, default
of ableness, and riper skill in the mysteries of sorren speech. Which is the
guerdon (besides public benefit) after which I gaze, and the best stipende
that each well willing mind (as I suppose) aspireth for their travel. And
briefly to touch what comoditie thou shall reap of these succeding Histories,
I deem it not unapt for thine instruction, to unfold what pithe and substance,
rests under the context of their discourse.

In the Novel of the AMAZONES, is displaied a strange and miraculous port (to
our present skill) of women's government, what states they subdued, what
increase of kingdom, what combats and conflicts they durst attempt contrairie
to the nature of that sex.

In ALEXANDRE the great, what ought to be the gratitude and courtesy in a (...)
Prince, toward his slave and captive, and to what perilous plundge he slippeth
by exchange of vice for virtue.

In TIMOCLIA and THEOXENA the stoutnesse of two noble Dames to avoid the
beastly lust and raging fury of Tyrants.

ARIOBARZANES tells the duty of a Subject to his Prince: and how he ought
not to contend with his sovereign in matters of courtesy, at length also the
condition of Courting flaterers: and the poison of the Monster Envy.

ARISTOTIMVS disgarboileth the iutrails of Tyranny, describing the end
whereunto Tyrants do atteine, and how that vice plageth their posterity.

The two Roman Queens do point (as it were) with their fingers, the natures
of Ambition and Cruelty, and the gredy lust (hidden in that feeble sex) of
soueraintie.

SOPHONISBA reports the force of beauty, and what poison distilleth from
that licorous sap to inuenim the hearts of valiant (...).

The Gentlewoman of HYDRVSA the sicklenesse of Fortune.

The Empress FAVSTINA and the Countess of Celant, what (...) blome of whorish
life and what fruits thereof be culled.

The Letters of the Emperor TRAIANE, do paint a right shape of virtue, a good
state of government, and the comely form of obedience.

Three Amorous Dames (...) the sleightes of love, the readiness of Nobles to be
baited with that amorous hook, and what desire such infamous Strumpets have,
to be honored.

Queen ZENOBIA, what the noble Gentlewomen, (whom the fates ordaino to rule)
ought to do, how far their magnanimity ought to stretch, and in what bounds
to contain their soueraintie.

EVPHIMIA a Kings daughter of Corinthe, and the unfortunate Duchess of Malfi,
what match of marriage Ladies of renown, and Dames of Princcly houses ought to
choose.

Mistress DIANORA, MITHRIDANES and NATHAN, KATHERINE of Bologna, and SALADINE,
the mutual (...) of noble and gentle personages, and for what respects.

Queen ANNE of Hungary, the good nature and liberality of a Queen: and with
what industry Gentlewomen of privy chaumbre ought to prefer the suits of
the valiant, and of such as have well served the Commonwealth.

ALEXANDRE de Medices, a Duke of Florence, the justice of a Prince and
Governor to the wronged party, what (...) ought to shine in Courtiers, and
with what temperance their insolence is to be repressed.

IVLIETTA and RHOMEO disclose the hearty affections of two incomparable lovers,
what secret sleightes of love, what danger either sort incur which mary
without the advice of Parents.

Two Gentlewomen of Venice the wisdom and policy of wives to (...) and
restrain the follies of Husbands, and the stoutnesse they ought to use in
their defense.

The Lord of Virle and the widow ZILIA, give lessons to Lovers, to avoid the
immoderate pangs of love, they pronosticate the indiscretion of promised
penance, they warn to beware all unseemly hestes, lest the penalties of
couetise and (...) glory be incurred.

The Lady of Boeme, schooleth two noble Barons, that with great boast assured
themselves to impair her honor.

DOM DIEGO and GINEVRA, record the cruelty of women, bent to hate, and the
voluntary vow performed by a passionate knight, with the perfect friendship of
a true (...) in redress of a friends missehap.

SALIMBENE and ANGELICA the kindness of a gentleman in delivery of his
enemy, and the constant mind of a chaste and virtuous maiden.

Mistress HELENA of Florence, discovers what lothsom lusts do lurk under
the bark of fading beauty, what stench of filthy affection fumeth from the
smoldring gulf of dishonest Love, what prankes such Dames do play for deceit
of other and shame of themselves.

CAMIOLA reproves the mobilitie of youth, such chiefly as for noble anncestrie
regarded riches more than virtue. She like a Mistress of constancy lessoneth
her equalles from wavering minds, and not to adventure upon vnstedie
contracts: with those that care not (under what pretense) they come by riches.

The Lords of Nocera foretell the hazards of whordom, the rage of (...), the
difference of (...) between Prince and subject, the fructes of a Rebel, the
ends of Traiteric and Tyranny, and what monstrous success such vices do
attain.

The King of Marocco describes the good nature of the homely and loiall
subject, the matuelous love of a true and simple Cuntry man toward his liege
and sovereign Lord, and the bounty of a curetous prince, upon those that
under rude attire be (...) with the flowers of virtue.

To be short, the conte^ts of these Nouels from degree of highest Emperor, from
the state of greatest Queen and Lady, to the homely (...) peasant and rudest
vilage girl, may conduce profit for instruction, and pleasure for delight.
They offer rules for avoiding of vice and imitation of virtue, to all estates.
This book is a very Court and Palace for all sorts to fix their cies therein,
to view the deuoires of the Noblest, the virtues of the gentlest, and the
duties of the meanest. Yt is a Stage and Theater, for show of true Nobility,
for proof of passing loialtie, and for trial of their contraries, Wherefore
as in this I have continued what erst I partly promised in the first: So upon
intelligence of the second sign of thy good will, a Third (by Gods assistance)
shall come forth.

Farewell.
Authorities from whence these Nouels be collected: and in the same avouched.
Strabo. Pliny Quintus Curtius. Plutarche Titus Liuius. Dionysius
Halcarnasoeus. Appianus Alexandrinus. Ouide Horace Propertius. Cicero. Valerius
Max. Tribelius Pollio. Xenephon. Homere Virgilius. Baptista Campofulgosus.
Bandello. Bocaccio. Gyraldi Cynthio. Belleforrest. Boustuau. Pietro di
Seuiglia. Antonio di Gueuarra
THE SECOND TOME of the Palace of Pleasure.
The Amazones.
The hardiness and conquests of diverse stout and (...) women, called AMAZONES,
the beginning and continuance of their reign, and of the great (...) of one
of their Queens called THALESTRIS to visit ALEXANDER the great: and the cause
of her (...).

The first Nouel.
WHere the first book began with a Co^bate fought and tried between two mighty
cities, for principality and government, the one hight Rome after called the
head of the world (as some think by reason of a man's head found in the place
where the Capitole did stand) the other Alba. To which Combat (...) gentlemen
of either city were appointed, and the victory chanced to the Roman side:
In this second part, in the forefront and first Nouel of the same, is
described the beginning, continuance and end of a Woman's Common wealth (an
History (...) and strange to the unlearned, ignorant of the (...) fickle
ruled stay) which contended with mighty Princes and puissant Potentates for
defense of their kingdom, no less than the Carthaginians and Romans did for
theirs. But as it is no wonder to the skilful that a whole Monarche and kingdom
should be inticrly peopled with that Sex: so to the not well trained in
Hystories, this may seem miraculous. Wherefore not to stay thee from the
discourse of those strange and Aduenturous women, diverse be of diverse opinions
for the Etimologie of the word: where of among the Grecians (...) diverse
judgments. These Amazones were most excellent warriers, very valiant, and
without man's advise did conquer mighty Countries, famous Cities, and notable
Kingdoms, continuing of long time in one Seigniorie and government. These
people occupied and enjoyed a great part of Asia. Some writers divide them into
two Provinces, one in Scithia in ye North part of Asia: other by the hill
Imaus, which at this day is called the Tartarian Scithia, different from that
which is in Europa: the other sort of the Amazones were in Libia a province of
Africa. But because the common sort of Authors do understand the Amazones to
be those of Asia, I mean to leave off the difference. The Scithians were a
warlike people, and at the beginning of their kingdom had two kings, by whom
they were governed. Notwithstanding the nature of dominion being of it self
ambicious, cannot abide any companion or equal. Which caused these two Kings
to beat variance, and afterward the matter grew to civil wars, wherein the
one being Uictory, two of the principal and (...) of the contrary faction,
called Plinius and Scolopithos, were banished with a great number of their
(...), all which did withdraw themselves to the limits of Cappadocia in the
lesser Asia, and in despite of the Country Pesantes, dwelled alonges the river
of Thermodon, which enters into the sea Euxinum, otherwise called Pontus. And
they being made Lords of the country, and of the places adjoining, reigned
for certain years until the peasantes and their confederates made a
conspiracy against them: and assembling by policy, overcame them and slew
them all. The news of their death known to their wives dwelling in their
country, caused them to conceive great heaviness and dolor extreme. And
although they were women, yet did they put on ma^ly courage, and determined to
revenge the death of their husbands, by putting their hands to weapons
wherwithall they did exercise themselves very often. And that they might all be
equal and their sorrow common, they murdered certain of their husbands which
remained there after the other were banished. Afterward being all together,
they made a great army, and forsook their dwelling places, refusing the marriage
of many suitors. And arriving in the land of their enemies (that made small
account thereof, although foretold of their approache) they suddenly came upon
them unprovided, and put them all to the sword. This being done, the women took
the gouerna^ce of the Country, inhabiting at the beginning along the River of
Thermodon, where their husbands were stain. And although many Authors do differ
in the situacio^ of the place where the Amazones did dwell, yet the truth is,
that the beginning of their kingdom and of their habitacion was upon that
River. But of their manifold conquestes, be engendered diverse opinions declared
by Strabo and others. They fortified them selves in those places and wanne
other countries adjoining, chosing among them two Queen's, the one named
Martesia, and and the other Lampedo. Those two louyngly divided the army and
men of war in two parts, either of them defending (with great hardiness) the
Lands which they had conquered: and to make them selves more dreadful (such
was the credit and vanity of men that time) they fained themselves to be yt
daughters of Mars. Afterward these miraculous women living after this manner in
peace and justice, considered that by succession of time, for want of
daughters that might succeed, wars, and time, would extinguishe their race.
For this cause they treated marriage with their neighbors named Gargarians (as
Pliny says) with condition, that upon certain times of the year, their
husbands should assemble together in some appointed place, and use them for
certain days until they were with child: which being done and known, they
should return home again to their own houses. If they brought forth
daughters, they norished and trained them up in arms, and other manlyke
exercises, and to ride great horse. They taught them to run at base, and to
follow the chase. If they were delivered of males, they sent them to their
fathers. And if by chance they kept any back, they murdered them, or else
brake their arms and legs in such wise as they had no power to bear
weapons, and served for nothing else but to spin, twist, and to do other
feminine labor. And for as much as these Amazones defended themselves so
valiantly in the wars with Bow and Arrows, and perceived, that their
breasts did very much impech the use of that weapon, and other exercises of
arms, they seared up ye right breasts of their young daughters, for which
cause they were named Amazones, which signifies in the Greek tongue, without
breasts, although that some other do give unto that name an other Etimologie.
Afterward, increasing by course of time in number and force, they made great
preparation of weapons and other (...) for the wars, and leaving their
country (which they thought was very small) in the keeping of some, whom they
specially trusted, ye rest marched abroad, co^quering and subduing all those
which they found rebellious. And having passed the river of Tanais, they entered
Europa, where they vanquished many countries, directing their way toward
Thracia, from whence they returned a while after, with great spoil and
victory: and coming again into Asia, they brought many provinces under their
subjection, proceeding even to Mare Caspium. They edified and peopled an
infinite number of good cities, amo^gs which, according to the opinion of
diverse, was the famous City of Ephesus, the same being the chief of all
their Empire, and the principal place that stood upon Thermodon. They defended
them selves in wars with certain Tergats, made in fashion of a half Moon,
and entering into battle used a certain kind of flutes to give the people
courage to fight, as the Lacedemonia^s were wont to do. In this wise increased
more and more the same of those women, and so continued until the time that
Hercules, Theseus, and many other valiant men lived in Graecia. The said
Hercules, king Euristeus of Athenes commanded, to proceed with great force of
people against the Amazons, and that he should bring unto him the armures of the
two Queens, which then were two sisters, that is to say Antiopa and Oritia. At
this commandment Hercules incoraged with desire of honor and glory,
accompanied with Theseus, and other his friends, sailed (...) Pontus, and
arrived in most convenient place upon the shore of Thermodon, where he la^ded
in such secret manner and with such opportunity of time, as Oritia, one of the
two Queen's was gone out of the country with the greatest part of her women, to
make war and conquer new Countries, in so much that he found Antiopa,
which doubted nothing, ne yet knew of his coming. Upon which occasion,
Hercules and his people surprising the Amazones unawares, and although they
entered into field and did put them selves in defense with such diligence as
the time served, yet they were overcome, and put to flight, and many of them
slain, and the rest taken: amongst whom were the two sisters of the Queen, the
one named Menalipe which was Hercules prisoner, and the other Hipolita, the
prisoner of Theseus. Certain Historia^s do say, that they were vanquished in a
pitched field, and appointed battle. And that afterward the two (...) sters
were vanquished in singular Combat. The Queen Antiopa then seeing this
overthrow, and the taking of her sisters, came to composition with Hercules, to
whom (...) gave her armure to carry to Euristeus. Upon charge that he should
render unto her, her sister Menalipe. But Theseus for no offer that she could
make, would deliver Hipolita, with whom he was so far in love, that he carried
her home with him, and afterward took her to wife, of whom he had a son
called Hipolitus. Hercules satisfied of his purpose, returned very joyful of
his victory. Oritia certified of these news, being then out of her (...),
conceived no less shame than sorrow, who fearing greater damage, returned
spedily with her women, ye greter part whereof being of her opinion, persuaded
(...) opa to be reue^ged upon the Greeks. For which purpose they made great
preparation of war. And afterward leuying so great a number of yt Amazons as
they could, they sent to Sigillus king of Scythia for succor: who sent them
his son Pisagoras, with a great number of horsemen, by whose help the
Amazones passing into Europa, and country about Athenes, they greatly (...)
their (...). But Pisagoras entered in quarrel against the Queen and her women,
by means whereof, the Scythians could not fight, but withdrew them selves
aside, whereby the Amazones (not able to supporte the force of the Greeks,)
were overcome and vanquished, and the gretest part of the^ cut in pieces. Those
which did escape, ran to the Scythians camp, of whom they were defended.
Afterward being returned into their country, they lived in less force and
surety than before. In process of time the Greeks passed into Asia, and made
a famous conqueste of the City of Troy, when Penthesilea was Queen of the
Amazones, who remembering ye injuries received by the Greeks, went with a great
army to help the Trojans: Where that Queen did things worthy of remembrance,
but the Troianes vanquished, in many skirmishes all the Amazones were almost
slain. And Penthesilea amongs other, was killed by the hand of Achilles.
Wherefore those that remained, returned into their country, with so little
power (in respect of that they had before) as with great difficulty they
sustained and defended their old possessions, and so continued till the time
that Alexander the great went into Asia, to make war against the Hircanians.
In (...) time one of their Queens named Thalestris, accompanied with a great
number of the Amazones, went out of her country with great desire to see and
know Alexander. And approaching the place where he was, she sent her
Ambassador unto him to the end that she might obtain safeconducte to see
him, making him to understand how much the (...) of his personage had
inflamed her heart to see him. Whereof Alexander being (...), granted her his
(...). By means whereof, after she had chosen out some of her principal women,
leaving the rest in a certain place in very good order, she went toward
Alexander, of whom she was courteously entertained, and then with very good
countenance, she offered unto him the effect of al her ability. Who prayed her
to tell him, if he were able to do her pleasure, and promised that her request
should be accomplished. She answered that her coming was not to demand either
lands or dominions, (whereof she had sufficient) but rather to know and be
acquainted with such a famous Prince as he was, of whom she had heard
marvelous and strange report. But the chiefest cause of her coming was; to
pray him of carnal copulation, that she might be conceived with child, and
have an heir begotten of so excellent a prince, telling him that she was come
of noble kind, and of high parentage, and that he ought not to disdain her
use. Promisyng him that if it pleased the Gods, that she should have a
daughter, she would nourish it her self, and make it her universal heir, and
if it were a (...), she would send it unto him. Alexander asked her if she
would go with him to the wars, and if she would, he promised her his
company. But she excusing her self, answered that she could not go with him
without great shame and danger of loss of her kingdom. Wherefore she prayed
him again to satisfy her request. Finally she kept company with Alexander by
the space of. xiij. days in public and secret sort, which being expired,
she took her leave, and returned home to her province. But as it is the
property of time to consume all things: even so the kingdom and power of the
Amazones grew to utter decay, no one such nation at this day to be found. For
what monstrous Sex was this that durst not only by many armies encountre with
puissant nations, but also by such single Combat, to fight with that terrible
personage Hercules, whose unspeakable and incredible labors and victories, are
by antiquity reported to be such, as none but he, duxst ever adventure the
like. Whose nation was comparable to the Greeks, or the nian city? and yet
these mankind women for revenge shronke not to pierce their province. What
like besieged town as that of Troy was? and yet Penthesilea one of their
Nueenes with her maynie, would go about to raise the Greeks, that so many
years had lien before the same. What Queen (nay what Stalant) durst sue for
company of meanest man? and yet one of these presumed to beg the match of
the mightiest Monarch that ever ruled the world. The manners and qualities of
which nation, because they were women of no common spirit and boldness, be
thought good in the front of this second volume to be described: because of
diverse women's lives plentiful variety is offered in the sequel. And for that
some mention has been made of the great Alexander, and in what wise from
virtue he fell to vice, the second Novel ensuing, shall give some further
advertisement.

Alexander the great.
The great pity and co^tinencie of ALEXANDER the great and his loving
entertainme^t of SISIGAMBIS, the wife of the great Monarch. (...), after he
was vanquished.

The second Nouel.
GReat Monarchs and princes be the Gods and only rulers upon earth, and as
they be placed by Gods only providence and disposition, to conquer and rule
the same, even so in victorious battles and honorable exploites, they ought
to rule and order their conquests like Gods: that is to say, to use moderate
behavior to their captives and slaves, specially to the weaker sort and
feminine kind, whom like tyrants and barbarous, they ought not to corrupt and
abuse, but like Christians and virtuous victors, to cherish and preserve their
honor. For what can be safe to a woman (said Lucrece, when she was (...) by
the Roman Tarquine) her chastity being defiled? Or what can be safe to a
man, that gives him self to incontinencie? For when he has despoiled the
virgin, robbed the wife, or abused the widow of their honor and good name, they
protrude them selves into many miseries, they be impudent, unshamefast,
aduenturous and careless, how many mischiefs they do. And when a Prince or
gouerner does give him self to licencious life, what mischieues, what rapes,
what murders does he commit? No friend, no (...), no subject, no enemy does
he spare or defend. Contrariwise, the merciful and continent captain, by
subduing his affections recouereth immortal fame, which this history of king
Alexander full well declares. And because before we spoke of that great
conqueror in the Novel of the Amazones, and of the repair of Queen
Thalestris for use of his body, at what time (as Curtius says) he fell from
virtue to vice: we purpose in this, to declare the great continency and
mercy that he used to Sisigambis, the wife of the Persian Prince Darius, and
briefly to touch the time of his abused life, which in this manner does begin.
Alexander the great having vanquished Darius and his infinite army, and
retiring with his host from the pursuit and slaughter of the Persians, entered
into their camp to recreate him self. And being with his familiars in the
mids of his ba^ket, they suddenly heard a pitiful cry, with strange howling
and crying out, which did very much astonne them. The wife and mother of
Darius with the other noble women newly taken prisoners, were ye occasion of
that present noise, by lamenting of Darius, whom they believed to be slain,
which opinion they conceived through one of the Eunuchs, which standing before
their tent door, saw a soldier bear a piece of Darius Diadem. For which
cause Alexander, pitying their misery, sent a noble man called Leonatus to
signify unto them that they were deceived, for that Darius was living.
Repairing toward the tent where the women were with certain armed men, he
sent word before, that he was coming to them with message from the king. But
when such as stood at the tent (...) saw armed men, they thought they had been
sent to murder the Ladies: for which cause they ran in to them, crying that
their last hour was come, for the soldiers were at hand to kill them. When
Leonatus was entered the pauilion, the Mother and wife of Darius fell down at
his feet, entreating him that before they were slain, he would suffer them to
bury Darius, according to the order and manner of his country, after the
performance of which obsequies, they were content (they said) willingly to
suffer death. Leonatus assured them, that both Darius was alive, and that there
was no harm toward them, but should remain in the same state they were in
before. When Sisigambis heard those words, she suffered her self to be
lifted up from the ground, and to receive some comfort. The next day,
Alexander with great diligence buried the bodies of such of his own men as
could be found, and willed the same to be done to the noble men of the
Persians, giving license to Darius mother to bury so many as she list, after
the custom of her country. She performed the same to a few that were next of
her kin, according to the ability of their present fortune, for if she
should have used the Persians pomp therein, the Macedonians might have envied
it, which being victors, used no great curiosity in the matter. When the due
was performed to the dead, Alexander signified to the women prisoners, that he
him self would come to visit them, and causing such as came with him to tarry
without, he only with Ephestion entered in amongs them. The same Ephestion of
al men was best beloved of Alexander, brought up in his company from his
youth, and most privy with him in all things. There was none that had such
liberty to speak his mind plainly to the king as he had, which he used after
such sort, that he seemed to do it by no authority, but by suffrance. And as
he was of like years unto him, so in shape and personage he did somewhat excel
him. Wherefore the women thinking Ephestion to be the king, did fall down and
worship him (as their country manner was to do to kings) till such time as one
of the Eunuchs that was taken prisoner, showed which of them was Alexander.
Then Sisigambis fell down at his feet, requiring pardon of her ignorance, for
so much as she did never see him before. The King took her up by the hand, and
said: Mother you be not deceived: for this is Alexander also. Then he behaved
him self after such a manner, that he erceded in continency and compassion, all the kings that had been before his time. He entertained ye two Queens with
those virgins that were of excellent beauty, so reverently, as if they had
been his sisters. He not only absteined from al violation of Darius wife,
which in beauty excelled all the women of her time, but also took great care
and diligence, that none other should procure her any dishonor. And to all the
women, he commanded their ornaments and apparel to be restored: So that they
wa^ted nothing of the magnificence of their former (...), saving only the
assured trust that creatures want in misery: which things considered by
Sisigambis, she said unto the king: Sir, your goodness toward us, does
deserve, that we should make the same prayer for you, that whilome we did for
Darius: and we perceive you worthy to pass so great a king as he was, in
felicity and good fortune, that abound so in justice and clemency. It
pleases you to term me by the name of Mother and Queen: but I confess my
self to be your handmaide. For both I conceive the greatness of my state
past, and feel that I can bear this present servitude. It lies only in your
hands how we shall be dealt withal, and whether you will make us notable to the
world thorough your cleme^cie or cruelty. The King comforted them all he
might, and willing them to be of good cheer, took Darius son in his arms.
Thereat the child was nothing afraid, having never seen him before, but took
and embraced him about the neck. He was so moved with the constancy of the
child, as he beheld Ephestion, and said: Oh, I would yt Darius had had some
part of this childs gentleness. Which mercy, continency, humility and
constancy of mind in Alexander, if he had still kept to his latter days,
might have been accounted much more fortunate than he was, when having subdued
all Asia from Hellespont to the Occean sea, he did counterfeit the (...) of
Bacchus. Or if amongs the residue of his co^quests, he would have travailed to
overcome his pride and wrath, being vices invincible. Or in his drunkenness
abstained from the slaughter of his Nobility, and not to have put to death
those excellent men of war without judgment, which helped him to conquer so
many Nations. But at this time the greatness of his Fortune had not yet
altered his nature, although afterward he could not bear his victories with
that Virtue, wherewith he wanne them. For when he gave him self to (...) and
banketting, he used the company of harlots. Among whom there was one Thais,
who upon a day in her drunkenness, affirmed to Alexander, yt he should
wonderfully win the favor of the Greeks, if he commanded the Palace of
Persepolis to be set on fire. The destruction whereof (she said) they greatly
desired, for so much as the same was the chief seat of the kings of Persia,
which in times past had destroyed so many great Cities. When the dronken harlot
had given her (...), there were other present, who being likewise dronken,
confirmed her words. Alexander then that had in him more inclinacion of heat
than of patience, said: Why do we not then revenge Greece, and set this City
on fire? They were all chafed with drinking, and rose immediately upon those
words to burn that City in their drunkenness, which the men of war had
spared in their fury. The king himself first, and after his guestes, his
servants and his Concubines, set fire in the Palace, which being builded for
the most part of Cedre trees, (...) suddenly in a flame. When the army that was
encamped near unto the City, saw the fire, which they thought had been kindled
by some casualtie; they came running to quench the same again. But when they
saw the king there present increasing the fire, they poured down the water
which they brought, and helped likewise the matter forwards. Thus the palace
that was the head of the whole Orient, from whence so many nations before had
fetched their laws to live under, ye seat of so many kings, the only terror
sometime of Greece, the same that has been the sender forth of. 9000. ships,
and of the armies that ouerflowed all Europa, that made bridges over the Sea,
and undermined mountains where the Sea has now his course, was consumed and
had his end, and never rose again in all the age that did ensue. For the
kings of Macedon used other Cities which be now in the Persians hands. The
destruction of this City was such, that the foundation thereof at this day
could not be (...), but that the river of Araxes does show where it stood,
which was distant from Persepolis. xx. furlongs, as the inhabitants rather do
believe than know. The Macedonians were ashamed that so noble (...) was
destroyed by their king in his drunkenness: yet at length it was turned into
an earnest matter, and were content to thincks it expedient that the City
should have been destroyed after that manner. But it is certain, that when
Alexander had taken his rest, and was become better advised, he repented him of
his doing. And after he had kept company with Thalestris aforesaid, which was
Queen of the Amazones, he turned his continency and moderation (being the
most excellent virtues appearing in any kind of estate) into Pride and
voluptuousness, not esteeming his country customs, nor the wholesome
temperance that was in the vsages and discipline of kings of Macedon. For he
judged their civil usage and manner, to be over base for his greatness, but
did counterfaite the height and (...) of the kings of Persia, represe^ting the
greatness of the Gods. He was content to suffer me^ there to fall down flat
upon the ground and worship him, and (...) ye victorers of so many nations, by
little and little to servile offices, coveting to make the^ like unto his
captives. He ware upon his head a Diadem of purple, interpaled with white,
like as Darius was accustomed: and fashioned his aparell after the manner of the
Persians, without (...) of any evil token that is signified, for the (...) to
change his habit into the fashion of him whom he had vanquished. And although
he vaunted, that he ware the spoils of his enemies, yet with those spoils he
put upon him their evil manners, and the insolency of the mind, followed the
pride of the apparel. Besides, (...) sealed such letters as he sent into
Europa, with his accustomed seal, but all the letters he sent abroad into
Asia, were sealed with Darius ring. So it appeared that one mind could not
bear the greatenesse that appertained to two. He aparelled also his friends,
his captains, and his horsemen in (...) apparel, whereat though they grudged
in their minds, yet they durst not refuse it, for fear of his displeasure.
His court was replenished with Concubines, for he still maintained three
hundred and three score that belonged to Darius, and among them were flocks of
Eunuchs accustomed to perform the use of women. The old soldiers of Philip
naturally abhorring such things, manifestly withstode to be infected with such
voluptuousness and strange customs. Whereupon there rose a general talk and
opinion thoroughoute the Camp, that they had lost more by the victory, than
they had won by the wars. For when they saw them selves overcome in such
excess, and forain customs so to preuaise, they judged it a simple guerdon of
their long being abroad, to return home in prisoners manner. They began to be
ashamed of their king, that was more like to such as were subdued, than to them
that were victorious: and that of a King of Macedon, was become a Prince of
Persia, and one of Darius Courtiers. Thus this noble prince from continency
and mercy fell into all kind of disorder, the original whereof, he took by
delight in women, which being used in sort lawful, be great comforts and
delights, otherwise, the very spring of all cruelty and mischief.

Timoclia of Thebes.
(...), a Gentlewoman of (...), understanding the covetous desire of a Thracian
knight, that had abused her, and promised her marriage, rather for her goods
than love, well acquitted her self from his falshode.

The third Nouel.
QVintus Curtius, that notable historiographer remembering the stout fact of
this Thebane gentlewoman, amongs other the gestes and factes of Alexander the
great, I have deemed it not altogether unfit for this place, to reveal the
fine and notable policy devised by her, to rid her self from a covetous
(...) of the Thracian kind, who for lucre rather than love, for gain than
gratitude, promised golden hills to this distressed poor gentlewoman. But she
in the end paying him his well deserved hire, was liked and praised of
Alexander for her adue^turous fact, being not one of the least virtues that
shined in him, before he grew to excessive abuse. But because Plutarch in his
treatise De claris mulieribus, more at large recounteth this history, I have
thought good almost ( verbatim) to follow him. Theagenes a gentleman of Thebes,
(...) himself with Epaminondas. and Pelopidas, and with other noble men, for
preservation of their common wealth, in the battle sought at Cheronaea, for
delivery of their (...) of Greece? was slain in the chase of his enemies, as
he pursued one of the chief of his adversaries, yt same crying out unto him:
Whether (...) thou pursue us Theagenes? even to Macedonia answered he. This
gentleman thus slain had a sister, whose virtue and neerenesse of kin by noble
deeds, she well witnessed, although she was not well able to manifest her
virtue, for the adversity of the time, but by pacient sufferance of the common
calamities. For after Alexander had won the city of Thebes, the soldiers
greedy of spoil running up and down the city, every of them chancing upon
such booty as fortune offered them, it chanced that a captain of the Thracian
horsemen, (a barbarous and wicked wretch,) happened upon the house of Timoclia,
who somewhat near the King both in name and kin, in manners and conditions
was greatly different from him. He neither regarding the noble house, ne yet
the chastity of her forepassed life, upon a time after supper, glutted and
swelled with abundance of wine, caused Timoclia forcibly to be haled to his
dronken couch: and not contented with the forced wrong, as they were in talk
together, diligently demanded of her, if she had in no place hidden any gold
or silver, and partly by threats, and partly by promise to keep her as his
wife, endeavored to get that he desired. But she being of ready wit, taking
that offered occasion of her adversary: I would to God (said she) that it had
been my luck to have died before this night, rather than to live. For hitherto
have I kept my (...) pure and untouched from all despite and villainy, until
unlucky fate forced me to yield to thy disordinate lust: but (...) my (...) is
such, why should I conceal those things that be (...) own, thou being mine
only tutor, lord, and husband (as thou say) when the Gods shall please to
bring the same to pass. For by thy will and pleasure must I unhappy Thebane
wench be ruled and governed. Each vanquished wight must subdue their will and
mind to their lord and (...): I being thy slave and prisoner, must needs by
humble means, yield. up my self to the vnsaciate hest of thy puissant heart.
What shall let me to disclose the pray that thou desire, that we both, if thy
mind be such, may rather joy the same, than the soily filth of stinking earth,
should devour such spoil, which for fear and hope of future fortune, I
buried in the bowels of the same. Then mark my words, and bear them well in
mind, since lot has wrought me this mishap. I having plenty of coined silver,
and of fined gold no little store besides such Jewels as belong to the setting
forth of the grace of woman's beauty, of valor and price (...): when I saw
this City brought to such distress as impossible to be saved from taking, all the same I threw away, or more truly to say, I whelmed altogether in a dry
ditch void of water, which my fact few or none did know. The pit is covered
with a little cover above, and thickly round about beset with bushes and
thorns. Those goods will make thee a welthy personage, none in all the camp
to be compared to thee, the riches and value whereof, will witness our former
fortune, and the state of our gorgeous and stately house. All those do I
bequeath to thee, as on whom I think them well bestowed. This greedy Lecher,
laughing to him self for this sudden pray, and thinking that his Lady fast
holden within his barbarous arms had told him truth, routed in his (...)
couch till the day had discovered yt morning light, then gaping for his (...)
gain, he rose and prayed her to tell the place, that he might recover the
same. She then brought him into her garden, the door whereof she commanded to
be shut, that none might enter. He in his hose and doublet, went down to the
bottom of the pit. When Timoclia perceived him down, she beckned for certain
of her maids, and she rolled down diverse great stones with her own hands,
which of purpose she had caused to be placed there, and commanded her maids
to tumble down the like. By which means she killed that lecherous and
covetous vilaine, that rather (...) to satisfy his desire, than coueted to
observe his promised faith. Which afterward being known to the Macedonians,
they haled his body out of the pit. For Alexander had made proclamation, that
none should dare to kill any Thebane, and therefore apprehe^ding Timoclia, they
brought her to yt king, accusing her for doing of that murder: who by her
countenance and stature of body, and by her behavior and gravity of manners,
beheld in her the very Image of gentle kind. And first of al, he asked her
what she was. To whom boldly with constant cheer, she (...) answered:
Theagenes was my brother (said she) who being a valiant captain, and fighting
against you for the common safeguard of the Greeks, was (...) at Chaeronea,
that we might not (...) and prove yt miseries, wherewith we be now oppressed.
But I rather than to suffer violence unworthy of our race and stock, am in
your (...) presence brought ready to refuse no death: For better it were for me
to die, than feel such another night, except thou commau^de the contrary.
These words were uttered in such (...) plight, as the standers by could not
forbear to weep. But Alexander saying, that he not only pitied the woman
endewed with so noble wit, but much more wondered at her virtue and wisdom,
commanded the princes of his army, to foresee no wrong or violence to be done
to the Gentlewoman. He gave order also, that Timoclia and all her kin, should
be guarded and defended from slaughter or other wro^gs. What say ye (good
Ladies) to the heart of this noble Gentlewoma^, that durst be so bold to stone
this (...) wretch to death, and for wrong done to her body till that time
untouched, to wrong the corpse of him that sauoured of no gentle kind: who
rather for earthly (...), than for love of such a pleasant prisoner, exchanged
love for gold? But note hereby what force the purity of mind unwilling of
beastly (...) does carry in it self: A simple woman void of help, not backed
with defense of husbands aid, does bring a mighty captain, a strong and
lofty lubber, to enter into a cave, and when she saw her best advantage,
thacked him with stones, until he groned forth his (...) (...). Such is the
might and prowess of chastity. No charge too burdenous or weighty for such a
virtue, no enterprise too hard for a mind so pure and clean.

Ariobarzanes.
ARIOBARZANES great Stuarde to (...) king of Persia, goth about to excede his
sovereign Lord and master in courtesy: wherein be contained many notable and
pleasant chances, besides the great patience and loyaltic naturally planted
in the said ARIOBARZANES.

The fourth Novel.
AQuestion is moved many times among learned men and Gentlemen addicted to the
service of the Court, whether commendable deed or, courteous and gentle fact
done by the gentleman or courtier toward his sovereign lord, ought to be
called Liberality and Courtesy, or rather Ba^d and Duty. Which question is
not proponed without great reason. For so much as each man does know, that a
servant do what he can for his master, or let him imploye the vttermoste of
his endeavor, all the labor and travail he bestows, all trouble and danger
which he susteineth, is too little, yea, and the same his very bounden duty.
Have we not red of many, and known the like, that to gratify their prince
and master, have into a thousand dangers and like number of deaths, adventured
their own proper lives? Marcus Antonius that notable orator being accused of
incest, and brought to the judgment seat, his accusers required that his
servant should be called for, because he bare the candell before his master,
when he went to do the deed, who seeing his masters life and death to depend
upon his evidence, utterly denied the fact, and notwithstanding that he was
whipped, racked, and suffered other cruel torments, would rather have lost his
life than accuse and betray his master. I could allege and bring forth in
place, the example of Mycithus, the servant of one Anaxilaus Messenius, the
fidelity of the servants of Plotinus Plancus, the faithful maiden called
Pythias, that waited upon Octauia the chaste Empress and wife of that Monster
Nero, with diverse other: but that I think they be to the learned well known,
and of the simple the virtue of servants fidelity is greatly liked and
commended. But if the faithful servant know that his deserts do gain the
grace and favor of his master, (...) travails, what pains ought he to suffer
to maintain his reputation, and to increase the favor obtained? For as the
common (...) and wise saying reports, That the virtue is no less to conserve
Friendship gotten, than the wisdom was great to get and win the same. Other
there be, which do contrarily contend, and with very strong arguments do force
to prove, that al which the servant does besides his duty, and beyond the
obligation, wherein he is bound to his master, is and ought to be termed
Liberality, which is a matter to provoke his patron and master, to devise
new benefits for his servant. And that at all times when a man does his duty
and service appointed by his master, executing the same with all diligence and
industry requisite there unto, that then he (...) to be rewarded. Which is not
to be discommended. For no true and honest servant will refuse any travail
for commodity of his master, (...) yet discrete and wise master, will leave
the same (...), according to that portion of ability, wherewith he is
possessed. But leaving questions and disputation aside, proceed we to that
which this Novel purposes. I say then, that there was in the kingdom of
Persia, a king called Artaxerxes, a man of most noble mind, and of great
prowess in arms. This was he which first being a private man of arms, not
having as yet obtained any degree in the field, killed Artabanus the last king
of the Arsacides whose soldier he was, and recovered ye Persian kingdom, which
was then in the Macedonians (...) on (by ye death of Darius, which was
vanquished by Alexander the great) the space of. 538. years. This noble
ge^tleman having delivered al Persia, and created King, kept a princely court,
wherein were many magnificent facts and virtuous deeds exercised and done, and
he himself most noble in all his affairs, besides the titles, which he
worthily wanne in many bloody battles, was esteemed thoroughout the east part
of the world, to be the most liberal and magnanimous prince that in any age
ever reigned. In feasts and bankets he was an other Lucullus, royally
intertaining strangers that repaired to his court. This king had in his court,
a Senescall or steward, named Ariobarzanes, whose office was, that when the
king made any pompous or public feast, to mount upon a white Courser, with a
Mace of gold in his hand, and to ride before the Esquiers and Sewers for the
Kings own mouth, and those that bare the Kings meat in vessel of gold,
covered with fine naperie, wrought and purled with most beautiful workmanship
of silk and gold. This office of Senescall was highly esteemed, and commonly
wont to be given to one of the chiefest Barons of the Realm. Wherefore this
Ariobarzanes, besides that he was of most noble Lignage and incomparable
riches, was the most courteous and liberal knight that frequented the Court,
whose immoderate expense was such, as leaving the mean, wherein al virtue
consists, by reason of his outrage which many times he used, he fell into the
vice of prodigality. Whereby he seemed not only in courteous deeds to compare
with the King, but also contended to exceed and surpass him. One day the King
for his disport and recreation called for the Chesseborde, requiring
Ariobarzanes to keep him company. Which game in those days amongs the
Persians was in great use and estimation, in such wise as a cunning gamster at
that pastime was no less commended and honored, than among us in these days
an excellent Drator, or famous learned man. Yea and the very same game in
common use in the Court, and noble men's houses of our tune, no doubt very
commendable and mete to be practiced by all states and degrees. The King and
Ariobarzanes being set down at a table in the great hall of the Palace, one
right against an other, accompanied with a great number of noble personages and
Gentlemen looking upon them, and marking their play with great silence, they
began to encountre one an other with the Chessemen. Ariobarzanes, whether it
was that he played better than the king, or whether the king (...) no heed to
his game, or what soever the occasion was, he coursed the King to such a narrow
straight, as he could not avoid, but within. ii. or. iij. draughts he must be
forced to receive the Checkemate: which the King perceiving, and considering
the danger of the mate, by and by there grew a greater color in his face than
was wont to be, and imagining how he might avoid the checkemate, besides his
blushing he shaked his (...) and fetched diverse sighs, whereby the standers by
that marked the game, perceived that he was driven to his shifts. The
Senescall espying the Kings demeanor, and seeing the honest shamefastness of
the King, would not suffer him to receive such foil, but made a draught by
moving his Knight back, to open a way for the King to pass, as not only he
delivered him from the danger of the Mate; but also lost one of his Rocks for
lack of taking heed: whereupon the game rested equal. The King (who knew ye
good nature and noble mind of his servant, by experience of the same in other
causes) faining that he had ouerseene the taking of his Rock, gave over the
game, and rising up, said: No more Ariobarzanes, the game is yours, and I
confess my self overcome. The King thought that Ariobarzanes did not the same
so much for courtesy, as to bind his sovereign lord and king by benefit to
recompense his subjects like behauior, which he did not very well like, and
therefore would play no more. Notwithstanding the King neither by sign or deed,
ne yet in talk, showed any token of displeasure for that courtesy done. Nowbeit
the King would that Ariobarzanes in semblable act, should abstain to show him
self courteous or liberal, except it were to his inferiors and equals,
because it is not connenient for a servant to contend with his master in
those qualities.

Not long after the King being at Persepolis (the principal city of Persia,
ordained a not able day of hunting of diverse beasts of that country breed:
And when all things were in readiness, he with the most part of his Court
repaired to the pastime. When they were come to the place, the King commanded
a wood to be beset about with nets and toiles, and appointed each man where
he should stand in most convenient place, and he him self attended with the
dogs and (...), to cause the beasts to issue forth of their (...) and holes.
And behold, they roused a wild beast, which with great (...) leapte over
the nets, and ran away with much speed. The King seeing that strange
beast, purposed to pursue him to death: And making a sign to certain of his
noble men which he desired to keep him company, he gave the rain and spur
to his horse, and followed the chase, Ariobarzanes was one of those noble men
that pursued the game. It chanced that day that the King rode upon a horse,
that was the swiftest in his stable, which he esteemed better than a thousand
other, as well for his velocitie, as for his readynesse in factes of arms.
Thus followyng with bridle at will, the flying rather than running beast, they
were divided far from their company, and by reason of the Kings speediness,
none was able to follow him but Ariobarzanes, and behind him one of his
servants upon a good horse, which always he used in hunting inatters, which
horse was counted the best in all the Court. And thus following the chase with
galloping speed, Ariobarzanes at length espied that the horse of his
sovereign lord had lost his shoes before, and that the stones had surbated
his hoofs, whereupon the King was driven either to give over the chase, or else
to mar his horse. But there was none of these two necessities but would have
greatly displeased the King, that did not perceive his horse to be vnshodde.
The Senescall did no sooner epsy the same, but suddenly dismounted from his
own, caused his man to deliver unto him a hammer and nails (which for such
like chances, he always carried about him) and took of two shoes from ye
(...) of his good horse, to set upon the Kings, not caring for his own, rather
than the King should forgo his pleasure. Wherefore hallowing the King which was
earnestly bent upon the chase, told him of the danger wherein his horse was
for lack of shoes. The King hearing that, lighted from his horse, and seeing
two shoes in Ariobarzanes man's hand, thinking that Ariobarzanes had brought
them with him, or that they were the shoes which fell from his own, tarried
still until his horse was shodde. But when he saw the notable horse of his
Senescall vnshodde before, then he thought that to be the courtesy of
Ariobarzanes, and so did let the matter pass, studying by like means to
requite him with Courtesy, which forced him self to surmounte in the same.
And when his horse was shod, he gave the same to Ariobarzanes in reward. And
so the king chose rather to lose his pleasure of hunting, than to suffer
himself by his man to be excelled in Courtesy, well noting the stoutnesse of
Ariobarzanes mind, which seemed to have a will to contend with his Prince in
factes renoumed and liberal. The Senescall thought it not convenient to
refuse the gift of his liege Lord, but accepted the same with like good will
as before he shodde his horse, still expecting occasion how he might surpass
his master in curtesse, and so to bind him to requite the same. They had not
tarried there long, but many of those which came after had overtaken them. And
then the King got up upon a spare horse, and returned to the city with all
his company.

Within few days after, the King by proclamation sommoned a solemn and
pompous just and triumph at the tilt, to be done upon the Kalendes of May next
ensuing. The reward appointed for the victor and best doer in the same, was a
courageous and goodly Courser, with a bridle and bitte of fine gold richely
wrought, a saddle correspondent of passing great price, the furniture and
trappers for the bridle and saddle of like cost and workmanship, the raines
were two chains of gold very artificially made, the barbe and couerture of
the horse, of cloth of gold, upon gold, fringed round about with like gold,
whereat depended certain belles of gold, over which horse was placed a fine
sword, the hiltes and chape whereof together with the scaverde were curiously
beset with pearls and precious stones of inestimable value. On the other side
was placed a very beautiful and strong. Mace, very cunningly wroughte with
damaskin. The horse was placed in form of triumph, and besides the same, all
the Armures and weapons meet for a combatant Knight, rich and fair without
comparison: The Placart was marvelous and strong, the Lance was guilt and
big, as none greater in all the troop of the chalengers and defendants. And
al those furnitures were appointed to be given to him that should do best that
day. A great assembly of strangers repaired to that solemn feast, as well to
do deeds of Arms, as to look upon that pompous triumph, Of the Kings
subjects there was neither Knight nor Baron, but in rich and sumptuous apparel
appeared that day, amongs whom, of chiefest fame the kings eldest son was
the first that gave his name, a Gentleman very valorous, and in (...) of Arms
of passing estimation, brought up from his very youth, and trained in the field
and other warlike exercises. The Senescall also caused his name to be enrolled.
The like did (...) there knights, as well Persians as other strangers. For,
that ye Proclamation was general, with safeconduct for all forainers, noble
men or other that should make their repair. The King had elected three
ancient Barons to be Judges and Arbitratours of their deeds, such as in
their time, for their own personages had been very valiant, and in many
enterprises well exercised, men of great discretion and judgment. Their stage
was placed in the mids of the Lists, to view and mark the counterbuffes and
blows of the Combatants. We need not to remember, (...) ought to forgette
the number of Ladies and Gentlewomen assembled out of all parts, to behold
and view this triumph, and peradventure each knight that ran that day, was
not without his amorous Lady to note and behold his Actiuitie and Prowess,
every of them wearing his Ladies sleeue, glove, or other token, according to
the common Custom in such like cases. At the day and hour appointed,
appeared all the Combatantes in great Triumph and pomp, with rich
furnitures, as well upon them selves as upon their horse. The triumph
begone, and many Lances broken in good order, on either sides, Judgment was
given generally, that the Senescall Ariobarzanes had won the price, and next
unto him, the kings son did pass them all, for that none of all the
Combattants had broken past. v. staves, and the said young Gentleman had in the
face of his adversary broken in pieces nine at the least. This Senescall
brought forth eleven lau^ces, which were courageously and honorably broken, and
by breaking of the last staff which was the twelfthe, he was judged most
worthy of the price. The condition whereof was, that every Combatant should run
twelve courses with twelve lances, and he which should first break the same,
should without doubt or further controversy obtain the reward. What pleasure
and delight the King did conceive to see his son behave him self so
valiantly that day, I refer to the judgment of fathers, that have children
endued with like actiuitie. But yet it grieved him, that the Senescall had the
greater advantage, and yet being a matter so well known and discerned by the
Judges, like a wise man he dissembled his (...). On the other side, the young
Gentleman which did combat before his amorous lady, was very sorrowful for that
that he was void of hope of the chiefest honor. So that between the father
and the son, was one very thought and desire. But the virtue and valor of the
Senescall did truncate and cut of all their grief. Now the time was come, that
the Senescall should run with his last staff, and mounted upon the horse
which the King gave him when he was on hunting. And knowing well that the King
was very desirous that his son should excel all me^, perceiving likewise the
inflamed mind of ye young Gentleman for the presence of his lady to aspire to
honor, purposed to give over the honor archieued by himself, to leave it to
the son and heir of his Lord and (...). He knew full well that those his
courtesies pleased not ye King, nevertheless he was determined to persevere in
his opinion, not to berieue the King of his glory, but only to acquire fame
and honor for him self. And yet he thought unkindness in the King, that he
would not accept his gentle deeds in better part. But fully minded that the
honor of the triumph should be attributed to the Kings son, he welded the
staff within his rest, and when he was ready to encountre (because it was he
that should come against him) he let fall his lance out of his hands, and
said: Farewell this courtesy of mine, since it is no better esteemed. The kings
son gave a gentle counterbuffe upon the Placard of the Senescall, and brake
his staff in many pieces, which was the x. course. Many heard ye words which
the Senescal spoke when his staff fell out of his hands, and the standers by
well perceived that he was not minded to give the last blow, because the
kings son might have the honor of the triumph, which he desired so much. Then
Ariobarzanes departed the listes. And ye Prince without any great resistance
wan the price and victory. And so with sound of diverse instruments the
price borne before him, he was throughout the city honorbaly conveyed, and
among other, the Senescal. (...) waited upon him with merry countenance, greatly
praising and exalting yt valiance of yt young Prince. The King which was a very
wise man, who many times had had experience of the Chivalry of his Senescall,
at other Tourneys, Iustes, Barriers, and Battles, and always finding him to be
prudent, politic, and for his person very valiant, knew to well that the fall
of his lance was not by chance but of purpose, continued his opinion of his
Senescals liberality and courage. And to say the troth, such was his exceeding
courtesy, as few may be found to imitate the same. We daily see that many be
liberal of Fortunes goods, inuesting some with promotion, some with apparel,
gold and silver, Jewels, and other things of great value. We see also noble
men, bountiful to their servants, not only of those mouable things, but also
of Castles, Lands, and Cities. What shall we speak of them, which will not
stick to sheade their own blood, and many times to spend their life to do
their friends good? Of these and such like examples, all Records be full. But a
man that contemns same and glory, or is of his own bonor liberal, is never
found. The victorious Captain after the bloody battle, gives the spoil of
his enemies to his soldiers, rewards the^ with prisoners, departs unto
them the whole pray, but the glory and honor of the battle he reserueth
unto him self. And as divinely that father of Roman eloquence does say,
Those philosophers, which write yt glory ought to be despised by their written
books, do seek after glory them selves. The King was displeased with these
noble deeds and courtesy of his Senescall, because he thought it not meet or
decent, that a subject and servant should compare with his lord and master:
and therefore did not bear him that cheerful countenance which he was wont
to do. And in the end, purposed to let him know, that he spent his brains in
very great error, if he thought to force his master to be bound or
beneficial unto him as hereafter you shall perceive.

There was an ancient and approved custom in Persia, that the kings yearly did
solemnize an Anniuersarie of their Coronation, with great feast and triumph,
upon which day all the Barons of the kingdom were bound to repair to the
Court, where the King by the space of viii. days with sumptuous bankets and
other sorts of feasts kept open house. Upon this Anniuersarie day of
Artaxerxes coronation, when all things were disposed in order, the King
desirous to accomplish a certain conceived determination, commanded one of
his faithful chamberlains speedily to seek out Ariobarzanes, which the said
faithful chamberlain did, and telling him the kings message, said: My lord
Ariobarzanes, the King has willed me to say unto you, that his pleasure is,
that you in your own person even forthwith shall carry your white steed and
Courser, the mace of gold, and other (...) due to the office of Senescall, unto
Darius your mortal enemy, and in his majesty's behalf to say unto him, that
the king has given him that office, and has clearly dispossessed you
thereof. Ariobarzanes hearing those heavy news, was like to die for sorrow;
and the greater was his grief, because it was given to his greatest enemy.
Notwithstanding, like a Gentleman of noble stomach, would not in open
appearance signify the displeasure which he conceived within, but with merry
cheer and loving countenance, said unto the chambrelaine: Do my right humble
co^mendations unto the kings majesty, and say unto him, that like as he is
the sovereign lord of all this land, and I his faithful subject, even so
mine office, my life, lands and goods, be (...) his disposition, and that
willingly I will perform his (...). When he had spoken those words, he
rendered (...) his office to Darius, who at dinner served in the same. And when
the king was set, Ariobarzanes with comely countenance sat down amongs the
rest of the Lords. Which sudden deposition and deprivation, did (...) lously
amaze the whole assembly, every man secretly speking their mind either in
praise or dispraise of that fact. The king all the dinner time, did mark and
note the countenance of Ariobarzanes, which was pleasant and merry as it was
wont to be, whereat the king did greatly marvel: And to attain to the end
of his purpose, he began with sharp words in presence of the nobility to
disclose his discontented mind, and the grudge which he bare to Ariobarzanes,
On the other side, the king suborned diverse persons diligently to epsy what he
said and did. Ariobarzanes hearing the kings sharp words of rebuke, and
stimulated by the persuasion of diverse flatterers, which were hired for that
purpose, after he perceived that his declared patience prevailed nothing, that
his modest talk and his long and faithful service, which he had done unto the
king, his loss and hinderance sustained, the peril of his life, which so many
times he had suffered, at length banquished with disdain, he brake the Bridle
of Patience, and sorted out of the bounds of his wonted nature, for that in
place of honor, he received rebuke, and instead of reward, was deprived of his
office, began in a rage to co^plain of yt king, terming him to be an unkind
prince, which amongs the Persians was esteemed a word of great offense to the
majesty: wherefore feign he would have departed the court, and retired home to
his country, which he could not do without special license from the king,
and yet to crave the same at his hands, his heart would not serve him. Althese
murmures and complaints which secretly he made, were told the king, and
therefore the king commanded him one day, to be called before him, unto whom
he said: Ariobarzanes your grudging complaints and envious quarrels, which you
disparcle behind my back throughout my Court, and your continual rages
outragiously pronounced, through the very windows of my Palace have (...)
mine ears, whereby I understand that thing which hardly I would have believed.
But yet being a Prince as well inclined to favor and quiet hearing of al
causes, as to credit of light reports, would feign know of you, the cause of
your lamentation, and what has moved you thereunto. For you be not ignorant,
that to murmr at the Persian King, or to term him to be unkind, is no less
offense than to blaspheme the Gods immortal, because by ancient Laws and
Decrees they be honored and worshipped as Gods. And among all the penalties
contained in our laws, the vice of Ingratitude is most bitterly corrected.
But leaving to speak of the threats and dangers of our laws, I pray you to
tell me wherein I have offended you. For albeit that I am a king, yet reason
persuadeth me, not to give offense to any man, which if I should do (and the
Gods forbid the same) I ought rather to be termed a tyrant than a King.
Ariobarzanes hearing the King speak so reasonably, was abashed, but yet with
stout countenance he feared not particularly to remember the words which he
had spoken of the King, and the cause wherefore he spoke them. Well (said the
King) I perceive that you blushe not at the words, ne yet fear to rehearse the
same unto my face, whereby I do perceive and note in you a certain kind of
stoutness, which naturally (...) from the greatness of your mind. But yet
wisdom would that you should consider the reason and cause why I have
deprived you from your office. Do you not know that it appertains unto me
in all mine affairs and deeds to be liberal, courteous, magnificent, and
bounteous? Be not those the virtues that make the fame of a Prince to (...)
amongs his subjects, as the Sun beams do upon the circuit of the world? Who
ought to reward well doers, and recompense each wight which for any service
and advantage have all the days of their life, or else in some particular
service used their painful travail, or adventured the peril of their life,
but I alone being your sovereign Lord and Prince? To the virtuous and
obedient, to the Captain and Soldier, to the politic and wise, to the learned
and grave: finally to each well (...) wight, I know how to use the noble
princely virtues of Courtesy and Liberality. They be the comely ensigns of a
King. They be the only ornaments of a Prince. They be my particular virtues.
And will you Ariobarzanes being a valiant soldier, a grave counsailer, and a
politic personage, go about to dispossess me of that which is mine? Will
you which are my servant and subject, of whom I make greatest account and have
in dearest estimation, upon whom I did bestow the greatest dignity within
the compass of my whole Monarchy, grate benefit at my hands, by abusing
those virtues which I above other do principally regard? You do much abuse the
credit which I repose in your great wisdom. For he in whom I thought to
find most grave advise, and deemed to be a receptacle of all good counsel,
does seek to take upon him the personage of his Prince, and to usurp the
kingly state which belongs only unto him. Shall I be tied by your deserts, or
bound by courteous deeds, or else be forced to render recompense? No no, so long
as this imperial crown shall rest on royal head, no subject by any courteous
deed of his, shall strain unwilling mind, which meant it not before. Tell me
I beseech you what reward and gift, what honor and preferment have I ever
bestowed upon you, since my first arrival to this victorious reign, that
ever you by due desert did bind me thereunto? Which if you did, then liberal I
can not be termed, but a slauishe Prince bound to do the same, by subjects
merit. High and mighty Kings do reward and advance their men, having
respect that their gift or benefit shall excede desert, otherwise that
preferment can not be termed liberal. The great conqueror Alexander Magnus,
wanne a great and notable City for wealth and spoil. For the principality
and government whereof diverse of his noble men made suit, alleging their
painful service and bloody wounds about the getting of the same: But what
did that worthy King? was he moved with the bloudshead of his Captains? was
he stirred with the valiance of his men of war? was he provoked with their
earnest suits? No truly: But calling unto him a poor man, whom by chance he
found there, to him he gave that rich and wealthy City, and the government
thereof, that his magnificence and liberality to a person so poor and base,
might receive greater fame and estimation: And to declare that the co^ferred
benefit did not. proceed of (...) or duty, but of mere liberality, very
courtesy, true munificence, and noble disposition, derived from princely heart
and kingly nature. Howbeit I speak not this that a faithful servant should
be unrewarded (a thing very requisite) but to infer and prove, that reward
should excel the merit and service of the receiver. Now then I say, that you
going about by large desert and manifold courtesy to bind me to recompense the
same, you seek next way to cut of the mean, whereby I should be liberal.
Do you not see that through your unadvised (...) I am prevented, and let
from mine (...) liberality, wherewith daily I was wont to reward my kind,
loving and loyal servants, to whom if they deserved one talent of gold, my
manner was to give them two or three: If a thousand crowns by the year, to
give them five? Do you not know that when they looked for least reward or
preferment, the sooner did I honor and advance them? Take heed then from
henceforth Ariobarzanes, that you live with such providence and
circumspection, as you may be known to be a servant, and I reputed (as I am)
for your sovereign Lord and master. All Princes in mine opinion require.
(...). things of their servants, that is to say, Fidelity and Love, which
being had, they care for no more. Therefore he that list to contend with me in
courtesy, shall find in the end that I make small account of (...). And he
that is my trusty and faithful servant, diligent to execute and do my
commandments, faithful in my secret affairs, and duetifull in his
vocation, shall truly wit and most certainly feel, that I am both courteous
and liberal. Which thou thy self shall well perceive, and be forced to
confess that I am the same man in deed, for courtesy and liberality, whom
thou indeuorest to surmount. Then the king held his peace and Ariobarzanes very
reverently and stoutly made answer in this manner.

Most Noble and victorious Prince: Well understanding the conceived grief of
your invincible mind, pleases your sacred majesty to give me leave to answer
for my self, not to aggrauate or heap your wrath and displeasure (which the
Gods forbid) but to disclose my humble excuse before your majesty, yt the same
poized with yt equal balance of your rightful mind, my former attemptes may
neither seem presumptuous, ne yet my well meaning mind well measured with
justice, ouerbold or malapert. Most humbly then, prostrate upon my knees, I say
that I never went about, or else did think in mind, to exceed or compare
with your infinite and incomprehensible bounty, but endeavored by all possible
means, to let your grace perceive, and the whole world to know, that there is
nothing in the world which I regard so much, or esteem so dear, as your
good grace and favor. And mighty Ioua grant that I do never fall into so
great error to presume for to contend with the greatness of your mind: which
fond desire if my beastly mind should apprehend, I might be likened to the man
that goes about to berieue and take away the clerenesse of the Sun, or
brightness of the splendant stars. But ever I did think it to be my bounden
duty not only of those fortunes goods which by your princely means I do
enjoy, to be a distributer and large giver, but also bound for the profit and
advancement of your regal crown and dignity, and defense of your most noble
person, of mine own life and blood to be both liberal and prodigal. And
where your majesty thinks that I have labored to compare in courteous deed
or other liberal behauior, no deed that ever I did, or fact, was ever
enterprised by me for other respect, but for to get and continue your more
ample favor, and daily to increase your love: for that it is the servants part
with all his force and might to aspire the grace and favor of his sovereign
lord: Howbeit (most noble Prince) before this time I did never believe, nor
heard your grace confess, that magnanimity, gentleness and courtesy, were
virtues worthy of blame and correction, as your majesty has very (...) done
me to understand by words severe and taunting checks, unworthy for practice of
such rare and noble virtues. But how so ever it be, whether life or death shall
depend upon this praiseworthie and honorable purpose, I mean hereafter to
pelde my duty to my souerain lord, and then it may please him to term my
deeds courteous or liberal, or to think of my behauior, what his own princely
mind shall deem and judge. The King upon those words rose up and said:
Ariobarzanes now it is no time to continue in further disputation of this
argument, committing the determination and judgment hereof, to the grave
deliberation of my Council, who at convenient leisure advisedly shall
according to the Persian laws and customs conclude the same. And for this
present time I say unto thee, that I I am disposed to account the accusation
made against thee to be true, and confessed by thy self. In the means time
thou shalt repair into thy country, and come no more to the Court, till I
command thee. Ariobarzanes receiving this answer of his sovereign Lord,
departed, and to his great contentation, went home into his country, merry
for that he should be absent out of the daily sight of his ennimies, yet not
well pleased for that the King had remitted his cause to his Council.
Nevertheless minded to abide and suffer all fortune, he gave him self to the
pastime of hunting of Dear, running of the wild Boar, and flying of the
Hawk. This noble Gentleman had. (...). only daughters of his wife that was
deceassed, the most beautiful Gentlewomen of the country, the eldest of which
two was peerless and without comparison, older than the other by one year.
The beauty of those fair Ladies was bruted throughout the whole Region of
Persia, to whom the greatest Lords and Barons of the country were great and
importunate suitors. He was not in his country resiant the space of iiij.
months, which for salubritie of air was most wholesome and pleasant, full of
lordelike liberties and gentlemanlike pastimes, as well to be done by the
hounde as by the spaniell, but one of the Kings Haraulds sent from the Court,
appeared before him with message to this effect, saying: My lord Ariobarzanes,
the King my sovereign Lord has commanded you to send with me to the Court
the fairest of your two daughters, for that the report of their famous beautic
has made him hardly to believe them to be such, as common brute would fayn do
him to understand. Ariobarzanes not well able to conceive the meaning of the
kings commandment, reuolued in his mind diverse things touching that
demand, and concluding upon one which fell to his remembrance, determined to
send his younger daughter, which (as we have said before) was not in beauty
comparable to her elder sister, whereupon he caused the maiden to be sent for,
and said unto her these words: Daughter, the King my master and thy sovereign
Lord, has by his Messanger commanded me to send unto him the fairest of my
daughters, but for a certain reasonable respect which at this time I purpose
not to disclose, my mind is that thou shall go, praying thee not to say but
that thou thy self art of the twain the fairest, the concealing of which mine
advise will breed unto thee (no doubt) thy great advancement, besides the
profit and promotion that shall accriue by that thy silence: and the
disclosing of the same may hap to engendre to thy dear father his everlasting
hindrance, and perchance the deprivation of his life; but (...) so be the King
do beget thee with child, in any wise keep close the same: And when thou
(...) thy (...) begin to swel, that no longer it can be closely kept, then in
convenient time, when thou see the King most merrily disposed, thou shall tell
the King that thy sister is far more beautiful than thy self, and that thou
art the younger sister. The wise maiden well understanding her fathers mind,
and conceiving the sum of his intent, promised to perform his charge, and so
with the Haraulde and honorable train, he caused his daughter to be conveyed
to the Court. An easy matter it was to deceive the King in the beauty of
that maiden. For although the elder daughter was the fairest, yet this
Gentlewoma^ seemed so peerless in the Court, that without comparison she
appeared the most beautiful that was to be (...) either in Court or country:
the behavior and semblance of which two daughters were so like, that hard it
was to judge whether of them was the eldest. For their father had so kept them
in, that seldom they were seen within his house, or at no time marked when
they walked abroad. The wife of the King was dead the space of one year
before, for which cause he determined to marie the daughter of Ariobarzanes,
who although she was not of the royal blood, yet of birthe she was right
noble. When the King saw this Gentlewoman, he judged her to be the fairest that
ever he saw or heard of by report, whom in the presence of his noble me^ he
(...) did marry, and seut unto her father to appoint the (...) of his married
daughter out of hand, and to return the same by that messanger. When
Ariobarzanes herd tell of this unhoped marriage, right ioyefull for that (...)
cesse, sent unto his daughter yt dowry which he had promised to give to either
of his daughters. Many of the Court did marvel, that the King being in aged
years would mary so young a maiden, specially the daughter of his subject,
whom he had vanished from the Court. Some praised the Kings disposition for
taking her whom he fansied: Each man speaking his (...) mind, (...) to the
diverse customs of men. Notwithstanding there were diverse that moved the King
to that marriage, thereby to force him to confess, that by taking of the goods
of Ariobarzanes, he might be called Courtenus and Liberal. The marriage being
solemnized in very (...) and princely guise, Ariobarzanes sent to the King the
like dowry which before he had sent him for marriage of his daughter, with
message to this effect: That for so much as he had assigned to his daughters
two certain dowries to marie them to their equal (...), and seeing that he which
was without exception, was the husband of the one, his duty was to bestow
upon his grace, a more greater gift, than to any other which should have been
his son in law. But the King would not receive the increase of his dowry,
deeming him self well satisfied with the beauty and good co^dicions of his new
spouse, whom he entertained and honored as Queen. In the mean time she was
great with child with a son (as afterward in the birth it appeared) which
so well as she could she kept close and secret, but afterward perceiving her
belly to ware big, the greatness whereof she was not able to hide, being
upon a time with yt King and in familiar disporte, she like a wise and sobre
Lady, induced matter of diverse argument, amongs which as occasion served, she
disclosed to the King, that she was not the fairest of her fathers daughters,
but her elder sister more beautiful than she. The King hearing that, was
greatly offended with Ariobarzanes, for that he had not accomplished his
commandment: and albeit he loved well his wife, yet to attain the effect of
his desire, he called his Haraulde unto him, whom he had first sent to make
request for his wife, and with him returned again his new married spouse unto
her father, commanding him to say these words: That for so much as he knew
him self to be vanquished and overcome by the Kings humanity, his grace did
marvel, that in place of Courtesy, he would use such contumacie and
disobedience, by sending unto him, not the fairest of his daughters which he
required, but such as he himself liked to send. A matter no doubt worthy to
be sharply punished and (...). For which cause the King being not a little
offended, (...) home his daughter again, and willed him to send his eldest
daughter, and that he had returned the dowry which he gave with his younger.
Ariobarzanes received his daughter and the dowry with willing mind, and said
these words to the Harauld: Mine other daughter which the King my sovereign
Lord requires, is not able presently to go with thee, because in her bed she
lies sick, as thou may manifestly perceive if thou com into her chamber: but
say unto the King, ye upon my faith and allegiance so soon as she is
recovered, I will send her to the court. The Haraulde seeing the maiden lie
sick on her bed, weak and impotent, not able to travel, returned to the
King, and told him of the sickness of the eldest daughter of Ariobarzanes,
where withal being satiffied, he attended the success of his desired suit. The
(...) man no sooner being recovered, but the time of the others childbirth was
come, which brought forth a goodly boy, both the mother safely brought to bed,
and the child strong and lusty. Which greatly contented and pleased
Ariobarzanes, and the greater grew his joy thereof, for that he saw the child
to be like unto the King his father. And by that time the young Gentlewoman was
risen from her childbed, the sister was perfectly whole, and had recovered her
former hiewe and beauty, both which being richely apparelled, Ariobarzanes
with an honorable train, sent unto the King, instructing them first what they
ought to say and do. When they (...) arrived at the Court, one of the privy
chamber (...) the King that Ariobarzanes had not only sent one of his
daughters, but both of them being so many as he had. The King hearing and
seeing the liberality of Ariobarzanes, accepted the same in gracious part, and
determined for that his (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) with (...) princely
liberality, as he should be forced to confess him self ouercom. And before
the messanger which had brought the young Gentlewoman did depart, he caused to
be called before him his only son called Cyrus unto whom he said: Because
Cyrus the time of thy years be such, as mete they be to match thee in
marriage, for hope I have to see some progeny proceed of thee before I die, my
mind is that thou shall marie this goodly Gentlewoman here, the sister of my
wife. To which his fathers hest, the young Gentleman willingly (...). Then the
King took again his own, and ordained a royal feast, for the marriage of his
son, which was celebrated and done with great triumph and solemnity,
continuing the space of viij. days. Ariobarzanes hearing these good news, would
not yet acknowledge him self to be overcome, and seeing that his purpose was
now brought to an extremity, determined to send the little child, a little
before begotten of his daughter, to the King, which so resembled the Kings face
and countenance as was possible. And therefore caused (...) to be made of the
fairest yuorie that was to be (...), (...) and garnished with pure gold, (...)
and set with most precious stokes and Ieinels, wherein he caused the child to
be placed, and covered with rich clothes of finest gold and silk, and together
with the nourice, (...) with a pompous (...) of Gentlemen, he sent hun to the
King, the very (...) that the solemn marriage should be celebrated. And the
King being in his great (...), which was hanged with marvelous rich and costly
Arras, attended upon with a (...) (...) (...) Barons and noble men, he that had
the charge of the conduction of the child, upon his knees presented the same
before him, lying in the cradle. The King and the noble men, maruelling what
that did mean expected what the messanger (...) say, who holding the (...) by
one of the pomels, said these words: Most renoumed and victorious Prince, in
the behalf of Ariobarzanes my Lord and your subject, most humbly I present
unto your (...), with all submission and reverence, this gift. And my said
Lord does render infinite thanks unto your highness, for the great (...) it
has pleased you to use, by (...) to entertain him into your alliance. For
which not to seem (...), this present (and there withal he opened the cradle)
by me he has (...) unto your majesty. When the cradle was discovered, there
appeared a goodly young child, smiling and laughing upon his father, the
ioyfullest sight that ever his father saw, and so like unto him, as the half
Moon is like the proportion of the rest. Then every of the standers by
began to say his mind touching the resemblaunce of the child to his father,
hardily protestyng the same without doubt to be his own. The King could not
be satisfied with the sight of his child, by reason of the great delight he
had to look upon (...), and of the general opinion which all men (...)
touching his likeness. The child again upon the common rejoice made upon
him, but specially of his father, with preatie motions and sweet laughings,
representing two smilyng pyttes in his ruddie (...), crowed many times upon his
father, toying (...) and down his tender hands. Afterward the King beheld
the workmanship of that sumptuous cradle, and demanded whereof the substance
was. Unto whom the Messanger described the history and whole content of that
incomparable Jewel. Who (...) that discourse, caused the Queen to be called
forth, and by her was further certified of her fathers Noble disposition, with
exceeding contentation, and wonderful rejoice, he received the little child,
and (...) him self in manner vanquished. Not withstandyng, seemyng to be thus
surmounted, he thought if he did not surpass this Courtesy, his Noble and
Princely mind should be disgraced. Wherefore he determined to use a kind of
Magnanimity, thereby either to overcome Ariobarzanes, or else having apparent
occasion altogether to fall out and to conceive a mortal malice against him.

The King had a daughter of the age of. xxi. years, a very fair and comely
Lady (according as her royal education and princely bringing up required)
whom as yet he had not matched in marriage, meaning to bestow her upon some
King or great Monarch, with a dowry of ten hundred thousand Crowns, bisides
the princely and great costlye apparel and Jewels, which her own mother
lying upon her death bed did bequeathe her.

The King then purposing to excel Ariobarzanes, minded by couplyng him with
his daughter; to make him his sonue in law: Which to a Lady of royal Lineage,
appears some debacing of her noble blood, to be matched with a man of
inferior birth. The like to a man how honorable so ever he be can not
chance, if he take a wife of degree never so base. For if he be borne of
noble and gentle kind, he does illustrate and advance the woman whom he
takes, all be it she were of the meanest trampe of the popular forto, and the
children which be borne of them, by the fathers means, shall be noble and of
gentle kind. But a woman, although she be most Noble, if she be married to
her inferior, and that her husband be not fo noble, the children that shall
be borne of them shall not receive the honor of the mothers storke, but the
state of the fathers lotte, and so shall be unnoble. Such is the Reverence and
Authority of the ^ere of ^a^, where upon does rise comparyson of the wise,
which does resemble the man unto the Sun, and the woman to the Moon. For we
see that the Moon of her self does not give light, ne yet can yield any
brightness to the darkness of the night, if the did not partake some shining
of the Sun, who with his lively flames at times and places, does brighten the
Stars, and makes the Moon to shine. Even so the woman depends of the man,
and of him does take her nobility. The King therefore thought the match not
mete for Ariobarzanes to marry his daughter, and (...) red he should incur
some blemishe of his house. But for all respect and fear of shame, the
emulation which he had to be victorious of his forced courtesy, did surpass.
Wherefore he sent for Ariobarzanes to come unto the Court. And he upon that
commandment came. And so soon as he was entered the Palace, he repaired to do
his reverence unto the king, of whom he was welcomed with glad and joyful
entertainment. And after they had a while debated of diverse matters, the King
said unto him: Ariobarzanes, for so much as thou art without a wife, we (...)
to bestow upon thee a Gentlewoman, which not only we well like and love, but
also is such a one, as thou thy self shall be well contented to take.
Ariobarzanes answered, that he was at his commandment: And that such choice
as pleased his Majesty, should very well content and satisfy him. Then the
King caused his daughter, (...) (...) (...) attired to come before him, and
there openly in presence of the (...) Court, commanded that Ariobarzanes
should marry her. Which with seemly ceremonies being (...), Ariobarzanes
showed little joy of that parentage, and in appearance made as though he cared
not for his wife. The nobles and Gentleman of the Court (...) to see the
strange (...) of the (...), considering the great (...) (...) of their Prince
toward his subject, by taking him for his father and son in law: and
greatly murmured to see the obstinacy and rudeness of Ariobarzanes, toward
the King and the fair new married spouse, much blaming and rebuking his
unkind demeanor. Ariobarzanes that day fared as though he were besides him
self, void of joy and mirth, where all the rest of the Court spent the time
in sport and triumph, the Ladies and noble women together with the King and
Queen them selves, dancing and (...), until the time of night did force
(...) wight to retire to their chambers. Notwithstanding the King did mark the
gesture and countenance of Ariobarzanes, and after the bankette, the King in
solemn guise and great pomp caused his daughter to be accompanied with a
great train to the lodging of Ariobarzanes, and to be carried with her her
princely dowry, where Ariobarzanes very honorably received his wife, and at
that instant, in the presence of all the noble men and Barons that waited upon
the Bride, he doubled the dowry received, and the same with the ten hundred
thousand crowns, given him by the King, he sent back again. This unmeasured
Liberality seemed passing strange unto the King, and bredde in him such
disdain, as doubtful he was whether to yield, or to condemn him to perpetual
banishment. The King thought that the greatness of Ariobarzanes mind was
invincible; and was not able patiently to suffer, that a subject in matters of
Courtesy and liberality, should compare with his King and master.
Herewithall the King conceiving malice, could not tell what to say or do. An
easy matter it was to perceive the rage and (...) of the king, who was so sore
displeased, as he bare good look and countenance to no man. And because in
those days the Persian kings (...) honored and reverenced as Gods, there was a
law that when the king was driven into a (...) or had conceived a just
displeasure, he should manifest unto his counselors, the cause of his anger,
who afterward by mature diligence having examined the cause, (...) finding yt
king to be (...) displesed, should seek means of his appeasing. But if they
found his anger and displeasure to be justly conceived, the cause of the same,
according to the quality of the offense, little or great, they should
punish, either by banishment or capital death. The sentence of whom should
pass and be pronounced without appeal: Howbeit lawful it was for the king,
the pronounced sentence, either in all, or in part, to diminishe the pain, or
clearly to assoile the party. Whereby it evidently appeared, that the
Counselors sentence once (...) termined, was very justice, and the kings will
if he pardoned, was mere grace and mercy. The King then was constrained by
(...) statutes of his kingdom to disclose (...) to his Counsel the cause of
his displeasure, which parti cularly he recited. The Counselors when they
heard the reasons of the king, sent for Ariobarzanes, of whom by due
examination, they gathered, that in diuors causes he had provoked the kings
offense. Afterward the lords of the Counsel, upon the proposed question began
to argue, by inuestigation and search whereof, in the end they judged
Ariobarzanes worthy to lose his head. For that he would not only compare, but
also go about to (...) him in things (...), and to she we him self
discontented with the marriage of his daughter, and unthankful of the benefits
so courteously bestowed upon him. A custom was observed among the Persians,
that in every act or enterprise, wherein the servant endeavored to surpass and
vanquishe his lord and master (albeit the attempt were commendable and praise
worthy) for (...) of want of duty, or contempt to the royal Majesty, he
(...) lose his best joint. And for better confirmation of their judgment, the
Counselors alleged a certain (...) sentence, registered in their Chronicles,
(...) done by the Kings of Persia. The cause was this: One of the Kings of that
Region disposed to disporte with certain of his noble men abroad in the fields,
went a Hanking, and with the (...) to fly at diverse gante. Within a while they
sprang a Hearon, and the King commanded that one of the Faulcons which was a
notable swift and soaring Hawk, should be cast off to the Hearon: which done,
the Hearon began to mount, and the Faucon speedily pursued, and as the Hawk
after many batings and intercourses, was about to seize upon the Hearon, he
espied an Egle. The stout Hawk seeing the Egle, gave over the fearful
Hearon, and with swift (...) flewe toward the Egle, and fiercely attempted to
(...) upon her. But the Egle very stoutly defended (...) self, that the Hawk
was forced to let go her hold. In the end (...) good Hawk, with her sharp
talands, again seized upon the Egles neck, and with her beak struck her stark
dead, wherwithall she fell down amidde the company that waited upon the King.
All the Barons and Gentlemen, highly commended and praised the Hawk, affirming
that a better was not in the world, attributing unto the same such praise, as
they thought mete. The King for all the acclamations and shoutes of the troop,
spoke not a word, but stood musing with him self, and did neither praise nor
blame yt Hawk. It was very late in the evening, when the Faucon killed the
Egle, and therefore the King commanded each man to depart to the City. The
next day the King caused a Goldsmith to make an exceeding fair crown of Gold,
apt and mete for the (...) head. Afterward when he saw time convenient, he
(...) that in the market place of the City, a pearche should be erected; and
(...) with tapestrie, Arras, (...) other costly furnitures, such as Princes
palaces are (...) decked withal. Thither with sound of (...) he caused the
Falcon to be conveyed, where the King (...) ded one of his noble men to place
the Crown upon his head, for prise of the excellent pray achieved upon the
Egle. Then he caused the hangman or common executioner of the City, to take
the Crown from the Faucon, and with the trenchant sword to cut of his head.
Upon these contrary (...) the beholders of this sight were amazed, and began
diversely to talk thereof. The King which at a window stood to behold this
fact, caused silence to be kept, and so loud opened his Princely voice, as he
was well heard speaking these words:

There ought (good people) none of you all to (...) and grudge at the present
fact executed upon the Faucon, because the same is done upon good reason and
just cause as by process of my discourse you shall well perceive. I am
persuaded that it is the office and duty of every magnanimous prince, to know
the valor and difference between virtue and vice, that all virtuous acts and
(...) thie attempts may be honored, and the contrary (...) and punished,
otherwise he is not worthy of the name of a King and Prince, but of a cruel
and traitorous tyrant. For as the Prince bears the title by principality and
chief, so ought his life chiefly to excel other, whom he governs and
rules. The bare title and dignity is not sufficient, if his conditions and
moderation be not to that supreme state (...). Full well I knew and did
consider to be in this dead Faucon, a certain generositie and stoutnesse of
mind, joined with a certain fierce (...) and nimblenesse, for which I crowned
and rewarded her with this golden garland, because of the stout slaughter
which she made upon that mighty Egle, worthy for that (...) and prowess to
be honored after that solemn guise. But when I considered how boldly and
rashely she assailed and killed the Egle, which is (...) Queen and maistresse,
I thought it a part of justice, that for her bold and uncomely act, she
should suffer the pain due to her (...). For unlawful it is for the
servant, and undutiful for the subject, to imbrue his hands in the blood
of his sovereign Lord. The Faulcon then having slain her Queen, and of all
other birds the sovereign, who can with reason blame me for cutting of the
Falcons head? Doubtless none, that has respect to the quiet state between
the Prince and subject.

This example the (...) alleged against Ariobarzanes when they pronounced
sentence, And applying the same to him, ordained that first Ariobarzanes, for
his Magnanimity and liberal Courtesy should be crowned with a Laurel Garland
for the generositie of his mind and exceeding courtesy, but for his great
emulation, earnest endeavor, and continual (...) to contend, with his prince,
and in Liberality to show him self superior, (...) the (...) (...) speech
uttered against him, his head ought to be stricken of. Ariobarzanes being
advertised of this severe (...), he purposed to sustain the (...) darte of
Fortune, as he had endured other bruntes of that envious inconstant Lady, and
in such manner behaved and directed his (...) and countenance, as no sign of
choler or despair appeared in him, only pronouncing this sentence with joyful
(...) in the presence of many. Glad I am that at length there rests in me so
much to be liberal, as I employ my life and blood, to declare the same to my
sovereign Lord, which right willingly I mean to do, that the world may know,
that I had rather lose my life, than to saint and give over in mine (...)
liberality. Then calling a Notarie unto him, he made his will (for so it was
lawful by the Persian laws) and to his wife and daughters he increased the
dowries, and to his kinsfolk and friends (...) bequethed diverse rich and
bountiful legacies. To the King he (...) a great number of most precious
Jewels. To Cyrus the Kings son, and his by marriage (bisides a great mass of
money) he bequeathed all his armure and (...), with all his instruments for
the wars, and his whole stable of horse. Last of all he ordained, that if
(perhaps) his wife should be found with child, and brought to bed of a
Son, he should be his universal heir: But if a woman child, to have the
like dowry that his other daughters had. The rest of his goods and cattle he
gave indifferently to all. iii. equally to be divided. He provided also, that
all his (...) according to their degree, should be rewarded. The day before he
should be put to death (according to the custom of Persia) his praises and
valiant factes, as well by Epitaphes fixed upon (...), as by (...), were
generally sounded (...) the Realm, in such wise as each wight (...) (...) him
to be the most liberal and noble personage that was in all the Country, and
in the borders (...) upon the same. And if there had not been some envious
persons near the King, which studied and practiced his overthrow, all other
would have deemed him unworthy of death. Such is the envy of the maliciously
disposed, that rather than they would see their equals to be in (...) (...)
with the Prince than them selves, study and devise all policy, either by
flattery or false (...), to bring them in discredit, or to practice by false
accusation, their utter subversion by death or vanishement. But whiles (...)
was disposing his things in order, his wife and daughters with his friends and
(...), were affected with great sorrow day and night, complaining for the heavy
(...) of that noble Gentleman. The eight day (...) (...) (for the law allowed
that space to the condemned, for disposition of their things) a skaffolde was
made by commandment of the King, in the mids of the Market place, all
covered with black (...), and an other right over against the same with
purple and (...), where the King (if he (...)) in the mids of the Judges should
sit, and the indictment read, judgment (by the Kings own mouth declared)
should be executed, or if it pleased him, discharge and assoile the condemned.
And the King unwilling to be present, gave to one of the (...) Judges, his full
power and authority. But yet sorrowful that a Gentleman so noble and valiant,
his father and (...) in law, should finishe his life with a death so horrible,
would needs that morning be present him self at that execution, as well to
see the continent and stout end of Ariobarzanes, as also to take order for
his delivery. (...) the time was come, Ariobarzanes by the (...) and (...) was
brought unto the Skaffolde, and there apparelled in rich (...), the Laurel
Crown was set upon his head, and so continuing for a certain space, the
garmente and Crown was taken off from his head, together with his other
apparel. The Executioner (...) for commandment to do his office, and lifting
up his sword to do the fact, (...) King desired to see the countenance of
Ariobarzanes, who never changed color for all that terror of death. The King
seeing the great constancy and invincible mind of Ariobarzanes, spoke (...)
that all men might hear him, these words:

Thou know Ariobarzanes, that it is not I, which have wroughte thy
condemnation, ne yet by (...) desire have sought thy blood, to bring thee to
this extremity, but it has been thy ill disordred life, and the statutes of
(...) (...), which have found thee guilty, and thereupon sentence and death
pronounced, and execution now ready to be done, and the minister ready to
advance his arm, to play the last act of this tragedy: And yet for that our
holy laws do give liberty that I may assoile and deliver whom I list, and
them restore to their former state, if now thou will acknowledge thy self
vanquished and over come, and accept thy life in grateful part, I will pardon
thee, and restore thee to thine offices and promotions. Ariobarzanes hearing
these words, kneeled down with his head declined, and expecting the blow of
the sword, lifted by himself, and turning his face to the King, perceiving
his malice not so sore bente against him as the envy and malice of his
ennimies desired, he determined to prove and use the pitiful liberality and
favor of his sovereign Lord, that his foes by his death might not triumph, ne
yet attain the thing, for which so long they aspired. Wherefore in reverent
wise (...) before his majesty, with a (...) and perfect voice said these
words: Most victorious and merciful sovereign Lord, in equal worship and honor
to the immortal Gods, since of thy abundant grace and mercy it has pleased
thee to grant me life, I do most humbly accept the same, which if I wist
should be prolonged in thy disgrace and wrath, could not be pleasant unto me,
and therefore do (...) my self altogether (...) and overcome. I most humbly then
do give thee (...) for preservation of the same, hoping hereafter to employ the
uttermost of mine endeavor for the benefit and honor of thy Crown and
dignity, as readily and without supplication made in my behalf, thou have
(...) to restore the same. And since thy (...) has revived me thine humble
(...), I (...) thy majesty to give me leave to say my mind, trusting thereby
to do thee to understand the effect and cause of that my former presumption.
The King made signs that he should rise and boldly speak the sum of his
desire. When he was upon his feet, silence was proclaimed: who then began to
speak these words: Two things there be, (most sacred Prince) which
doubtless do resemble the raging waves of surging seas, and the mutabilitie
of unstable winds, and yet great is the folly of an infinite number, which
employ their whole care and diligence to seek the same. These two things
whereof I speak, and be so derely beloved of flattering courtiers, are the
grace and favor of their sovereign Lord, and the luring love of Amorous dames:
which two things do so often beguile the Courtly Gentleman, that in the end
they engendre naught else but repentance. And to begin with ye love of Ladies,
they, as by common experience is proved, most commonly do recline to their
inferiors. It is daily seen by too much unhappy proof, that a young Gentleman
by birth comely and noble, and otherwise rich, virtuous, and endued with many
goodly gifts, shall choose and worship one for his sovereign Lady and
maistresse, and her shall serve and honor with the same faith and fidelity
due to the immortal Gods, and shall not stick to employ for her love and
service all the possible power and travel be is able to do, and yet she in
despite of all his humble endeavor, shall love an other void of all virtue,
making him possessour of that benefit, after which the other seeks, and she
not long constant in that mind, afterwadrs will attend unto the first suter,
but in such mouable and (...) sort, as the wandering stars (through their
natural instabilitie) be moved to and fro, and him in the end will suffer to
fall headlong into the bottomless pit of despair: and he that asks her the
reason of this variety, she makes none other answer but that her pleasure is
such, and wilful will to dally with her suitors, that seldom times a true and
perfect lover can fasten his foot on certain hold, but that his life is
tossed up and down like the whirling blastes of the inconstant winds. In like
manner in the Courts of Kings and Princes, he which is in favor with his
sovereign Lord in all men's eyes, so great and near, as it seems the Prince
is disposed to resolve upon nothing without his advise and counsel, when such
favored person shall employ his whole care and industry to maintain and
increase the co^menced grace of his sovereign Lord, behold, upon the
sudden, his mind and vain is changed, and an other without desert, which
never carked or labored to win good will, is taken in place, cherished as
though he had served him an hundred years before: and he that was the first
minion of the Court in greatest grace and estimation, is in a moment despised,
and out of all regard. An other, within few days after, shall be brought in
place of the other twain, very diligent and careful to serve, trained up in
Courtly exercise, whose mindful mind shall be so caring over his lords
affairs, as upon the safegarde and preservation of his own propre life. But
all his labor is employed in vain: and when the aged days of his expired
life approach, for the least displeasure he shall be thrust out without reward
for former travel, that right aptly the Common Proverb may be applied: The
common Courtiers life is like a golden misery, and the faithful servant an
Ass perpetual. I have seen my self the right well learned man to (...) in
Court for want of meat, and a blockish beast void of virtue for lust and not
for merit, advanced and made a Gentleman. But this may chance because his
lord is not disposed to lerning and virtue, little esteeming those that be
affected with good sciences for lack of careful trayning up in youthful
days, or else for that their mind can not frame with the gentle spirits of
them, the closets of whose breasts be charged and fraught with infinite loades
of lerning, and have not ben noscled in trade of Courts, ne yet can use due
courtly speech, or with vnblushing face can shuffle them selves in presence of
their betters, or commen with Ladies of dame (...) toys: or race of birth not
mingled with the noble or gentle Sire. For these causes perhaps that virtuous
wight can not attain the hap of Fortunes gifts. Which person though in Court
he be not esteemed, in Schoolehouse of good art yet deemed famous, and for his
worthy skill right worthy to be preferred above the heavens. In semblable wise,
how oftentimes and commonly is it seen that the man perchance which never thou
saw before, so soon as he is seen of thee, suddenly he is detested like a
plage, and the more earnest he is to do thee service and pleasure, the greater
is thy wrath bent toward him? Contrariwise, some other upon the first view
shall so content and please thee, as if he require the bestowing of thy life,
thou have no power to deny him, thou art in love with him, and let him twhart
thy mind and will never so much, thou carest not for it, all is well he does.
But that these varieties do proceed from some certain temprement of blood
within the body conformed and moved by some inward celestial power, who
doubts? And surely the foundation of these Courtly mutations, is the pricking
venomous (...) of pestiferous Envy, which continually holds the favor of
Princes in balance, and in a moment hoisteth up him which was below, and
poizeth down again him that was exalted. So that no plague or poison is more
pestiferous in Courts, than the hurtful disease of Envy. All other vices
with little pain and less labor may easily be cured, and so pacified, as
they shall not hurt thee: but rooted Envy by any means is discharged, with no
policy is expelled, ne yet by any drugge or medicine purged. Uerily without
great danger, I know not which way the poinaunt bittes of Envy can be
avoided. The proud man in Court, the arrogant and ambicious, the lofty
minded fool, more eleuate and lusty than Pride it self, if reverence be
done to him, if he be honored, if place be given to him, if he be praised and
glorified above the heavens, if thou humble thy self to him, by and by he will
take thee to be his friend, and will deem thee to be a courteous and gentle
companion. Let the lascivious and wanton person given to the pleasures and lust
of women, fixing his mind on nothing else but upon fugitive pleasures, if his
love be not impeached, ne yet his wanton toys reproved, if he be praised
before his Lady, he will ever be thy friend. The covetous and gluttonous
carle, if first thou make him quaffe a money medicine, and afterward bid him
to thy (...), the one and other disease is speedily cured. But for the envious
person, what physic can be sought to purge his pestiferous humor? Which if
thou go about to heal and cure, rather must thou remedy the same by wasting
the life of him that is so possessed, than find causes of recovery. And who
knows not (most (...) Prince) that in your Court there be some attached
with that poisoned plague, who seeing me your majesty's humble vassal in
greater favor with your grace, than they, my service more acceptable than
theirs, my prowess and exercise in arms more worthy tha^ theirs, my diligence
more industrious than theirs: my advise and counsel more available than
theirs, all mine other deeds and doings in better estimation than theirs: They
I say, dallied in the lap of the cancred witch dame Envy, by what means are
they to be recovered? by what means their infection purged? by what means
their malice cured? If not to. see me deprived of your grace, expelled from
your court, and cast headlong into the gulf of death extreme? If I should
bribe them with great rewards, if I should honor them with humble
reverence, if I should exalt them above the skies, if I should employ the
uttermost of my power, to do them service, all is frustrate and cast away.
They will not cease to bring me into (...), they will not spare to reduce me
to misery, they will not stick to imagine all devises for mine anoyance, when
they see all other remedies impotent and unable. This is the poisoned plague
which enuenometh all Princes Courts. This is the mischief which destroys
all Kingdoms. This is the monster that deuoureth al virtuous enterprises, and
offends each gentle spirit. This is the dim veil which so ouershadoweth
the cleerenesse of the eyes, as the bright beams of verity can not be seen,
and so obscureth the equity of justice, as right from falshode can not be
discerned. This is the manifest cause that bredeth a thousand errors in the
works of men. And to draw nere to the effect of this my tedious talk, briefly,
there is no vice in the world, that more outragiously corrupts Princes
courts, that more unfriendly vntwineth Frendships band, that more unhappily
subuerteth noble houses, than the poison of Envy. For he that inclines his
ears to the envious person, he that attends to his malignant devises,
impossible it is for him to do any deed that is either good or virtuous. But
to finish and end for avoiding of weariness, and not to stay your majesty
from your weighty affairs, I say that the Envious man rejoices not so much
in his own good turns, nor gladdeth him (...) so greatly with his own
commodities, as he does insulte, and laugh at the disco^moditie and hinderance
of others, at whose profit and gain he sorroweth and lanienteth, and to put
out both the eyes of his companion, the envious man cares not to pluck out one
of his own. These words (most invincible Prince) I purposed to speak in the
presence of your Majesty, before your guard and courtlyke train, and in the
universal hearing of all the people, that each wighte may understand, how I
not of your majesty's pretenced malice, or mine own committed fault, but
through the venomous tongues of the ettuious, fell into the lapse of your
displeasure. This most true oration of Ariobarzanes greatly pleased the noble
Prince, and although he felt him self somewhat touched therewith, yet knowing
it to be certain and true, and that in time to come the same might profit
all sorts of people, he greatly praised him in the presence of all the
assembly. Wherefore Ariobarzanes having recovered his life, and confessing
himself to be vanquished and overcome by the King that knew the valor and
fealty of that noble Gentleman, and loving him with hearty (...), he caused
him to come down from the mournyng scaffolde, and to ascend the place where
he was him self, whom he embraced and kissed, in token that all displeasure
was remitted. All his ancient offices were restored to him again, and for his
further advancement, he gave him the city of Passagarda, where was the old
monument of King Cyrus, and made him Lieuetenant general of all his Realms
and (...), commanding every of his subjects to obey him as his own person.
And so the Kingrested the honorable father in (...) to Ariobarzanes, and his
loving son by Marriage, craving still in all his enterprises, his grave advise
and counsel. And there was never thing of any importance done, but his liking
or disliking was first demanded. Ariobarzanes then returned into greater grace
and favor of his sovereign lord than before, and for his singular virtue,
having dispersed and broken the arms and malice of all his enemies, if before
he were courteous and liberal, after these so stout adventures he became more
than Princely in his deeds, and if sometimes he had done one courteous act, now
he doubled the same. But such was his Magnanimity, so noble were his
endeavors, tempred with such measure and equanimitie, as the whole world
clearly might discern, that not to contend with his sovereign Lord, but to
honor him to express the Majesty of his Prince, he employed the goods and
living which the King and Fortune had bou^tifully bestowed upon him: Who until
his dying day famously maintained him self in the good grace and favor of his
Prince, in such wise as the King more clearly than the shining Sunnebeames,
knew Ariobarzanes to be framed of Nature for a christalline mirror of courtesy
and Liberality, and that more easy it was to berieue the fire of heat, and
the Sun of light, than despoile Ariobarzanes of his glorious deeds.
Wherefore he ceased not continually to honor, exalte, and enriche him, that
he might use the greater liberality. And to say the truth, although these two
virtues of (...) and Liberality be commendable in all persons, without the
which a man truly is not he whereof he bears the name yet very sitting and mete
it is for every rich and welthie subject, to beware how he does compare in
those noble virtues with Princes and great men, which being right noble and
peerless upon earth, can abide no comparisons, which according to the
Proverb be odious and hateful.

Aristotimus the Tyrant.
LUCIUS one of the Guard to ARISTOTIMVS the Tirant of the City of (...), fell
in love with a fair maiden called MICCA, the daughter of one (...), and his
cruelty done upon her. The stoutnesse also of a noble Matrone named MEGISTONA
in defense of her husband and the common wealth from the tyranny of the said
ARISTOTIMVS: and of other acts done by the subjects upon that Tyrant.

The fifth Novel.
YOu have heard, or as it were in a manner, you have beholden the right images
and courteous conditions of two well conditioned persons mutually each toward
other observed. In the one a Princely mind toward a noble Gentleman his
subject: In the other a dutiefull obedience of a loving vassal to his
sovereign Lord and Master. In both of them the true figure of Liberality in
lively orient colors described. Now a contrary plotte, ill grounded upon
extreme tyranny, is offered to the view, done by one Aristotimus and his
clawbacks, against his humble subjects of the city of Elis, standing in
Peloponessus, a country of Achaia (which at this day we call Morea.) This
Aristotimus of nature was fierce and passing cruel, who by (...) of king
Antigonus was made Tyran of that City. And like a Tyran governed his Country
by abuse of his authority with new wrongs and strange cruelties, vering and
afflicting the poor Citizens and all his people. Which chanced not so much
for that of himself he was cruel and tyrannous, as for that his Counselors
and chief about him were barbarous and vicious men, to whom he committed the
charge of his kingdom and the guarde of his person. But amongs al his
mischiefs wrongfully done by him, which were innumerable, one committed
against Philodemus, (the same which afterward was the cause, of the
deprivation of his life and kingdom) is specially remembered. This Philodemus
had a daughter called Micca that not only for her right chaste and honest
qualities and conditions which (...) flourished in her, but for her extreme and
goodly beauty, was in that City of passing (...) and admiration. With this
fair maiden one of the Tyrants guard called Lucius fell in love, if it deserve
to be called love, and not rather, as the end full well declared, a most
filthy and heastlie lust. This Lucius was dearly beloved of Aristotimus, for
the flendish resembla^ce and wicked (...) of his vile and abominable
conditions: and therefore feared and obeyed as the Tyrants own person. For
which cause this Lucius sent one of the (...) of the kings chamber, to (...)
Philodemus at an appointed hour al excuses set apart, to bring his daughter
unto him. The parents of the maiden hearing this sudden and fearful message,
constrained by Tyrants force and fatal necessity, after many tears and (...)
sighs, began to persuade their daughter to be contented to go with him,
declaring unto her the rigor of the magistrate that had sent for her, the
(...) that would be executed, and that there was no other remedy: but to obey.
Alas, how sore against their wills, with what trembling gessure, with what
(...) the good parents of this (...) (...) were affected, to consider the
purpose of that dreadful message, all dear fathers, and natural mothers can
tell. But this gentle maiden (...), which was of nature stout, and (...)
lessoned with sundry right good and wholesome instructions from her infantes
age, was determined rather to die than to suffer her self to be defloured. This
(...) maiden fell down prostrate at her fathers feet, and clasping him fast
about the knees, lovingly did pray him, and pitifully besought him, not to
suffer her to be haled to so (...) and vile an office, but rather with the
piercing blade of a two edged sword to kill her, that thereby she might be rid
from the violation of those fleshly and (...) varlets, saying, that if her
virginity were taken from her, she should live in eternal reproach and shame.
As the father and daughter were in these terms, Lucius for the long tariance
and (...), drunk with the wine (...) lechery, made impacient and furious, with
(...) speed posted to the house of Philodemus, and finding the maiden
prostrate at her fathers feet, weeping, her head in (...) (...), with taunting
voice and threatening words commanded presently without longer delaie she
should rise and go with him. She refusing his hasty request, and crying out
for fathers help, who (God wot) durst not resist, stood still and would not
go Lucius seeing her (...), full of fury and proud disdnine, began furiously
to hale her by the garments, upon whose struggling he fare her (...) and
furnitures off her head and shoulders, that her alablaster neck and bosom
appeared naked, and without compassion tare and whipped her flesh on every side,
as the blood ran down, beating that tender flesh of hirs with manifold and
grenous blows. O (...) tirant, more (...) and savage than the desert beast or
mountain (...), (...). Could cruelty be so deeply rooted in the heart of man
which by nature is affected with reasons instinct, as with out pity to lay
hands, and violontly to hurt the tender body of a (...) Maiden? Can such
inhumanitie harbor in any that bears about him the shape of man? But what did
this martyred maide^ for all this force? Did (...) yield to violence, or render
her self to the disposition of this merciless man? No surely. But with so
great stoutnesse of mind, she suffered those impressed wounds, that no one
word sounding of sorrow, or womanly shrieche was heard to (...) from her
delicate mouth. Howbeit the poor father and miserable mother at that ruefull
and lamentable sight, moved with inward (...) and natural pity, cried out
aloude. But when they saw that neither plaint nor fair speech could deliver
their daughter out of the hands of that cruel monster, they began with open
cries and horrible exclamation to implore help and succor at the hands of the
immortal Gods, thinking that they were unworthily plaged and tormented. Then
the proud and most barbarous wretch, moved and (...) by cholers rage and fume
of chasing wine, suddenly catched the most constant virgin by the hair of the
head, and in her fathers lap did cut her white and tender throat. O (...) fact
right worthy of (...) revenge. But what did this unfaithful and cruel Tyrant
Aristotimus when by the blustering brute of peoples rage he heard of this
vengeable murder, not only he showed himself contented with the fact, but had
him in greater regard than before, and toward them which made complaint
hereof, greater cruelty and mischief was done and executed. For in open
streat, like beasts in the shambles they were (...) and hewed in pieces, which
seemed to (...) (...) at this (...) and unlawful act: the rest were banished
and expelled the City. Eight hundred of these exiled persons (...) into
Etolia. (a province adjoining to Epirus, which now is called Albania.) Those
people so banished out of they: country, made instant suit to Aristotimus to
suffer their wives and children to repair to them: but their suit was in
vain, their peticions and supplications seemed to be made to the deaf, and
dispersed into the winds. Notwithstanding, within few days after, he caused
by sound of trumpet to be openly proclaimed, that it should be lawful for the
wives and children of the banished to pass with their baggage and furniture to
their husbands in Etolia. This Proclamation was exceeding joyful to all the
women whose husbands were exiled, which at the least by common report were the
number of. vj. hundreds. And for more credit of that Proclamation, the wicked
tyrant did ordain, that all the company should depart upon a (...) day. In
the mean time, the joyful wives glad to visit their poor husbands, prepared
horse and wagon, to carry their provisions. The appointed day of their
departure out of the City being come, all of them assembled at a certain gate
assigned for their repair, who that time together resorted with their little
children in their hands, bearing upon their heads their garments and
furnitures, some on horseback, and some bestowed in the wagons, according as
each of their states required: when al things were in readiness to depart, and
the gate of the City opened, they began to issue forth. They were no (...)
gone out of the City walls, and had left behind them the soil of their
nativity, but the Tyrants guard and Sergeants brake upon them, and before they
were approached, they (...) out to stay and go no further upon pain of their
lives. So the poor amazed women, contrary to the promise of the Tyrant, were
(...) to retire. Which sudden countremaund was sorrowful and woeful unto that
(...) flock. But there was no remedy, for proceed they could not. Then those
Termagants and villains caught their horse by the bridles, and drove back
again their wagons, pricking the poor oxen and beasts with their spears and
Iauelyns, that horrible it is to report the tyranny used toward man and
beast, in such wise as the poor miserable women (God wot) contrary to their
desires, were forced in dispite of their teeth to return. Some (alack) fell
off their horse with their little babes in their lappes, and were miserably
trodden under horse feet, and ouerrunne with the wheels of the wagons, their
brains and guts gushing out through the weight and comberance of the carriage,
and (which was most pitiful) one of them not able to help an other, and much
less to rescue their young and tender sucking babes, the vile sergea^ts forcing
each wight with their staves and wepons maugre their desirous minds to reentre
the City. Many died by that constrained means out of hand, many were trodden
under the horsefeete, and many gasping between life and death: but the
greatest part of the little infants were slain out of hand, and crushed in
pieces: those which remained alive, were committed to prison, and the goods
which they carried with them altogether seized upon by the Tyrant. This most
wicked and cruel fact was most intolerable and grievous unto the Citizens of
Elis, Whereupon the holy dames consecrated to the God Bacchus, adorned and
garnished with their priestly garments, and bearing in their hands the sacred
mysteries of their God, as Aristotimus was passing through the street guarded
with his Soldiers and men of war, went in procession to find him out. The
sergeants for the reverence of those religious women disclosed themselves, and
gave them place to enter in before the Tyrant. He seeing those women apparelled
in that guise, and bearing in their hands the sacred Bachanal mysteries, stood
still, and with silence heard what they could say. But when he knew the cause of
their approach, and that they were come to make suit for the poor imprisoned
women, suddenly possessed with a devilish rage, with horible hurly burly,
bitterly reprehended his garrison for suffering of those women to come so near
him. Then he commanded that they should be expelled from that place without
respect, and condemned every of them (for their presuming to entreat for such
caitiue prisoners) in. y. (...) a piece. After these mischiefs (...) by the
tyra^t, Hellanicus one of the principal and best esteemed persons of the City,
although that he was decrepite, and for age very weak and feeble, cared not
yet to adventure any attempt, what soever, so it might extend to the delivery
of his country from the unspeakable tyranny of most cruel Aristotimus. To
this gray haired person, because he was of aged years, void of children which
were dead, this tyrant gave no great head ne yet employed any care, thinking
that he was not able to raise any mutine or (...) in the City. In the mean
space, the Citizens, which as I have said before, were banished into Etolia,
practiced amongs them selves to prove their Fortune, and to seek all means
for recovery of their country, and the death of Aristotimus.

Wherefore having levied and assembled certain bands of Soldiers, they marched
forth from their banished seat, and never rested till they had gotten a place
hard adjoining to their City, where they might safely lodge, and with great
(...) and advantage besiege the same, and erpel the tyrant Aristotimus. As the
banished were (...) in that place, many citizens of Elis (...) fled forth, and
joined with them, by reason of which auriliaries and daily assemblies, they
grew to the full number of an army. Aristotimus certified hereof by his
espials was brought into a great chafe and fury, and even now began to presage
his fall and ruin. But yet meaning to (...) his best advantage, went unto the
prison, where the (...) of the banished were fast enclosed, and because he was
of a troublesome and tyrannical nature, he concluded with him self rather to
use and entreat those wives with hun and threats, than with humanity and
fair words. Being entered the prison, he sharply and with great fierceness
commanded them to write unto their husbands that besieged him without,
earnestly to persuade them to give over their attempted wars: otherwise (said
he) if ye do not follow the effect of my commandment, in your own presence I
will first cause cruelly to be slain al your little children, tearing them by
piece meal in pieces, and afterward I will cause you to be whipped and
scoutged, and so to die a most cruel and shamfull death. At which fierce and
tyrannical news, there was no one woman amo^gs them that opened their mouths
to answer him. The most wicked and vile tyrant seeing the^ to be in such
silence, charged them upon their lives to answer what they were disposed to
do. But although they (...) not speak a word, yet with silence one beholding
each other in yt face, fared as though they cared not for his threats, more
ready rather to die tha^ to obey his commandment. Megistona then (which was
the wife of Timolion, a matrone as well for her husbands (...) as her own
virtue, in great regard and estimation, and the chief amongs all the women,
who at his coming in would not rise, but kept her place, nor vouchsasing to do
any reverence or honor unto him, and the like she bad the rest: In this wise
sitting upon the ground we unloosed tongue and liberty of speech, stoutly she
answered the tyrants demand in this manner: If there were in thee Aristotimus,
any manly prudence, wisdom, or good discretion, truly (...) would not
co^mande us poor imprisoned women to write unto our husbands, but rather
suffer us to go unto them, and use more (...) words and mylde behavior, than
wherewith of late thou did entertain us, by scoffing, mocking, and cruelly
dealing with us, and our poor children: and if now thou being void of all
hope, dcest seek to persuade by our means likewise to deceive our husbands
that be come hither to put their lives in peril for our deliverance, I assure
thee thou vainly (...) thy self, for we henceforth do purpose never to be
(...) of thee: we require thee also to think and steadfastly believe, that our
husbands heads be not so much bewitched with folly, as despising their wives
and children, neglecting their duties toward them, will being in this
forwardness, abandon their preservation and give over the liberty of their
cositrey. Think also that they little esteem or wey yt regard of us, and their
children, in respect of the great co^tentation they shall attain by vnyoking
the liberty of their country from thy pride and intolerable bondage, and
which is worst of all, from that tyranny which never people felt the like.
For if thou were a King as thou (...) a tyrant, if thou were a Gentleman borne
of noble kind asthou art a slave, proceeding from the devil, thou (...) never
execute thy curssed cruelty against a feeble kind, such as women be, and
werest thou alone joined in singular co^bat with my baliant and dear beloved
husband, thou durst not hand to hand to show thy face: for commonly it is
seen, that the Courtely (...) backed on with such mates as he is him self,
cares not what attempt he takes in hand, and stareth with hair upright,
looking as though he would kill the devil, but when he is preast to service of
the sielde, and in order to encountre with his Princes foe, upon the small sway
by shocke or push that thaunceth in the fight, he is the first that takes
flight, and last that stands to the face of his ennimie. Such kind off man
art thou, for so long as our husbands were far of, absent from their
Country, not able to rid us from thy thrall, thou wroughtest thy malice then
against their wives at home, doing the greatest cruelty toward the^ and
their sucking babes, that ever devil could do upon the (...) sort, and now
thou see them arrived here under our country walls, thou fliest, and
seek help at women's hands, whose power if it served them according to their
wills, would make thee taste the fruit of thy committed smart. And as she would
have proceeded further in her liberal talk, the Caitife tyrant not able to
abide any further speech, troubled beyond measure, presently commanded the
little child of her to be brought before him, as though immediately he would
have killed him, and as his servant sought him out, the mother espied him
playing amo^gs other children, not knowing for his small stature and less
years, where he was become, and calling him by his name said unto him: My boy
come hither, that first of all thou may loose thy life, to feel the proof
and have experience of the cruel tyranny wherein we be, for more grievous it
is to me to see thee serve against the nobility of thy blood, than dismembered
and torn in pieces before my face. As Megistona stoutly and vnfearfully had
spoken those words, the furious and angry tyrant drew forth his glistering
blade out of his sheathe, purposing to have slain the gentlewoman, had not one
Cilon the familiar friend of Aristotimus staid his hand, forbidding him to
commit an act so cruel. This Cilon was a fained and counterfeit friend of the
Tyrant, very conversant with other his familiar friends, but hated him with
deadly hatred, and was one of them yt with Hellanicus had conspired against the
tirant. This Gentleman then seeing Aristotimus with so great fury to ware wood
against Megistona, embraced him, and said, that it was not the part of a
gentleman proceeding from a race right honoble, by any means to (...) his
hands in woman's blood, but rather the sign and token of a cowardly knight,
wherefore he besought him to stay his hands. Aristotimus persuaded by Cilon,
appeased his rage, and forsook the company of the women. Not long after, a
great prodige and wonder appeared in this sort: before supper the tyrant and
his wife withdrue themselves into their chamber, and being there, an Egle was
seen to soar over the tyrants palace, and being aloft, by little and little
to descend, and letting fall from her tallands a huge and great stone upon the
top of that chamber, with clapping wings and flying noise soared up again,
so far as she was clean out of sight from them that did behold her.

With the rumor and shouts of those that saw this sight, Aristotimus was
appalled, and understanding the circumstance of the chance, he sent for his
divine to declare the signification of this Augurie, which greatly troubled his
mind. The Southsayer bad him to be of good chere, for that it did portend the
great favor and love which Jupiter bare unto him. But the prophet of the City
whom the Citizens had well tried and proved to be faithful and trusty,
manifested unto them the great danger that hong over the tyrants head, such as
the like never before. The confederats which had conspired with Hellanicus,
made great speed to prosecute their enterprise, and the next night to kill
the tyrant. The very same night Hellanicus dreamed that he saw his dead son
to speak unto him these words: What mean you father this long time to sleep,
I am one of your sons whom Aristotimus has slain, know you not that the
same day you attempt your enterprise, you shall be captain and prince of your
country? By this vision Hellanicus confirmed, he rose bytimes in the morning,
and exhorted the conspirators that day to execute the benefit of their
Country. That time Aristotimus was certified how Craterus the tyran of another
City, with a great army, was coming to his aid against the banished people
of Elis, and that he was arrived at Olympia a City between the Mount Ossa
and the mountain Olympus. With which news Aristotimus being encouraged,
thought already that he had put to flight and taken the banished persons,
which made him to adventure himself abroad without guard or garrison,
accompanied only with Cilon and one or two of his familiar friends, the very
same time that the conspiratours were assembled to do the fact. Hellanicus
seeing the time so convenient to deliver his beloved Country by the death of
the traitorous Tyrant, not attending any sign to be given to his companions
(although the same was concluded upon) the lusty old man lifting up his hands
and eyes unto the heavens, with clear and open voice cried out to his
companions and said: Why stay ye, O my Citizens and loving country men in the
face of your City to finishe this good and commendable act? At which words,
Cilon was the first which with his brandishing blade killed one of those that
waited upon the Tyrant. Thrasibulus the^ and Lampidus assailed Aristotimus,
upon whose sudden approach, he fled into the Temple of Jupiter, where he was
murdered with a thousand wounds upon his body, accordingly as he deserved. He
being thus deservedly slain, his body was drawn up and down the streets, and
proclamation of liberty sounded unto the people: Where unto each wight
assembled, amongs whom the imprisoned women also brake forth, and reioysed
with their country deliuerers of that egregious enterprise, by fires and
bankettes outwardly disclosing their exceeding great joy within, and in midde
of their mirth the people in great throngs and companies ran to the Tyrants
palace, whose wife hearing the peoples noise, and certified of her husbands
death, enclosed her self in a chamber with her two daughters, and knowing how
hateful she was unto the Citizens, with a (...) cord upon a beam she hong
her self. The chamber doors being broke open, the people viewed the horrible
sight of the strangled lady, wherwithall not moved, they took the two
trembling daughters of the tyrant, and carried them away, purposing to ravish
and violate the same, first to saciate their lust with the spoil of their
virginity, and afterward to kill them (those Gentlewomen were very beautiful
and mariageable) and as they were about to do that shameful deed, Magistona
was told thereof, who accompanied with other Matrons, sharply rebuked their
fury, saying, that uncomely it were for them which sought to establish a
civil state, to do such a shameless act as tirants rage would scarce permit.
Upon that noble matrons authority and interception, they ceased from their
filthy fact, and then the woman took the (...) out of the peoples hands,
and brought them into the chamber where their strangled mother was. And
understanding that it was decreed that none of the Tyrants blood should rest
on live, she turned her face to the two young Gentlewomen, and said: The
chiefest pleasure which I can do to you, rests in this choice, that it shall
be lawful for either of you to choose what kind of death you list, by knife
or halter, if you will to dispatche your lives from the hedlesse peoples
greater fury, upon whose two white and tender bodies if they do seize, the
Gods do know and we do fear the cruelty and great abuse which they do
mean to use, I think not for despite of you, but for the just revenge of your
most cruel fathers acts, for the tyrannous life of whom, the Gods do thunder
down the boltes of their displeasure, afflicting his nearest blood and best
beloved wife and children, with vengeance poured from heavens. Upon the
sentence of this their fatal end, the elder maiden of the twain unloosed a
girdle from her middle, and began to tie the same to hang her self, exhortyng
her younger sister to do the like: and in any wise to beware by sparing of her
life, to incur the beastly rage of the monstrous people, which cared not to
do each vile and filthy act, unworthy their estate. The younger sister at
those words, laid hands upon the fastened cord, and besought her right
earnestly first of all to suffer her to die. Whereunto the elder answered: So
long as it was lawful for me to live, and whiles we led our princely time in
our fathers court, and both were free from enemies danger, all things between
us two were common and indifferente: wherefore the Gods forbidth at now the
gates of death be opened for us to enter, when with the Ghostes of our dear
parents our souls amids the infernal fields be predestined to raunge and
wander) that I should make denial of thy request. Therefore go to good sister
mine, and shrink not, when thou see the ugly face of her, that must consume
us all. But yet (dear sister) the deadly sight of thee before my self, will
breed to me the woe and smart of double death. When she had so said, she
yielded the collar to her sister, and counseled her to place the same so near
the neck bone as she could, that the sooner the halters force might stop her
breath. When the unfearful younger sister was dead, the tre^bling hands of yt
dredlesse elder maid untied the girdle from her neck, covering in comely wise
her senseless corpse. Then turning her self to Megistona, she humbly prayed her
not to suffer their two bodies to be seen naked, but so sone as she could, to
bury them both in one earthly grave, referring the fruits of their virginity
to the mould whereof they came. When she had spoken those words, without any
stay or fear at all, with the self same cord the strangled her self, and so
finished her fatal days. The guiltless death of which two tender maids,
there was none of the citizens of Elis (as I suppose) so stony hearted and
void of Natures force, ne yet so wroth against the tyrant father, but did
lament, as well for the constant stoutnesse and manner of their death, as for
their maydenlyke behauioure and right honest petitions made to that sobre
matrone Megisthona, who afterward caused the other dames, to bury those two
bodies in one grave. O how happy and famous had these two sisters ben, if they
had not been the daughters of so wicked and cruel a father? But parents
offense on Childrens trespass, ought not to deface the virtuous deeds of
their posterity.

Two Roman Queens.
The marvelous courage and ambition of a Gentlevvoman called TANAQVIL, the
Queen and wife of TARQVINVSPRISCVS the fifth Roman King, with her persuasions
and policy to her husband for his advancement to the kingdom: her like
encouragement of SIRVIVSTVLLIVS, wherein also is described the ambition of one
of the. ij. daughters of SERVIVSTVLLIVS the sixth Roman King, and her cruelty
toward her own natural father: with other accidents chanced in the new
erected commonwealth of Rome, specially of the last Roman King TARQVINVS
SVPERBVS, who with murder atteined the kingdom, with murder maintained it, and
by the murder and insolent life of his son, was with all his progeny
banished.

The sixth Novel.
ANcus Marcius being yt fourth King (after Romulus the first builder of that
City) there came to dwell in Rome one Lucumo, a lusty gentleman, rich, and
desirous of honor, who determined to continewe his habitation there. The Same
Lucumo was the son of one Demaratus a Corinthian, who for sedition fled his
own country, and dwelt in (...) amongs the stock of the Tarquines: and after
he was married he begat two sons, one of them was this Lucumo, and the other
was called Arnus. Lucumo was heir to his father, for that Arnus died before,
leaving his wife great with child. The father not knowing that his daughter in
law was with child, gave nothing in his will to his Nephewe: for which cause
the child was called Arnus Egerius. Lucumo being the sole heir of his father,
married a noble woman named Tanaquil, and because the Thuscans could not abide
to see a stranger grow to abundance of wealth and authority, she despised her
own country rather than she would suffer her husband in any wise to be
dishonored. Wherefore she devised to forsake the Tarquinians, and to dwell at
Rome, where she thought among that honorable sort and new rerected state,
that her husband being stout and valiant, should attain some place of
resiance. For she called to remembrance that Tatius ye Sabine, Numa borne of
ye stock of Curetes and Ancus brought forth by a Sabine woman, all strangers,
did reign and became noble and mighty. Thus ambition and desire of honor
easily does persuade any devise. Wherefore, carrying with the^ al their
substance, they repaired to Rome. It chanced when they came to Ianiculum, as
he and his wife were sitting in a Wagon, an Eagle hoouering her wings over
Lucumo, suddenly took away his cappe, which done, she soared over the wagon with
great force, then she returned again, as though she had been commanded by
some celestial providence, and aptly placed his cappe again upon his head,
and then soared away up into the element. Tanaquil conceiving this act to be
some Augurie or Prophecy, being cunning in that knowledge (as commonly all the
people of Hetruria be) embraced her husband and willed him to be of good chere
and to expect great honor. And as they were ymagining and consulting upon
these events, they entered the City, and when they had gotten a house for him
and his family, he was called Tarquinins Priscus. His riches and great wealth
made him a noble man amongs the Romans, and through his gentle entertainment
and courteous behavior, he wanne the good wills of many, in so much as his
fame and good report was bruted throughout the palace. At length he grew in
acquaintance with the King him self, who seeing his liberal demeanor and
duetifull service, esteemed him as one of his familiar and nere srends, and
both in his wars and also at home he imparted to him the secrets of his
counsel, and having good experience of his wisdom, by his last will and
testament appointed him to be tutour of his children. Ancus reigned. xxiiii.
years, a man in peace and war, in policy and valiance with any of his
predecessors comparable. His children were very young, and for that cause
Tarquinius was more instant to summon a parliament for creation of a king. When
the day was come he sent the young children abroad a hunting, and then
ambiciously presumed to demand the kingdom, being the first that ever
attempted the like. For the better conciation and obteining of the peoples good
will, he uttered this Oration: I do not presume to require a strange or new
thing, that was never before put in practice, nor yet am the first, but the
third stranger and foraine borne that affected and aspired to this government.
For which consideration there is no cause why any man ought to muse or marvel
more than behooves. It is evidently known that Tatius, not only being a
stranger, but also an ennimie, was made King. Numa also was made King, being
altogether a foraine and stranger borne, not through his own request, but
rather voluntarily accited and called thereunto by the Romans: but for my
part, after I was able to govern my self, I repaired to dwell at Rome with my
wife, my children, and all my substance, where I have spent the chiefest
portion of my life, specially after it was mature and able to execute civil
magisterie, which I chose rather to bestow at Rome than at home in mine own
country. I have learned the Roman rites and laws, as well such as be mete to
serne abroad in the wars, as also necessary to be practiced at home, at
the hands of mine old master Ancus Martius your late king, a master right
worthy and famous in all points to be followed. I showed my self an humble
and obedient subject to the King and in friendeship and familiarity toward
others, I contended with the King him self. When he had spoken those words,
which in deed were very true, with the whole consent of the people, he was
saluted King. And as all things succeeded his Noble request, even so after he
was settled in his Kingdom, he gave him self to (...) the common wealth. He
chose an hundred grave persons, which he called the Fathers of the lesser
countries. He warred first with the Latins, and (...) the City of Appiolas,
who bryngyng from thence a greater spoil and booty than was looked for
(ordained richer and more gorgeous Plays than any of his predecessoures. He
builded certain Galleries and other places of assembly about the Forum, he
walled the City round about with stone. And as he was doing these things, the
Sabines interuented him upon the (...), in so much as they were passed the
Kyuer of Anienes before the Roman host was in a readiness. Which was an
occasion of great fear and stir at Rome. In the (...) after the battles
were joined between them both, a cruel and blouddie slaughter was committed,
the victory falling to neither part. Then the Romans sought means to renew
their force, by addyng to their army a further band of horsemen. Wherefore
Tarquinius sent to the Rammenses, Titienses, Luceres. To the bands that
Romulus had conscribed, he added other new troops of horsemen, purposing that
the same should continue in memory of him after his death. And because Romulus
did the same without advise of the Southsayers, one Accius Nauius the notablest
Prophecier in those days, withstoode that constitution, (...) that it was not
lawsull for him either to appoint a new order, or to alter the old, except
the birds and auguries did assent thereunto. Wherewith the king was displeased,
and deluding that science, said: Go to M. Sothsayer, tell me now (quod he) is
it possible to bring that to pass which I have now conceived in my mind? Yea
quod the Southsayer if you tell me what it is. Then quod Tarquinius, I have
devised that thou shall pare thine own skin with a Raser. Therefore take this
knife and do as thy birds do portend and signify. And as it was reported he
pared his own skin in deed. In memory whereof an Image of Accius was erected,
with his head (...). After that time there was nothing attempted without those
auguries. Notwithstanding, Tarquinius proceeded in his constitution, and added
to the Centurias an other number, for that. 1800. horsemen were contained in
the three Centuriae. The later addition was called also by the same name, which
afterward were doubled into vj. Centurias. When his number was thus increased,
once again he joined battle with the Sabines, who by a notable policy
recovered a great victory. And because the Sabines doubled a fresh onset
without any order of battle or good aduisement, they were overthrown, and
then constrained to make peticion for peace. The city of Collatia, and the
Country confining upon the same, was taken from the Sabines. The Sabine wars
being in this sortended, Tarquinius in triumphant manner (...) to Rome. At that
time a prodige and miraculous (...) chanced to be seen in the Palace. The
head of a child whose name was Seruius Tullius lying a sleep in the palace,
was seen to burn. The king was brought to see that miracle. And as one of his
servants was going to fetch water to quench the fire, he was staid by the
Queen, who commanded that the child should not once be touched until he
awaked of himself. And so soon as he rose from sleep, the fire vanished.
Then she took her husband aside, and said: do you see this child whom we
have very basely and negligently brought up? I assure you sir (said she) he
will be the only safeguard and defender of this our doubtful state, and will be
the preserver of our household when it is afflicted. Wherefore let us make much
of him, that is like to be the ornament and a worthy stay to all our family.
After that they had accounted him amongs the number of their children, and
traded him up in those Arts, which excite all good dispositions to aspire unto
honor, the pleasure of the Gods appeared in short time: For the child grew to
a royal behauior, in so much, as among all the Roman youth, there was none
more meet to mary the daughter of Tarquinius. This Seruius Tullius was the
son of one Seruius Tullius that was a Captain of a town called Corniculum,
at the apprehension whereof, it chanced that the said Tullius the father was
(...), leaving his wife great with child: the mother being a captive and bond
woman was delivered of her child at Rome, in the house of Priscus Tarquinius.
After Tarquinius had reigned. xxxviij. years, the young man began to grow to
great honor and estimation, as well with the king himself, as also with the
Fathers. Then the Romans conceived a hateful indignation against the king, for
that he being put in trust to be the Tutor and governor of Ancus children,
displaced them from their right inheritance, and specially for that he himself
was a stranger, fearing also that the kingdom should not return again to the
election of themselves, but degenerat and grow into servile bondage. They also
called to remembrance, that the City continewed one hundred years after the
sublation of Romulus, an intier kingdom within one City, and that it was a
shame for them to suffer a bondsman, borne of servile kind, to possess the
same, and would rebound to their perpetual ignominy, having the progeny of
Ancus alive, to suffer the same to be open to strangers and bo^dmen. Wherefore
they determined to defend the grief of that injury, and to be revenged rather
upon Tarquinius, than upon Seruius. In fine, they committed the execution of
that fact to two shepherds chosen out for that purpose. Who devised this
policy. Before the entry into the Palace they fell together by the ears,
upon which fray all the kings officers assembled and repaired thither to know
the cause of their falling out, when they were parted, they appealed to the
king, with such exclamation, as they were heard to the Palace. Being called
before the king, both of them fell to brawling, and one of the^ striued of
purpose to hinder the tale of the other. The kings sergeant rebuked them,
commanding them to tell their tales in order. When they were a little quieted,
one of the^ begins to discourse the tale. And as the king was attentife to
hear the plaintiff, the other took up a hatchet and threw it at the king, and
leaving the weapon sticking in the wound, they conveyed themselves out of the
doors. Those that waited upon the King, made have to relieve him, and the
sergeants followed to apprehende the malefactors. With that a hurly burly
rose amo^gs the people, every man maruelling what the matter should be.
Tanaquil commanded the palace gates to be shut, and seeks remedy to cure
her husband, as though some hope of life had been remaining. When hope failed
of his recovery, she called Seruius before her (which married her daughter)
and showed unto him her dead husband, holding him fast by the right hand,
she entreated him that he would not suffer the death of his father in law to
be unrevenged, to the intent he might not be ridiculous to the traitors,
saying to him further these words: If thou be a man of thy hands (O Seruius)
the kingdom is thine and not theirs, which thus cruelly by the hands of other
have committed this abominable fact. Wherefore put forth thy self, and the
Gods be thy guide: For they did portende this noble head to be the Governor of
this city, at such time as they circumfused the same with a fire descendyng
from above. Let that heavenly (...) excite thy courage. Be thoroughly awaked. We
being strangers sometime have reigned. Think and consider what thou art, and
not from whence thou came. If the strangeness of the case do affray thee,
my counsel from time to time shall relieve thee. The cry and stir of the
people being unmeasurable, that one could scarce hear an other, Tanaquill
opened the windows that had their prospect to the new way (for the King dwelt
at the temple of Jupiter Stator) and then spoke to them in this wise: Be of
good cheer (good people) the King is but amazed with the sodainesse of the
stroke, the wound is not very deep, for even now he is come again to him
self, and the wound being opened and dressed, there is good hope of life: I
trust within these few days you shall see him. In the mean time, I pray you
to (...) your obedience to Seruius Tullius, who is appointed to execute the
laws, and to do all other affairs in the absence of my husband. Seruius
occupying the state and Authority of the King, executed the laws in some
cases, and in other some made the people believe that he would consult with the
King him self. The death of the King was concealed and kept close a certain
space, till such time as Seruius had gathered his force about him. After the
death of the King was disclosed, Seruius being guarded with a strong Garrison,
took upon him to be King, not by the consent of the people, but by the will of
the Fathers. The children of Ancus understanding that the King was alive, and
that Seruius power and force was great, conveyed them selves in exile to
Suessa Pometia. And least the children of Tarquinius should attempt like
enterprise against him, as the children of Ancus did against Tarquinius, he
married. (...). of his daughters to Lucius and Aruns, the children of
Tarquinius. But yet the devise of man could not break the necessity of fate
and constellation, for the hatred conceived in desire of Ambicious government,
made all things unstable and unfaithful amongs domestical friends. But yet to
quiet and pacify the present time, war was renewed with the Veientes, and
other Cities of Hetruria: wherein the fortune and valia^ce of Tullius excelled.
For when he had given an overthrow to the ennimie, least the peoples and
fathers good will should be withdrawn, he returned to Rome: who then attempted
and brought to pass a notable work in the common wealth. He instituted a
certain yearly tax and reuenew, to satisfy and discharge all charges sustained
in the time of peace and war, with sundry other notable laws and devises
for the defense of the public state. After that he had mustered the whole
number of the Citizens in the field called Martius, the same amounted to lxxx.
M. And as Fabius Pictor says, there were so many that were able to bear
armure. Then the hills of Quirinalis, Viminalis and Exquiliae, were added to
the city. He compassed the town round about with a vamure, enuironing the same
with a double trench. He divided the Romans into. v. bands called Classes, and
into Centurias, which be bands of an hundred men. He also builded a Temple to
Diana, with the help and assistance of the Latin people. Amongs the Sabines
there chanced an Ox in the house of an husband man to be brought forth, of
an huge bigness and marvelous shape (the horns whereof were placed at the
porche of Dianas temple for a monument long time after.) The Soothsayers
prophesied, that where the same Ox should be first sacrificed to Diana, there
the chief Empire and principal government should remain: which prophecy came
to the knowledge of the chief minister of Diana her Temple. One of yt Sabins
expecting for a day mete to be employed in that sacrifice, brought the said
Ox to Rome to the Temple of Diana, placing the same before the Altar. The
chief Minister calling to remembrance the oracle, and saw that the greatness
of that sacrifice should be famous, spoke to the Sabine these words. What do
thou mean (thou impure Stranger) to prepare sacrifice to Diana, before thou
be purified and cleansed in the lively River of Tyber? Here below in this
valley the said river does run. Go get thou hence and wash thee. The Sabine
attached with a religious fear, goes down to yt River, and while he is
washing of himself a Roman does offer the Sacrifice, which was right
acceptable both to the king and his country. The king although that of long
time he had reigned, yet understood that the elder Tarquinius which was married
to one of his daughters, did brag and report (...) that his father in law
obtained the government and kingdom without the consent of the people: wherefore
the king through his liberality by dividing the conquest achieved of the
ennimy amo^gs the common people, conciliated their (...) and good wills. In so
much as he affirmed that he would reign in despite of them all, and that there
was no King at any time that reigned with a more general consent: All which
did nothing diminish the hope and desire of Tarquinius. He had a brother whose
name was Aruns, being of a quiet and gentle disposition. Both they married two
of the kings daughters, which were of manners and conditions very unlike. The
younger daughter being the wife of Aruns, the sharper shrewe, and fiercer of
nature, seeing that her husband was nothing given or pliant to match with her
ungracious device or ambicious stomach, attempted her brother, whose condition
was correspondent to hirs, and said unto him, that he was a man in deed, and
one worthy to be accounted to be borne and proceed of the blood royal. Then
she began to contemn her sister: for that she having such a man to her
husband, would suffer him to neglecte so mete and just occasion for recovery
of the Kingdom. Their natures being of one disposition, as commonly one (...)
procures an other, al things began to be (...) (...) the attempt of that
ungracious woman. To be short, they two devised means, that Aruns his
brother, and the Elder Tullia her sister were (...): which done, they two
married together. The wicked woman ceased not daily to (...) and provoke her
husband from one (...) to an other. And amo^gs all her wicked talk and cruel
(...), she used these words: If thou be that man unto whom I think I am
married, then I will call (...) both husband and King: But if thou be not he, then
the alteration is changed to the worse, and cruelty is matched with
cowardice. But why do thou not put thy self in a readiness? Why thou (...)
not now from (...), or from the (...) Tarquines, to atchieue and conquer new
kingdoms as thy father did. The (...) Gods, and the Gods of thy country, the
nobility of thy father, and thy royal blood, thy stately seat within thine
own house, and thy name Tarquinius, do create and make thee King. But if in
all these occasions thou do want stomach, why (...) thou make the whole
City conceive a false opinion of thee? Why do thou not show thy self to be
the son of a King? Avoid hence I say, and go to the Tarquinians, or to
Corinth, retire again to thy first lineage: thou do rather resemble thy
brothers effeminate heart, than the valiant stomach of thy father. (...) these
words and such like, she pricked forward her husband, and she her self
could in no (...) be quiet. Then Tarquinius went forth to the fathers of the
lesser countries, and called to their remembrance the benefits unto them by
his father extended, desiring the like to be showed and rendered unto him: he
allured the younger sort of the City by gifts and other liberal rewards,
promising them, if he atteined to his purpose, more frankly to reco^yence
them. By this means the King became odious and (...) to the people. Tarquinius
seeing his time, guarded with a band of armed men, entered the market place,
wherewith the (...) people were greatly abashed, then (...) mounted into the
palace, and placed him self in the royal seat of the same, causing the Fathers
to be cited before him by the Haraulde, unto whom he repeted the petigree of
Seruius, and his first entrance into the kingdom. As he was speaking these
words, Seruius in great have repaired to the Palace, and finding Tarquinius
sitting in his place, said to him these words. Why? what is the matter
Tarquinius (quod he?) how dare thou be so bold so long as I am living to
call the Fathers, (...) yet presume to sit in my seat? whereunto Tarquinius
(...) ly replied, That he possessed but the room of his father, which was
more mete for a Kings conne and heir, heir, than for such a bondeman as he
was, and that he had long enough abused his Lords and masters: wherwithall a
great hurly (...) and tumult began to rise by the (...) of both parts, so that
(...) was like to attain yt garland, which best could dance for it. Tarquinius
forced to give the last adventure, being more lusty and stronger than the
other, took Seruius by the middle, and carrying him out of the Court, threw him
down the stairs, which done, he caused the Senate to return into the
Palace. Then the King with all his train of Officers, and other his servant
(...) away, and as they were (...), he was slain by those that Tarquinius sent
after to pursue him, in the street called Cyprius. Tullia understanding yt
Seruins her father was slain, (...) bashed not in her wagon to come into the
market place before (...) the assembly there, called her husband out of the
Court, and boldly was the first that called him King. But being rebuked and
commanded by him to avoid out of that great throng of people, she retired home
again, and when she was past yt upper end of the said street called Cyprius,
the wagoner driving toward the right hand to the hill called Exquiliae, he
stayed the wagon, and showed his lady the body of her father, lying (...)
dead in the street. In memory of which shameful and unnatural fact, long time
after there continued a (...). For the same street was called Vicus Sceleratus.
Some report that she caused the wago^ to be driven over the dead corpse of her
father, with the blood of whom and her husband, her wagon being contaminated,
(...) presented the same to her Gods. After which abominable beginnings, like
end ensued. This Seruius Tullius reigned (...). (...). Then (...) began to
reign, unto whom Superbus was added for his surname. This wicked some in law
would not suffer the dead body of Seruius to be buried. His conscience being
pricked with the abominable gain of his kingdom, fearing also least other
might conceive like example, he guarded his person with a band of armed men,
executing all things (...) force and Tirannie, contrary to the advice and
consents of the Senate and people. He caused the fautors and friends of Seruius
to he put to death, whereby the number of the Fathers was diminished, whose
places he suffered none other to supply, of purpose to bring that honorable
order to contempt. He governed the commonwealth by his own domestical and
private Counsel. War, peace, truce, society of the Cities adjoining, he
used as he list, without any further assent. The Latins he specially regarded,
to the intent yt through foreign aid he might reign in more surety at home,
with the chief of which country he joined affinity. One Octauius Manilius a
Tusculan born, was the prince and chief ruler of that country, desce^ding from
the stooke of Ulysses, and the (...) Circes, if the (...) be true, unto whom
Tarquinius gave his daughter in marriage: By reason whereof he conciliated great
alliance and friends. Tarquinius being of great authority amongs the Latins,
appointed them upon a day to assemble at a wood called Ferentina, there to
entreat of matters concerning both the states. To which place the Latins
repaired upon the break of the day. But Tarquinius came not thither til the
Sun was set. During which time many things were in talk. There was one
amongs them called Turnus Herdonius, which in Tarquinius absence had inueyed
(...) against him, affirming that it was no marvel though he was called
Suporbus by yt (...). For what prouder (...) could be enforced to the Latins,
(...) to make the^ wait a whole day for his pleasure. Diverse princes and noble
me^ (quod he) that dwell a far of, be come according to the appointment, and he
which first allotted the day, is not present. Hereby it most evidently
appears in what sort he will use us if he might once atteine the soueraintie.
And who can doubt in so manifest appearance, but that he went not about to
affecte and aspire the dominion of the Latins? If the Romans have had just
cause to believe him, and if their kingdom had been but gotten and not violently
rapt and (...) (...) parricide, then the Latins might also believe him, who
being but a stranger to them, had no great cause to believe him. His own
subjects do repent the time that ever he bare rule: For some be slain and
heaped upon the dead bodies of other, some be banished, some have lost their
goods: what other fruits than these may the Latin people expect and look
for? Therefore if they would be ruled, he required every man to return home to
his own house, and give no more attendaunce for the day of the Counsel, than be
does which first appointed the same. This and such like, this, sedicious and
desperate man declared: Whose talk Tarquinius interuented, and upon his
coming every man converted himself to salute him. Then (...) began to excuse
himself of his long (...), for that he was appointed an arbitrator between the
father and the son, for whose reconciliation he was forced to stay that long
space, and to spend the time of that day. Wherefore he appointed the next day.
The (...) of which excuse Turnus could not keep secret, but said: that a
matter between the father and the son might be ended in few words: for if
the child would not be obedient to his father, some mischief must needs light
upon him. Tarquinius understanding these inuections made against him by Turnus,
immediately deuiseth means to kill him, to the intent (...) might inculcate like
terror to the Latins, that he did to his own subjects. And because he was not
(...) to sort his purpose and effect, by secret malice, he attempted to accuse
him of treason, and (...) (by means of diverse of the City of Aricia,) his
(...) man whom with gold he had corrupted to bring in a forged accusation,
which was, that his master had prepared in one night a number of men with (...)
and weapon to distroy the Nobility of the Latins, of purpose to recover the
principality of the same. This matter began to be suspicious, by reason of the
Tumult made the day before against Tarquinius, and therefore the people the
sooner did credit the case. In (...), Turnus was (...), and therefore a new
kind of death devised. Who being laid upon a Hurdle, his face upward, was
thrown into the water of Ferrentina. This execution being done Tarquinius
revoked the Latins to Counsel, wherein he praised them for (...) Justice
extended upon Turnus, and then he spoke these words: I may by an old order and
constitution justly say thus much unto you. The whole Nation of the Latins
descending from the City of Alba are bound to observe that (...), which the
Albanes with all their colonies annexing themselves to the Roman Empire in the
time of Tullius Hostilius were firmly obliged to accomplish. The renouation
whereof will now conduce more advantage and utility to them all, than ever
it did before. For through this (...) the Latins shall possede and
participate (...) of the prosperous success of the Roman people. Better it
were in this sort to join themselves together, than to see Destruction of
either Cities, Depopulacions, and spoils of their Countries, which in the time
of Ancus (my Father then reigning) ye suffered. The like also (if you do
forsake this offer) ye may still expect and suffer. The Latins here unto were
soon persuaded, a day was appointed when the (...) sort of their Country
should be ready armed at the wood called Ferrentina. Being joined in order of
battle, they marched toward the Volsciens, and wanne the City of (...)
Pometia, the spoil whereof Tarquinius sold for. xl. Talents, employing the
same upon the Temple of Jupiter. After wards he assaulted the Gabinians, and
when he saw he could not by force obtain the same, he (...) a policy. Who
seeming to bend him self wholly upon the building of the (...). and to set
aside the affairs of his wars, devised with his son Sextus, which was the
yo^gest of the three, that he should run to the Gabinians, and complain of
his fathers intolerable cruelty, which accordingly he did.

Who showing himself as a voluntary exile, said, that his father had
converted his tyranny from other, and began to execute the same upon his own
(...): And that he was also weary of the presence of his own children, going
about to remove his (...) conuersants out of his house, as he had done the like
out of the Court, to the intent he would leave no offspring or heir behind him
to possess his kingdom: adding further, that he was escaped even through the
midde of his fathers weapons and fury, thincking no place better for his
safeguard and refuge, than to seek succor amongs his (...). And because (quod
he) ye shall not be (...), he is even now preparing of wars against you, and
purposes upon the sudden to set upon you. Now if there be no place of abode
for me your humble suppliant (...) you, I must needs wander through Italy,
and first I will attempt the Volscians, afterward the Aequians and
Hernicians, till such time as I find some nation willing to defend the poor
child from the cruel and wicked fury of the Father. And perchance (quod he)
ye shall win him that may be an Instrument and courage (...) you all, to
repress that proud king and cruel Nation.

The Gabinians deliberating what was best to be done in this case, the young man
(...) as though he were offended, and would in all have depart: and seek refuge
of others, then they courteously interteined him. This young man being had in
great estimation amongs them, through crafty and vain persuasions, making
them believe that he would conducte their army even under the walls of Rome,
with sundry other (...) (...) to bring him self the more in credit. (...)
length he was chosen captain of their wars, and recovered sundry (...) for
the Gabinians. Whereby the foolish nation both of the lower and chiefest sort,
believed that their captain was sent unto them by the providence of the Gods.
He (...) peril and pain in like sort as the common soldier did, liberally
dividing his spoils and booties amongs them. He was so well beloved, that his
father Tarquinius at Rome was of no greater authority than he was among the
Gabinians. When he thought that he had recovered force enough to answer his
fathers expectation, he sent a post to Rome, to know his fathers pleasure,
although the Gods had given him sufficient authority amongs the Gabinians. And
because Tarquinius was doubtful of the trust and fidelity of the Messanger,
he would answer nothing by word of mouth, but carrying the Messanger into a
garden, hard adjoining his house, with a wand which he carried in his hand, he
cut of the heads of the highest Poppies that were in the garden: meaning thereby
that he should dispatche the heads of the chiefest and principal in the City.
Whereupon the messanger without answer by mouth returned. But by declaring
those signs and circumstances which his father used, Sextus conceived his
meaning. Then like a (...) (...) son, following the steps of his father, he
cut of the heads of the Gabinian nobility, whereupon some ran away, upon whose
departure the goods as well of them as of other that were put to death were
divided. The of the Gabinians being in this doubtful case, bold of all
counsel and succor, at length was surrendered to the Romans. Then Tarquinius
concluded peace with the Aequians, and renewed a truce with the Thuscanes, and
wholly bent him self to the affairs of the City.

This Tarquinius was the father of him, that ravished the noble Lady Lucretia:
the lamentable history whereof, is recited in my former Tome, by the end of
which stock, remembered in that history, and beginning of the same described
in this. Novel, may be gathered, what fruits Ambition and loathsome lust bring
forth. For Tarquinius Priscus repairing out of Hetruria, to dwell at Rome, by
the ambicious will of his wife aspired and achieved the Kingdom, which was by
the sundry device of Tullia, the daughter of Seruius Tullius maintained, and
by the (...) desire of Sextus Tarquinius, the son of Superbus the. (...).
Roman King ended, and the whole race expelled and everlastingly vanished out
of that City, So mete an example for those, that (...) and long after the
rights, titles, and Kingdoms of other, as may be read in any Author. For
although the Spring appear very fresh and (...), of some degenerate grifft
planted upon some ancient stock, (...) the fruit most commonly in taste
eats somewhat sower, and the rellishe in mouth not altogether so pleasant,
as that which both in soil and stock, is duly planted.

Sophonisba.
The unhappy end and success of the love of king (...), and of Queen
SOPHONISBA his wife.

The seventh Novel.
IF men would have a fore consideration of their own things and doings, before
they do attempt yt same, or else premeditate and study the scope and success
thereof, I do verily believe that a (...) would (...) (...) themselves (...) into
so many gulfs of miseries and (...) as they do, specially noble men and
Princes, who oftentimes do excel in temeritie and rashness, by letting the
raines of their own lusts, to far to (...) at large, wherein they do plunge
and (...) themselves to their great prejudice and dishonor, as teaches this
goodly History ensuing, which affirms that there was a prince (...)
Massinissa, the son of Gala king of Massezali, (...) people of Numidia, and
(...) with the Carthaginians in Spain against the Romans, having first (...)
honorably against king Syphax in Numidia, it chanced that Gala his father
died, upon whose death his kingdom was invaded and occupied by other, wherefore
susteining (...) the surges of adversity, and diversely combating with his
ennimies, sometimes getting part of his kingdom, and sometimes (...), and
many times molesting both Syphax and the Carthaginians, was in diverse co^flicts
like to be taken or slain. With these his (...), impacient of no pain and
trouble, he became very famous and renowned, that amo^gs the people of Africa
he acquired the name and title of a valiant and puissant soldier, and of a
politic and provident Capten. Afterward he was generally well beloved of the
Soldiers, because not like the kings son or a prince, but as a private
soldier and companion, his conversation and usual trade of life was amongs
them, calling every man by his propre name, (...) and esteeming them according
to their desert, observing nevertheless a certain comeliness of a Superior.
This Massinissa by means of one Syllanus being in Spain, privily entered
acquaintance and (...) with that Scipio which afterward was surnamed
Affricanus, and who in those days with the authority of Proconsul in that
province, victoriously subdued the Carthaginians. The same Massinissa entered
league with the Romans, and inuiolably so long as he lived observed (...) with
the Roman people, and left the same to his children and posterity as an
inheritance. When the Romans began wars in Africa, spedily with that power
he was able to make, he repaired to his old friend Scipio. within a while after
Syphax being ouerthrown in battle and taken, Massinissa and Laelius was sent to
take the chief (...) of yt kingdom, which sometimes were king Syphax own, called
Cirta. In that City remained Sophonisba yt wife of Syphax and daughter to
Hasdrubal of Giscon, who had alienated her husband from the Romans, with whom
he was in league, and by her persuasions he went to aid and defend the
Carthaginians. Sophonisba perceiving that the ennimies wire entered the City of
Cirta: and that Massinissa was going toward the Palace, (...) ned to meet
him, to prove his gentleness and courtesy, whereupon in the mids of the
soldiers throng, which were already entered the Palace, she stoutly thrust, and
boldly looked round about, to prove if she could espy by some signs and tokens
the personage of Massinissa. She amo^gs that prease perceived one, whose
apparel and armure and the reverence done unto him, seemed unto her that
without doubt the same was the king. And therefore incontinently (...) dawne
before him, and pitiously began to speak in this manner: For so much (O
puissant Prince) as selicitie and good fortune, but specially the favor of the
Gods immortal have permitted, that thou should recover thine ancient
kingdom descended unto thee by right and lawful inheritance, and therwithall
have taken and vanquished thine ennimie, and now have me at thy will (...)
pleasure to save or spil, I poor wretched miserable woman brought into bondage
from Queenelike state, whilom leading a delicate life in Princely court,
accompanied with a royal train of beautiful dames, and now at shy merciful
disposition, do humbly appeal to thy mercy and goodness, whose Princely
majesty and comfortable aspect, chereth up my woeful heart to look for grace,
and therefore (...) bold thus to presume with most humble voice to implore and
cry out, beseeching thee to reach me hither thy victorious hands to kiss and
salute. This Lady was a passing fair gentlewoman, of flourishing age and
comely behavior, none (...) unto her within the whole region of Africa. And
so much the more as her pleasant grace by amiable gesture of complaint did
increase, so much the heart of Massinissa was delited, who being lusty and
(...) youthly age (according to the nature of the Numides,) was easily
intrapped and tangled in the nets of Love. Whose glutting eyes were never
full, nor fiery heart was (...) in beholding and wondering at her most excellent
beauty: not foreseeing therefore, or taking heed of the dangerous effect of
beauties snares, his heart was so fiercely kindled, with (...) swinging flames
of love, that causing her to rise, he exhorted her to prosecute her
supplication, who then began to proceed as follows: If it may be lauful for me
thy prisoner and bondwoman (O my soneraigne Lord) to make request and petition,
I most humbly do beseech thee, by thy royal majesty, wherein no long time past
we were magnificently placed in so Kinglike guise as thou art now, and by that
Numidicall name, common unto thee and my husband Syphax, and by the saving
Gods and patrons of this City, who with better fortune and more joyful
success do receive thee into the same, tha^ expelled Syphax out from thence:
it may please thy sacred state, to have pity on me. I require no hard and
difficult thing at thy hands, use thine imperial government over me, such as
law of arms and reason of war require. Cause me if thou will, to pine in
cruel prison, or do me to such death, with torments, as thou list to use. The
sharp fierce and cruel death that any wight can (...), or Perillus Bull shall
not be dreadful unto me, but more dear and acceptable than (...) life in
pleasures led. For no death shall be refused of me, rather than to be rendered
into the proud hands of the most cruel Romans. Rather had I (...) the trust of
a native Numide, borne with me in Affricke soil, than the faith of strangers
kind. I know full well yt thou do know what courtesy a Carthaginian and
daughter of Hasdrubal, shall surely look for at yt Romans hands: whose mind is
fearful of nothing more tha^ of their pride and glory intolerable. If thou (my
Lord) had sisters of (...) own, or daughters of thy royal blood brought
forth, think yt they may chance (if fortune frown) to slide into the pit of
adverse luck, so well as I am now. Of that form Fortunes wheel is made,
which we (...) (...) see to be (...), turning and diverse, that now peace, and
now war it promises, now good, now evil it thretneth, now mirth, now sorrow
it (...), now aduauncing (...), now tumbling down the clymbers up. Let
Syphax be a clear and lively example to thee, which could never find any
(...) stay under the Moons globe. He was the mightiest and the richest (...)
that reigned in Africa, and now is the most miserable and unlucky wight that
lives (...) land. The Gods grant that I be no prophet or (...) of future
evil, whose omnipotency I deuoutlye beseech to suffer thee and thy posterity
in Numide, and most happily to reign. Uonchsafe then to (...) me from the
Romans thraldom, which if thou be not able safely to bring to pass; death
unto me shall be most heartily welcome. In speaking those words, she took the
Kings right hand, and many times sweetly kissed the same. And then her tears
turned into pleasant cheer, in such wise as not only the mind of the armed
and (...) (...) Prince was moved to mercy, but (...) wrapped in the amorous
nets of the Lady, whereby the victour was subdued by the vanquished, and the
Lord surprised of his captive, unto whom with tre^bling voice thus he
answered: Make an end O Sophonisba, of thy large complaint, abandon thy
conceived fear, for I will not only rid thee from the Romans hands, but
also take thee to my (...) wife (if thou therewith shall be content) whereby
thou shalt not lead a prisoners life, but pass thy youthful days and (...)
age (if Gods do grant thee life so long) as Queen unto a King, and wife unto
a Roman friend. When he had said so with weeping tears, he kissed and
embraced her. She by the (...), signs, gestes, and interrupted (...),
comprehending that the mind of the Numide King was kindled with fervent love:
the more to inflame the same, she behaved her self in such pitiful plight, as
the beastly hearts of the Hircane Tigres would have been made gentle, and
dispoiled of all fierceness. For again she fell down at his feet, and kissed
the armed sabbatons upon yt same, bedewing them with her warm tears. And
after many sobbes and infinite sighs, comforted by him, she said: O the glory
and honor of all the Kings that ever were, be, or shall be hereafter. O the
safest aid of Carthage mine unhappie country without desert, and now the
present and most terrible astonishment: If my hard fortune and great distress
after so great ruin might have been relieved, what greater fauore, what thing
in all my life, could chance more and fortunate unto me, than to be called
wife of thee? O I blessed above all other women to have a man so noble and
famous to husband. O mine aduenturous and most happy ruin. O my most
fortunate misery, that such a glorious and incomparable marriage was prepared
for me. But because the Gods be contrary unto me; and the due end of my life
approaches, ^easse from henceforth (my dear sovereign Lord) to kindle again
in me, my hope half dead, or rather consumed and spent, because I see my self
wrapped in a state, that in vain against the pleasures of the Gods, I go about
to molest thee. A great gift (and to say the truth) a right great good turn,
I make account to have received of thee, if mine own death I should procure,
that dying by thy means or with thy hands, which were more acceptable, I
should escape the fear of the Romans thrall all and subjection, and this
soul delivered of the same, should straight way pass into the Elysian
fields. The final scope of this my humble playnt, is to rydone from the hands
hands the Romans, whose thraldom to suffer I had rather die. The other
benefit which thou do frankly offer to me poor wretch, I dare not desire,
much less require the same, because the present state of my mishappe dares
not presume so high. But this thy pity and compassion joined with loving
regard and mind toward me, mighty Ioua with all the other Gods reward and
bless thy gotten kingdom with long reign, enlarging the same with more ample
bounds, to thine eternal renoum and praise. And I do not only render humble
thanks for this thy kind and loving enterteinme^t, but also yield my self
thine own, so long as life governs this caitife corpse of mine. These words
were pronounced with such effect, as Massinissa was not able for pity to hold
his tears, which watered so his comely form, as the dew thereof soaked into
his tender heart, and not able a long time to speak, at last thus he said:
Give over (O my Queen) these cares and thoughts, dry up thy cries (...)
plaints, make an end of all these dolorous suits, and rejoice, that froward
Fortune has changed her mind: the Gods no doubt with better success, will
perform the rest of thy living days. Thou shall he^ceforth remain (...).
Queen and wife, for pledge whereof the sacred Godhead^. I call to witness.
But if perchance (which the thu^dring mighty God above forbid) that I shall
be forced to render thee the Romans prisoner, be well assured, that on live
they shall not possess thee. For credit and accomplishment of this promise,
and in sign of his assured faith, he reached his right hand to Sophonisba, and
led her into the inner lodgyng of the Kings Palace, where afterward Massinissa
with him self considering how he might perform his promised faith, ^ ered and
troubled with a thousand cogitations, seeing in a manner his manifest
overthrow and ruin at hand, provoked with mad and temerarious love, the very
same day in open presence he took her to wife, solemnizing that marriage, which
afterward (...) unto him great veration and trouble, meaning by the same to
have discharged Sophonisba from the Romans rule and order. But when Laelius
was come and heard tell thereof, (...) (...) and chased, and with (...) words
commanded Massinissa to send his new married wife (as the booty and pray of
the Romans) together with Syphax, to their Captain Scipio. Notwithstanding
vanquished with the supplications and tears of Massinissa, referring the
matter wholly to the judgment of Scipio, he dispatched Syphax with the other
prisoners and booty, to the Roman camp, and he himself remained with
Massinissa for the recovery of other places of the Kingdom, minding not to
return before the whole province were brought under the Roman subjection. In
yt mean time Laelius gave (...) unto Scipio, of the success of Massinissa his
marriage. Who knowing the same to be so hastily celebrated, was maruellously
offended and troubled in mind, much maruellyng, that Massinissa would make
such post have before the coming of Laelius, Yea and upon the very first day
of his entry into Cirta, that he would (...) that unadvised wedding: and the
greater was Scipio his displeasure toward Massinissa, for (...) the love which
he had conceived of that woman, was unseemly and dishonest, wondering not a
little that he could not find out some Lady within the region of Spain, of
(...) beauty and (...), to please and content his honest and commendable
intent: wherefore he judged Massinissa his (...) to be done out of time, to the
prejudice and great decay of his honor and estimation. (...) like a wise and
Prudent personage he dissembled his conceived grief, expecting occasion for
remedy of the same. Now the time was come that Laelius and Massnissa were (...)
for to the camp. But to declare the tears and lamentable talk, the great
(...) and sighs, uttered between this new married couple, time would want, and
(...) nesse would ensue to the reader of the same. He had skarce lain with his
beloved two or three nights, but that Laelius (to their great grief and sorrow)
claimed her to be his prisoner. Wherefore very sorrowful and pensive he departed,
and returned to the Camp. Scipio in honorable wise received him, and openly
before his Captains and men of war, gave thanks to Laelius and him, for
their prowess and notable exploites. Afterward sending for him into his Tent,
he said unto him: I do suppose (my dear friend Massinissa) that the virtue and
benevolence, you saw in me did first of all provoke you, to transfrete the
straites, to visit me in Spain, wherein the goodwill of my valiant friend
Syllanus did not a little anaile, to solicit and procure amity between us
both, which afterward induced your constant mind, to retire into (...), and
to commit both your self and all your goods into my hands and keeping. But I
well pondering the quality of that virtue which moved you thereunto, you being
of (...), and I of Europa, you a Numidian borne, and I a Latin and Roman, of
diverse customs and language different, thought that the temperance and
abstinence from veneriall pleasures which you have seen to be in me, and
experience thereof well tried and proved, (for the which I render unto the
immortal Gods most humble thanks) would or ought to have moved you to follow
mine example, being these virtues which above al other I do most esteem and
cherish, which virtues should have allured you (being a man of great prowess
and discretion) to have imitated and followed the same. For he that well marketh
the rare gifts and excellent benefits wherewith dame nature has (...) you,
would think that there should be no lack of diligence and travel to subdue
and overcome the carnal appetites of temporal beauty: which had it (...)
applied to the rare gifts of nature planted in you, had made you a personage
to the posterity very famous and renoumed. Consider well my present time of
youth, full of courage and youthly lust, which contrary to that natural race I
stay and prohibit. No delicate beauty, no voluptuous delectation, no seminine
flattery, can entice the same to the perils and dangers whereunto that
heedelesse age is most prone and subject, by which prohibition of amorous
passions, temperatly reigned and governed the tamer and subduer of those
passions, closing his breast from lascivious imaginations, and stopping his
ears from the Syrenes and Marmaides, of that sex and kind, gets greater
glory and fame, than that which we have gotten by our victory had against
Syphax. Hannibal the greatest ennimie that ever we Romans felt, the stoutest
gentleman and captain without peer, through the delites and imbracements of
women effeminated, is no more that ma^like and notable Emperor which he was
wont to be. The great exploits and enterprises which valiantly you have done in
Numidia, when I was far from you, your care, readiness, (...), your strength
and valor, your expedition and bold attepts, with all the rest of your noble
virtues worthy of immortal praise, I might and could perticulerly recite, but
to commend and extol them, my heart and mind shall never be satisfied, by
renouacio^ whereof I should rather give occasion of blushing, than my self could
be contented to let them sleep in silence. Syphax as you know is taken
prisoner by the valiaunce of our men of war, by reason whereof, him self, his
wife, his kingdom, his camp, lands, cities, and inhabitants, and briefly all
that which was king Syphax, is the pray and spoil to the Roman people, and
the king and his wife, albeit she was no Citizen of Carthage, and her father,
although no captain of our ennimies, yet we must send them to Rome, there to
leave them at the pleasure and disposition of the Roman (...) nate and people.
Do you not know that Sophonisba with her toys and flatteries did alienat and
withdraw king Syphax from our amity and friendship, and made him to enter
force of arms against us? Be you ignorant that she, full of rancor and malice
against the Roman people, endeavored to set al (...) against us, and now by her
fair inticements has gained and won you, not I say our (...), but an
ennimie so far as she can, with her cruel inchauntme^ts? What damage and
hurt have lighted upon diverse Monarchs and Princes through sugared lips and
venomous words, I will not spend time to recite. With what prouocations and
co^iured charms she has already bewitched your good nature, I will not now
imagine, but refer the same to the deep consideration of your wisdom.
Wherefore Massinissa, as you have been a Conqueror over great nations and
provinces, be now a conqueror over your own mind and appetites, the victory
whereof deserves greater praise than the conquest of the whole world. Take
heed I say, that you blot not your good qualities and conditions, with the
spots of dishonor and pusillanimitie. (...) not that fame which hitherto is
(...) above the Region of the glittering stars. Let not this vice of Feminine
flattery spoil the deserts of Noble chivalry, and utterly deface those (...)
with greater ignominy than the cause of that offense is worthy of dispraise.

Massinissa hearing these egre and sharp rebukes, not only blushed for shame,
but bitterly werping, said yt his poor prisoner and wife was at the
commandment of Scipio. Noiwithstanding, so instantly as tears would suffer
him to speak, he besought him, that if it were possible, he would give him
leave to observe his faith foolishly assured, because he had made an oath to
Sophonisba that with life she should not be delivered to the hands of the
Romans. And after other talk between them, Massinissa departed to his
pauilion, where alone with manifold sighs, with most bitter tears and
plaintes, uttered with such houlings and outcries, as they were heard by those
which stood about the same, he rested all the day bewailing his present state:
the most part of the night also he spent with like heaviness, and debating in
his mind upon diverse thoughts and devises, more confused and amassed than
before, he could by no means take any rest: sometimes he thought to flee and
pass the straights commonly called the pillars of Hercules, from thence to
sail to the Fortunate Islandes with his wife: then again he thought with her
to escape to Carthage, and in aid of that City to serve against the Romans,
sometimes he purposed by sword, poison, halter, or some such means to end his
life and finish his dolorous days: many times he was at point by prepared knife
and sword to pierce his heart, and yet stayed the same, not for fear of
death, but for preservation of his fame and honor. Thus this wretched and
miserable (...) burned and consumed with love, tossing and tumbling him self
upon his bed, not able to find comfort to ease his pain, thus began to say:
O Sophonisba, my dear beloved wife, O the life and comfort of my life, O the
deyntie repast of my joy and quiet, more amiable than the balls of mine
unhappy eyes, what shall become of us? Alas, and out alas I cry, that I shall
see no more that incomparable beauty of thine, that thy surpassyng comely
face, those golden locks, those glistering eyes which a thousand times have
darkened and obscured the rays and beams of the Sun it self: Alas I say,
that I can no longer be suffered to hear the pleasant harmony of thy voice,
whose sweetness is able to force Jupiter himself to mitigate his rage, when
with lightning thunderboltes and (...) claps in his greatest fury he (...) to
plague (...) earth. Ah that it is not lawful any more for me to throw these
unhappy arms about thy sweet neck, whose (...) of face entermingled with
seemly rudds, (...) the morning roses, which by the sweet nightly dewes do
sproute and budde. The Gods grant that I do not long remain on live without
thy sweet haunt and company, which can no longer draw forth this breathing
ghost of mine, than can a body live without like breathe in it. Grant (O
mighty Jupiter) that one grave may close us twain to live among the ghostes
and shadows that be already past this world for like right loving fittes,
(...) intent of life be meant to me without thy fellowship and delectable
presence. And who (O good God) shall be more blisfull amongs the Elysian fields,
wandryng amids the spirits and ghostes of departed souls, than I, if there we
two may iette and stalk among the shadowed friths and forests huge, besette
with Myrtle trees, odoriferous and sweet? that there we may at large recount
and sing the sweet and sower pangs of those our passed loves without any stay
or let at all: that there I say we may remember things already done, rejoicing
for delights and sighing for the pains. There shall no hard hearted Scipio
be found, there shall no marble minded captain rest, which have not had
regard of Loves toys, ne yet have pitied my bitter pains, by having no
experience what is the force of Love. He then with over cruel words shall not
go about to persuade me to forsake thee, or to deliver thee into the Romans
hands, to incur miserable and (...) cruel bondage: he shall there never
check me for the seruent love I bear thee: we shall there abide without
suspicion of him or any other: they can not separate us, they be not able to
divide our sweetest company. I would the Gods above had granted me the
benefit, that he had never arrived into Africa, but had still remained in
Sicilia, in Italy or Spain. But what stand I upon these terms, O I fool and
beast? what means my drousie head to dreme such fancies? if he had not passed
over into Africa, and made war against king Syphax, how should I have ever
seen my fair Sophonisba, whose beauty far surmounteth each other wight,
whose comeliness is without peer, whose grace inspeakeable, whose manners rare
and incomparable, and whose other qualities generally disparcled throughout
dame Natures mould by speech of man can not be described? If Scipio had not
transfraited the seas to arrive in Affrike soil, how should I, (O only hope
and last refuge of my desires) have known thee, neither should I have been thy
feere, ne yet my wife thou sholdest have been, but great had been thy gain and
loss not much, never sholdest thou have felt the present painful state,
wherein thou art thy life (whereof most worthy no doubt thou art) should not have
lien in balla^ce poize, or rested in doubtful plight, which now in choice of
enemies thrall thou may prolong, or else in Romans hands a pray or spoil by
captive state. But I beseech the Gods to prevent the choice to be a Roman
prisoner. And who can think that Scipio ever meant to grant me the life of
one, and goes about to spoil me of the same? Did not he give me the pardon of
one, when he sent me to besiege the City of Cirta, where I found fair
Sophonisba which is my life? A strange kind of pardon, by giving me a pardon
to dispossess me of yt same. Who ever hard tell of such a pardon? So much as if
he said to me, thus: Massinissa,) go take the pain to cause yt City yield, or
ransack the same by force, and I will pardon thee thy life, and not with yt only
benefit, but with Craesus goods will enrich thee, and make she owner of the happy
soil of Arrabia, and when I have so done and rased the walls by mine endeavor,
wherein mine only life and joy did rest, at my return for guerdone of my noble
fact, in steed of life he choppeth of my head, and for fair promise of golden
mountes, he strips me naked, and makes me a Roman slave. According to which
case and state he deals with me. For what auailes my life, if in grief and
sorrows (...) I drown the pleasures of the same? Does not he berieue my life
and breeds my death by dividing me from my fair Sophonisba? Ah Caitife wretch
what luck have I, that neither storm nor whirle wind could send him home to
Italian shore, or set him packing to Sicile land? What meant cruel Scipio, when
so sone as Syphax was taken, he did not straight way dispatche him to Rome, to
present the glorious sight of the Numidian king to yt Roman people? If Scipio
had not been here, thou Sophonisba frankly had been mine: for at Laelius
hands I could have found some grace. But surely if Scipio did once see
Sophonisba, and reclined his eyes to view her perelesse beauty, I doubt not
but he would be moved to have compassion upon her and me, and would have judged
her worthy not only to be Queen of Numidia but of all the province besides.
But what? do I make this good account? The common proverb says, that he which
counts without his host, must reckon twice: and so perhaps may be my lot.
For what know I if Scipio did well view her, whether he himself would be
inamored of her or not, and so utterly deprive me of that Jewel? He is a man no
doubt as others be, and it is impossible me think, but that the hardness of
his heart must bow to the view of such a noble beauty. But (beast as I am)
what mean these words? What follies do I vaunt by singing to the deaf, and
teaching of the blind? O wretch, wretch, nay more than miserable wretch. Mark
the words of Scipio, he demands Sophonisba, as a thing belonging unto him,
for which cause he says that she is the pray and part of the Roman spoil.
But what shall I (...)? shall I give her unto him? He (...) have her, he (...)
me, he exhortes me, he prays me, but I know full well (...) those entreaties
tend, and under the grass what linking Serpent lies. Shall I then put into
his hands mine own (...). But before I so (...), the (...) God above, with his
flashing fires and (...) brands shall thunder me down into the depthe of Hell.
The gapyng ground receive my corpse, before I yield to that request, the
trampling steedes of savage kind do tear my members in thousand gobbets, the
desert beasts consume my flesh, the (...) gripes and (...) kites, pick out my
tongue and eyes, before I glutte his (...) mind with that demand to break
the (...) whith by holy oath I have promised to perform. Oh (...) (...), but
what shall I do then? It behooves to obey, and in despite of my teeth to do
that which the Roman Emperor commands. Alas, by thinking upon that
straight and needful lot, I die a thousand deaths: wherefore of evils to
(...) the least of twain, and to preserve my plighted faith, O sweet
Sophonisba, thou must die, and by means of thy beloved feere, shall void the
yoke of Romans thral: for so it pleases unmindful Ioua to appoint. The
wretched heavens by cruel fate have thrown their lot, that I of mine own
mischief shall be the minister. And so (O life most dear) I shall perform the
(...) to keep the faith which last of al before thy face I did confirm. By
this spech and manner of talk, the good Prince bewailed his case, excogitating
by what means he might do to death the thing which above all the world he
loved best. At length it came unto his mind to send her a draught of poisoned
drink, which devise he had no sooner invented, but he was drive into a new
kind of fury, and kindled with disdain, his (...) were on fire with extreme
madness, and as though (...) had been before him, he (...) and (...) in
Bedlemwise, sometimes (...) taunts he checked her to her (...), sometimes
lamented her unfortunate state; sometimes with paws displayed, he seemed to
rampe into her (...), (...) then again into amorous toys his passions drove
him (...), When I do think what kind of man Massinissa was, who in deed was
a (...) and (...) noble king, (...) who with such Prndence governed his new
(...) recovered kingdoms, and so constantly perseuered (...) of ye Roman
people, I pray to God to (...) my friends and my self also, not to enter into
so (...) and louesonie Labyrinth, wherein this noble Prince was tangled, and
with more (...) to govern our beloved things.

But retourning again to this afflicted gentleman Massinissa. He sent unto his
beloved wife and Queen a pot of (...) to rid her of her life: but yet
staying his messanger, he cried out these words: God forbid that I should
commit this infamous murder upon her whenie I most dearly love, I would:
rather (...) her into the extreme parts of the unknown and sandy coast of
Lybia, where ye Cau^trie is full of venomous beasts and crawling poisoned
serpents, in which place we shall be safe and sure from the danger of cruel and
inexorable Scipio, by which means he shall never see ye rare and divine
beauty, which the Serpents once beholding, will mitigate and assuage their
bitter poison; and for whose sake they will not annoy ne yet hurt me her loving
husband and companion. Wherefore let us make have to flee thither, to (...) the
bondage and death prepared for us. And if so be we be not able to carry with us
gold and silver, yet shall we not want there some relief to maintein our lines?
for better it is to feed on bread and water, then to live in perpetual
thraldom, And living with thee (sweet wife) what (...) and beg gery am not I
able to sustain? The (...) of exile and (...), I have already suffered. For
being driven out of iny kingdom many times, I have repaired to obscure dens
and caves, where I have hidden my self, and lined in the wilderness among the
Sanage beasts. But what mean I thus to say of my self, whom no misaduenture
can affray or mislike? but thou dear wife which have ben trained up and
norished amongs the delicacies and bankets of the Court, (...) with trains of
many fair and noble ladies, living like a Queen in all kind of plesures and
delights: what shall I do with thee? I know thy heart will not suffer thee to
follow me, and yet if the same would serve thee, from whence shall I procure
present shipping? Upon the sea ye Roman fleet bears the swinge, upon yt land
Scipio with his army occupies every coast, and is general lord of the field.
What then shall I most miserable and unfortunate caitife do? For whilst I am
thus making my bitter complaints, the night is past away, day light approaches,
and the bright shining morning begins to clear the earth. And behold,
yonder comes the Generals messanger for Sophonisba, whom I must either
deliver into his hands, or else commit her to present slaughter, being assured
that she had rather make choice to die, than fall into the lappes of the cruel
Romans.

Whereupon he determined to send her the poison, and for very sorrow fell down
upon the ground like a man half dead. Afterward being come again to him
self, he cursed the earth, the air, the sire, heaven, hell, and all the Gods
of the same, and exclaming in lamentable wise he called unto him one of his
most faithful servant, who according to the custom of those days, always
kept poison in store, and said unto him: Receine this cup of gold, and
deliver the same with the poison therein, to the Queen Sophonisba now abiding
within the City of Cirta, and tell her that I with greatest good will would
fain have kept the marriage knot, and the first faith which I plighted unto her,
but the lord of the field, in whose power I am, has utterly forbidden the
same. I have assayed all possible means to preserve her my wife and Queen at
liberty, but he which commands me, has pronounced such hard and cruel
sentence, as I am forced to offend my self, and to be the minister of mine
own mischief. This poison I send her with so doleful message, as my poor
heart God knows) does only (...) the smart being the most sorrowful present
that ever was offered to any fair Lady. This is the way alone to save her from
the Romans hands. Pray her to consider the worthiness of her father, the
dignity of her country, and the royal majesty of the. (...). Kings her
husbands, and to do as her mind and will shall fancy best. Get thee hence
with all possible speed, and lose no time in doing this thy message. For thou
shall carry the bane and present death of the fairest Lady that ever Nature
framed within her fairest moulde. The servant with this commandment (...)
part, and Massinissa like a child beaten with the rod, wept and cried
behind. The messanger being come to the Queen, and giving her the cup with
the poison, declared his cruel embassage. The Queen took the poisoned cup,
and said unto the messanger: Give the king thy master right humble thanks in
my behalf, and say unto him, that I receive and drink this poison with a will
so good, as if he had commanded me to enter in triumph with Laurel garlande
over mine ennimies. For a better gift a husband can not give to wife, than
accomplishment of assured faith, the funerals whereof shall be done with
present obsequie. And saying nothing else unto the Messanger, she took the
cup, and myngling well together the poison within, she vnfearfully (...) it
up. And (...) (...) had drunk the same, she delivered the messanger his cup
again, and laid her self upon her bed, commau^ding her Gentlewomen in comely
wise to cover her with clothes, and without lamentation or sign of Feminine
mind, she stoutly waighted for approaching death. The Gentlewomen which waited
upon her, bewaited the rufull state of their (...) esse, whose plaints and
schriches were heard throughout the palace, whereof the brute and rumor was
great. But the good Queen vanquished with the strong force of the poison,
remained not long before she died. The Messanger returned these heavy news
unto Massinissa, who sorowfully complained the loss of his beloned wife, in
such wise, as many times he was like to kill him self, that his soul might
have accompanied the ghost of her, which was beloved of him above all the
dearest things of the world. The valiant and wise captain Scipio
understanding hereof, to the intent Massinissa should not commit any cruelty
against himself, or perpetrate other uncomely deed, called him before him,
and comforted him with the sweetest words he could devise, and friendly
reproved him for the little faith and trust that he had in him. The next day in
the (...) of all the arinie he highly commended him, and rewarded him with the
Kingdom of Numidia; giving him many rich jewels and treasures, and brought him
in great estimation amo^gs yt Romans, which the Senate and people of Rome; very
well approned and confirmed with most ample privileges, attributing unto him
the title of King of Numidia, and friend of the Romans. Such was the eude of
the unhappy love of king (...), and the fair and unluckie Queen Sophonisba.

Poris and Theoxena
The cruelty of a King of (...), who forced a Gentlewoma^ called THEOXENA, to
persuade her children to kill and poison them selves: after which fact, she
and her husband PORIS, ended their life by drowning.

The. viij. Novel.
BUt since we have begone to treat of the stoutnesse of certain noble Queens,
I will not let also to recite the History of a like unfearful dame of
Thessalian land, called Theoxena; of right noble race, the daughter of
Herodicus prince of that cu^trey in the time that Philip the son of Demetrius
was king of Macedone, told also by Titus Liuius, as two of the former be. This
lady Theoxena, first was a notable example of (...) and virtue, and afterward
of rigorous cruelty. For the said King Philip, having through his wickedness
first murdered Herodicus, and by succession of time cruelly done to death also,
the husbands of Theoxena and of Archo her natural sister, unto either of them
being widows remaining a son: afterward Archo being married again to one
of the principal of their country named Poris, of him she had many children.
But when she was dead, yt said lady Theoxena her sister, who was of heart more
constant and stout than the other, still refused the second marriage, although
sued unto by many great lords and princes, at length pitying her nephews
state, for scare they should fall into the hands of some cruel stepdame, or
that their father would not bring them up with such diligence, as till that
time they were, was contented to be espoused again to Poris, (no law that time
known to defend the same) to the intent she might train up her sisters
children as her own. That done she began (as if they were her own) to entreat
and use them lovingly, with great care and (...): whereby it (...) appeared,
that she was not (...) again to Poris for her own commodity and pleasure, but
(...) for the wealth and government of those her sisters children. Afterward
Philip king of Macedon, an unquiet Prince, determining to make new wars upon
the Romans (then throughout the world famous and (...) for their (...)
fortune) (...) not only the chief and noble men, but almost all the ancient
inhabi (...) of the Cities along the sea coast of Thessalia, and their whole
and entier families into Peonia afterward called Emathia, a country far
distant from the sea: giving their voided cities for the Thracians to inhabit,
as most propre and faithful for the Romans wars, which he intended to make:
and hearing also the (...) and maledictions pronounced against him by the
banished people, and universally by all other, thought he was in no good
surety, if he caused not likewise all the sons of them, whom a little
before he had (...), to be put to death. Wherefore he commanded them to be
taken and holden under good guard inprison, not to do them all to be (...) at
once, but at times now one and then an other, as (...) (...). Theoxena
understanding the (...) of this wicked and cruel King, and well remembering the
death of her husband, and of him that was husband to her sister, knew well that
her son and nephew (...) (...) be demanded, and greatly (...) the Kings
wrath, and the rigor of his Guarde, if once they fell into their hands, to
defend them from shame and cruelty, sodeinly applied her mind unto a
strange device. For she durst to say unto her husband their fathers sace,
that sooner (...) would kill them with her own hands, if otherwise she could
not warraunt (...), than suffer them to be at the will and power of King
Philip. By reason whereof Poris abhorring (...) erecrable cruelty, to comfort
his wife and to save his children, promised her secretly to transporte them
from thence, and carried them himself to certain of his faithful friends at
Athenes, which done without long delay, he made as though he would go from
Thessalonica to Aenias, to be at the (...) of certain sacrifices, which
yearly at an appointed time was done with great ceremonies to the honor of
Aeneas the (...) of that city, where spending the time amongs other in solemn
bankets, the. iij. watch of the night when every man was a sleep, as though he
would have returned home to his country with his wife and children, privily
he embarketh him self and them, in a ship hired of purpose to pass into
Euboea, and not to (...) to Thessalonica. But his intent was clean altered and
changed: for his ship was no sooner under sail, but at that instant a
contrary wind and tempest rose, that brought him back again, in despite of
their labor, and all the endeavor they were able to do. And when day light
appeared, the Kings garrison descried that ship, and manned out a boat, to
bring in the same, which secretly they thought was about to escape away,
giving them straight charge, that by no means they should return without
her. When the (...) drew near the ship, Poris bent him self to encourage the
mariners to hoyse by sail again, and to make way with their oars into the
sea, if it were possible, to avoid the imminent and present danger, to save
the life of him self, his wife and children: then he erected his hands up
unto the heavens to implore the healpe and succor of the Gods, which the stout
Gentlewoman Theoxena perceiving, and manifestly seeing the danger wherein they
were, calling to her mind her former determinate vengeance which she meant to
do, and beholding (...) in his prayers, she prosecuted her intent, preparing a
poisoned drink in a cup, and made ready naked swords: All which bringyng
forth before the childrens face, she spoke these words: Death alone must be
the revenge of your siely lives, whereunto there be two ways, poison or the
sword. Every of you choose which ye list to have: or of whether of them your
heart shall make the frankest choice. The Kings cruelty and pride you must
avoid. Wherefore dear children be of good (...), raise up your no ble courage:
ye ye elder aged boys, show now your selves like men, and take the sword into
your hands to pierce your tender hearts: but if the bloody smart of that most
dreadful death, shall fear and fright your green and unripe age, then take
the venomed cup, and gulpe by sundry draughts, this poisoned drink. Be
frank and lusty in this your destenied death, since the violence of Fortune by
sea, does let the lengthning of your life. I crave this request of choice, and
let not the same rebound with fearful refuse of this my craved hest. Your
mother afterward shall pass that straight, whereof she prays her babes to
be the poastes: ye the vaunt currours, and she, with your loving (...),
shall end and finishe Philips rage bent against us. When she had spoken these
words, and (...) the enemies at hand, this courageous dame, the (...) of the
death, egged and provoked these young (...) children (not yet well resolved what
to do) with her encharmed words in such wise, as in the end, some drank the
poison, and other struck them selves into the body, and by her commandment
were thrown over boorde, not altogether dead, and so she set them at liberty
by death, whom tenderly she had brought up. Then she embracing her husband the
companion of her death, both did voluntarily throw them selves also into the
sea: And when the Kings espials were come aboorde the ship, they found the same
abandoned of their pray. The cruelty of which fact, did so move the common
people to detectation and (...) of the king, as a general curse was
pronounced against him and his children, which heard of the Gods above was
afterward terribly revenged upon his stock and (...). This was the end of
good Poris and his stout wise Theoxena, who rather than she would fall into the
lapse of the Kings fury, as her father Herodicus, and her other husband did,
chose violently to die with her own hands, and to cause her husbands children
and her own, to berieue them selves of life, which although against the loving
order of natural course, and therefore that kind of violence to be abhorred,
as horrible in it self, yet a declaration of a stout mind, if otherwise she
had been able to revenge the same. And what coward heart is that, that dare not
upon such extremity, when it sees the merciless ennimie at hand, with shining
blade ready bent, to strike the blow, that without remedy must rid the
same of breath, specially when it sees the trembling babe, naturally begotten
by his own kind and nature, before the face imploryng fathers rescue, what
(...) heart dare not to offer himself, by singular fight (though one to
twenty) either by desperate hardiness to avoid the same, or other anoyance,
adventure what he can? which in Christians is admitted as a comely fight,
rather than with that Pagane dame to do the death it self.

But now return we to describe a fact that passes all other forced deeds.
For Theoxena was compelled in a manner thus to do of mere constraint to eschew
the greater torments of a tyrants rage, and thought it better by chosen death
to change her life, than by violent hands of bloody butchers to be haled to
the slaughter. But this Hidrusian dame was weary of her life, not for that
she feared loss of life, but desperate to think of Fortunes (...) stay:
which (...) Fortunes darlings would regard in time, they would foresee their
slippery hold.

A Gentlewoman of Hidrusa
A Strange and marvelous use, which in old time was observed in HIDRVSA,
where it was lawful, with the license of a Magistrate ordained for that
purpose, for (...) (...) and woman that list, to kill them selves.

The nynth Novel.
BAndello amongs the company of his (...), tells this History: and in his
own person speaks these words. If I should begin to tell those things which
I saw in the time that I sailed alo^gs the leua^t seas, very tedious it would
be for you to hear, and I in reporting could not tell which way to end,
because I saw and heard things right worthy to be remembered. Notwithstanding,
for satisfaction of diverse that be my friends, I will not stick to rehearse
some of them. But first of all one strange custom, which in the Romans time
was used in one of the Islands of the sea Aegeum, called Hidrusa, in these
days by the trauailers called Cea or Zea, and is one of the Islands named
Ciclades, whilome full of populous and goodly Cities, as the rumes thereof at
this day do declare. There was in old time in that Island a very strange law and
ordinance, which many hundred years was very well and perfectly kept and
observed. The Law was, that every person inhabitant within the said (...), of
what sex and condition so ever, being thorough age, infirmity, or other
accidents, weary of their life, might choose that kind of death which liked
them best: howbeit it was provided that the party, before the doing of the
same, should manifest the cause that moved him thereunto, before the
Magistrate elected by the people for that special purpose, which they ordained
because they saw that diverse persons had volu^tarily killed themselves, upon
triflyng occasions and matters of little importance: according to which law
very many men and women, hardily with so merry chere went to their death, as if
they had gone to some bankette or marriage. It chanced that Pompeius Magnus
that dreadful Roman, vetwene who^ and Julius Caesar were fought the greatest
battles for superiority that ever were. Pompeius (I say) sailing by the sea
Aegeum, arrived at Hidrusa, and there going a land understood of the
inhabitants the manner of that law and how the same day a woman of great worship
had obtained license of the Magistrate to poison her self. Pompeius hearing
tell hereof, was driven into great admiration, and thought it very strange,
that a woman which all the days of her life had lived in great honor and
estimation, should upon light cause or occasion poison her self, since it was
naturally given to each breathyng wight, to prolong their living days with the
longest threede that Atropos could draw out of dame Natures web. Where upon he
commanded the said matrone to be brought before him, whose death for her
virtue was generally lamented by the whole country. When the Gentlewoma^ was
before him, and had understanding that she was fully resolved and determined to
die, he began by great (...) to exhort her, that she should not wilfully (...)
her self away, upon consideration that she was of lusty years, rich and
(...) of the whole country: and how great pity it were but she should
renew her mind and give her self still to live and remain, til natural
course did end and finish her life: howbeit his (...) and earnest persuasion
could not divert her from her intended purpose. But Pompeius (...) to have her
die, ceased not still to (...) his former talk with new reasons and stronger
arguments. All which she patiently heard with fired (...), til at length with
clear voice and (...) cheer (...) answered him in this manner.

You be greatly deceived (my lord Pompeius) if you do believe that I without
very great providence and (...) (...) go about to end my days: for I do know
and am (...) persuaded, that each creature naturally craves the prolongation
and lengthning of life, and so much abhors to die, as the desirous to (...),
(...) the poison which I have prepared for consummation of my life. Where upon
I have diverse times thought, considered and discoursed with my self, and
amongs many considerations (...) debated in my mind, there came into the same
the (...) and (...) change of Fortune, whose whir (...) (...), never (...), ne
yet remains (...), It (...) daily seen how she does exalt and advance some
man from the lowest and bottomless pit, even to the (...) of the high
Heavens, endowyng him with so much substance as he can desire. An other that
was most happy, honored in this world like a God, unto whom no goods and
welfare were wantyng, who might well have been called in his life, a three
times happy and blessed wight, suddenly from his honor and (...) deprived
and made a very poor man and beggar. Some man also, that is both rich and
lusty, accompanied with a fair wife and goodlye children, living in great
mirth and ioylitie, this wicked Lady Fortune, the deuourer of all our
contentacions, depriueth from the inestimable treasure of health, causes the
fair wife to love an other better than her husband, and with (...) venomous
tooth, biteth the children, that in short space miserable death catches them
all within his dreadful clouches, whereby he is defrauded of those children,
whom after his death he purposed to leave (...) his heirs.

But what mean I to consume time and words in declaration of fortunes unsteady
stay, which is more clear than the beams of the Sun, of whom daily a
thousand thousand examples be manifest. All histories be full of them. The
myghtie country of Graecia does render ample witness wherein so many
excellent men were bredde and brought up. Who desirous with their finger to
touch the highest heaven, were in a moment thrown down: And so many famous
Cities, which governed numbers of people, now at this present day we see to
be thrall and obedient to thy City of Rome. Of these hurtefull and perilous
mutations (O noble Pompcius) thy Roman City may be a (...) clear glass and
Spectacle, and a multitude of thy noble Citizens in time paste and present, may
give plentyfull witness.

But to come to the cause of this my death, I say, that fyndyng my self to
have lived these many years (by what chance I can not tell) in very great
prosperity, in all which time I never did suffer any one myssehappe, but
still from good to better, have passed my time until this day: Now fearyng
the frownyng of Lady Fortunes face, and that she will repent her long
continued favor, I fear, I say, least the same Fortune should change her
style, and begin in the midst of my pleasant life to sprinckle her
poisoned bitterness, and make me the (...) and Quiver of her sharp and
noisome arrows. Wherefore I am now determined by good advise, to rid my
self from the captivity of her force, from all her misfortunes, and from the
noysom and grievous infirmities, which miserably be incident to us mortal
Creatures: And believe me ( Pompcius) that many in their aged days have left
their life with little honor, who had they ben gone in their youth had died
famous for ever.

Wherefore (my Lord Pompeius) that I may not be tedious unto thee, or hinder
thine affairs by long discourse, I beseech thee to give me leave to follow my
deliberate disposition, that frankely and freely I may be (...) of all
danger: for the longer the life does grow, to the greater discommodities it
is subject.

When she had so said, to the great admiration and compassion of all those
which were present, with tremblyng hands and fearful cheer, she quaffed a
great cup of poisoned drink, the which she brought with her for that
purpose, and within a while after dyed.

This was the strange use and order observed in (...). Which good counsel of
that dame had the noble and valiant captain followed, no doubt he would have been contented to have been brought to order: And then he had not lost that
bloody battle achieved against him by Julius Caesar at Pharsalia, in Egypt:
Then he had not sustained so many overthrows as he did: then had he not ben
forsaken of his trendes, and in the end endured a death so miserable. And for
so much as for the most part (...) thereto we have entreated of many tragical and
bloody rhaunces, respiring now from those, let us a little touch some
medicinable remedies for love, some lessons for government and obedience, some
treaties of amorous dames, and hautie (...) of Princes, Queens and other
persons, to variate the chaungeable diet, wherewith diverse be affected,
rellishyng their Stomachs with some more pleasant digestions than they have
tasted.

Faustina the Empress.
The dishonest Love of (...) AVSTINA the Empress, and with what remedy the
same love was removed and taken away.

The tenth Novel.
TRue and most holy is the sentence, that the lady, gentlewoman, or other
wighte of Female kind, of what degree or condition soever she be, be she
saire, foul, or ylfauoured, can not be endewed with a more precious Pearl or
Jewel, than is the (...) and pure virtue of honesty: which is of such valor,
that it alone without other virtue, is able to render her that (...) in her
attire, most famous and excellent. Be she more beautiful than Helena, be she
mightier than the Amazon, better learned than Sappho, rycher than Flora, more
loving than Queen Dido, or more noble than the best Empress and Queen of the
world, or be she full of any other virtue, if the want the name of chaste, she
is not worthy so much as to bear the title of honor, nor to be entertained
in honest company. Ye shall peruse hereafter an history of a Countess of
Celant, that was a passing fair dame, singularly adorned with Natures gifts.
She was fair, pleasant, (...), comely, and (...) not altogether barraine of
good erudition and learning: she could play upon the instruments, (...),
dance, make and compose witty and amorous Sonets, and the more her company
was frequented, the more amiable and gracious the same was (...), But because
she was (...) fast and less (...), she was of no regard and estimation. Such
as be dishonest, do not only hurt them selves, but give cause to the (...)
people to mutter and grudge at their parents education, at their husbands
government and institution of their children, causing them most commonly to
lead a (...) and heavy life. Think you that Augustus Caefar (albeit he was a
victorious Emperor, and led a triumphant reign) lived a contented life when
he saw the two Iuliae, one of them his daughter, the other his Niece, to use
them selves like common (...) constrained through their shameful (...), to pin
and close up himself, and to shun the conversation of men, and once in mind
to cut his daughters veins to let cut her lusty blood? Was not he wo^t the
teeres trickling down his Princely face to say, that better it was never to
have children and to be dead without them, than to have a fruteful wife and
children so disordred? He (...) his daughter to be a carrion lump of flesh,
full of (...) and filthiness. But if I list to speak of woms^ of this age,
from noble to unnoble, from an Emperors daughter to a plough man's modder, whose
lives do frame after Iulia (...) lore, my pen to the stumpes would wear, and
my hand be wearied with writing. And so likewise it would of numbres now no
doubt, that follow the trace of Lucrece (...), that (...) and chastely contriue
the day and nights in pure and godly exercise. But of the naughty sort to
speak, (leaving to void offense, such as do flourish in our time) I will not
concele the Empress Messalina, that was wife to the Emperor Claudius, not
only unworthy of Empress degree, but of the title of woman: who being abused
by many, at length arrived to such abominable lust, that not contented with
daily adulterous life, would resort to the common stews, where the ruffians and
public harlots haunted, for little hire, and there for vilest price with each
slave would humble her self: and at night not satisfied, but wearied, would
return home to her Palace, not ashamed to disclose her self to any that list
to look upon her: And for victory of that beastly game, co^tended with her
like. But not to say so much of her as I find in (...) his natural history,
in Suetonius, and Cornelius Tacitus, I leave her to her self, because I have
made promise to remember the dishonest love for example sake, which I read of
Faustina, whose beauty of all Writers is (...) to be most excellent, if
excellency of good life had thereunto been coupled. She was the daughter and
wife of two holy and virtuous Emperors, the one called Antonius Pius, the
other Marcus Antonius, This M. Antonius in all virtuous works was perfect and
godly, and singulerly loved his wife (...), and although she was (...) to the
world, and a (...) to the people, yet cared not for the same, such was the
passing love he bare unto her. Leave we to speak of her beastly behavior
with the noble sort, without regard unto her most noble husband, and come we
to treat of a certain savage kind of lust she had (...) one of the
Gladratores, which were a certain sort of Gamsters in Rome, which we term to
be masters of Defense. She was so far in (...) with this Gladiator, that she
could not eat, drink, or sleep, ne take any kind of rest. And albeit Faustina
was thus unshamefast she thought that the (...) disordinate love deserved (...),
and engendered shame unto the noble house, whereof she came, that she (...) the
daughter and wife of two famous Emperors, would subdue her state to a man so
base: and many times would go to Caieta, a City and haven of Campania, to
join her self with the Galie slaves there. Her husband which loved her
dearly, comforting his wife so well as he could, caused the best Physicians
he could find, to repair unto her for recovery of her health. But all the
devised Physike of the world was not able to cure her, she was so louesick. In
the end knowing by long experience the favor and love her husband bare unto
her, and knowing that nothing could withdraw his continued mind, she told
him, that all the torment and pain (...) sustained, was for the love of a
Gladiator, toward whom her love was so miserable, that except she had his
company, death was she next (...) for her disease. The good husband which
beyond measure loved his wife, comforted her with so loving words as he could
devise, and bad her to be of good cheer, promising he would provide remedy.
Afterward consulting with a wise man, a Chaldee born, opened unto him the
effect of his wives disease, and how she was louesick with such a person one of
(...) Gamsters of the City, promising great rewards if he could by his
secrets, search out redress to save her life. The Chaldee could tell him none
other remedy, but that he must cause the Gladiator to be slain, and with the
blood of him to anoint the body of the Empress, not beknowing unto her what it
was; which done, that he must go to naked bed to her, and do the act of
matrimony. Some Historiographers do write, that the Chaldee gave him counsel,
that Faustina should drink the blood of the Gladiator, but the most part, that
her body was bathed in the same. But how so ever it was, it would have cooled
the hottest (...) stomach in the world, to be anointed with like (...). To
conclude the Gladiator was (...) and the medicine made and applied to the
pacient, and the Emperor lay with the Empress, and begatte her with child.
And immediately she forgot the Gladiator, and never after that tune remembered
him. If this medicine (...) applied to our carnal loving dames (which God
defend) they would not only follow Faustine in forgetfulness, but also would
mislike such Physike: and not greatly regard the counsel of such (...). By
means of this medicine and copulation was the emperor Commodus borne, who
rather resembled the Gladiator than his father: In whose breast rested a
storehouse of mischief and (...), as Herodian and other writers plentifully do
write.

Two Maidens of Carthage.
CHERA hid a tresure ELISA going about to hang her self, and tyeng the halter
about a beam, found that treasure, and in place thereof left the halter.
PHILENE the daughter of CHERA going for that treasure, and busily serching for
the same, found the halter, wherwithal for despair she would have hanged her
self, but forbidden by ELISA, who by (...) espied her, she was restored to
part of her loss, leading afterward a happy and prosperous life.

The. xj. Novel.
FOrtune the lady Regent and gouernesse of ma^s life, so altreth and changes
the state thereof as many times we se the noble born from that great mighty
port, wherein they be debased so far, as either infamously their life is spent
in the hungry lap of dame penury, or else contrived in the ugly lothsom
house of Wantonness, the stepdame of all honesty and virtue. Sometimes we
make the unnoble ladde that was nooseled in the homely country (...), or rude
civil shop, attain to that which the only honorable and gentle do aspire:
and he again that is ambicious in climbing up the turning wheel, thrown
down beneth the brinke of (...) luck, whelmed in the ditche and pit of black
despair. We note also sometimes that the careless wight of Fortunes gifts,
has (unlooked for) his mouth and throat crammed full of promotion and worlds
delights. Such is the manner of her fickle stay. When of this History ensuing,
gives some intelligence, by remembering the destenied lucks of. you poor sorry
girls that were left destitute of desired things, both like to fall into
despair, and yet both holyen with that they most desired: which in this sort
begins. In the time that Scipio Affricanus had besleged the City of
Carthage, Chera that was a widow (dwelling there) seeing the danger at hand
wherein the City stood, and doubtyng the loss and overthrow of the same, and
that the honor of the dames and womankinde, could vneths be safe and
harmless, determined not to abide the vttermoste: and having a good quantity
of gold and precious stones, she bestowed the same in a casquet, and hid it
upon one of the beams of her house, purposing when the stir and danger was
past, to return to her house again for those her hidden things. Which done
in the habit of a poor woman with her only daughter in her hand that was
about. b. or. bf. years of age, she went out of Caithage, and passed over the
seas into Scicilia, where falling sick, after she had been there three or four
years, at length died. But before she departed, she called her daughter before
her, then about. x. years of age, and told her the place where she had (...)
(...) casket. And by reason of the (...) gotten by Scipio, the city was
maruellously changed, and amongs other things, the house of Chera was given to
a Roman (...) that was so enriched with nobility of mind, as he was poor of
Fortunes goods. Which Chera understanding, was sorrowful, and doubted of her
things secretly bestowed upon the beam. Whereupon she said unto her daughter,
that for so much as their house was in the posfession of an other, she ought to
be wise and circumspect in the recovery of her hidden goods: and that her
death was the more sorrowful unto her, because she must leave her (so young a
maiden) unprovided of friends for her good government. But yet she encouraged
her and said: that since necessity approached, she must in childishe age, put on
a grave and ancient mind, and beware how she bewrayed that casket to any
person, for that of purpose she reserved the knowledge thereof, to her self,
that it might serve for her preferment, and procure her a husband worthy of
her self. And the maiden demanding the value of the same, she told her that
it was worth. CC. (...), and gave her in writing the particulers enclosed
within the Caskette, and said, that the like bill she should find within
the same, written with her own hand. And so the good woman within a while
after dyed, leaving behind her the young maiden her Daughter, that maruellously
lantented the death of her mother, accordingly as Nature taught her, and each
other reasonable wight deprived from their dearest friends. The maiden for her
years was very wise, and would disclose to none what her mother had said,
keeping the writing very carefully and (...). Not long after Philene (which was
the maidens name) fell in love with a Gentleman of Scicilia of great
reputation and authority, who all be it he saw her to be very fair and
comely, yet cared not for her love in respect of marriage, for that he knew
her to be poor, and without dowry mete for a Gentleman, jesting and mocking
to see her fire her mind on him, for desire to have him to her husband, that
was a personage so noble and rich: which refusal pierced the heart of that
tender maiden, because she saw her self forsaken for nothing else, but for want
of goods: which made her to think and consider, how she might recover the
riches that her mother had laid up in Carthage. It chanced as she was in
this thought, that the daughter of him to whom the house of Chera was given,
called Elisa, was likewise enamoured of a noble young gentleman in Carthage, who
because Elisa was the daughter of a soldier, and not very rich, in like
manner laughed and iested at her love, no less than the other did at Philene.
Notwithstanding Elisa attempted all means possible to induce the young man to
love her, but her practice and attemptes tended to none effect. And last of
all, desirous to have a resolute answer, and thereby understood, that he
would rather die than take her to wife, she fell into despair, and curssed
fortune, and her fate, that she was not borne rich enough to match with her
chosen Gentleman, and that she being poor, must fall in love with such a
personage: whereupon she miserably formented her self, still bewayling her
unhappy luck, that she could not win him to be her husband, for which only
intent and purpose she loved him. And this amorous passion incredibly growing
in her, the roots whereof be planted in the restless humor of melancholy,
and wanting all hope and comfort to stay that rank and ra^mishe weed, it so
increased in her, as she frantic in raging love, gave her self over to the
spoil of hirself: And to rid her from that grief, she determined to kill her
self, imagining which way she might do the same. At length she was resolueb,
with her fathers sword to pierce her body: But her heart not serving her
thereunto, devised by the halter to end her life, saying thus to her self:
that at lest wise my death shall do me good, because that cruel man shall know
that for his sake I have done this fact, and shall perform my funerals with
some tears or sighs: And if his heart be not of iron or steel, he can not
chose but sorrow and lament, that one which loved him better than her own
life, has made such wretched end only for his cruelty. Elisa concluding
upon this intent, prepared a halter: And being alone in her house, in the
chamber where the Casket lay upon the beam, placed a stool under the same,
and began to tie the halter about the beam: (...) doing whereof, she espied
the casket, and reached the same unto her, who feelyng it to be heavy and
weighty, immediately did open it, and found the bil within, which Chera had
written with her own hand, agreeable to that which, she had delivered to her
daughter, wherein were particularly remembered the Jewels and other riches
enclosed within the casket. And disclosing the bags wherein the gold and
Jewels were bound up, and seeing the great value of the same, wondered thereat,
and joyful for that fortune, hid the rope which she had prepared for her
death, in the place where she found the casket, and with great gladness and
mirth went unto her father, and showed him what she had found, whereat the
father rejoiced no less, than his daughter Elisa did, because he saw himself
thereby to be discharged of his former poor life, and like to prove a man of
inestimable wealth and substance: and saw like wise that the poor wench his
daughter, by the addicion of those riches, was like to attain the party whom
she loved. When he had taken forth those bags and well (...) the value, to
the intent no man might suspect the sodeine mutation of his state, took his
daughter with him, and went to Rome, where after he had remained certain
months, he returned to Carthage, and began very galantly to apparel
himself, and to keep a bountiful and liberal house. His table and port was
very delicate and sumptuous, and his stable stored with many fair horse, in
all points showing him self very noble and rich: By which sodein change and
mutation of state, the whole City beleened, that he had brought those riches
from Rome. And because it is the common opinion of the vulgar people, that
where there is no riches, there is no nobility, and that they alone make the
noble and Gentleman (a foolish opinion in deed, proceeding from heads that
be rash and light) the people seeing such a port and charge kept by the
Soldier, conceived and thought that he was of some noble house. And
thoroughout the whole City great and solemn honor was done unto him:
whereupon the young Gentleman, with whom Elisa was in love, began to be
ashamed of himself, that he had disdained such a maiden. And then the young
maiden seeing her fathers house to be in such reputation, made suit to her
father, that he would procure the Gentleman to be her husband. But her father
willed her in any wise to (...) secret her desire, and not to seem her self
to be in love, and wisely told her, that more meet it was, that she should be
solicited by him, than she to make suit or request for marriage: alleging that
the less desirous the Gentleman had been of her, the more dear and better
beloved she was to him. And many times when his daughter was demanded to wife,
he made answer that Matrimony was a state of no little importance as enduring
the whole course of life, and (...) ought well to be considered and wayed,
before any (...) were made. But for all these demaundes and answers, and all
these stops and stays, the maiden was endowed with (...) (...) (...), and in
the end her lover and she were married, with so great pleasure and satisfaction
of them both, as they (...) them selves happy. In the mean time while these
things were done at Carthage, Philene in Scicilia took thought how she might
recover her goods given to her by her mother, destrous by their means also to
sort her earnest and ardcnt love to happy success: And debating with her
self (as we have said before) how she might obtain them, because the house was
in possession of an other, thought it to be against reason and order, that
although she had lost her house, yet that her goods ought to be (...) unto
her, which were her only maintenance and reputation, and the fittest
instruments that should conduct her love to happy end. And hearing tell that
the father of Elisa; the possessour of her mothers house lived at Carthage with
great royalty and (...), thought that if by some slight and policy she
found not means to enter the house without suspicion, her attempt would be in
vain: determined therefore to go to Carthage, and to seek service in that
house, counterfaiting the kind and habit of a Page. For she considered, that
if she went thither in order and apparel of a maiden she should incur the
peril of her virginity, and fall into the lapse of diverse other dangers:
purposed then to go thither in manner of a page and lackie. And when she had in
that sort furnished her self, she passed the seas, and arrived at Carthage. And
seeking service about the city, at length chanced to be retained in a house
that was next neighbor to the Soldier, and because this wench was gentle and
of good disposition, was well beloved of her master, who being the friend of
Elisa, her father, many times sent unto him diverse prese^ts and gifts by
Philene, whereupon she began to be acquainted and familiar with the servants
of the house, and by her often repair thither, viewed and marked every corner,
and upon a time entered the chamber, wherein her mother Chera told her, that she
had bestowed her goods, and looking upon the beams espied by certain signs
and tokens, one of them to be the same where the casket lay. And therwithal
well satisfied and contented, verily believed that the casket still remained
there, and without further business for that time, expected some other season
for recovery of the same. In the end, the good behavior and diligence of
Philene, was so liked of Elisa, as her father and she made suit to her master
to give her leave to scrue them: who because they were his friends, preferred
Philene unto them, and became the page of that house. And one day secretly
repairing into the chamber, where she thought the treasure lay, mounted upon a
stool, and sought the beam for the casket: where she found no casket, but in
place (...) that lay, the halter, wherwithal Elisa would have strangled her
self: And searching all the parts of the chamber and the beams, and finding
nothing else but the halter, she was surprised with such incredible sorrow, as
she (...) like a stock, without spirit, voice or life. After Wards, being
come again to her selfs, she began pitifully to lament and complain in this
manner: Ah wretched Philene, under what unlucky sign and planet was thou
begotten and borne? with what offense were the heavens wroth, when they forced
thee to pierce thy mothers womb? Could I poor creature when I was framed
within the moulde of nature, and fed of my mothers substance within her womb,
and afterward in due time brought forth to light, commit such crime, as to
provoke the celestial inpressions to conspire against my Nativity, to bring
mine increased age into such wretched state and plighte, wherein it is now
wrapped and entangled? No no, my fault was nothing, it was parents offense, if
any were at all: For many times we see the innocent babe, afflicted and
cruciated for the fathers guilt. The Gods do punish the posterity, for some
sacrilege or notorious crime committed by progenitors. Their manner is not to
suffer heinous faults vnreue^ged. Their Justice can not abide such mischief
uncorrected for example sake. So fares it by me. First my father died,
afterward my mother a widow was driven to abandon native soil, and seek
relief in forain land: And leaving that wherewith we were possessed in (...)
keeping, were forced a simple life to lead among strangers. And my mother,
yeldyng forth her ghost, made me believe that she had hidden great tresures
here: And I (...) wench thinking to obtain the pray, have wandered in counter
(...) kind, and fetched many a bitter sigh, until I came into this place: And
the thing I hoped for, which might have been the means and end of all my
care, is turned to nothing: A casket transformed into a halter, gold and
Jewels into a piece of rope? Is this the marriage (...) thou art like to have to
match with him whom thou so derely (...) Is this the knot that shall conioyne
you both in yoke of man and wife? Ah wretch and miserable caitife, the goods
thy mother laid up for thee, for maintenance of thy rest, and (...) of thine
honor, and for the reputation of thy noble house where of thou came, is nows
berieued from thee. They that keeye this noble house, and bear their lofty
port amid the best, have despoiled thee poor wench of that after which thon
did vainly travail. But what remedy now? Since thy wicked lot does thus fall
out, (...) thy cruel fate is loath thou should atteine the thing on which
thy mind is bent, and since thy painful life can take no end, make speed to
rid thy self from misery by (...) means which he has prepared for thee that
has found thy goods: who seeing his good adventure to be thy bane, his happy
pray to be thy spoil, has left in lieu of (...) sure, a halter, that
therewith thou (...) dispatche thy self from all thy griefs, and in their
unhappy company to cease thy life, that the loathsome lengthning of the same
might not increase thy further plaints, sorrows, (...) and affliction. And in
the place where unfortunate (...) took her beginning, there the miserable
wretch (...) (...) that, which without her desired gain no longer can be
maynteined. Peradventure it may come to pass as when thy soul is losed from
this mortal charge, it shall stalk by him, by whom it lives, and by him also
whom she thought to joy in greatest co^tentation, that ever mortal woman did.
And thus plaining and sighing her ill fortune, when she had ended those words,
she tied the (...) ter about the beam, where sometimes her treasure lay, which
being done she put the same about her neck, saying: O crooked Lady Fortune
that have thus (...) dealt with thine humble client: Ah despair, thou (...)
wretch and companion of those that be (...) (...), that is unwilling to leave
my haunt until thou play the hangman. Ah devil incarnate that go about to
hale and pluck the innocent into thy hellishe (...). Out upon thee thou
deformed hellish dog, that waitest at the (...) gate to let them in, which
feign would pass an other port. And as she was grinding forth these
spiteful words, ready to remove the (...) to fetch (...) swing, the Gods
which would not give consent, that the innocent wench should enter that vile
and (...) death, moved the (...) of Elisa; to pass by the place where she was
in workyng on her self that desperate end: who hearing those (...) plaints
vttred after such terrible manner, opened the chamber door, and saw that
miserable sight: and ignorant of the occasion, moved with pity, ran and
(...) her from the fact, saying thus unto her: Ah Philou (which was the name
that she had given to her self) what folly has bewitched thy mind? what
frenzy has incharmed thy brain? what hard adventure has moved thee in
this miserable wise, to end thy life? Ah (said Philene) suffer me Elisa, to
finishe my tormented life, give me liberty to unburden my self from the band
of cares that do assail me on every side: Let these hellhoundes that stand
here round about me, have their pray for which they gape. Thou moved by
compassion, art come hither to stay me from the halter: but in doing so, thou
do me greater wrong, than does despair, which eggeth me thereunto. Suffer
I say, that mine afflictions may take some end, since cruel fortune wills it
to be so, or rather unhappy fate: For sour death is sweeter in my co^ceite,
than bitter life contrived in sharper sause thau gall or wormwood. Elisa
hearing her speak these words, said: For so much as thy myshap is such, as
only death is the nearest remedy to deprive thy pain, what wicked chance
has induced thee, in this house to finishe those thy miseries? What has
provoked thee to give such augurie to this our most happy and joyful
family? Forced is the party (said Philene) so to do, when destenie has so
appointed. What destenie is that demanded Elisa? Tell me I beseech thee,
perchance thou may prevent the same by other remedy than that wherabout
thou go. No (answered Philene) that is impossible, but to satisfy thy
request which so instantly thou crauest of me, I will tell thee the sum of al
my misery. In saying so, the tears gushed forth her eyes, and her voice brake
out into complaints, and thus began to say: Ah Elisa, why should I seek to
prolo^g my wretched life in this vale of wretchedness, wherein I have been so
miserably afflicted? my mother pitieng mine estate and seeing me void of
friends, and a fatherless child, upon her death bed, disclosed unto me a
tresure which she had hidden upon this (...), whereunto this halter (the best
(...) of my misery) (...) tied, and I making (...) for the same, in place of
that treasure found this halter, ordained (...) I suppose (by what misfortune
I know not) for my death: and where I thought among (...) happy to be the most
happy, I see my self amongs al (...) women to be the most unfortunate; (...)
hearing her say so, greatly (...) and said: Why then I (...) (...) (...) a
woman and not a (...). (...) truly answered the (...) maiden: A singular
example of extreme misery to all sorts of women. And why so? demanded Elisa.
Because (answered (...)) that the pestilent planet under which I was (...),
will have it to be (...): and then she told her all that which had (...) from
the time of her mothers departure out of Carthage, and how she went into
Scicilia and recounted (...) her the love that she bare to a Scicilia
Gentleman, and how that he (...) her for her poverty, refused to be her
husband: whereupon to atchieue her desire, as loath to forgo him, was come in
manner (...) page to (...), to recover the (...) which her mother had hidden
there, to (...) she might obtain (if not by other means) with some rich
dowry, the young Gentleman to husband whom she so derely loved. And then
reenforcing her complaint, she said, that (...) Fortune had (...) her of that
which might have accomplished her desire, resting no cause why she should any
longer live, the halter was prepared for her to end her days, and to rid her
life from troubles. And therefore she prayed her to be contented, that she might
make that end which her misaduenture and wicked fortune had predestinate. I
doubt not but there be many, which understanding that the treasure did belong to
Philene, if they had (...) the like as Elisa did, would not only not have
forbidden her the death, but also by speedy means have (...) the same, for so
much as by that occasion the hidden tresure should have been out of strife and
contention: so great is the force of Covetousness in the mind of man. But
good Elisa knew full well the mutabilitie of Fortune in human things, for so
much as she by seeking death, had found the thing which not only delivered
her from the same, but made her the best contented woman of the world. And
Philene seeking her contentation, in place thereof, and by like occasion, found
the thing that would have been the instrument of her death. And moved with very
great compassion of the maiden, desired to have better advertisement how that
treasure could belong to her. Then Philene showing forth her mothers writing,
which particularly remembered the parcels within the casket: and Elisa seeing
the same to be agreeable to the hand wherewith the other was written, that was
found in the casket, was assured that all the gold and Jewels which she had
found, did belong unto (...), and said unto her self: The Gods defend that I
should prepare the halter for the death of this innocent wench, whose substance
has yielded unto me so great contentation. And comforting the maiden, in the end
she said: Be contented Philene, and give over this thy desperate determination,
for both thy life shall be prolonged, and thy discontented mind appeased,
hoping thou shalt receive the comfort thou desire. And with those words she
losed the halter from her neck, and taking her by the hand, brought her to the
place where her father and husband were, and did them to understand the force
and terms whereunto the fire of love and desperation had brought that amorous
maiden, telling them that all the treasure and Jewels which she had found
(where she left the halter, and wherewith Philene was minded to hang her self)
did by good right and reason belong to her: then she did let them see the
counterpaine of that bil which was in the (...), in all points agreeable
thereunto, declaring moreover, that very mete and reasonable it were, like (...)
should be used unto her, as by whom they had received so great honor and
contentation. Her husband which was a Carthaginian borne, very churlish and
covetous, albeit by conferring the writings together, he knew the matter to be
true and that Philene ought to be the possessor thereof, yet by no means would
agree unto his wines request, but fell into a rage, calling her fool and
(...), and saying that he had rather that she (...) ben a thousand times
hanged, than he would give her one penny: and although she had saved her life,
yet she ought to be banished the City, for so much as the same and all the (...)
thereof was brought into the Romans hands, and amongs the same her mothers
house, and all her goods in possession of the victors, and every part thereof
at their disposition and pleasure. And moreover, for so much as her mother and
she had departed Carthage, and would not abide the hazard and extremity of
their country as other Citizens did, and having concealed and hidden those
Riches which ought to have been brought forth for the common defense of their
country, and gone out of the city as though she had been a poor simple woman,
poorly therefore she ought to live in Scicilia, whither she was fled. Wherefore
he was of opinion, that she in this manner being departed when the city had
greatest need of her help, was disfranchised of all the rightes and customs
of the country, and that like as a stranger can recover nothing in that
city, except he have the privilege and freedom of the same, even so Philene
(for the considerations before said) ought to be compted for a stranger, and
not to participate any thing within the city, accordingly as the laws forbid.
When he had so said he was like by force to (...) the sorrowful maiden out of
the house. These words greatly grieved Philene, who doubted least his father
in law would have toyned (...) him, and agree unto his alleged reasons, which
seemed to be of great importance and effect: and therefore thought newly to
return to the halter for (...) of (...) griefs: but it otherwise chanced, for
the father of Elisa, which was a Roman borne, and affected with a Roman
mind, and therefore of a gentle and well disposed nature, knew full well, that
although the house was given unto him by the consent of Scipio, and other the
captains, yet he knew that their pleasure was not to (...) on him the treasure
hidden in the same, and therefore ought to be restored to the true owner, or
else (...) and proprely due to the Roman (...), or common treasure house of
the same. And albeit that it was true that her mother went out of Carthage, in
the time of the siege, and therefore had forfaited the same, yet he determined
to show some (...) unto the young maiden, and to be thankful to fortune, for the
benefit which by her means he had received, thynkyng that she would be
displeased with him, if he with ungrateful mind or dishonorable intent
should receive her gifts. For in those days the Romans highly reverenced
lady Fortune, and in her honor had directed Temples, and dedicated Aultars, and
in prosperous time and happy adventures, they (...) vows, and did sacrifices
unto her, thinking although supersticously) that like as from God there
proceeded none evil, even so from him all goodness was derived that all
felicity and other good happes, which chanced upon the Roman common wealth,
proceeded from Fortune, as the fountain and most principal occasion, and that
they which would not confess her force, and be thankful unto her godhead,
incurred in the end her displeasure and dangers very great and heinous. This
Roman then having this opinion, being (as I said before) of a gentle (...)
would at one instant both render thanks to Fortune, and use courtesy unto that
maiden, by (...) ches and goods from low degree he was advanced to
honorable state. Wherefore turning his face unto her, with loving countenance
he spoke these words: Kight gentle damosel, albeit by the reasons alleged by
my son in law, none of the treasure hidden by thy mother, and found by my
daughter in this house, of right (...) (...) to thee, yet I will that thou
shalt understand my courtesy, and that thou see how the Romans do more
esteem the nobility of their mind, than all the riches of the world.
Therefore that thou may enjoy thy love, I refer unto thee and to thy
disposition all the goods and Jewels that were in the Caskette, and contained
in thy writing. Behold therefore (causing the Casket to (...) brought unto
him) all the Jewels and other parcels that were in the same when they were
found, take so much thereof as thou will, and if so be thou desire the
whole, willingly I render the same unto thee, (...) by means of those riches,
and the industry of my trafique, I have gained so much, as having given a
convenient dowry unto my daughter, I can honorably line without it. Philene
seeing the (...) of this valiant Gentleman, (...) him insinite thanks, and then
said unto him: Sir, I for my part dare ask nothing, well knowing that if you
give me nothing, there is no cause why I should complain of you, but of my
hard and wicked fortune, which has offered and given that to you, which ought
to have been mine. Wherefore, fith your courtesy is such, as you refer the
whole to me, I purpose to take nothing, but will that the whole shall be in your
disposition: and give me what you list, and that so given of your liberality,
I shall more thankfully receive, than if debt or duty did constrain it: And
if it shall please you to give me nothing, my heart shall be (...) well
appeased, for that your curtesse, as rather would I choose to live in the
poor estate wherein I am, than be rich with your displesure. Howbeit, the
Roman entreated Philene to take thereof what she thought good: And Philene
craved no more than it pleased (...) to give. Cyther of them standing upon
these terms, Elisa brake the strife, who knowing the force of love, and the
griefs incident to his clie^ts, of her own harms, moved to have compassion
upon the afflicted, turned toward her father, and (...) unto him: Right
loving father, the contencion between Philene and you, is risen of a matter
which came by me. The treasure for which you strive, and commit to the will of
Philene, was found by me, whereof if it please you both, I will take such order,
as both you shall be satisfied. I am contented said her father: and I likewise
answered Philene. Then said Elisa: You father hitherto have had but one
daughter, which am I, unto whom like a child and loving daughter I have been
obedient, and shall be all the days of my life: And I again have received from
you such fatherly education, as your ability and state required. This treasure
I sound, and gave to you for case and comfort of us both. To me it yielded the
only delectation of my heart in choice of husband, to you honor and (...)
within this city. Wherefore, since the principal came from me, and the right
rests in this careful maiden, my desire is this, that where before you had
but one daughter, you will adopte this maiden for an other, and think that you
have twain, and that you will entreat Philene in like sort as if she were my
(...): And where this inheritance and renenue wherewith now you be possessed,
and this casket also ought to be only mine aster your decease, for that you
have no sons, nor other issue, my desire is that you give unto her the half,
and that you accept her for your daughter, as I do mean to take her for my
sister: and accordingly to use her during (...). With these words Elisa
embraced Philene, and lovingly did kiss her, saying unto her: For my sister I
entertain thee Philene, and then she took her by the hand, and (...) her unto
her father with these words: Behold father; your new daughter, whom I
beseech you so heartily to love, as you do Elisa your natural child. The
father praised the courtesy of Elisa, and received Philene for his daughter:
And was contented with the arbitrament of his daughter. But Elisa perceiving
her husband to be somewhat offended therewith, specially for that the same
should be (...) into two parts, which was like to have been his wholly
before, persuaded him by gentle means to be content with that agreement: and
although at the first he could not well brook the liberality of his wife,
yet at length viewing the good behavior and gentle disposition of Philene, and
the contented mind of his father in law, together with the noble nature of
his wife, and her wise advertisement of Fortunes fickle assurance, yielded, and
acknowledged Philene for his (...). And so Philene put in possession of the
half of those goods, whereof she was altogether out of hope, was well
satisfied, and had the Roman for her (...), Elisa for her sister, and her
husband for her kinsman. That (...) Roman was so careful over Philene, as if
she had been his own daughter, and so endeavored, as he brought to pass that
she obtained her beloved Scicilian to husband: who also (...) for him to
Carthage, where he continued with his wife in the Romans house, and loved them
both so dearly as though he had been father to the one, and father in law to
the other.

In this manner these two poor wenches attained their two husbands, for having
of whom, their only care was for Riches, and for lack thereof were driven to
despair. And in the end both (though (...), and the one more fortunate than
the other) recovered riches, and with the same their husbands, to their
hearts singular joy and contentation. Which luck I (...) to all other poor
Girls (but not hanging ripe, or loving in despair) that bend their minds on
Marriage, and seek to people by that estate, their country common wealth.

But leauyng for a time these Tragical Nouels and heavy chances, we purpose
to remember some moral matters right worthy of remembrance, Letters they be
from a godly Pagane clerk, the famous philosopher Plutarch, Schoolemaister to
an Emperor of no less virtue, than his masters school and mind was (...)
with divine precepts. Wherefore proceed (good reader) to continue thy pains
upon the reading of these, so well as thou have (...) to employ thy time
before. They shall no less delight thee, if virtue brook thee, they shall no
less content thee, if duty please thee, than any delighte some thing,
whereupon (at any time) thou have employed thy vacant time.

Letters of the Emperor Traiane.
Letters of the Philosopher Plutarch to the noble and virtuous Emperor
Traiane, and from the said Emperor to Plutarch: the like also from the said
Emperor to the Senate of Rome. In all which be contained godly rules for
government of Princes, obedience of Subjects, and their duties to Common
wealth.

The. xiij. Novel.
Because these Letters ensuing (proceeding from yt infallible school of
wisdom, and practiced by an apt Scholar of the same, by a noble Emperor that
was well trained up by a famous Philosopher) in mine opinion deserve a place of
Record among our English (...), and for the wholesome erudition, ought to (...)
in English shape to be described, I have thought good in this place to
introduce the same. And although to some it shall not per (...) seem fit and
convenient to mingle holy with profane (according to the proverb) to
intermedle amongs pleasant histories, ernest epistles, amid amorous Nouels,
learned Letters: yet not to care for report or thought of such findefaults, I
judge them not (...), the course of those histories. For amidde the divine
works of Philosophers and Orators, amongs the pleasant pains of ancient
Poets, and the Nouel writers of our time, merry verses so well as moral
matters (...) mingled, (...) bankets so well as wise disputatio^s celebrated,
tau^ting and (...) orations so well as (...) declamations and persuasions
pronounced. These Letters contain many grave and wholesome documents, sundry
virtuous and chosen Institutio^s for Princes and noble men yea and for such as
bear office and preferme^t in common (...), from highest title to (...)
degree. These letters do vouch the rejoice of a schoolmaster, for bringing up
a scholar of capacity and aptness, to embrace and fire in (...) such lessons
as he taught him. These letters do gratulate and remember the joy of the
disciple for having such a master. These Letters do (...) the mind of a
(...) Prince toward his subjects for choice of him to the Empire, and for that
they had respect rather to the virtue and condition, than to the nobility or
other extreme accident. To be short, these letters speak and pronounce the
very hu^blenesse and (...) that ought to rest in subjects hearts: with a
thousand other excellent sentences of duties. So that if the (...) (...) had been (...) again to peruse these letters and (...) of congratulation between the
scholemaister and scholar, he would no less have reioysed in Plutarch, tha^
King Philip of Macedon did of Aristotle, (...) he affirmed himself to be
happy, not so much for having such a son as Alexander was, as for that he
was (...) in such a time, as (...) brought (...) to be his (...). That good
emperor (...), she wed a pattern to his (...) by his good virtuous life and
godly government, which made a successor and a people of no less consequence
than they were trained, accordingly as Herodian (...), That for the most part
the people be wont to imitate the life of their Prince and sovereign Lord. If
Philip (...) himself (...) and blessed for having such a son and (...), then
might Nerua term him self (...) times more happy for such a nephew and such
a notable (...) master as Plutarch was, who not only by doctrine, but by
practice proved a passing good scholar. Alexander was a good scholar, and for
the time well practiced his masters lessons, but afterward as glory and good
hap accompanied his noble disposition, so did he degenerate from former life,
and had quite forgotten what he had learned, as the second Nouel of this book
more at large declares. But Traian of a toward scholar, proved such an Emperor
and victor over him self, as schooling and rulyng were in him mixaculous, a
surmounting Paragon of piety and virtue: wherefore not to stay thee, from the
perusing of those Letters, the right image of himself: thus begins Plutarch
to write unto his famous scholar Traiane.

A Letter of the philosopher Plutarch to the Emperor Traiane, Wherein is
touched how gouerners of Common Welths ought to be prodigal in deeds and spare
in words.
MY most dread and sovereign Lord, albeit of long time I have known the
modesty of your mind, yet neither I nor other (...) man did ever know that you
aspired to that, which many men desire, which is to be Emperor of Rome: That
man should withdraw him self from honor, it were clean without the bounds
of wisdom: but not to license the heart to desire the same, that truly is a
work divine, and not proceeding of human nature. For he does indifferently
well, that represseth the works which his hands be able to do, without staying
upon his own desires, and for good consideration we may term thine Empire to
be very happy, since thou have so nobly demeaned thy self to deserve the same
without search and seeing industrious policy to attain thereunto. I have
known within the city of Rome many great personages, which were not so much
honored for the offices which they had as they were for the means and devises
which they sought and endeavored to be advanced to the same. May it please you
to understand (most excellent Prince) that the honor of a virtuous man does not
consist in the office, which he presently has, but rather in the merits
which he had before: In such wise, as it is the office that honoreth the
party, and to the officer there rests but a painful charge. By means
whereof, when I remember that I was your gouerner from your youth, and
instructed your virtuous mind in letters, I can not choose but very much
rejoice, so well for your sovereign virtue, as for your majesty's good
fortune, deming it to be a great happiness unto me, that in my time Rome had
him to be their sovereign lord, whom I had in times past to be my scholar.
The principalities of Kingdoms some win by force, and maintain them by
arms, which you ought not to do, nor yet conceive such opinion of your self,
but rather to think that the Empire which you govern by universal consent, ye
ought to entertain and rule with general justice. And therefore if you love
and reverence the Gods, if you be pacient in travels, ware in dangers,
courteous to your people, gentle to strangers, and not (...) of treasure, nor
lover of your own desires: you shall make your fame immortal, and govern the
common wealth in soueraign peace. That you be not a lover of your own desires,
I speak it not without cause. For there is no worse government than that
which is ruled by selfewill and private opinion. For as he that governs a
common wealth ought to live in fear of all men, even so much more in fear of
him self: in so much as he may commit greater error, by doing that which his
own lust commaunbeth, than if he were ruled by the counsel of other. Assure
you sir, that you can not hurt yourself, and much less prejudice us your
subjects, if you do correct your self before you chastise others, esteemyng
that to be a right good government, to be prodigal in works, and spare of
speech. Assay then to be such a one now, that you do command, as you were
when you were commanded. For otherwise it would little avail to do things for
deserving of ye empire, if afterward your deeds be contrary to your deserts.
To come to honor it is a humane work, but to conserne honor it is a thing
(...). Take heed then, (most excellent Traiane) that you do remember and still
reuolue in mind, that as you be a Prince supreme, so to apply your self to
be a passing ruler. For there is no authority amongs men so high; but that the
Gods above be judges of their thoughts, and men beneth beholders of their
deeds. (...) presently you are a mighty Prince, your duty is the greater to
be good, and (...) less to be wicked, than when you were a private man. For
having gotten authority (...) (...) your liberty is the less to be idle: so
that if you be not (...) a one as the common people have (...), and such again
as your master Plutarch desires, you shall put your self in great danger,
and mine enemies will seek means to be revenged on me, knowing well that for
the scholars fault, the master (...) suffers wrong, by (...) (...) imputed
unto him (although wrongful) for the (...). And for so much as I have been thy
master, and thou my scholar, thou must (...) by well doing, to render me some
honor. And likewise if thou do evil, great infamy shall light on me, (...)
as it did to Seneca for Nero his cause, whose cruelties done in Rome were (...)
to his master Seneca Thelike wrong was done to the Philosopher Chilo, by being
burdened with the negligent nouriture of his Scholar Leander: They truly were
famous personages and great learned men, in whom the government of myghtie
Princes was reposed. Notwithstanding, for not correctyng them in their youth,
nor teaching them with careful diligence, they blotted for evermore their
renouine, as the cause of the destruction of diverse common wealths. And
for so much as my pen spared none in times pass, be well assured Traiane,
that the same will pardon neither thee nor me, in time to come. For as we be
confederate in the fault, even so we shall be heirs of the pain. Thou
know well what lessons I have taught thee in thy youth, what counsel I have
(...) thee, being come to the state of man, and what I have written to thee,
(...) thou have been Prince, and thou thy self art record of the words said
unto thee in secret. In all which I never persuaded thing but tended to the
service of the Gods, profit of the common wealth, and increase of thy
renoume. Wherefore, I am right sure, that for any thing which I have written,
said, or persuaded, I fear not the punishment of the Gods, and much less the
reproachful shame of men, verily believing that all that which I could say in
secret, might without reproach be openly published in Rome. Now before I took
my pen in hand to write this Letter, I examined ned my life, to know, if
(during the time that I had charge of thee) I did or said in thy presence any
thing that might provoke thee to evil example. And truly ((...) for me to say
it) upon that search of my forepassed life, I never found my self guilty of
fact unmeet a Roman Citizen, nor ever spoke (...) unseemly for a Philosopher.
By means whereof I do right heartily wish, thou (...) remember the good
education and instruction which thou did learn of me. I speak not this,
that thou should gratific me again with any benefit, but to the end that
thou might serve thy self, esteemyng that no greater pleasure can redounde
to me, than to hear a good report of thee. Be then well assured, that if an
Empire be bestowed upon thee, it was not for that thou were a Citizen of Rome,
or a courageous person descended of noble house, rich and mighty, but only
because virtues did plentifully abound in thee. I dedicated unto thee certain
books of old and ancient commonwealth, which if it please thee to use, and
as at other times I have said unto thee, thou shalt find me to be a
proclaimer of thy famous works, and a thronicler of all thy noble faicts of
arms: but if perchance thou follow thine own advise, and change thy self to
be other than hitherto thou have ben, presently I invoke and cry out upon
the immortal Gods, and this Letter shall be witness, that if any hurt do
chance to thee, or to thine Empire, it is not thorough the counsel or means
of thy master Plutarch. And so farewell most noble Prince.


The answer of the Emperor Traiane to his master Plutarch.
COcceius Traiane Emperor of Rome, to thee the Philosopher Plutarch sometimes
my master, salutation and consolation in the Gods of comfort. In Agrippina was
delivered unto me a letter from thee, which so soon as I opened, knew to be
written with thine own hand, and endited with thy wisdom. So flowing was
the same with goodly words, and accompanied with grave sentences, an occasion
that made me read the same twice or thrice, thynking that I saw thee write,
and beard thee speak, and so welcome was the same to me, that at that very
instant, I caused it to be red at my table, yea and made the same to be fixed
at my beds head, that thy well meaning unto me might be generally known, how
much I am bound unto thee. I esteemed for a good presage ye co^gratulation
that the Consul Rutulus did unto me from thee, touching my coming to the
Empire. I hope through thy merits, that I shall be a good Emperor. Thou
say in thy letter, that thou canste by no means believe, that I have given
bribes, and used other endeavors to redeem mine Empire, as other have done. For
answer thereunto I say, that as a man I have dcsired it, but never by
solicitation or other means attempted it. For I never saw within the City of
Rome, any man to bribe for honor, but for the same, some notable infamy
chanced unto him, as for example we may learn of the good old man Menander
my friend and thy neighbor, who to be Consul, procured the same by unlawful.
means, and therefore in the end was banished and died desperately, The great
Caius Caesar, and Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, (...), Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
and Domitian, some for gettyng the Empire, some for tirannie, some for gettyng
the same by bribes, and some by other means procuryng the same, lost (by the
sufferance of the righteous Gods (not only their honor and goods, but also
died miserably. When thou (...) read in thy school, and I that time an hearer
of thy doctrine, many times heard thee say, that we ought to travel to
deserve honor, rather than procure the same, esteming it unlawful to get
honor by means unlawful. He that is without credit, ought to assay to
procute credit. He that is without honor, ought to seek honor. But the
virtuous man has no need of nobleness, ne he himself, ne yet any other person
can berieue him of due honor. Thou know well Plutarch, that the year past,
the office of Consul was given to Torquatus, and the (...) to Fabritius, who
were so virtuous and so little ambitious, as not desirous to receive such
charges, absented themselves, although that in Rome, they might have been in
great estimation, by reason of those offices, and yet nevertheless without
them they be presently esteemed, (...), and honored. And therefore I conceive
greater delight in Quintius Lincinatus, in Scipio Affricanus, and good Marcus
Portius, for contemning of their offices, than for the victories which they
achieved. For victories many times consist in Fortune, and the not caryng for
honorable charge in only wisdom. Semblably, thou thy self art witness,
that when mine uncle Cocceius Nerua was exiled to Capua, he was more (...), and
better served, than when he was at Rome. Whereby may be inferred, that a
virtuous man may be exiled or banished, but honor he shall never want. The
Emperor Domitian (if you do remember) at the departure of Nerua, made me many
offers, and thee many fair promises, to entertain thee in his house, and to
send me into Almayne, which thou could not abide, and much less consent,
deeming it to be greater honor with Nerua to be exiled, than of Domitian to be
favored. I swear by the Gods immortal, that when the good old man Nerua sent
me the ensign of the Empire, I was (...) ignorant thereof, and void of hope to
atteine the same: For I was advertised from the Senate, that Fuluius sued for
it, and that Pamphilius went about to buie it. I knew also, that the Consul
Dolobella, attempted to enjoy the same. Then since the gods did permit, that I
should be Emperor, and should govern the Empire, and that mine uncle Nerua
did command the same, the Senate approved it, and the Common wealth would
have it to be so. And since it was the general consent of all men, and
specially your advise, I have great hope that the Gods will be (...) unto me,
and Fortune no enunie at all, assuring you, that like joy which you do say
you have by teaching me, and seeing me to be Emperor, the like I have to
think that I was your Scholar. And since that you will not call me from
henceforth any other but Sovereign Lord, I will term you by none other name,
than Loving father. And albeit that I have been visited and counseled by many
men, since my coming to the Empire, and by thee above the rest, whom above
all other I will believe, considering that the intent of those which counsel
me, is to draw my mind to theirs, where your letters purporte nothing else
but mine advantage. I do remember amongs other words, which once you spoke to
Maxentius the Secretary of Domitian, thus saying: that they which do presume
to give counsel unto Princes, ought to be free from all passions and
affections: for in counsel, where the will is more inclined, the mind (...)
prompte and ready. That a Prince in all things do his will, I praise not.
That he take advise and conusell of every man, I less allow. That which ho
ought to doc (as me think) is to do by counsel, (...) for all that to what
counsel he applies his mind. For counsel ought not to be taken of him
whom I do well love, but of him of whom I am beloved. All this I have written
(my Master Plutarch) to advertise you, that from henceforth I desire nothing
else at your hands, but to be helped with your advise in mine affairs, and
to tell me of my committed faults. For if Rome do think me to be a defender
of their common wealth, I make account of you to be an ouerseer of my life.
And because that I seem to you sometimes not to beevery thankful, thorough
the defaulte of that whereof you have said your mind, I pray you master not
to be displeased therewith. For in such case no grief can rise in me, for
telling me my fault, but rather for shame yt I have committed the same. The
bringing of me up in the house the hearing of thy loctures, the following of thy
(...), and living under thy discipline, have been truly the principal causes
that I am common to this Empire. This I say (Master) thinking that it were an
unnatural part, not to assist me to bear that thing, which thou have helped
me to gain and (...). And although that Vespasian was by nature good, yet
great profit (...) to him by entertainyng of the Philosopher Appolonius. For
truly it is to be counted a greater felicity, when a Prince has chanced
upon a good and faithful man, to be near about him, than if he had atchicued
a great (...) and Kingdom. Thou say (Plutarch) that thou shall receive
great contentation, from (...), if I be such a one as I was before, upon
condition that I ware (...) worse. I believe that which thou do say, because
the Emperor Nero, was the first five years of his Empire good, and the other
nine years exceedyng evil, in such wise as he grew to be greater in
wickedness, tha^ in dignity. Notwithstanding, if (...) shinke that as it
chanced unto (...), so may happen unto Traiane, I beseech the (...) Gods
rather to deprive me of life, than to suffer me to reign in Rome. For tirants
be they, which procure dignities and promotions, to use them for delight and
filthy (...): and good Rulers be they which seek them (...) of common wealth.
And therefore to them (which before they came to those (...)) were good, and
afterward wared wicked, greater pity than envy ought to be attributed,
considering specially, that Fortune does not (...) them to honor, but to
shame and villainy. (...) (...) then (good master) that since hitherto I have
(...) reputed (...), I will (...) by Gods assistance to aspire the better,
rather than to the worsse. And so the Gods preserve thee.


The Letter of the Emperor Traiane to the Senate of Rome, wherein is
contained, that Honor ought rather to be deserved than procured.
COcceius Traiane Emperor of the Romans, ever Augustus,
to our sacred Senate health and consolation in the Gods of comfort.
We being advertised here at Agrippina, of the death of the Emperor Nerua,
your (...) Lord and my predeccssour, and knowing it to be true, that you have
wept and bewailed the loss of a Prince so noble and righteous, as we likewise
have felt like sorrow, for the death of so notable a father. When children lose
a good father, and subjects a good prince, either they must dye with them, or
else by tears they think to raise them up again, for so much as good princes
be in a common wealth so rare, as the Phoenix in Arabia, My lord Nerua brought
me out of Spain to Rome, nourished me up in youth, caused me to be trained in
letters and adopted me for his (...) in mine old age. Which graces and benefits
truly I can not forget, knowing that the ingrate man provoke the Gods to
anger, and men to hatred. The death of a virtuous man ought to be lamented of
all men, but the death of a good Prince ought to be extremely mourned. For if a
common person die, there is but one dead, but if a good Prince die, together
with him dies a whole realm. I speak this (O ye Fathers) for the rare
virtues abounding in mine uncle Nerua: For if the Gods were disposed to sell us
the lives of good Princes already departed, it were but a small ransom to
redeem them with tears. For what gold or (...) may be sufficient to buie the
life of a virtuous man? Truly there would be a great mass of money given by
the Assyria^s to redeem the life of Belus, by the Persia^s for Artaxerxes, by
the Trojans for Hector, by the Greeks for Alexander, by the Lacedaemonians for
Lycurgus, by the Romans for Augustus, and by the Carthaginians for Annibal.
But as you know the Gods have made all things mortal, having reserved only
themselves to be immortal. How eminent and passing the virtue of the good
is, and what priu ledge the godly have, it may easily be known: for so much,
as honor is carried even to the very graves os the dead, but so it is not to
the great Palaces of the wicked. The good and virtuous man, without sight or
knowledge we love, serve, and answer for him: where the wicked we can not
believe that which he says, and less accept in good part the thing which
he does for us. Touching the election of the Empire, it was done by Nerua, it
was demanded by the people, approved by you, and accepted by me. Wherefore I
pray the immorall Gods that it may be lyked of their godheades. For to
small purpose avails the election of Princes, if the Gods do not confirm
it: and therefore a man may know him which is chosen by the Gods, or elected
by men, for the one shall decline and fall, the other vpholden and preserned.
The choice of man sodaynely exalted does decline and fall, but that which is
planted by the Gods, although it be tossed to and fro with several winds, and
receives great adversity, and boweth a little, yet he shall be never seen to
fall. Ye know right well (most honorable Fathers) that I never demanded the
Empire of Nerua my Sovereign Lord, although he brought me up and was his
nephew, having heard and well remembryng of my Master Plutarch, that honor
ought rather to be deserved than procured. Notwithstanding I will not deny
that joyful I was when my lord Nerua sent me the ensign of that great and
high dignity: but I will also confess that having begone to taste the travails
and cares which that Imperial state brings, I did repent more than a
thousand times for taking upon me the same. For Empire and government is of
such quality, that although the honor be great, yet the governor sustaineth
very great pain and miserable travail. O how greatly does he bind himself,
which by government byndeth other? for if it be just, they call it cruel, if
it be pitiefull, it is contemned, if liberal, it is esteemed prodigal, if he
keep or gather together, he is counted covetous, if he be peaccable and
quiet, they deem him for a coward, if he be coragious, he is reputed a
quareller, if grave, they will say he is proud, if he be easy to be spoken
to, he is thought to be light or simple, if solitary, they will esteem him to
be an hypocrite, and if he be joyful, they will term him dissolute: In such
wise as they will be contented, and use more better terms to all others what
soever, than toward him, which governs a common wealth. For to such a one
they reckon the morsels which he eats, they measure his pases, they note his
words, they take heed to his companies, and judge of his works (many times
wrongfully,) they examine and murmr of his pastymes, and attempt to
conjecture of his thoughts. Consider then the travails which be in
Government, and the Envy which many times they bear unto him that rules.
We may say, that there is no state more sure than to be in that which is
furthest off from Envy. And if a man can not but with great pain govern the
wife which he has chosen, the (...) which he has begotten, nor the servant
which he has brought up, having them altogether in one house: how is it
possible that he can still conserve in peace a whole common wealth? I pray you
tell me, in whom shall a poor Prince repose his trust? since that many times he
is most slaundered by them whom he favors best? Princes and great lords can
not eat without a guard, can not sleep without a watch, can not speak
without espiall, nor walk without some safety, in such wise as they being
lords of all, they be as it were, prisoners of their own people. And if we
will behold somewhat nearely, and consider the servitude of Princes, and the
liberty of subjects, we shall find that he which has most to do in the
realm, or bears greatest swinge, is most subject to thraldom: In so much as
if Princes have authority to give liberty, they have no means to be free
them selves. The Gods have created us so free, and every man desires to have
his liberty so much at will, that a man be he never so familiar a friend, or
so near of kin, we had rather have him to be our subject, than our lord and
master. One man alone commands all, and yet it seems to him but little.
Ought we then to marvel, if many be weary to obey one? We love and esteem
our selves so much, as I never saw any which of his own good will would be
subject, ne yet against his will was made a lord, which we see to be very
true. For the quarells and wars that be amongs men, are not so much for
obedience sake, as to rule and command. I say moreover, that in drinking,
eating, clothing, speaking, and loving, al men be of diverse qualities: but to
procure liberty, they be all conformable. I have spoken all this (O Fathers
conscript) upon occasion of mine own Empire, which I have taken with good
will, albeit afterward I was sorry for that great charge. For the waltering
seas and troublesome government be two things agreeable to behold, and
dangerous to prove. Notwithstanding (...) it has pleased the Gods that I
should be your lord, and you my subjects, I beseech you heartily to use your
obedience, as to your sovereign lord, in that which shall be right and meet,
and to advertise me like a father, in things that shall seem unreasonable. The
Consul Rutulus has told me much in your behalf, and has saluted me for the
people, he himself shall bring answer and salute you all in my name. The
Allobrogians and the inhabitants about the river of Rhene, be at controversy
for the limittes of their country, and have prayed me to be their arbitratour,
which will stay me a little there. I require that this Letter may be red within the Senate house, and manifested to the whole people. The Gods
preserve you.


An other Letter of the Emperor Traian to the Roman Senate, containing how
gouerners of common wealths ought to be friends rather to those which use
trasicke, than to them that gather and heap together.
COcceius Traiane Emperor of the Romans
to our holy Senate health and consolation in the Gods of comfort.
The affairs be so manifold, and business so grave and weighty, which we
have to do with diverse countries, that scarce we have time to eat, and
space to take any rest, the Roman Princes having still by ancient custom both
lack of time, and commonly want of money. And because that they which have
charge of common wealths, to the uttermost of their power ought to be friends to
traficke of merchandise, and enemies of heaping treasure togethers, Princes
have so many people to please, and so great number of crauers, that if they
keep any thing for them, the same shall rather (...) a spice of theft than of
providence. To take away an other man's goods, truly is a wicked part: but if
it be permitted to accumulate treasure and money together, better it were to
take it out of the Temples, than to defraude the people. For the one is
consecrated to the immortal Gods, and the other to the poor Commons. I speak
this (right honorable Fathers) to put you in remembrance, and also to advise
you, that you take good heed to the goods of the Common welthe, how they be
dispended, how gathered together, how they be kept and how they be employed.
For ye ought to understand, that the goods of the Common wealth be committed
to you in trust, not to the end ye should enjoy them, but rather by good
government to use them. We do hear that the walls be ready to sall, the
towers in decay, and the temples be come to great ruin: whereof we be not a
little offended, and you ought also to be ashamed, for so much as the damages
and detrimentes of the Common wealth, we ought either to remedy, or else to
lament. Ye have written unto me to know my pleasure, whether the Censors,
Pretors, and Ediles, should be (...) chosen, and not perpetual, as hitherto
they have been: and specially you say, that the state of the Dictator (which is
the greatest and highest dignity in Rome) is only (...) six months. To that
I answer, that we are well contented with that advise: For not without cause
and just reason our predecessors did (...) the first Kings of Rome, and
ordained, that the Consuls should yearly be chosen in the common wealth.
Which was done, in consideration that he which had perpetual government,
many times became insolent and proud. And (...) that the charges and offices
of the Senate, should be yearly, to avoid danger, which if they should be
perpetual there might ensue great hurt and damage to the Common wealth. For
if the Officers being yearly chosen, be good, they may be continued. And if
they be evil, they may be changed. And truly the officer, which knows
that upon the end of every year he must be changed, and examined of his
charge, he will take good head to that which he speaks, and first of all will
well consider what he takes in hand. The good Marcus Portius was the first
that caused the Officers of the Roman Common wealth to thee thus visited and
corrected. And because that these Almayne wars dee still increase, by reason
that the King Deceball will not as yet be brought to obedience of the Romans,
but rather goth about to occupy and win the Kingdoms of Dacia and Polonia,
I shall be forced through the business of the wars, so long continuing) to
devise and consult here upon the affairs concerning the government of the
common wealth of Rome. For a less evil it is for a Prince to be negligent in
matters of war, than in the government of the common wealth. A prince also
ought to think, that he is chosen, not to make wars, but to govern, not to
kill the enemies, but to root out vices, not that he go in person to invade or
defend his foes, but that he reside and be in the common wealth, and not to take
away other men's goods, but to do justice to every man, for so much as the
prince in yt wars can fight but for one, and in the public wealth he
commits faults against a number. Truly it likes me well, that from the
degree of Captains men be aduau^ced to be Emperors, but I think it not good,
that Emperors do descend to be Captains, considering that the realm shall
never be in quiet, when the Prince is to great a warrior. This have I spoken
(Fathers co^script) to the intent ye may believe, that I for my part, if these
wars of Almayne were to begin, I being at Rome, it were impossible that I
should be brought unto the same, for that my principal intent, is to be
esteemed rather a good gouerner of a common wealth, than a foreward Captain in
the field. Now then principally I commend unto you the veneration of the
Temples, and honor of the Gods, because Kings never live in surety, if the
Gods be not honored, and the Temples served. The last words which my good Lord
Nerua wrote unto me were these: Honor the Temples, fear the Gods, maynteine
Justice in thy Common wealth, and defend the poor, in so doing thou shalt
not be for, gotten of thy friend, nor vanquished by thy ennimies. I do
greatly recommende unto you the virtues of (...) and Fraternity, for that you
know that in great common wealths, greater hurt and damage do civil and
neighborly wars bring unto the same, than those attempted by the enemies. If
parents against parents, and neighbors against neighbors had not begone
their mutual hatred and contencion, never had Demetrius overthrown the
Rhodes, never had Alexander conquered Thyr, Marcellus Syracusa, Scipio
Nuimantia. I reco^mende unto you also the poor people, love the Orphans and
fatherless children, support and help the widows, beware of quarrels and
debates amongs you, and the causes of the helpless fee that ye maintain and
defend: because the gods did never wreake more (...) vengeance upon any, than
upon those which did ill entreat and use the poor and nedie. And many times I
have heard my lord Nerua say: that the Gods never showed them selves so
rigorous, as against a merciless and vnpitiful people. Semblably, we pray you
to be modest of words, pacient to suffer, and ware in your form of life. For
a great fault it is, and no less shame to a gouerner, that he praise the
people of his common wealth, and give them occasion to speak evil of him.
And therefore they which have charge of the common wealth, ought rather to repose
trust in their works, than in their words, for so much as the citizens or
common people, do rather fire their judgment upon that which they see, than on
that which they hear. I would wish that (touching the affairs appertinent
to the Senate) they might not know in you any spark of ambicion, malice,
deceit, or envy: to the intent that the just men might not so much complain
of the commanding of the common wealth, as upon the entertainment and profit
of the same. The Empire of the Greeks, and that of the Romans, were ever
contrary, as well in arms and laws, as in opinions: The Greeks putting their
felicity in eloquence, and we in well doing. I speak this (right honorable
Fathers) to counsel and exhorteye, that when ye be assembled in Senate, ye
do not consume time in disputing and holdyng opinions for the verification of
any thing. For if you will judge without parcialitie and affection, without
great disputation; ye may come to reason. I do remember that being at a lesson
of Appolonius Thyaneus, I heard him say that it was not so expedient that
Senators and Emperors should be skilful and wise, as if they suffered themselves
to be governed by those that were of great skill and knowledge: and verily he
(...) truth. For by that means he prohibited and forbad them, not to arrest
and stand upon their own opinion, whereof they ought to be many times
suspicious: Likewise (...) recommende unto you the Censores, who have charge of
judgment, and the Tribunes, whose office is to attend the affairs of Common
wealth, that they be wise and learned in the laws, expert in the Customs,
provident in Judgments, and ware in their trade of life. For I say unto you,
that a wise man is more available in government of a commonwealth, than a man
of overmuch skill and experience. The form then which ye shall observe in
matters of judgment, shall be thus: That in civil process you keep the law,
and in criminal causes to moderate the same, because heinous, cruel, and
rigorous laws be rather made to amase and fear, than to be observed and kept.
When you give any sentence, ye ought to consider the age of the offenda^t,
when, how, wherefore, with whom, in whose presence, in what time, and how long
ago, for so much as every of these things may either excuse or condenme: which
you ought to (...) and use toward them in like sort as the Gods toward us,
who give us better help and succor, and correct us less than we deserve.
That consideration the judges ought to have, because the offenders do rather
trespass the Gods than men. If then they be forgiven of the Gods for offenses
which they commit, reason it is that we pardon those faults done unto others,
and not unto our selves. In like manner we command you, yt if your enemies do
you any anoiance or injury, not (...) to take revenge, but rather to dissemble
yt same, because many wro^gs be done in the world, which were better to be
(...) than (...). Wherein ye shall have like regard, touching yt (...) the
Senate and Common wealth, that they be not (...) to ambicious or covetous
(...). For there is no beast in the world so pestiferous and benemotis, as that
(...) of man is to the Common wealth, the ambicious I say in commanding, and
the covetous in gathering together. Other things we let pass for this time,
until we have intelligence, how these our commandments be (...). This Letter
shall be red in the chiefess place within the Senate, and afterward pronounced
to the people, that they may both know what (...) (...), and see also what ye
do. The Gods keep you, whom we pray to preserve our mother the City of Rome,
and to send us good (...) in these our wars.


A notable Letter sent from the Roman Senate to the Emperor Traiane, wherein
is declared how sometimes the region of Spain did furnish Rome with gold from
their mines, and now do adorn and garnish the same with Emperors to govern
their Common wealth.
THe sacred Roman Senate, to thee the great Cocceius Traiane new Emperor
Augustus, health in thy Gods and ours, graces everlasting we render to the
immortal Gods, for that thou art in health, which we desire and pray may be
perpetual. We signified unto thy majesty the death of Nerua Cocceius, our
sovereign Lord, and thy predecessor, a man of sincere life, a friend of his
common wealth, and a zealous lover of Justice, wherein also we advertised, that
like as Rome did weep for the cruel life of Domitian, so much the more
bitterly does she bewail the death of thine uncle Nerua, whose council
(although he was very old and diseased) which he gave us lying on his bed,
we loved better, and embraced with greater comfort, than all the enterprises
and deeds done by his predecessors, when they were in health and lusty. And
besides the ordinary mourning used to be done in Rome for princes, we have
caused all recreation and passetime to cease, so well in the common wealth, as
with every of us particularly. We have shut up the Temples and made the Senate
to (...) to do the Gods to understand, how displeasantly we accept the death
of good men. The good old gentleman Nerua died in his house, and was buried in
the field of Mars; he died in debt, and we have paid his debts. He died
calling upon the Gods, and we have canonized him amongs their number, and that
which is most to be noted, he died commending unto us the Common wealth, and
the Common wealth recommending it self unto him. And a little before his
latter gasp, the principal of the holy Senate, and many other of the people,
standing about his bedside, he said: O ye Fathers, I commit unto you the
common wealth and my self also unto the Gods: unto whom I render infinite
thanks, because they have taken from me my children, to be mine heirs, and
have left me Traiane to succeed. You do remember (most dread sovereign
Lord) that the good Emperor Nerua had other successors than your majesty,
of nerer alliance, of greater friendship, more bound by service, and of greter
proof in warfare: Notwithstanding amongs other noble personages, upon you
alone he cast his eyes, reposing in you such opinion and confidence, as to
revive the prowes and valiant faicts of the good Emperor Augustus, by
suppressing in oblivion the insolent faicts of Domitian. When Nerua came unto
the Crown, he found the treasure (...), the Senate in dissension, the people
in commotion, justice not observed, and the Commonwealth overthrown: which you
likewise presently shall find, although otherwise quiet and wholly reformed.
Wherefore we shall be right glad, that you conserve the common wealth in the
state wherein your uncle Nerua left it, considering specially that new Princes
under color to introduce new customs, do overthrow their common wealths.
Fourtene Princes your predecessors in the empire were naturally borne in Rome,
and you are the first stranger Prince. Wherefore we pray the immortal Gods,
(since that the stock of our ancient Caesar's is dead) to send (...) good
Fortune. Out of the country of Spain was wont to (...) to this our Roman
City great abundance of gold silver, steel, lead, tin, from their (...):
but now in place thereof, she gives us Emperors to govern our common
wealths. Since then that thou co^mest of so good a country as Spain is, from
so good a Province as is Vandolosia, and from so excellent a city as Cales is,
of so noble and fortunate a lineage as is Cocceius, and (...) to so noble an
Empire, It is to be supposed that thou will prove good, and not evil. For the
Gods immortal many times do take away their graces from ungrateful men.
Moreover (most excellent Prince) since you wrote unto us the manner and order
what we ought to do: reason it is that we write to you again what you ought to
foresee. And since you have told us, and taught us to obey you, mete it is that
we may know what your pleasure is to command. For that (it may come to
pass) that as you have been brought up in Spayn, and of long time ben absent
from Rome, through following the wars, that not knowing the laws whereunto
we are sworn, and the customs which we have in Rome, Ye command some
thing that may redound to our damage and to your dishonor. And therefore we
account it reason that your Majesty be advertised hereof, and the same
prevented, for so much as Princes oftentimes be negligent of many things, not
for that they will not foresee the same, but rather for want of one that dare
tell them what they ought to do. And therefore we humbly beseech your most
excellent majesty, to extend and show forth your wisdom and prudence, for
that the Romans hearts ben drawn and made pliant rather by favorable
diligence, than by provoked force. Touching the virtue, Justice, may it please
you, to remember the same. For your old uncle Nerua was wont to say, that a
prince for all his magnanimity, valiance, and felicity, if he do not use and
maintain justice, ought not for any other merit to be (...) and (...).
Semblably we make our humble petition, that those commandments which you shall
send and require to be put in execution, be thoroughly established and
observed. For the goodness of the law does not consist in the ordinance, but
in the fulfillyng and accomplishement of the same. We will not also omit to
say unto you (most famous Prince) that you must have patience to suffer the
importunate, and to dissemble with the offenders. For that it is the deed of a
Prince to chastise and punish the wrongs of the common wealth, and (...)
pardon the disobedience done unto him. You send us word by your letters that
you will not come to Rome, until you have finished the German wars. Which
seems unto us to be the determination of a (...) and right noble emperor, for
so much as good Princes such as you be, ought not to desire and chose places of
delight and recreatio^, but rather aspire to seek and win renome and fame. You
command us also to have regard to the veueration of the Temples, and to the
service of the Gods. Which request is just, but very just it were and mete that
your self should do the same. For our service would little prevail, if you
should displease them. You will us also one to love an other, which is the
counsel of a holy and peaceable prince? but know ye, that we shall not be able
to do the same, if you will not love and entreat us all in equal and
indifferent sort. For princes cherishyng and loving some above the rest, do
raise slanders and grudges amongs the people. You likewise recommend unto us,
the poor and the widows: wherein we think that you ought to command the
Collecters of your tributes, that they do not grieve the same, when they gather
your rightes and (...). For greater sin it is to spoil and pill the nedie
sort, than (...) to succor and relieve them. Likewise you do persuade us to be
quiet and (...) in our affairs, which is a persuasion (...) of a prince, not
only yt is just, but also of a pitiful father. In (...) manner you require us
not to be opinionatiue and wilful in the (...), ne affectionate to selfwil,
which shall be done accordingly as you command, and accept it as you say. But
there (...) you ought to think that in grave and (...) (...), the more depely
things (...) debated, yt better they shall be provided and decreed. You bid us
also to (...) yt the Censores be honest of life and rightful in doing justice.
To that we answer that in the same we will have good respect, but it is
expedient that you take heed to them whom you shall name and appoint to those
affairs. For if you do choose them such as they ought to be, no cause shall
rise to reprehende them. Item where you say that we ought to take heed, that
our children commit no offenses to the people, wherein the advice of the
Senate is, that you do draw them away from us, and call them to the Almayne
wars, for as you do know (right souerain prince) that when the public wealth
is exempt, and void of enemies, then the same will begin to be replenished with
youthful vices. Notwithstanding when the wars be far off from Rome, then
the same to them is profitable, because there is nothing which better (...)
common wealths from wicked people, than wars in country strange. Concerning
other things which you write unto us, needful it is not now to recite them,
but only to see them kept. For truly they seem rather to be the laws of
God Apollo him self, than Counsels of a mortal man. The Gods preserve your
Majesty, and grant you good success in those your wars.


These Letters and Epistles, although besides the scope and Nature of a Novel,
yet so worthy to be read and practiced, as no History or other Moral
Precepte more: expressing the great care of a master toward his scholar,
that he should prove no worse being an Emperor, than he showed him self (...)
when he was a Scholar: fearing that if he should govern contrary to his
expectation, or degenerate from the good institution, which in his young years
he embraced, that the blame and slander should rest in (...), that was his
tutour and bringer up. O careful Plutarch, O most happy master, as well for
thine own industry, as for the good success of such a scholar. And O most
fortunate and virtuous Emperor, that could so welbrooke and digest the blissed
persuasions of such a master, and whose mind with the blast of promotion was
not so swollen and puffed, but that it (...) to call him Father and Master,
(...) craving for an instigation of reproof, when he (...) or slipped from the
pathe of reason and duty. And O happy Counsel and Senate, that could so well
like and practice the documentes of such an Emperor.

Of three Amorous Dames.
A notable History of three Amorous Gentlewomen, called LAMIA, FLORA, and
LAIS: conteinyng the suits of noble Princes and other great personages made
unto them, with their answers to diverse demaundes: and the manner of their
death and funerals.

The. xiiij. Nouel.
LEauyng now our moral discourse of a careful Master, a provident Scholar,
of a virtuous Emperor, of a sacred Senate, and uniform magisterie, return we
to the setting forth and description of. iij. arrant honest women, which for
lewdness were famous, and for wicked lyse worthy to be noted with a black
coal, or rather their memory raked up in the dust and cindres of the corpses
vnpure. But as all histories be full of lessons of virtue and vice, as books
sacred and profane describe the lives of good and bad for example sake (...)
yield means to ye posterity, to ensue the one and (...) the other, so have I
thought to intermingle amongst these Nouels the several sorts of either,
that each sex and kind may pike out like the Be of each flower, honey, to
store and furnishe with delights their well disposed mind. I purpose then to
unlace the dissolute lives of three amorouse dames, that with their graces
(...) the greatest princes that ever were: enticed the noble men, and sometimes
procured the wisest and best learned to crave their acquaintance, as by the
sequel hereof shall well appear. These three famous women, (as writers do
witness) were furnished with many goodly graces and gifts of nature, that is
to say, great beauty offace, goodly proporcion of body, large and high
forheads, their breasts placed in comely order, small wasted, fair hands, of
passing cunning to play upon Instruments, a heavenly voice to feign and sing:
(...), their qualities and beauty were more famous, than ever any ye were
borne within the countries of Asia and Europa. They were never beloved of
Prince which did forsake them, nor yet they made request of any thing which was
denied them. They never mocked or flouted man (a thing rare in women of their
condition) ne yet were mocked of any: But their special propreties were to
allure men to love the^: Lamia with her pleasant look and eye, Flora with her
eloquent tongue, and Lais with the grace and sweetness of her singing voice, A
strange thing that he which once was (...) with the love of any of those three,
either too late or never was delivered of the same. They were the richest
Courtizans that ever lived in the world, so long as their life did last, and
after their decease, great monumentes were erected for their remembrance, in
place where they dyed. The most ancient of these three amorous dames was
Lamia, who was in the time of king Antigonus, that warfared in the service of
Alexander the great, a valiant gentleman, although not favored by Fortune. This
king Antigonus left behind him a son and heir called Deinetrius, who was
less valiant, but more fortunate than his father, and had been a (...) of
great estimation, if in his youth (...) had acquired friends, and kept the
same, and in his age had not been given to so many vices. This king Demetrius
was in love with Lamia, and presented her with rich gifts and rewards, and
loved her to affectionatly, and in such sort, as in the love of his Lamia, he
seemed rather a (...) than a true lover: for forgetting the gravity and
authority of his person, he did not only give her all such things as she
demanded, but bysides yt he used no more the company of his wife Euxonia. On
a time king Demetrius asking Lamia, what was the thing wherewith a woman was
sonest won. There is nothing (answered she,) which sooner over comes a
woman, than when she sees a man to love her with all his heart, and to sustain
for her sake great pains and passions with long continuance and entier
affection: for to love men by collusion, causes afterward that they be mocked
again. Demetrius asked her further, tell me Lamia, why do diverse women
rather hate than love men? whereunto she answered: The greatest cause why a
woman does hate a man, is, when the man does vaunte and boaste himself of
that which he does not, and performs not the thing which he promises.
Demetrius demanded of her. Tell me Lamia what is the thing wherewith men do
content you best: when we see him (said she) to be discrete in words, and
secret in his deeds. Demetrius asked her further. Tell me Lamia how chances
it ye men be ill matched: because answered Lamia, It is impossible that they be
well married, when the wife is in need, and the husband indiscreet. Demetrius
asked her what was ye cause, that amity between two lovers, was (...)? There is
nothing answered she, that sooner makes cold the love between two lovers, than
when one of them does straye in love, and the woman lover to importunate to
crave. He demanded further. Tell me Lamia, what is the thing that most (...)
the loving man? Not to attain the thing which he desires answered she, and
thinks to lose the thing which he hops to enjoy. Demetrius yet once again
asked her this question. What is that Lamia which most troubles a woman's heart?
There is nothing (answered Lamia) wherewith a woman is more grieved, and makes
her more sad, than to be called ill favored, or that she has no good grace, or
to understand that she is dissolute of life. This lady Lamia, was of judgment
delicate and subtle, although ill ymployed in her: and thereby made all the
world in love with her: and drew all men to her through her fair speech. Now
before she lost the heart of king Demetrius, she haunted of long time the
Uniuersities of Athenes, where she gained great store of money, and brought to
destruction many young men. Plutarch in the life of Demetrius says, yt the
Athenians having presented unto him. (...). C. talents of money for a subsidy
to pay his men of war, he gave all that (...) to his woman Lamia. By means
whereof, the Athenians grudged, and were offended with the king, not for the
loss of their gift, but for yt it was so evil employed. When the king
Demetrius would assure any thing by oath, he swore not by his Gods, ne yet by
his predecessors, but in this sort: As I may be still in the grace of my lady
Lamia, and as her life and mine may end together, so true is this which I say
and do, in this and this sort. One year and two months before the death of
king Demetrius, his friend Lamia died, who sorowed so much her death, as for the
absence and death of her, he caused the Philosophers of Athenes to enter
disputation: Whether the tears and sorrow, which he shed and and took, were
more to be esteemed, than the riches which he spent in her obsequies and
funeral pompes. This amorous gentlewoman Lamia was borne in Argos, a city of
Peloponnesus, by (...) nes, of base parentage, who in her first years haunted
the country of Asia mayor, of very wild and dissolute life, and in ye end came
into Phaenicia. And when yt king Demetrius, had caused her to be buried before
a wyndow joining to his house, his chiefest friends asked him, wherefore he had
entombed her in that place. His answer was this: I loved her so well, and she
likewise me so heartily, as I know not which way to satisfy yt love which she
bare me, and the duty I have to love her again, if not to put her in such
place, as mine eyes may weep every day, and mine heart still lament. Truly
this love was strange, which so mighty a Monarch as Demetrius was, did bear
unto such a notable Curtizan, a woman utterly void of grace, barren of good
works, and without any zeal or spark of virtue as it should appear. But since
we read and know yt none are more given or bent to unreasonable love, than
mighty princes, what should it be demed strange and marvelous, if Demetrius
amongs the (...) do come in place for the love of that most famous woman, if
fame may stretch to either sorts both good and evil? But let us come to yt
second sort, of this infamous gentle woman called Lais. She was of the Isle of
Bithritos, which is in the confines of Graecia, and was the (...) of ye great
Sacrificer of Appollo his temple at Delphos, a man greatly experienced in the
magike art, whereby he prophesied the perdition of his daughter. Now this (...)
Lais was in triumph in the time of the renowned king Pirrhus, a prince very
ambicious to acquire honor, but not very happy to keep the same, who being
young of sixtene or (...) years, came into Italy to make wars against the
Romans. He was the first (as some say) that aranged a camp in order, and made
the Phalanx, the maine square and battle. For before his time, when they came
to enter battle, they assailed confusedly, and out of array gave the onset.
This amorous Lais, continued long time in the camp of King Pyrrhus, and went
with him into Italy, and with him returned from war again. Notwythstanding
her nature was such, as she would never be maintained with one man alone. The
same Lais was so amorous in her conversation, so excellent fair, and of so
comely grace, that if she would have kept her self to one, and been (...) to
one lord or gentleman, (...) was no prince in the world but would have yielded
himself and all that he had at her commandment. Lais from her return out
of Italia into Greece, repaired to the city of Corinth to make her abode there,
where she was pursued by many kings, lords, and princes. Aulus Gellius says
(which I have recited in my former part of the Palace of pleasure the fiftenth
Novel) that the good Philosopher Demosthenes, went from Athenes to Corinth, in
disguised apparel, to see Lais, and to have her company. But before the door
was opened, she sent one to demand. (...). C. Sestercos of silver: (...)
Demosthenes answered: I bye not repentance so dear. And I believe that
Demosthenes spoke those words by following the sentence of Diogenes, who says,
that every beast after such act is heavy and sad. Some writers affirm of
this amorous Lais, that thing which I never read or heard of woman: which is,
that she never showed sign or token of love to that man which was desirous to
do her service: nor was never hated of man that knew her. Whereby we may
comprehend the hap and fortune of that amorous woman. She never showed
semblance of great love to any person, and yet she was beloved of all. If the
amorous Lamia had a good spirit and mind, Lais truly had no less. For in
the art of love, she exceeded all other women of her (...) art and science, as
well in knowledge of love, as to profit in the same. Upon a day a young man of
Corinth demanding of her, what he should say to a woman whom he long time
had loved, and made so great suit, that thereby he was like to fall into
despair. Thou shall say (said Lais) unto her, that since she will not grant
thy request, yet at least wise it might please her to suffer thee to be her
servant, and that she would take in good part the service that thou shall do
unto her. Which request if she do grant, then hope to atteine the end of thy
attempt, because that we women be of such nature, as opening the mouth to give
some myld and pleasant answer to the amorous person, it is to be thought that
we have given our heart unto the first suter. An other day in the presence of
Lais, one praised the Philosophers of Athenes, saying that they were very
honest personages, and of great skyll and knowledge. Whereunto Lais answered:
I cannot tell what great knowledge they have, nor what science they study, ne
yet what books your Philosophers do read, because that I being a woman and
never was at Athenes, I see them repair hither, and of Philosophers beecome
amorous persons. A Theban knight demanded of Lais, what he might do to enjoy
a lady with whose love he should be surprised: She answered thus. A man
that is desirous of a woman, must follow his suit, serve her and suffer her,
and sometimes to seem as though he had forgotten her. For after that a woman's
heart is moved to love, she regards more the forgetfulness and negligence
used toward her, than she does the service before time (...) unto her. An
other Gentleman of Achaia asked her what he should do to a woman, whom he
suspected that she had (...) her faith. Lais answered, make her believe that
thou think she is very faithful, and take from her the occasions whereby she
has good cause to do the same: For if she do perceive that thou know it,
and dissemblest the matter, she will sooner dye than amend. A ge^tleman of
Palestine at another time inquired of her what he should do to a woman which
he served, and did not esteem the service done unto her, ne yet gave him
thanks for the love which he bare her. Lais said unto him: If thou be
disposed to serve her no longer, let her not perceive that thou have given her
over: For naturally we women be tender to love, and hard to hate. Being
demanded by one of her neighbors what she should do to make her daughter
very wise. She (said Lais) that will have her daughter to be good and honest,
she must from her youth learn her to fear, and in going abroad to haunte little
company, and that she be shamefast and moderate in her talk. An other of her
neighbors inquiring of her what she might do to her daughter which began to
have delight to rome in the field and wander abroad. The remedy (said Lais)
that I find for your daughter disposed to that condition, is, not to suffer
her to be idle, ne yet to be brave and sumptnous in apparel. This amorous
gentlewoman Lais dyed in the city of Corinth, of the age of. lxxij. years,
whose death was of many Matrones desired, and of a great number of amorous
persons lamented.

The third amorous gentlewoman was (...) Flora, which was not so aucient, ne
yet of so great renoume as Lamia and Lais were, whose country also was not so
famous, For she was of Italy, and the other two of Grecia, and although that
Lamia and Lais exceded Flora in antiquity, (...) Flora surmounted them in
lineage and generositie. For Flora was of noble house, although in life less
than chaste. She was of the country of Nola in Campania, issued of certain
Romans, knights very famous in facts of arms and of great industry and
government in the common wealth. When the father and mother of this Flora
deceased, she was of the age of. xb. years, endued with great riches and
singular beauty, and the very orphane of all her kynne, For she had neither
brother left with whom she might soiourne, ne yet uncle to give her good
council. In such wise that like as this young maistres Flora had youth, riches,
liberty and beauty, even so there wanted neither bauds nor Pandores to (...)
her to fall, and allure her to folly. Flora seeing her self beset in this wise,
she determined to go into the Afric wars, where she hazarded both her
person and her honor. This dame flourished and tryumphed in the time of the
first Punique wars, when the Consul Mamillus was sent to Carthage, who
dispended more money upon the love of Flora, than he did upon the chase and
pursuit of his (...). This amorous lady Flora had a writing and title fixed
upon her gate, the effect where of was this: King, Prince, Dictator, Consul,
Censor, high Bishop, and Questor may knock and come in. In that writing Flora
named neither Emperor nor Caesar, because those two most noble names were long
time after created by the Romans. This amorous Flora would never abandon her
person, but with gentlemen of great house, or of great dignity and riches. For
she was wont to say, that a woman of passing beauty should be so much esteemed
as she does esteem and set by her self. Lais and Flora were of contrary
manners and conditions. For Lais would first be paid, before she yielded the
use of her body: but Flora without any semblance of desire either of gold or
silver was contented to be ruled by those with whom she committed the fact.
Whereof upon a day being demanded the question, she answered: I give my body to
Princes and noble Barons, that they may deal with me like gentlemen. For I
swear unto you by the Goddess Venus, that never man gave me so little, but
that I had more than I looked for, and the double of that which I could demand.
This amorous lady Flora was wont many times to say, that a wise woman (or more
aptly to term her a subtle wench) ought not to demand reward of her lover
for the acceptable pleasure which she does him, but rather for the love which
she bears him, because that all things in the world have a certain price,
except love, which cannot be paid or recompensed but with love. All the
Ambassadors of the world, which had access into Italy, made so great report
of the beauty and generositie of Flora, as they did of the Roman common
wealth, because it seemed to be a monstrous thing to see the riches of her
house, her trayue, her beauty, the princes and great lords by whom she was
required, and the presents and gifts that were given unto her. This amorous
Flora had a continual regard to the noble house whereof she came, touching the
magnificence and state of her service. For albeit that she was but a common
woman, yet she was served and honored like a great lady. That day wherein she
rode about the city of Rome, she gave occasion to be spoken of a whole month
after, one inquiring of an other what great Roman lords they were that kept her
company: Whose men they were that waighted upon her: And whose livery they
ware? What ladies they were that rode in her train: the bravery of her
apparel: her great beauty and port, and the words spoken by the amorous
gentlemen in that troop were not unremembered. When this maistres Flora wared
old, a young and beautiful gentleman of Corinth, demanded her to (...), to
whom she answered: I know well that thou will not marie, the three score
years which Flora has, but rather thou (...) to have ye twelve hundred
thousand Sestercias which she has in her house. Content thy self therefore my
friend, and get thee home again to Corinth from whence thou (...). For to such
as be of mine age, great honor is borne, and reverence done for the riches and
wealth they have, rather than for marriage. There was never in the Roman
Empire; the like amorous woman that Flora was, endued with so many graces and
queenelike qualities, for she was of noble house, of singular beauty, of comely
personage, discrete in her affairs, and besides all other comely qualities,
very liberal. This maistres Flora spent the most part of her youth in Africa,
Almaine and Gallia (...). And albeit that she would not suffer any other but
great lords to have possession of her body, yet she applied her self to the
spoil of those that were in place, and to the pray of those that came from
the wars. This amorous Flora died when she was of the age of (...). years.
She left for the principal heir of all her goods and (...), the (...) people,
which was esteemed sufficient and able to make new the walls of Rome, and to
(...) and redeem the commonwealth of the same. And because that she was a
Roman, and had made the state thereof her heir, the Romans builded in her
honor a sumptuous Temple, which in memory of Flora, was called (...) and every
year in the memory of her, they celebrated her feast upon the day of her
death: Suctonuis Tranquillus says, that the first feast which the Emperor
Galba the second celebrated within Rome, was ye feast of the amorous Flora,
upon which day it was lawful for men and women, to do what kind of
dishonestie they could devise. And she was esteemed to be the greater saint
which that day showed her self most dissolute and wanton. And because that the
temple Florianum, was dedicated to amorous Flora, the Romans had an opinion,
that all women which upon the same day repaired to the Temple in whorish
apparel, should have the graces and gifts that Flora had. These were the sond
opinions and manners of the ancient, which after their own making and devises
framed Gods and Goddesses, and because the proved unshamefast and rich, a
Temple must be erected, and Sacrifices ordained for her whorish triumphs. But
that noble men and Kings have been rapt and transported with the lurements of
such notorious strumpets, is and has been common in all ages. And commonly
such infamous women be indewed with greatest gifts and graces, the rather to
noosell and dandle their favorers in the lappes of their fading pleasures. But
every of them a most special grace, above the rest. As of a king not long ago
we read that kept three, one the holiest, another the crastiest, and the third
the (...). Two of which properties meet for honest women: although the third
so incident to that kind, as heat to a living body. Cease we then of this
kind, and let us step forth to be acquainted with a lady and a Queen the
Godliest and stoutest, that is remembered in any aun. cient monument or history.

Zenobia Queen of Palmyres.
The life and gestes of the most famous Queen Zenobia, with the letters of the
Emperor (...) to the said Queen, and her stout answer thereunto.

The. xv. Nouel.
ZENOBIA Queen of Palmyres, was a right famous gentlewoman, as diverse
historiographers largely do report and write. Who although she was a gentle
queen, yet a christian princess so worthy of imitation, as she was for her
virtues and (...) facts of (...) praise. She by her wisdom and stoutnesse,
subdued all the empire of the Orient, and resisted the invincible (...). And
for that it is meet and requisite to allege and aduouche reasones by weight,
and words by measure, I will orderly begin to recite the history of that
most famous Queen. Wherefore I say, that about the. 284. Olimpiade, no long
time after the death of the unhappy Emperor Decius, Valerian was chosen
Emperor by the Senate, and (as Trebellius Pollio his historian does describe)
he was a well learned prince, endued with manifold virtues, that for his
special praise, these words be recorded. If all the world had been assembled
to chose a good Prince, they would not have chosen any other but good Valerian.
It is also written of him that in liberality he was noble, in words true, in
talk wary, in promise constant, to his friends familiar, and to his enemies
severe, and which is more to be esteemed, he could not forgette service, nor
yet revenge wrong. It came to pass that in the. (...). year of his reign,
there rose such cruel wars in Asia, that forced he was to go thither in
his (...) person, to resist Sapor king of the Persians, a very valiant man of
war and fortunate in his enterprises, which happiness of his not long time
after the arrival of Valerian into Asia, he manifested and showed. For being
between them such hot and cruel wars, in a skyrmish, through the great
fault of the General, (which had the conduct of the army) the Emperor
Valerian was taken, and brought into the puissance of King Sapor his enemy,
which curssed tyrant so wiekedly used that victory, as he would by no means
put ye Emperor to ransom, toward whom he used such cruelty, that so often
and so many (...), as he was disposed to get up on horseback, he used the
body of old Valerian to serve him for advantage, setting his feet upon the
throat of that aged gentleman. In that miserable office and unhappy
captivity served and dyed the good Emperor Valerian, not without the great
(...) of (...) that knew him, and the ruefull compassion of those that fawe
him: which the Romans considering, and that neither by offer of gold, silver
or other means, they were able to redeem Valerian, they determined to choose
for Emperor his (...) son called Galienus: which they did more for respect
of the father; than for any mind or courage they knew (...) be in the son.
Who afterward showed him self to be (...) different from the conditions of
his father Valerian, being in his entreprises a cowarde, in his promises a
liar, in correction cruel, toward them that served him unthankful, (and
which is worse,) he gave himself to his desires, and yealded place to
sensuality. By means whereof, in his time the Roman Empire, more than in any
other reign, lost most provinces and (...) greatest shame. In factes of war
he was a cowarde, and in government of common wealth, a very weak and
seeble man. Galienus not caring for the state of the Empire, became so
miserable, as the Governors of the same gave over their obedience, and in the
time of his reign, there rose up thirty tirantes, which usurped the same.
Whose names do follow, Cyriades, Posthumus yt younger, Lollius, Victorinus,
Marius, Ingenuus, Regillianus, Aureolus, Macrianus, Machianus the younger,
Quietus, Odenatus, Herodes, Moenius, Ballista, Valens, Piso, Emilianus,
Staturninus, Tetricus, (...) the younger, Trebelianus, (...), Timolaus, Celsus,
Titus, (...), Claudius, Aurelius, and Quintillus, of whom eightene, were
captens and seruiters under the good Emperor Valerian. Such delighte had the
Romans, in that ancient world, to have good Capteins, as were able to be
preferred to be (...). Now in that time the Romans had for their Captein
general, a knight called Odenatus, the prince of Palmerines, a man truly of
great virtue, and of passing industry and hardiness in factes of war. This
Captain Odenatus married a woman that descended of the ancient lineage of the
Ptolomes, sometimes kings of (...), named Zenobia, which (if the historians do
not deceive us) was one of the most famous Women of the world. She had the
heart of Alexander the great, she possessed the riches of Croesus, the
diligence of Pyrrhus, the travel of Haniball, the wary foresight of
Marcellus, and the justice of Traiane, When Zenobia was married to Odenatus, she
had by her other husband, a son called Herodes, and by Odenatus she had two
other, whereof the one was called (...), and the other Ptolomeus And when the
Emperor Valerian was vanquished and taken, Odenatus was not then in the Camp.
For as all men thought, if he had been there, they had not receued so great an
overthrow. So sone as good Odenatus was aduertized of yt defaict of Valerian,
in great haste he marched to yt Roman Camp, that then was in great disorder.
Which with great diligence he reassembled, and reduced the same to order, and
(helped by good Fortune,) (...). days after he recovered all that which
Valerian had lost, making ye Persian king to (...), by means whereof; and for
that Odenatus had taken charge of the army, he wanne among the Romans great
reputation, and truly not without cause: For if in that good time he had not
received the (...), the name and glory of the Romans had taken end in Asia.
During all this time Galienus lived in his delights at Millan, without care or
thought of the common wealth, consuming in his wilful vices, the money that
was (...) for the men of war. Which was ye cause that the governors of the
provinces, and Captens general, seeing him to be so vicious and negligent,
(...) the (...) and armies which they had in charge. Galienus void of all
obedience saving of the Italians and Lombards, the first that rose up against
him were Posthumus in France, Lollianus in Spain, Victorinus in Africa,
Marius in (...), Ingenuus in Germany, Regillianus in Denmark, Aureolus in
Hungary, Macrianus in Mesopotamia and Odenatus in Syria. Before Odenatus rose
against Valerian, Macrianus enjoyed Mesopotamia, and the greatest part of
Syria, whereof Odenatus having intelligence, he marched with his power against
him and killed him, and discomfited all his army. The death of the Tyran
Macrian being known, and that Galienus was so vicious, the armies in Asia
assembled and chose Odenatus Emperor: which election although the Sonate
publicly durst not agree upon, yet secretly they allowed it, because they
received daily news, of the great exploites and deeds of arms done by (...),
and saw on the other side the great continued follies of Galienus. Almost
three years and a half was Odenatus Emperor and lords of all the Orient,
during which time he recovered all the lands and provinces lost by Galienus,
and paid, the Roman army all the arrerages of their wages due, unto them. But
Fortune full of inconstancy, suffered not this good Prince very long to reign.
For having in his house a kinsman of his, named Meonius, to whom he bare great
good will, for that he saw him to be a valiant man of war, although ignorant
of his envy and covetousness: it chanced upon a day as they two rode on
hunting, and galloping after the pursuit of a wild Bore, with the very same
bore spear which Meonius carried to strike the beast, he killed by treason his
good cousin Odenatus. But that murdre was not long time (...). For the
borespeare wherewith he had so cruelly killed ye Emperor his cousin, was
inco^tinently known by the hunters which followed Odenatus: whereupon that day
the head of Meonius was stricken off. And Galienus understanding the death of
Odenatus, gave great rewards and presents to them that brought him the news,
being so joyful as the Romans were angry to understand those pitiful
tidings, because through the good (...) which Odenatus used in Asia, they had
great tra^quillitle and peace thorowout Europa. Now after the death of this
good Emperor Odenatus, the Armies chose one of his two sons to be Emperor
of the Orient: But for that he was young, they chose Zenobia to be Protector
of her son, and gouerner over the said Orient Empire. Who seeing that upon
the decease of Odenatus certain of the East Cuntries began to revolt, she
determined to open her Treasure, reassemble her men of war, and in her own
person to march into the field: where she did such notable enterprises, as
she appalled her enemies, and made the whole world to wonder. About the age
of. xxxv. years Zenobia was widow, being the Tutrix of her children, Regent of
an Empire, and Captain general of the army. In which weighty charge she used
her self so wisely and well, as she acquired no less noble name in Asia,
than Queen Semiramis did in India. Zenobia was constant in that which she took
in hand, true in words, liberal, myide, and severe where she ought to be,
discrete, grave, and secret in her enterprises, albeit she was ambicious. For,
not content with her title of Gouernesse or Regent, she wrote and caused her
self to be called Empress, she loved not to ride upon a Mule, or in a
littor, but greatly esteemed to have great horse in her stable, and to learn
to handle and ride them. When Zenobia went forth of her Tent to see the order
and government of her Camp, she continually did put on her Armure, and was
well guarded with a band of men, so that of a woman, she cared but only for
the name, and in the facts of Arms she craved the title of valiant. The
Captains of her Army, never gave battle, or made assault, they never
skyrmished or did other enterprise of war, but she was present in her own
person, and attempted to show her self more hardy than any of all the
troop, a thing almost incredible in that weak and feeble kind. The said
noble Queen was of stature, big and well proporcioned, her eyes black and
quick, her forehedde large, her stomach and breasts fair and upright, her
face white and ruddy, a little mouth, her teeth so white, as they seemed like a
rank of white pearls, but above all things she was of such excellent spirit
and courage, as she was feared for her stoutnesse, and beloved for her beauty.
And although Zenobia was endued with so great beauty, liberality, riches, and
puissance, yet she was never stained with the blemishe of unchaste life, or
with other banitie: and as her husband Odenatus was wont to say, that after she
felt her self with child, she never suffered him to come nere her, (such was
her great chastity) saying that women ought to marie rather for children than
for pleasure. She was also excellently well learned in the Greek and Latin
tongue. She did never eat but one meal a day. Her talk was very little and
rare. The meat which she used for her repaste, was either yt hanch of a wild
Bore, or else the side of a dear. She could drink no wine, nor abide the
scent thereof. But she was so curious in good and perfect waters, as she would
give so great a price for that, as is ordinarily given for wine: be it never
so excellent. So sone as the Kings of Egipte of Persia, and the Greeks, were
aduertized of the death of Odenatus, they sent their Ambassadors to Zenobia,
as well to visit and comfort her, as to be her confederats and friends. So
much was she feared and (...) for rare virtues sake. The affairs of Zenobia
being in such estate in Asia, the Emperor Galienus died in Lombardie, and the
Romans chose Aurelianus to be Emperor, who although he was of base and
obscure lineage, yet he was of great valiance in factes of arms. When
Aurelianus was chosen (...), he made great preparacion into Asia, to (...)
wars upon Queen Zenobia, and in all his time he never attempted greater
enterprise for the Romans. When he was arrived in Asia, the Emperor proceeded
against the Queen, and she as valiantly defended her self, continually being
between them great alarms and skirmishes. But as Zenobia and her people were
of less travel and of better skyll in knowledge of the Cu^trie, so they did
greater harm and more anoia^ce unto their enemy, and thereof received lesser
damage. The Emperor seeing that he should have much ado to vanquishe Zenobia
by arms, determined to overcome her by gentle words and fair promises: for
which cause he wrote unto her a letter, the tenor whereof ensues.

Aurelianus Emperor of Rome and lord of al Asia, to thee ye right honorable
Zenobia se^deth greting. Although to such rebellious women as thou art, it
should seem uncomely and not decent to make request, yet if thou will seek
aid of my mercy, and render thy self under mine obedience, be assured that
I will do thee honor, and give pardone to thy people. The gold, silver, and
all other riches, within thy Palace I am content thou shall enjoy, together
with the kingdom of Palmyres, which thou may keep during thy life, and
leave after thy death to whom thou shall think good, upon condition
notwithstanding, that thou abandone all thine other Realms and Cuntries which
thou haste in Asia, and acknowledge Rome to be thy superior. Of thy vassals
and subjects of Palmyres, we demand none other obedience, but to be
confederats and friends, so that thou break up thy Camp, wherewith thou make
war in Asia, and disobeyest the city of Rome, we will suffer thee to have a
certain number of men of war, so well for the tui^ion of thy person, as for
the defense of thy kingdom. And thy two children which thou had by thy
husband Odenatus: He whom thou love best shall remain with thee in Asia, and
the other I will carry with me to Rome, not as prisoner, but as hostage and
pledge from thee. The prisoners which thou haste of ours, shall be rendered in
exchange for those which we have of thine, without ransom of either parts. And
by these means thou shall remain honored in Asia, and I contented, will
return to Rome. The Gods be thy defense, and preserve our mother the city of
Rome from all unhappy fortune.

The Queen Zenobia having read the letter of the Emperor Aurelianus, without
fear of the contents, incontinently made such answer as follows.

Zenobia Queen of Palmyres, and Lady of all Asia, and the kingdoms thereof,
to thee Aurelianus the Emperor, health and consolation etc. That thou do
entitle thy self with the Emperor of the Romans I do agree, but to presume
to name thy self lord of the East kingdoms, I say therein thou do
offend. For thou know well, that I alone am Lady Regent of all the Orient,
and the only dame and maistres of ye same. The one part whereof descended unto
me by lawful inheritance from my predecessors, and the other part I have
won by my prowess and deeds of arms. Thou say that if I render obedience
unto thee, thou will do me great honor: To that I answer, that it were a
dishonest part of me, and a deed most unjust, that the Gods having created
Zenobia to comaunde all Asia, she should now begin to be slave and thrall unto
the city of Rome. Semblably, thou say that thou will give and leave me all
the gold, silver, and other riches which I have: Whereunto I answer, that it is
a wicked and fond request, to dispose the goods of another as they were thine
own. But thine eyes shall never see it, ne yet thy hands shall touch it, but
rather I hope in the Gods above to bestow and cry a larges of that which thou
haste at Rome, before thou finger that which I have and possess in Asia.
Truly Aurelianus, the wars which thou make against me, and thy quarrel,
be most unjust before the supernall Gods, and very unreasonable before men,
and I for my part if I have entered or do take arms, it is but to defend my
self and mine. Thy coming then into Asia is for none other purpose, but to
spoil and make havoc of that which an other has. And think not that I am
greatly afraid of yt name of Roman Prince, nor yet of the power of thine huge
army. For if it be in thy hands to give battle, it belongs only to the
gods to give either to thee or me the victory. That I remain in field it is to
me great fame, but thou to fight with a widdowe, ought truly to be
ashamed.

There be come unto mine aid and Camp the Persians, the Medes, the
Agame^nonians, the Irenees, and the Syrians, and with them all the Gods
immortal, who be wont to chastise such proud princes as thou art, and to
help poor widows as I am. And if it so come to pass, that the Gods do
permit and suffer my luck to be such, as thou do bereue me of life and
dispoile me of goods, yet it will be bruted at Rome, and published in Asia, that
the woeful wight Zenobia, was overthrown and slain, in defense of her
patrimony, and for the conservation of her husbands honor. Labor no more then
Aurelianus, to flatter and pray me, nor yet to threaten me: require me no more
to yield and become thy prisoner, nor yet to surrender that which I have: for
by doing that I can, I accomplish that I ought. For it will be said and noysed
through the world, (may it so come to pass as Fortune do not favor me) that
if the Empress Zenobia be captive, she was not yet vanquished. The son
which thou (...) to carry with thee to Rome, truly that request I cannot
abide, and much less do mean to (...) the same, knowing full well that thy
house is stored full of manyfolde vices, where mine is garnished with many
notable Philosophers: Whereby if I leave unto my children no great heaps of
goods, yet they shall be well taught and instructed: For the one half of the
day they spend in Learning, and the other half in exercise of Arms.

For conclusion of thy demand, and final answer thereunto, I pray thee
travel no more by letters to write unto me, ne yet by embassage to spend any
(...) talk, but attend until our controversy be decided rather by force of
arms than by uttered words. The Gods preserve thee.

It is said that Aurelianus, receiving that answer, did rejoice, but when he
had read it, he was greatly offended, which incontinently he made to be
known, by gathering together his Camp, and besieging the City wherein Zenobia
was. And Aurelianus, wroth and outraged with that answer, although his army
was werie and half in despair (by reason of the long wars,) yet he used
such diligence and expedition in the siege of that place, as the (...) was
taken and the city rased: which done, the Emperor Aurelianus returned to
Rome, carrying with him Zenobia, not to do her to death, but to tryumphe over
her. At what time to see that noble Lady go on foot, and march before the
triumphing Chariot bare (...), charged with yt burden of heavy chance, and
her two children by her side: truly it made the Roman Matrons to conceive great
pity, being well known to all the Romans, that neither in valo, rous deeds,
nor yet in virtue or chastity, any man or woman of her time did (...) her. The
days of the triumph being done, all the noble Ladies of Rome assembled and
repaired to Zenobia, and used unto her great and honorable enterteinement,
giving her many goodly presents and rewards. And Zenobia lived in the company
of those noble matrones the space of. x. years before she dyed, in estimation
like a Lucrecia, and in honor like a Cornelia. And if Fortune had accompanied
her personage, so well as virtue and magnanimity, Rome had felt the egrenesse
of her displeasure, and the whole world tasted the sweetness of her regiment.

Euphimia of Corinth.
EVPHIMIA the King of (...) daughter fell in love with ACHARISTO, the servant
of her father, and besides others which required her to marriage, she disdained
PHILON the king of PELOPONESVS, that loved her (...) (...), ACHARISTO
conspiring against the king, was discovered, tormented, and put in prison, and
by means of (...) delivered. The king promised his daughter and kingdom, to
him that presented the head of ACHARISTO. EVPHIMIA so wrought, as he was
presented to the King. The King gave him his daughter to wife, and when he dyed
made him his heir. ACHARISTO began to hate his wife, and condemned her to
death as an adulteress. PHILON delivered her: and upon the suit of her
subjects, she is contented to marie him, and thereby he is made king of Corinth.

The. xv. Nouel.
Constancy in Honest love, (being a perfect virtue, and a precious ornament
to the beloved, indewing (...), besides joy and contentacion, with immortal
same fame and glory,) has in it self these only marks and propertyes to be
known by, Chastity and toleration of adversity: For as the mind is constant
in love, not variable, or given to change, so is the body continent, comely,
honest and (...) of Fortunes plagues. A true constant mind is moved with no
sugared persuasions of friends, is diuerted with no eloquence, terrified with
no threats, is quiet in all motions. The blustering blastes of parents wrath,
can not remove the constant maid from that which she has peculiarly chosen to
her self. The rigorous rage of friends, does not dismay the loving man from
the embracement of her, whom he has amongs the rest selected for his unchanged
feere. A goodly example of constant and noble love this history ensuing
describes, although not like in both, yet in both a semblable constancy. For
Euphimia a Kings daughter, abandoneth the great love borne unto her by Philon,
a young Prince, to love a servant of her fathers, with whom she perseuered in
great constancy, for all his (...) and ungrateful dealings toward her.
Philon seeing his love despised, never married until he married her, whom
afterward he delivered from the false surmised treason of her cancred and
malicious husband, Euphimia fondly married against her fathers will, and there
fore deservedly after wards bare the penance of her fault: And albeit she
declared her self to be constant, yet duty to loving father ought to have
withdrawn her rash and headie love. What dangers do ensue such like cases,
examples be (...), and experience teaches. A great dishonor it is for the
(...) and Gentlewoma^ to disparage her no (...) house with marriage of her
inferior. Yea and great grief to the parents to see their children obstinate
and wilful in careless love. And albeit the (...) Propertius describes the
vehemente love of those that be noble, and have wherewith in love to be (...)
(...), in these verses:

Great is the (...) of Love; the constant mind does (...) (...):
And he that is well fraught with wealth, in Love does much prevail.
Yet the tender damsel or loving child, be they never so noble or rich,
ought to attend the fathers time and choice, and naturally incline to their
(...) and liking, otherwise great harm and detriment ensue: For when the
parents see yt disobedience or rather rebellious mind of their child, their
conceived sorrow for the same, so gnaweth the rooted plant of natural love,
as either it hastneth their untimely death, or else inge^dreth a heap of
melancholy humors: which force them to proclaim (...) and bitter curse
against their (...) fruit, upon whom (if by due regard they had (...) ruled)
they would have pronounced the sweet blessyng that Isaac gave to Jacob, the
mothers best beloved boy: yea and that displeasure may chance to dispossess
them of that, which should have been the only comfort and stay of the future
age. So that negligence of parents (...), and careless heed of youthful head,
breeds double woe, but specially in the not advised child: who tumbleth him
self first into the breach of divine laws, to the cursses of the same, to
parents wrath, to orphans state, to beggars life, and into a sea of manifold
miseries. In whom had obedience ruled, and reason taken place, the heart
might have been (...), the parent well pleased; the life joyfully spent, and
the posterity successively taste the fruits that elders have prepared. What
care and sorrow, (...) what extremitis the foresaid noble Gentlewoman (...),
for not yelding to her fathers mind, the sequel shall at large declare.

There was sometimes in Corinth, a City of (...), a King, which had a daughter
called Euphimia, very tenderly beloved of her father, and being arrived to the
age of marriage, many noble men of Grecia made suit to have her to wife. But
amongs all, Philon the young king of Peloponessus, so fiercely fell in love with
her, as he thought he could no longer live, if he were married to any other.
For which cause her father knowing him to be a King, and of singular beauty,
and that he was far in love with his daughter, would gladly have chosen him to
be his son in law, persuading her that she should live with him a life so
happy as was possible for any noble lady matched with Gentleman, were he never
so honorable. But the daughter by no means would consent unto her fathers
will, alleging unto him diverse and sundry considerations, whereby her nature by
no means would agree, nor heart consent to join with Philon. The king above
al worldly things loved his fair daughter: and albeit he would feign have
brought to pass, that she should have taken him to husband, yet he would not
use the fathers authority, but desired that Love rather than force, should
match his daughter, and therefore for that time was contented to agree unto her
will. There was in the Court a young man, borne of her fathers bondsman, which
hight Acharisto, and was manumised by the King, who made him one of the
Esquiers for his body, and used his service in sundry enterprises of the
wars, and because he was in those affairs very skillful, of bold personage,
in conflictes and (...) very hardy, the King did very much favor him, as well
for that he had defended him from manifold dangers, as also because he had
delivered him from the (...) pretended against him by the king of the
Lacedaemonians. Whose help and valiance, the king used for the murder and
destruction of the said Lacedemonian King. For which valiant enterprise, he
bountifully recompensed him with honorable prefermentes and stately revenues.
Upon this young man, Euphimia fired her amorous eyes, and fell so far in love,
as upon him alone she bent her thoughts, and all her loving cogitations:
Whereof Acharisto being certified, and well espying and marking her amorous
looks, nourished with like flames the fire, wherewith she burned.
Notwithstanding his love was not so (...) bent upon her personage, as his
desire was ambicious for that she should be her fathers only heir, and
therefore thought that he should be a most happy man, above all other of mortal
kind, if he might possess that inheritance. The king perceuing that love,
told his daughter, that she had placed her mind in place so strange, as he
had thought her wisdom would have more warely forseen, and better wayed her
estate and birth, as come of a princely race, and would have demed such love,
far unworthy her degree: requiring her with fatherly words, to withdraw her
settled mind and to join with him in choice of husband, for that he had none
other worldly heir but her, and told her how he meant highly to bestow her
upon such a personage, as a most happy life she should lead, so long as the
destenies were disposed to weaue the web of her predestined life: And
therefore was resolved to espouse her unto that noble Gentleman Philon.
Euphimia hearkened to this vnliked tale, and with vnliked words refused her
fathers hest, protesting unto him such reasons to like effect as she did
before, thereby to draw him from his conceived purpose. whereunto the wise King
having made reply, continuing his intended mind, at length in ragyng words
and stormed mind, he said unto Euphimia: How much the sweeter is the wine, the
sharper is the egred saw thereof. I speak this Parable, for that thou not
knowing or greatly regarding the gentle disposition of thy fathers nature, in
the end may so abuse the same, as where hitherto he has been courteous and
benign, he may become through thy disordered deeds, right sour and sharp:
and without utterance of further talk, departed. Who resting evil content with
that fond fixed love, thought that the next way to remedy the same, was to tell
Acharisto, how (...) he took his presumed fault, and in what heinous part he
conceived his ingratitude, and how for the benefits which liberally he had
bestowed upon him, he had brought and enticed his daughter to love him, that
was far vnagreable her estate. And therefore he called him before him, and
with reasons first declared the duty of a faithful servant to his souerain
Lord, and afterward he said: That if the received benefits were not able to
let him know what were convenient and seemly for his degree, but would
persevere in that which he had begone, he would make him feel the just
displeasure of a displeased Prince: whereby he should repent the time that
ever he was borne of woman's womb. These words of the King seemed grievous to
Acharisto, and not to move him to further anger he seemed as though that
(being fearful of the kings displeasure) he did not love his daughter at
all, but said unto him, that he deserved not to be so rebuked, for that it
lay not in his power to withstand her love, the same proceeding of her own
good will and liberty. And that he for his part never required love: if she
did bend her mind to love him, (...) could not remedy that affection, for
that the freewill of such unbridled appetite rested not in him to reform.
Notwithstanding, because he understood his unwilling mind, (...) from that
time forth would so endeavor himself, as he should well (...) that the
vnstayde mind of the young gentlewoman Euphimia, was not incensed by him, but
voluntarily conceived of her self. You shall do well (said the King) if the
effect proceed according to the promise. And the more acceptable shall the same
be unto me, for that I desire it should so come to pass. The king liked well
these words, although that Acharisto had conceived within (...) plat of his
intended mind, some other treason. For albeit that he affirmed before the
kings own face, that he would not love his daughter, yet knowing the assured
will of the loving gentlewoman, he practiced the marriage, and like an unkind
and wretched man, devised convenient time to kill him. And fully bent to
execute that cruel enterprise, he attempted to corrupt the chiefest men about
him, promising promocions unto some, to some he assured restitucion of
reuenewe, which by fathers fault they had lost before, and to other golden
hills, so that he might attain by slaughter of the King, to (...) a kingly
state and kingdom. Which the sooner he persuaded himself to acquire, if in
secret silence, they could put up that which by general voice they had
agreed. And although they thought themselves in good assurance, that their
enterprise could take no ill success, by reason of their sound and good
discourse debated among them selves for the accomplishement thereof, yet it
fortuned that one of the conspiracy (as commonly in such like traitorous
attemptes it chances) being with his beloved lady, and she making moan that
little commodity succeeded of her love for her advancement, brake out into
these words: Hold thy peace (said he:) for the time will not be long,
before thou shall be one of the chiefest Ladies of this land. How can that
be (said his woman?) No more ado (quod the Gentleman:) Cease from further
questions, and be merry: for we shall enjoy together, a very honorable
and a quiet life. When her Lover was departed, the gentlewoman went to an
other of her gossips very iocunde, and told her what her lover had said: and
she then not able to keep counsel, went and told an other: In such wise as in
the end it came to the cares of the Kings stewards wife, and she imparted the
same unto her husband, who marking those words, like a man of great wisdom
and experience, did verily believe that the same touched the danger of the
Kings person: And as a faithful servant to his lord and master, diligently
harkned to the muttering talk murmured in the court, by him which had told
the same to his beloved lady: and knowing that it proceeded from Acharisto,
which was an (...) and sedicious varlet, and that he with three or four other
his familiars, kept secret company in corners, judged that which he first
coniectured, to be most certain and true. Wherefore determined to move the
King thereof, and upon a day finding him alone, he said unto him, that the
fidelittie and good will wherewith he served him, and the desire which he had
to see him live in long and prosperous estate, made him to attend to the
safegarde of his person, and to hearken unto such as should attempt to danger
the same. For which cause, marking and espying the doings of certain of his
chamber (whose common assemblies and privy whisperings mislyking) he feared
least they conspiring with Acharisto; should work treason, for berieuyng of
his life: and to the intent their endeavors might be prevented, and his safety
foreseen, he thought good to reveal the same to his majesty. Then he told
the King the words that were spoken by the first Gentlewoma^, to one or two of
her companions, and disclosed the presumptions which he (...) seen and
perceived touching the same. Amongs the ill conditions of men, there is nothing
more common than poison, conspiracies, and treason of Princes and great lords:
and therefore every little suspicion presumyng such (...), is a great
demonstration of like mischief. Which made the King to give credit to the
words of his Steward, having for his long experience known him to be
faithful and trusty. And suddenly he thought that Acharisto attempted the
same, that after his death, by marriage of Euphimia, he might be the inheritour
of his kingdom. The belief whereof, and the singular credit which he reposed
in his Steward besides other things, caused him to command the captain of
his Guard to apprehend those. iiii. of whom his Steward told him, and
Acharisto, committing them to several prisons. Then be sent his officers to
examine them, and found upon their confessions, the accusation of his Steward
to be true. But Acharisto, although the whole (...) of the treason was
confessed by those four conspirators that were apprehended, and aduouched to
his face, and for all the torments wherewith he was racked and cruciated, yet
still denied, that either he was author of the enterprise, or partaker of a
treason so wicked. Then the king incontinently caused the four Gentlemen of
his chamber (...) be rewarded, according to the worthiness of their offense
and were put to death, and Acharisto to be repriued in sharp and cruel prison,
until with torments he should be forced to confess that which he knew to be
most certain and true, by the evidence of those that were done to death.
Euphimia for the imprisonment of Acharisto, conceived incredible sorrow, and
vneths could be persuaded, that he would imagine, much less conspire that
(...) fact, as well for the love which Acharisto seemed to bear unto her, as
for the great good will wherewith he was assured that she bare unto him, and
therefore the death of the (...) to be no less grief unto him, than the same
would be to (...) self, the king being her natural and loving father.
Acharisto thought on the other side, that if he might speak with Euphimia, a
way would be found either for his escape, or else for his delivery. Whereupon
Acharisto being in this deliberation, found means to talk with the Iailors
wife, and entreated her to show him so much favor, as to procure Euphimia to
come unto him. She accordingly brought to pass, that the young gentlewoman in
secret wise came to speak with this traitorous varlet, who so sone as he saw
her, sheding from his eyes store of tears, pitifully complaining, said unto
her: I know Euphimia, that the King your father does not enclose me in this
cruel prison, ne yet afflicts me with these miserable torments, for any
suspicion he conceiueth of me for any intended fact, but only for the love
which I bear you, and for the like, (for which I render humble thanks) that
you do bear to me: and because that I am werie of this wretched state, and
know that nothing else can (...) me from this painful life, but only death, I
am determined with mine own propre hands to cut the threede of life wherewith
the destinies hitherto have prolonged the same, that this my brething ghost,
which breaths forth (...) doleful plaintes, may flee into the Skies, to
rest it self among the restfull spirits above, or wandre into (...)
pleasant hellish fields, amongs the shadows of Creusa, Aeneas wife, or else
with the ghost of complaining Dido. But ere I did the same, I made mine humble
prayer to the majesty divine, that he would vouchsafe to show me so much
grace, as before I dye, I might fulfill my (...) eyes with sight of you, whose
image still appears before those greedy Gates, and (...) represents unto my
myndefull heart. Which great desired thing, since God above has granted, I
yield him infinite (...), and since my desteny is such, that such must be the
end of love, I do rejoice that I must dye for your sake, which only is the
cause that the King your father so labors for my death. I need not to
molest you with the false evidence given against me, up those malicious
vilaines, that be already dead: which only has thus incensed the Kings
wrath and heavy rage against me: whereof I am so free, as woorthily they be
executed for the same. For if it were so, then true it is, (and as lightly you
might believe) ye I never knew the love you bear me, and you likewise did
never know, what love I bare to you: and therefore you may think that so
impossible is the one, as I did ever mean, think, or ymagine any harm or
peril to your fathers person. To be short, I humbly do beseech you to believe,
that so faithfully as man is able to love a woman, so have I loved you: and
that it may please you to be so myndfull of me in this fading life, as I shall
be of you in that life to com. And in saying so, with face all bathed in
tears, he clyped her about the myddle, and fast embracing her said: Thus
taking my last farewell of you (mine only life and joy) I commend you to the
government of the supernall God, and my self to death, to be disposed as
pleases him. Euphimia, which before was not persuaded ye Acharisto was guilty
of that devised treason, now gave full belief and credit to his words, and
weping with him for company, comforted him so well as she could, and bidding
him to be of good chere, she said, that she would seek such means, as for
her sake and love he should not dye. And that before long time did pass, she
would help him out of prison, Acharisto although he uttered by ruful voice
that (...) talk, for remedy to rid him self from prison, yet he did but
(...) all that he spoke, addyng further: Alas Euphimia, do not incur your
fathers wrath to please my mind, suffer me quietly to take that death, which
sinister Fortune and cruel fate has provided to abridge my days. Euphimia
vanquished with inspeakable grief and burning passion of love, said: Ah
Acharisto, the only joy and comfort of my life, do not perce my heart with
such displeasant words. For what should I do in this wretched world, if you
for my sake should suffer death? wherefore put away ye cruel thought, and be
content to save your life, that hereafter in joy and mirth you may spend yt
same. Trusting that if means may be found for your dispatche from hence, we
shall live the rest of our prolonged life together, in sweet and happy days.
For my father is not made of stone of flint, nor yet was nourced of Hircan
Tigre, he is not so malicious but that in time to come, he may (...) made to
know the true discourse of thine innocent life, and hope thou shall atteyne his
favor more than ever thou (...) before, the care whereof only leave to me, and
take no thought thy self, for I make promise upon mine assured faith to bring
the same to pass: Wherefore give over thy conceived grief, and bend thy
self to live so merry a life, as ever gentleman did, trained up in court as
thou have been. I am content said Acharisto thus to do, the Gods forbid that I
should declyne my heart and mind from thy behest, who of thy wonted grace do
seek continuance of my life, but rather sweet Euphimia, than thou should
suffer any danger to perform thy promise, I make request (for the common love
between us both) to leave me in this present dangerous state. Rather would I
lose my life than (...) should hazard the least hear of thy head for my
relief. We shall be both safe enough (answered Euphimia) for my devise
proceeding from a woman's head, has already drawn the plotte of thy
deliverance, and with those words they both did end their talk, whose
trickling tears did rather finishe the same, than willing minds: and either
of them gyuing a kiss unto the Tower wall, wherein Acharisto was fast
shut, Euphimia departed, turmoiled with a thousand amorous pricks, and
ceased not but first of all to corrupt and win the Iaylers wife, whose
husband was sent forth on business of the kings. The conclusion of which
practice was, that when she carried meat to Acharisto, according to the order
appointed, she should feign her self to be violently dispoyled of ye
prison-key by Acharisto, who taking the same from her, should shut her in the
prison and escape, and when her husband did return, she should make compl(...)
of the violence done unto her: according to which devise, the practice was
accomplished. And when her husband returned home, hearing his wife cry out
within the Tower, was meruellously amazed, and understanding that Acharisto was
dead, (ignorant of the policy between his wife and Euphimia,) he fell into
great rage, and spe^delie repaired to the king, and told him what had
chanced. The King thinking that the breach of prison was rather through the
woman's simplicity than purposed malice, did mitigate his displeasure, (...)
forthwith he sent out Scoutes to spy and watch in to what place Acharisto was
gone, whose secret flight, made all their travel to be in vain. Then the
King when he saw that he could not be found, made proclamation throughout his
realm, that who so would bring unto him the head of Acharisto, should have to
wife his only daughter, and after his decease should possess his Kingdom for
dowry of that marriage. Many knights did put themselves in readiness to
themselves that enterprise, and above al, Philon was the chief, not for
gredinesse of the kingdom, but for love which he bare unto the Gentlewoman.
Whereof Acharisto having intelligence, and perceuing that in no place of Europa
he could be safe and sure from danger, for the multitude of them which
pursued him unto death, caused Euphimia to understand the miserable estate
wherein he was, Euphimia which bent her mind, and employed her study for his
safegarde, imparted her love which she bare to Acharisto, to an aged
Gentlewoman, which was her nurse and gouernesse, and besought her yt she would
entreat her son called Sinapus, (one very well beloved of the King) so reach
his help unto her desire, that Acharisto might return to the court again. The
Nurse like a wise woman left no persuasion unspoken, nor counsel unremembered,
which she thought was able to dissuade the young gentlewoman from her conceived
love: but the wound was so deeply made, and her heart so grievously wounded
with the three forked arrows of the little blind archer Cupide, that despising
all the reasons of her beloved nurse, she said, how she was firmly bente
either to run from her father, and to seek out Acharisto, to sustain with
him one equal fortune, or else with her own hands to procure death, if some
remedy were not found to recover the Kings good grace for the return of
Acharisto. The Nurse vanquished with pity of the young maiden, fearyng both
the one and the sort danger that might ensue, sent for Sinapus, and upon
their talk together, Euphimia and he concluded, that Acharisto should be
brought again unto the Court, and that she her self should present him to
the King: wherein should want no kind of diligence until the King did
enterteyne him again for his faithful servant, as he was wont to do. Upon
which resolution, Acharisto was sent for, and being come Sinapus and Euphimia
together with the Nurse told him in what (...) they three had concluded
touching his health and safegarde. Which of him being well lyked, did give
(...) humble thanks: And then Sinapus went unto the King, and told him, that
there was one newely arrived at Corinth, to make a present unto his grace of
the head of Acharisto. At which news the King showed him self so joyful, as if
he had gotten an other Kingdom: and being placed under his cloth of state,
with his Counsel and Princely train about him, telling them the (...) of that
assembly, commanded him that brought those news, to bring the party forth
newely come unto the City to present the head of Acharisto. Then Sinapus
brought Acharisto before the presence of the King, who no sooner looked upon
him, but fell into such a rage, as the fire seemed to flame out of his angry
eyes, and commanded him presentlye to be taken and put to death. But
Acharisto falling (...) upon his knees, humbly besoughte his Majesty to give
him leave (...) speak: But the (...) (...) sufferyng him to utter one word,
(...) him away. Then the Counselors and other Lords of the Court, entreated
his grace to hear him: At whose requests and supplications he (...) to (...)
content. Then Acharisto began to say: Most sacred Prince, and redoubted
Sovereign Lord, the cause of this my presumptuous repair before your
Majesty, is not to show my self guilty of the late beuised conspiracy, ne
yet to crave pardon for the same, but to satisfy your Majesty with that
contented desire, which by proclamation ye have prondunced through your
highness (...) and (...): which is, to offer this head for revenge of the
fault unjustly laid unto my charge by those four, which woorthily have tasted
the deserved pame of their (...). Whersore I am come hither of mine own
accord, to show the love and great desire, which ever I had to serve and
please your Majesty: And for that I would not consume my life in your
displeasure, I make offer of the same to your merciful will and disposition,
chosing rather to die, and leave your majesty satisfied and contented, than to
live in happy state, your princely mind displeased. But desirous that hour
majesty should know mine innocence, I humbly: beseech your grace to hear what
I can say, that my fidelity may be thoroughly understood, and the
wickedness of the (...) mine accusers well wayed and considered. Then he began
to rehearse all the things done by him for the service of his crown and
majesty, and finally into what danger he did put himself, when he killed the
Lacedemonian king, that went about by treason to murder him: which enterprise
might appear unto him to be (...) sure and evident testimony, that he meant
nothing hurtful or preindicial to his highness. And that he cstemed not his
life, when he adventured for his service and sauegarde to employ the same, and
after these alleged causes, he added briefly, that the love which his majesty
knew to be between him and Euphimia his daughter, ought to (...) persuaded
him, that (...) had rather have suffered death himself, than commit a thing
displeasant to Euphimia. And knowing that a more (...) thing could not chance
to her, than the (...) death of her father, he might well think yt he would have
devised the death of a thousand other, rather than that horrible and (...)
deed, such as his greatest enemy would never have done, much less (...)
which was bound unto him by so many received benefits, for whose service and
preseruacion he had dedicated and vowed his life and soul. But if so be his
majesty's rancor and displeasure could not be mitigated but by doing him to
death, he desired yt none of his alleged reasons should be accepted, and
therefore was there ready to sacrifice his life at his majesty's disposition and
pleasure. Acharisto by nature, could tell his tale excedyngly well, and the
more his tongue stood him in service, the greater appeared his eloquence: Which
so pierced the mind of the King, and persuaded the Counselors, and other of
the Court, as he was demed giltlesse of the treason: and the matter was so
debated, and the King entreated to grant him pardon, as he was accounted most
worthy of his favor. Then the King, by the advice of his Counsel, was
persuaded, that by force of his proclamation, his daughter should be given to
Acharisto in marriage, and his Kingdom for a dowry, because he had offered
his own head, according to the effect of the same. So the King repenting him
self that he had offended Acharisto, in the end agreed to the advice of his
counsel, and gave him his daughter to wife. Whereof Euphimia was so joyful, as
they be that atteine the sum of their hearts desire. The father lived one
whole year after this marriage, and Euphimia so pleasant a life for a certain
time, as was possible for any Gentlewoman. Her father was no sooner dead, but
the unkind man, nay rather brute beast, had forgotten all the benefits
received of his kind and loving wise: and having by her only means gotten a
Kingdom, began to hate her so straungely, as he could not abide her sight,
(Such is the property of cancred oblivion, which after it crepeth into
ambicious heads, never has mind of passed amity, ne regards former
benefit, but like a monster and deadly enemy to humane nature, ouerwhelmeth
in his bottomless gulf all piety and kindness) and determined in the end
for recompense of such great good turns, to despoile her of her life. How
think you fair Ladies, was not this a fair reward for the love, the
travails and sorrows sustained for this ingrate and villainous man, by that
royal lady, to save his life, and to take him to husband? Here is manifest (
probatum) that in a vile and servile mind, no virtue, no duty, no received
benefits can be harbored. Here is a lesson for young Gentlewomen to beware how
they contemn and despise the grave advise of their ancient fathers. Here they
may see the damage and hurt that unadvised youth incurreth, when neglecting
their parents holeseme admonitions, they give them selves to the love of such
as be (...) their estate and calling. For what should aile the gentle pucell
borne of gentle blood, but to match her self in like affinity, and not to care
for currish kind, or race of (...). Be there no Gentlemen to be found of
personage and beauty worthy to join in love with them? Be they so precious
in nature, or tender in education as their like can not be vouchsafed to couple
in marriage yoke? Compare the glistering gold to drossie durte, and such is the
difference between gentle and ungentle. But perhaps bringing up may alter
nature, and custom transform defect of birth: As Licurgus the lawemaker did
try between the Currish whelpe and the Spaniell kind, both by training up
running to their contraries, the Spaniel not used to hunte eigre upon the
potage dishe, the other nouseled in that pastyme pursuing his game. But that
Metamorphosis is seldom seen amongs humane sort, and therefore I advise the
gentle kind, to match them selves in equal lotte, and not to trust sir
Customs courtesy in choice of feere. Return we then to unkind Acharisto, who
now in full possession of his desired praio, reuerting to his puddle of carlish
will and cancred nature, after many thousand wrongs done to this most noble
and gentle Queen, accused her to be an adulteress, and as one in deed,
(although most innocent) she was condemned to the merciless fire. Philon, King
of Peloponessus which (as we have said before) loved Euphimia as did the balls
of his own eyes, understanding the cruelty that this wicked man used toward
her, to whom both his life and kingdom did belong, moved with nobility of
mind, determined to declare to Euphimia the inward fervent love which (...)
bare her, and to chastise Acharisto for his ingratitude with due correction.
Wherefore depely debatyng with him self of this adventure, thus he said: Now
is the time Euphimia, that Philon show what faithful love he has ever born
unto thee, and that he deliver thee both from the present danger wherein thou
art, and from the hands of that unkind wretch, that is far unworthy of
such a wife. For if thou had agreed to thy fathers will, and yielded to the
pursuit of him that loved thee best, thou had no need of rescue now, ne
yet been in peril of the wastful flames of fire, which be ready to consume
thy nesh and tender corpse, full tenderly sometimes beloved of thy dear father,
and of thy loving friend Philon. When he had spoken those words, he earnestly
disposed him self upon that enterprise. There was in those days a custom in
Corinth, that they which were condemned to death, were carried. iii. miles forth
of the City, and there the sentence pronounced against them, were put to
execution. Philon having intelligence hereof, did put in readiness a good
troop of horsemen, and being secretly embarked, arrived at Corinth, and
closely the night before Euphimia should be brought to the fire, hard by the
place where the miserable Lady should be burnt, into a wood he conveyed his
people: and so soon as the Sergeants and officers were approached nere the
place with the lady, he issued forth, and did set upon the throng, not
suffering one of them to remain alive, to carry news. When he had delivered
Euphimia from that prcsent danger of her life, and the company dispercled, he
said to the Queen: Now thou may see (fair Queen,) the diversity, between
the disloyalty and unkindness of Acharisto, and the faith and love of Philon.
But for that I mean not to leave his ingratitude unrevenged, thou shalt stays
here, until thou hear news of the due (...) which I shall give him. Those
dire and cruel words foretold of her husbands death, moved her honest and
Princely heart, which by no means could be altered from the gentle nature,
which it had first tasted and received: And although she had suffered mortal
and solemn injury of her unkind husband for manifold benefits, yet (she
good Gentlewoman) would permit no duty of a trusty and faithful wife
unperformed. Wherefore she besoughte Philon upon her knees, not to proceed to
further revenge of Acharisto, telling him, that enough it was for her to have
escaped that present peril, from which he like a Princely Gentleman had
delivered her, and therefore during her life was most bound unto him. Philon
greatly wondered at the goodness of this Lady, howbeit the ingratitude of
that (...) by no means he would suffer to be unpunished. And being
advertised that Acharisto remained in his Palace without any suspicion of this
adventure, banded neither with Guarde or other assurance, committed Euphimia to
safe custody, and suddenly assailed the Palace of Acharisto: And finding the
Gates open, he entered the city, crying out upon the wickedness and treason of
Acharisto. At which words the whole City began to rise, to help Philon in his
enterprise. For there was no state or degree, but abhorred the unkind order of
that variet, toward the noble woman their Queen. Philon aided with the
people, assaulted the Palace, and in short space invaded ye same: and the
Uarlet being apprehended, was put to death. The Corinthians seeing the noble
mind of Philon, and the love which he bare to Euphimia, and knowing that their
late King was disposed to have matched her with Philon, were very willing to
have him to be their king, and that Euphimia should be his wife, supposing that
under the government of a Prince so gentle and valiant, they might live very
happily and ioyefully. Execution done upon that most (...) varlet, Philon
caused the Lady to be conveyed home into her royal Palace. And the people
with humble submission, began to persuade her to marie with that young Prince
Philon. But she which had lodged her thoughts and fixed her mind upon that
caytife, who unnaturally had abused her, would by no means consent to take a
new husband, saying, that the second marriage was not to be allowed in any
woman. And albeit that she knew how greatly she was bound to Philon, as
during life not able to recompense his loving kindness and baliant exployte
performed for her safegarde, yet for all her unhappy fortune, she was minded
still to remain a widow, and well contented that Philon should possess her
whole domynion and kingdom, and she pleased to live his subject: Which state
she said, did like her best. Philon, that not for desire of the Kingdom, but
for love of the lady had attempted that worthy and honorable enterprise,
said unto her: Euphimia, it was only for your sake that I adventured this
dangerous endeavor, to rid you from the slander that might have ensued your
innocent death, and out of the cruel hands of him, whom unworthily you did so
dearly love. No desire of kingdom or worldely glory induced me hereunto: No
care that I had to enlarge the bounds of my country soil pricked the courage
of my mind (that is altogether empty of ambition) but the passion of
careless love, which this long time I have borne you in your happy fathers
days, to whom I made incessant suit: and to your self I was so long a suter,
until I received extreme repulse. For which I vowed a perpetual single life,
until this occasion was offered: the brute whereof when I heard first, so
stirred the mind of your most loving knight, that drousie sleep or greedy
hunger, could not force this restless body to tarry at home, until I
revenged my self upon that vilaine borne, which went about with roasting flames
to consume the innocent flesh of her whom I loved best. And therefore mustred
together my men of arms, and in secret sort embarked our selves and arrived
here. Where we have accomplished the thing we came for, and have settled you
in quiet reign, free from peril of traitorous minds, craving for this my
fact naught else of you but willing mind to be my wife: which (...) you do
refuse, I pass not for rule of your kingdom, ne yet for abode in Corinth, but
mean to leave you to your choice. For satisfied am I, that I have manifested
to the world the greatness of my love, which was so ample as ever King could
bear to virtuous Queen. And so fare well. At which words he made a sign to
his people, that they should ship them selves for return to Poloponessus.
But the Senators and all the people of Corinth seeing the courtesy of Philon,
and how greatly their Queen was bound unto him, fell down upon their knees,
and with joined hands befought her to take him to husband never ceasing from
tears and supplication, until she had consented to their request. Then the
marriage was solemnised with great joy and triumph, and the whole City after
that time, lived in great felicity and quiet, so long as nature lengthened the
days of those two noble Princes.

The Marchionisse of Monferrato.
The Marchionisse of MONFERRATO, with a banquet of hens, and certain pleasant
words, repressed the fond love of PHILIP the French King.

The. xvj. Nouel.
GOod Euphimia (as you have heard) did fondly apply her love upon a servile
man, who though bred up in Court, where trayuyng and use does commonly alter the
rude conditions of such as be interteyned there, yet void of all
gentleness, and frustrate of natures sweetness in that courteous kind, as
not exchaungyng native (...) for noble advancement, returned to his hoggish
soil, and walowed in the durtie filthe of Inhumanitie, whose nature might well
with Forke or Staff be expelled, but home again it would have come, as
Horace pleads in his Epistles. O noble Gentlewoman, that mildly suffered the
displeasure of the good King her father, who would feign have dissuaded her
from that unseemly match, to join with a young Prince, a King, a Gentleman of
great perfection: And O pestilent Carle, being beloved of so honorable a
pucell, that for treason discharged thy head from the block, and of a donghill
slave preferred thee to be a King, would for those deserts in the end frame
(...) matter to consume her. With just hatred then did the noble Emperor
Claudius Caesar prosecute those of bond and servile kind that were matched
with the free and noble. Right well knew he that some taste of egrenesse would
rest in such savage fruit, and therefore made a law, that the issue of them
should not have like liberty and pre-eminence, as other had, which agreeably
did couple. What harm such marriage has inferred to diverse states and persons
(to avoid other examples) the former Nouel teaches. Wherefore to end the
same, with bewailing of Euphimia for her unlucky lot, begin we now to glad our
selves with the wise and stout answer of a chaste Marquess, a Gentlewoman
of singular beauty and discretion, made to the fond demand of a mighty
Monarch, that fondly fell in love with her, and made a reckenyng of that, which
was doubtful to recover. This King by loving her whom he never saw, fared
like the man that in his sleep dreamed that he had in hold, the thing
furthest from him. For the King never saw her, before he heard her praised, and
when he heard her praised, for purpose to win her, he travailed out of his
way, so sure to enjoy her, as if he had never seen her. This history,
although brief, yet shows light to noble dames that be pursued by Princes,
and teaches them with what regard they ought to interteine such suitors.

The Marquess then of Monferrato, a city in Italy, being a Gentleman of
great prowess and valiance, was appointed to transfrete the Seas in a general
passage made by the christians, with an huge Army and great furniture. And as
it chanced, upon a day great talk was had in the court of King Philip
surnamed Luscus, (because he was poreblinde) who likewise was making
preparation to depart out of France in the said journey. Report was made by a
Knight which knew the said Marquize, that in all the world there was not the
like married couple, as the Marquize and his wife were, as well because the
Marquize had the fame to be an excellent Gentleman, as also for that his wife
among all the troop of Ladies, that lived in the world that time, was the
fairest and most virtuous: which words so entered the French Kings head, as
suddenly (never seeing her in all his life) he began to love her. And for that
purpose determined to imbarke him self at Genoua, that by travailing that way
by land, he might have good occasion to see the Marchionisse, thinking that
her husband being absent, he might easily obtein that he desired. And as he
had devised, he began his enterprise: who sending al his power before, took his
journey with a mean train of Gentlemen: and being within a days journey of the
Ladies house, he sent her word that the next day he would visit her at
dinner. The sage and discrete Lady joyfully answered the Messanger, that she
would account his coming for a great and singular pleasure, and said that
his grace should be most heartily welcome. Afterward she marvelled why such a
King as he was, would in her husbands absence, come to her house. And in yt
marvel and consideration she was no whit deceived, coniecturyng that, the fame
of her beauty was the cause of his coming. Nevertheless, like a wise Lady
and honest Gentlewoman, she determined to do him honor, and caused the
worshipful of her country such as remained behind, to be assembled, for
advise in all things that were necessary for his intertainement: but the feast
and variety of meats that should be served, she alone took upon her to dispose
and order. Wherefore spedily sending about, and making provision for all the
hens that might be gotten throughout the country, commanded her cooks, of
those hens without other thing what so ever, to prepare diverse services. The
King failed not the next day to come accordingly as he had sent word, and was
with great honor received of the lady: and in beholding her, she seemed unto him
(bisides his imagination comprehended by the former words of the Knight) to be
far more fair, honest and virtuous, than he thought, attributing unto her,
singular praise and commendation. And so much the more his desire was kindled,
as she passed the estimation bruted of her. And after that the King had
withdrawn him self into the chamber ordained and made ready for him, as
appertained to a Prince so great, and that dinner time was come, the King and
Madame the Marchionisse sat together at one boorde, and other according to
their degrees were placed at several tables. The King served with many dishes
and excellent wines, beholding some times the lady Marchionisse, conceived
great delight and pleasure. But viewing the service and meats (although
dressed in diverse sorts) to be but hens, he began to wonder, specially
knowing the soil wherein they were to be so rich and plentiful, as by little
travail, great abundance of foul and veneson might have been provided, and
thought that she had indifferent leisure to chase and hunt, after that he had
sent her word of his coming. Notwithstanding he would not take occasion to
enter into talk of those wants of better chere (her hens only excepted) who
looking upon her, with merry countenance he said unto her: Madame were al these
hens bred in this country without a cock? The Marchionisse which full well
understood the cause of his demand, thinking that God had sent her an apt time
for answer as she desired, boldly answered the King: No and it please your
grace, but of women, albeit in honor and apparel there is some difference,
yet they be al made in this (...) as they be else where. The King hearing her
(...), right well did know the occasion of the bankette of Hens, and whereunto
her words did tend: and considred that to bestow any further talk to so wise
a lady, it were in vain, and that force there could take no place. Like as
unadvisedly he fell in love, so it behooved him of necessity wisely to (...)
the fire for his honor sake, and without any more taunting words, fearing her
revenge, he dined without hope to get other thing of her. And when (...) had
done, to the intent by his sudden departure, he might cover his dishonest
coming, thankyng her for the honor which he had received, and she
reco^mending him to God, he departed to Genoua.

Here may be proved the great difference between wisdom and (...), between
virtue and vice. The King more by lust, than other desire, by circumstances
endeavored to sound the deapth of the ladies mind. She by comely answer
paid him home for his folly. A lively representation of a noble creature, so
well bedecked with virtue as with beauty.

Mistress Dianora.
Mistress DIANORA demanded of (...) ANSALDO a Garden so fair in January, as
in the month of May. Master ANSALDO (by means of an obligation which he
made to a Necromancer) caused the same to be done. The husband agreed with the
Gentlewoman that she should do the pleasure which master ANSALDO required, who
hearing the liberality of the husband, acquitted her of her promise, and the
Necromancer likewise discharged master ANSALDO.

The. xvij. Novel.
OF all things commonly accompanying the manner and trade of man's life, nothing
is more circumspectly to be attended and provided for, than regard and (...)
of honesty: which attire, as it is most excellent and comely, so above all
other vain toys of outward apparel to be preferred. And as honesty has al
other good conditions included in it self, as the same by any means can not
straye out of that tract, trodden before by the steps of that most excellent
virtue: Even so, impossible it is for the party adorned with the same, to
wander one (...) from that (...) path. Wherefore let each wight that traceth
this worldly life, foresee the due observation of all things incident to that
which is honest. Nothing in this life (says Tullie in his oration, for the
Poet Archias) is so much to be desired as Honesty, for the getting whereof all
torments of body, all perilles and dangers (...) death be not to be
regarded. Honesty then being a treasure so precious, what care not only for
the atchieuing, but for the conservation ought to be employed? In the practice
whereof, one special thing ought to be attended, which is, how a vow or
promise ought to be made, or how the estimation of honesty ought to be
hazarded for any thing seem it never so impossible. For what is it that love
and money has not brought to pass? What hard adventures by Jason, what
slight by Alexander the son of King Priamus, what monsters slain and labors
sustained by Hercules, what dangers and exploites some have incurred and other
attempted by diverse? To be short, Nihil est quod non effreno captus amore,
ausit.

As Ouide the Poet says:

Nothing there is, but that the loving man does dare, Surprised with frantike
fit, each deed he does not spare. Wherefore let every wight beware how they
gage their honesty for any enterprise (seem it never so impossible.)
Maistresse Dianora derely beloved of a gentleman, and earnestly assailed, in
the end yielded upon a condition: which if it could be brought to pass (which
she thought impossible) was content to surrender to his love. Who co^sulting
with a Magitian, performed her request: then what followed, and what counsel
her husband gave her, after she had broken the effect of her promise to him,
and what Courtesy was used on all sides, the sequel hereof discloseth.

The country of Frioli although it be cold, yet is it pleasant by reason of
many fair mountains, rivers, and clear springs that are in the same: where
there is a City called Vdina, and in the same sometime dwelling a fair
gentlewoma^ called Mistress Dianora, the wife of Gilberto, a notable rich
(...), a very courteous personage, and of good behavior. This Lady, for her
graces and virtues, was intierly (...) of a Gentleman and great lord, called
master Anfaldo Grandese, who for his liberality and valia^ce in arms, was
famous and well known. And albeit that he loved her (...), seeking all means
possible to be beloved of her, soliciting her many times by Ambassadors, yet
his labor was in vain. And the Lady being offended for his daily suit, and
travail, he for all her refusal and disagreement to his desire, would not
abstain from loving her, but still maintain his importunate suit. She
devising with her self how to rid him away, made a request unto him, so
strange and impossible, (in her judgment) as he was not hable to bring the
same to pass. And upon a day she said unto an old woman, (the which came
often times to sue unto her in his (...)) these words: Good wife, thou have
many times assured me, that Master Ansaldo does love me above all other, and
thou haste offered unto me marvelous gifts and presents in his name: All
which I have refused, upon consideration, that I mind not to favor or love
him for his goods: but if thou can (...) by warrantize, or other probable
argument, that he loves me so much as thou say, I will condescend without
fail to love him again, and to do the thing that it shall please him to
command me. Therefore if he will assure me to do that thing which I shall
require him to do, tell him that I am at his commandment. What is that
madame (said the old woman) that you desire? The thing which I demand
(answered the Gentlewoman) is, that he should cause to be made here without
the City, during the month of (...) next coming, a Garden full of green
herbs, flowers, and (...), bespred with leaves, even as it were in the month
of May: And if so be that he do it not, then let him never send thee or any
other unto me again: for if afterward he be importunat upon me, like as I have
hitherto kept it close from my husband and parents, (...) so complaining unto
them, I will assaye to be dispatched from his long and tedious suit. When the
Knight understood that request, and the offer that his Mystresse made him
(although it seemed a thing very difficult and almost impossible to be done)
knowing very well that she did the same for none other purpose, but only to
put him out of hope that ever he should enjoy her, he determined
notwithstanding, to prove what he was able to do. And for that purpose sent to
seek in many places of the world, if there were any man that could assist him
and give him counsel therein. In the end there was one found that offered to do
it (if he were well waged thereunto) by the art of Necromancie, with whom
master Ansaldo bargained for a great sum of money. The^ he expected the
month of (...) with great devotion, which being come, even when the coldest
wether was, and that all places were full of snow and ice, this Necromancer
used his art in such sort, as in the night after the holy days of Christmasse,
in a fair meadow adjoining to yt city, there appeared in the morning (as they
can testify that saw the same) one of the fairest gardens that ever any man
saw, full of herbs, trees, and fruits of al sorts: which when (...) Ansaldo
had seen, God knows if he were glad or not: and incontinently caused to be
gathered the fairest fruits and flowers that were there, and secretly sent the
same to his friend, inuiting her to come and see the Garden which she had
procured him to make, to the intent thereby she might know the love that he
bare her, and to remember the promise which she had made him, and confirmed by
oath, that he might from that time forth, esteem her a woman so good as her
promise. When the Gentlewoman saw the flowers and fruits and hearing tell by
report of the strange things that were in that Garden, began to repent her
self of the promise which she had made: but for all her repentance, she
like one desirous to see strange things, went with many other women to see
the same: and having praised it, not without great admiration, she returned
home, the angriest woman that ever was, when she had considered in what sort
she had abused her self by means of that Garden. And her rage was so great,
that she could by no means keep the same so secret or close, but that her
husband must perceive the same, who would needs know of her all the whole
matter. The Gentlewoman a long time kept it secret: in the end she was
constrained to declare unto him the whole matter in order. Her husband hearing
the same was suddenly very angry: afterward considering the pure intent
of his wife, he wisely appeased her, and said: Dianora, it is not the act of
a wise and honest wife to incline her ear to such messages as those be, and
less honest to make any mart or bargain of her honesty with any person,
under what condition soever it be. Words which the heart receives by the ears,
have greater (...) than many do esteem, and there is nothing so difficulte,
but by the amorous is brought to pass. First therefore thou have done evil to
give ear unto such embassage, and afterward for agreement to the bargain.
For the weight of chastity is so ponderous, as by no means it ought to be
laid in balance, either by impossibilities to bo aste and brag thereof, or
else by assurance of their conceived thought to bring it into question, least
in all places the same may be disputed upon, and blemishe with the note of
lightness, the person till that time unspotted: but because I know the purity
of thy heart, I will agree unto thee for discharge of thy promise, which
peradventure some other would not do, moved thereunto for the fear I have of
the Necromancer, who if he see Master Ansaldo to be offended because thou
haste deluded him, may do us some displeasure: wherefore I will that thou go to
master Ansaldo: and if thou can by any means so use thy self (as thine
honor saved) thou may discharge thy promise, I shall commend thy wit: but
if there be no remedy otherwise, for that only time then lend forth thy body
and not thy will. The Gentlewoman hearing her husband so wisely speak, could
do naught else but weep, and said, that she would not agree to his request.
Notwithstanding, it pleased the husband (for all the denial which his wife did
make) that it should be so: by means whereof, the next morning upon the point
of day the Gentlewoman in the homeliest attire she had, with two of her
servants before, and her maid behind, went to the lodging of master Ansaldo,
who when he heard tell that his lover was come to see him, marvelled much, and
rising up, called the Necromancer, and said unto him: My will is, that thou see
how much thine art has prevailed, and going unto her, without any disordinate
lust, he saluted her with reverence, and honestly received her. Then they
entered into a fair chamber, and sitting down before a great fire, he said
unto her these words: Madame, I humbly beseech you, if the love which I have
borne you of longtime, and yet do bear, deserve some recompense, that it
please you to tell me unfeignedly the cause which has made you to come hither
thus early, and with such a company. The shamefast Gentle woman, her eyes full
of tears made answer: Sir, the love which I bear you, nor any promised
faith have brought me hither, but rather the only commandment of my
husband, who has greater respect to the pain and travail of your
disordinate love, than to his own honor or my reputation, who has caused me
to come hither, and by his commandment am ready for this once to satisfy
your pleasure. If Master Ansaldo were abashed at the beginning, he much more
did marvel when he heard the Gentlewoman thus to speak, and moved with the
liberality of her husband, he began to change his heat into compassion,
and said: Mistress God defend if it be true that you do say, that I should
soil the honor of him, which has pity upon my love: and therefore you may
tarry here so long as it shall please you, with such assurance of your
honesty, as if you were my natural sister, and frankly may depart when you be
disposed, upon such condition, that you render in my behalf those thanks unto
your husband which you shall think convenient, for the great liberality which
he has employed upon me, deeming my self henceforth so much bound unto him, as
if I were his brother or servant. The Gentlewoman hearing those words, the best
contented that ever was, said unto him: All the world could never make me
believe (your great honesty considered) that other thing could happen unto me
by my coming hither, than that which presently I see: For which I reckon my
self perpetually bound unto you. And taking her leave, honorably returned in
the aforsaid company home to her husband, and told him what had chanced,
which engendered perfect love and amity between him and master Ansaldo. The
Necromancer to whom master Ansaldo determined to give the price, (...)
between them, seeing the liberality which the husband had used toward
master Ansaldo, and the like of master Ansaldo toward the Gentlewoman s aid:
God defend, that since I have seen the husband liberal of his honor, and
you bountiful of your love and courtesy, but that I be likewise fra^ke in my
reward. For knowing that it is well employed of you, I purpose that you shall
keep it still. The Knighte was ashamed, and would have forced him to take the
whole, or part: but in offering the same, he lost his labor. And the
Necromancer the third day after, having undone his Garden, and desirous to
depart, took his leave.

Thus Ansaldo extinguishing the dishonest love kindled in his heart, for
inioying of his lady, upon consideration of honest charity, and regard of
Courtesy, repressed his wanton mind, and absteined from that, which God
grant that others by like example may refrain.

Mithridanes and Nathan
MITHRIDANES envious of the liberality of NATHAN, and going about to kill
him, spoke unto him unknown, and being infourmed by him self by what means
he might do the same, he found him in a little woodde accordingly as he had
told him, who knowing him, was ashamed, and became his friend.

The. xviij. Nouel.
STrange may seem this following History, and rare among those, in whom the
virtue of liberality ever flourished. Many we read of, that have kept Noble
and bountiful houses, entertainyng guestes, both foreign and free borne,
ple^tifully feasting them with variety of cheer, but to entertain a guest
that aspireth the death of his host, and to cherish him after he knew of it, or
liberally to offer his life, seldom or never we read, or by experience know.
But what moved the (...) to frown at the state and life of Nathan? Even that
(...) pestilent passion Envy, the consumer and deadly monster of all
humanity: who (...) the like (...) and port of his devout host Nathan, and
seeking after equal glory and same, was thorough enuies force for not
atteinyng to the like, driven to imagine how to kill a good and innocent man.
For envy commonly waits upon the virtuous, even as the shadow does the
body. And as the Cantharides (which similitude Plutarche uses) delight in
ripe and prosperous wheat, and crawle in spreding roses, so envy chiefly them
which in virtue and richesse do abound. For had not Nathan been famous for his
goodness, and glorious for liberality, Mithridanes would never have
prosecuted him by envy, nor gone about to berieue his life. He that enuieth
the virtuous and industrious person, may be compared to Dedalus, whom the
Poets feign to murder Telon his apprentice for deuisyng of the Potters wheel.
And Mithridanes disdainefull of Nathans hospitality, would have slain him.
But how liberal the good old man was of his life, and how ashamed
Mithridanes was of his practice, this example at large discourses.

Uery true it is (at lest wise it credit may be given to the words of certain
Genoua merchantes, and of others which have travailed that country) that in
Cataia, there was sometimes a rich Gentleman without comparison, named Nathan,
who having a place or palace joining upon the high way, by which the
trauailers to and from the West and East, were constrained to pass, and having
a noble and liberal heart, desirous by experience to have the same to be
known, and with what nature and quality, it was affected, be assembled diverse
master Masons and Carpenters, and in a short time erected there one of the
stateliest palaces for greatness and riches that ever was seen in that
country, which afterward he caused to be furnished with all things
necessary, honorably to entertain each Gentleman that passed that way and
with a great train of servants he welcomed and accepted such as iourneyed
too and fro. And in this comme^dable custom he perseuered so long, as both in
the East and West parts, report was bruted of his renoume and fame: and being
come to ancient years, not for all that weary of his liberality, it chanced
that his fame flewe to the ears of a young Gentleman called Mithridanes, who in
a Country not far of from his, had his abode and resiance. Mithridanes
knowing himself to be so rich as Nathan, envious of his virtue and liberality,
purposed by some means or other to defame and obscure the same. And having
builded a Palace like to that which Nathan did possess, began to use courtesies
to those which passed too and fro, in outrageous and disordered sort: in such
wise as in little time be purchased great fame. Now it chanced upon a day, as
Mithridanes was alone in the court of his Palace, a poor woman entering in at
one of the gates of the same, craved alms, and had it, and so successively
even to the twelfth and thirtenth time also she returned again, which
Mithridanes perceiving, said unto her: Good wife you come hither very often.
And yet he denied not her alms. The old woman hearing those words, said: O how
marvelous is the liberality of Nathan, whose Palace has. (...). entries by
several gates, so great as this, and daily begging alms there, never made
(...) as though he knew me, and yet the same was never denied me: and being
come hither but (...). times, I have been perceived and reproved: and saying
so, she went her way, and never after came thither again. Mithridanes hearing
these words to proceed from the old woman, fell into a great rage, deeming
the fame reported of Nathan to be a duninution of his own, and said: Ah
wretch, when shall I be able to attain the liberality of Nathans greatest
things? And why then go I about to excel him, when in little matters I am not
able to come near him? Uerily I labor all in vain, if I my self do not rid
him out of this world, sith crooked age is not disposed to dispatch him, I must
therefore do the same with mine own hands. And in that fury making no man privy
to his intent, he rode forth with a small train, and in three days arrived
where Nathan dwelt, and then commanded his men in any wise not to be known
that they came with him, and likewise that they knew him not, but to provide
lodging for themselves, until such time as they had further news from him.
Mithridanes then being arrived about evening, all alone, found Nathan walking
up and down before his fair Palace, without other company then himself, who
in simple attire and garment went forth to meet him. Of whom Mithridanes,
because he knew not Nathan, demanded (...) he could tell him where Nathan
dwelt. Nathan pleasantly made him answer: My son, there is no man in these
quarters that can better tell thee than I, and therefore if thou please, I will
bring thee thither. Mithridanes said, that he should do him a very great
pleasure: but he would not if it were possible be seen or known of Nathan.
And that can I very well do said Nathan, now that I know your mind. Being
then lighted of from his horse, he went with Nathan, who by and by interteined
him with diversity of talk, to his fair Palace. And Nathan incontinently
caused one of his servant to take Mithridanes horse, and said unto him in
his ear, that he should with all speed give order to his household, that none
should tell the young man that he was Nathan, which accordingly was done. But
after they were in the Palace, Nathan brought Mithridanes into a very fair
chamber, that none might see him, except such as he had appoyncted to serve
him: and causing great honor to be done unto him, he himself kept him
company. As they two were together, Mithridanes asked him (to whom he used
conuenable reverence as to his father) what he was? whom (...) answered: I am
one of Nathans poor scruants, that (...) the time of my youth have been
brought up with him, and never advanced me to any thing but to that which you
see. Wherefore, although every man greatly praises him, yet have I no cause
to commend him. These words gave some hope to Mithridanes, by better advise
and surety to execute his wicked intent. And Nathan asked him very (...) what
he was, and for what business he was come thither, offering him help and
counsel in that he was able to do. Mithridanes then paused a while before he
would make him answer: and in the end purposing to put his trust in him,
required with great circumstance of words his faith, and after that his
counsel and aid. Then he wholly discovered what he was, wherefore he was
come, and the cause that moved him. Nathan hearing those words, and the
mischeuous determination of Mithridanes, was changed and troubled in mind,
notwithstanding without making any countenance of displesure, answered him with
bold countenance: Mithridanes, thy father was a Gentleman, and of stout
stomach, from whom so far as I see, thou will not degenerate, by attempting
so great an enterprise as thou have done. I intend to be liberal to each man,
and praise greatly the envy which thou (...) to the virtue of Nathan,
because if there were many such, the world which is now miserable, would
shortly become prosperous and happy: and do make thee promise, that the
intent thou go about, shall be kept secreate, whereunto I can sooner give
counsel, than any great help, and mine advise is this: (...) may see from the
place where (...) (...) be a little (...), about a (...) of a mile hence,
whereunto Nathan in a manner walks every morning, and tarieth there a long
time: there you may (...) find him, and do your pleasure. And if you kill
him, you may go, (to the intent without danger you may return home to your
own house) not that way you came, but by that you see on the left hand lead
out of the woodde, which although it be not so common as the other, yet is the
nearest way home, and safest for you to pass.

When Mithridanes was thus informed, and that Nathan departed from him, he
caused word secretly to be sent to his men, which likewise lodged there, in
what place they should weight for him the next day. And when the day was come,
Nathan not altering from the counsel be gave to Mithridanes, ne changing any
part of the same, went all alone into a little woodde, to receive his death.
When Mithridanes was up, and taken his bow and sweard, (for he had none other
weapons) he mounted upon his horse, and rode to the little woodde, where a
far of (...) (...) Nathan, coming thitherward all alone, and determining
before he would set upon him to see him and hear him speak, made toward him,
and catching him by yt band upon his (...), said unto him: Did (...), thou art
dead. Whereunto Nathan made none other an^swere, but: I have then deserved it.
When Mithridanes heard his voice, and looked him in the face, he knew by and
by that it was he, which had courteously received him, familiarly kept him
company, and faithfully had given him counsel. Whereupon, his fury assuaged, and
his anger converted to shame: By means whereof, throwing down his sword which
he had drawn to strike him, he lighted of from his horse, and did prostrate
himself at Nathan his fathers (...), and said unto him weeping: Imanifestly
perceive right loving father your great liberalltie, and by what policy, you
be come hither to render to me your life. Whereunto I having no right, declared
my self desirous to have the same. But our Lord God, more careful of my deudir
than my self, has even at the very point, when it was most needful, opened
the eyes of mine understanding, which curssed spite and cancred envy had
closed up: and therefore, the more you were ready to gratify my desire, the
greater punishment I knowledge my self to deserve for my fault. Take then of
me if it please you, such vengance as you think meet for mine offense.

Nathan caused Mithridanes to rise up, kissing and embracing him tenderly, then
he said unto him: (...) son, thou nedest not to demand pardon, for the
enterprise done, good or evil as thou list to name it. For thou did not
go about to rid me of my life for any hatred thou did bear me, but only to
be accounted the better. Be assured then of me, and verily believe, that there
is no living man, that I love better than thy self, considering the greatness
of thine heart not inclyned to hoorde or gather together the drossie mucke of
Silver, as the miserable do, but to spend that which is gathered. Be not
ashamed for having a will to kill me, thereby to get renown: For Emperoures
and greatest kings, never streatched forth their power, and racked their
Kealmes, and consequently aspired fame, for other purpose but to kill, not by
murdering one man as thou (...) mean, but of an infinite number, bysides the
burning of Countries, and rasing of Cities. Wherefore, if to make thy self
more famous, thou would have killed me alone, thine enterprise was not new
to be wondered at, but a thing in daily practice. Mithridanes no more excusing
his wicked intent, but praising the honest excuse, which Nathan had devised,
drew near unto him to enter into further talk with him, which was, how he
greatly marvelled, that he durst approach the place, with so little rescue,
where his death was sworn, and what he meant him self to tell the way and
means: wherein he required him to say his mind, for disclosing of the cause.

Whereunto Nathan replied: marvel not Mithridanes, of mine intent and purpose,
for (...) I was at age disposed to mine own free will, and determined to do
that which thou have gone about to do, never any came to me, but I have
contented them (so far as I was hable) of that they did demand. Thou art
come hither with desire to have my life, wherefore seeing that thou did
crave it, I forthwith did mean to give it, that thou alone might not be the
man that should depart from hence without atchieuing thy request: and to
bring to pass that thou myghtest have the same, I gave thee the best Counsel
I could, as well for bereuing of my life, as for enjoying of thine own. And
therefore I say to thee again, and pray thee for to take it, thereby to
content thy self, if thou have any pleasure therein. I do not know which
way better to imploye it. I have all ready kept it four score years, and
have consumed the same in pleasures and delyghtes, and do know by course of
nature in other men, and generallye in all things, that long it can not reast
in breathyng days. Wherefore I think good, that better it is to give, as I
have dailye done, and depart with my Treasures, than keep it till nature
carye it away in despite of my teethe, and maugre that I have. It is a little
gift to give one hundred years, how much less is it then to give (...) or
eighte of those I have to live?

Take it then if it please thee, I thee beseech. For never yet found I man
that did desire the same, ne yet do know when I shall find such one, if that
thy self which (...) desire it, do not take it. And if it chance that I do
find some one, I know full well that so much the longer as I shall (...) the
(...), the less esteemed it shall be, and therefore before the same be vile and
of little price, take it I beseech thee. Mithridanes sore ashamed, said: God
(...), that by separating so dear a thing as is thy life, that I should take
it, or only to desire the same, as I did erst, from which I would not diminish
years, but willingly would of mine own add thereto if I could. Whereunto
Nathan by and by replied. And if thou could, would thou give them? And
would thou cause me do to (...) that which I never did to any man, that is
to say, to take of thy things which never I did of any living person? Yea
verily answered Mithridanes. Then said Nathan: Thou should do then that
which I will tell thee. Thou should remain here in my house so young as thou
art, and should have the name of Nathan, and I would go to thine, and still
be called Mithridanes. Then Mithridanes answered: If I had also so great
experience as thou have, I would not refuse that which thou do offer: but
because I am assured, that my deeds would diminish the renoume of Nathan, I
will not mar that in another, which I can not redress in my self: and
therefore I (...) not take it. After this talk and a great deal more between
them, they repaired to the Palace, upon the request of Nathan, where many days
he did great honor to Mithridanes, incoraging and counselling him, so well as he
could: daily to persevere in his high and great endeavor. And Mithridanes
desirous to return home with his company, Nathan (after yt he had let him well
to know, that he was not able to surpass him in liberality) gave him leave.

Mistress Katherine of Bologna
Master GENTIL of CARISENDI being come from MODENA took a woman out of her
grave that was (...) for dead, who after she was come again, brought forth a
son, which Master GENTIL rendered (...) with the mother to master NICHOLAS
(...) her husband.

The. xix. Nouel.
REading this History, I consider two strange and rare chances: the one a
lyberall and courteous act of an (...) lover toward, his beloved and her
husband, in leaving her untouched, and not dishonored, although in full
puissance to do his pleasure: to her husband or presenting him with (...)
whom he (...) loved, and a new borne child: both supposed to be dead by her
friends, and therefore intombed in grave. The other chance a singular desire
of a gentlewoman, by humble suit for conservation of her honor, although long
time pursued by a gentleman that revived her almost from (...), and thought
utterly to (...) void of life. To praise the one, and to leave the other not
magnified, it were a part of discurtesie: but to extol both with shoutes and
acclamations of infinite praise, no dout but very comme^dable. If comparisons
may be made with Princes of elder years, and not to note those of later, truly
Master Gentil by that his fact, (...) not much inferior to Scipio Affricanus
for sparing the wife of Indibilis, ne yet to king Cyrus for Panthea the (...)
of Abradatas: although both of them not in equal state of love, (as wholly (...)
from that passion) like to master Gentil, who in deed for subduing that grief
and motion, deserves greater praise. For sooner is that torment avoided at the
first assault and pinche, than when it is suffered long to flame and reign in
that yelding portion of man, the heart, which once fed with the (...) of love,
is seldom or never loosed. To do at large to understand ye proof of those
most (...) persons, thus begins the history.

At Bologna a very notable City of Lombardie, there was a Knight of very great
respect for his virtue, named master Gentil Carissendi, who in his youth fell
in love with a gentlewoman called mistress Katherine, the wife of one master
Nicholas Chasennemie. And because during that love, he received a very ill
cou^terchange for his affection that he bare unto that gentlewoman, he went
away (like one desperate) to be the judge and potestate of Modena, whereunto he
was called. About yt time the husband being out of Bologna, and the gentlewoma^
at (...) Manor in the country, about a mile and a half from the City (whither
she went to remain, because she was with child) it chanced (...) she was
(...) surprised with a sickness, which was such and of so great force, as
there was no token of life in her, but rather judged by all Physicians to be a
dead woman. And because that her (...) (...), said that they heard her say,
that she could not be so long time with child, (...) that the infant must be
perfect and ready to be (...), and therefore (...) with some other disease and
(...) that would bring her to her end; as a (...) or other swelling, rising of
gross humors, they thought her a dead woman, and past recovery: wherefore upon
a time she falling into a (...), was verily supposed and left for dead. Who
after they had mourned her death, and bewailed the (...) expiration of (...)
soul, caused her to be buried without (...) of recovery (even as she was in that
ecstasy) in a grave of a church adjoining hard by the house where she dwelt.
Which thing (...) was advertised master Gentil by one of his friends, who
although he was not likely, as he thought, to attain her favor, and in utter
despair thereof, yet it grieved him very much that no better heed was taken
unto her, thinking by diligence and time she would have come to her self
again, saying thus in the end unto him self: How now (...) Katherin, yt death
has wrought, his will with you, and I could never obtein during your life one
simple look from those your glistering eyes, which lately I beheld to my great
overthrow and decay: wherefore now when you cannot defend your self, I may be
bold (you being dead) to steal from you some desired kiss. When he had said
so, being already night, and having taken order that none should know of his
departure, he (...) upon his horse, accompanied with one only servant, and
without tarying any where, arrived at the place where his Lady was buried, and
opening the grave, forthwith he entered in, and laying him self down bisides
her, he approached (...) her face, and many times kissed her, pouring forth
great abundance of tears. But as we see the appetite of man not to be content
except it proceed further (specially of such as be in love) being determined
to tarry no longer there, and to depart, he said: Ah God why should I go no
further, why should I not touch her, why should I not prove whither she be
alive or dead? (...) then with that motion, he felt her (...), and holding his
hand there for a certain time, perceived her heart as it were to pant, and
thereby some life remaining in her. Wherefore so softly as he could, with the
help of his man, he raised her out of the grave: and setting her upon his
horse before him, secretly carried her home to his house at Bologna. The
mother of master Gentil dwelled there, which was a grave and virtuous
gentlewoman, who understanding by her son the whole effect of that chance,
moved with compassion, unknown to any man, placing her before a great fire,
and co^forting her with bathe prepared for the purpose, she recovered life in
the gentlewoman that was supposed to be dead, who so soon as she was come to
her self, threw forth a great sigh, and said: Alas, where am I now? To whom
the good old woman (...) Be of good cheer sweet heart, ye be in a good place.
The gentlewoman having wholly recovered her senses, and looking round about
her, not yet well knowing where she was, and seeing (...) Gentil before her,
prayed his mother to tell her how she came (...). To whom master Gentil
declared in order, what he had done for her, and what means he used to bring
her thither. Whereof making her complaint, and lamenting the little regard and
negligence of her friends, she rendered unto him innumerable thanks. Then she
prayed him for the love which at other times he bare her, and for his (...),
that she might not receive in his house any thing that should be dishonorable
to her person, ne yet to her husband, but so soon as it was day (...) suffer
her to go home to her own house: whereunto (...) Gentil answered: Madame, what
so ever I have desired in time (...), now I purpose never to demand of you
any thing, or to do here in this place or in any other (...), but that I would
to mine (...) sister, since it has pleased God to do me such pleasure, (...)
from death to life to render you to me, in consideration (...) the love that I
have borne you heretofore.) But this good work, which this night I have done
for you, well deferueth some recompense. Wherefore my desire is, that you deny
me not the pleasure which I shall demand: whom the gentlewoman courteously
answered, that she was very ready, so the same were honest and in bir power to
do. Then said master Gentil: Mystresse, all (...) (...) and all they of
Bologna, do believe for a truth that you be dead, wherefore there is none
that looks for you at home: and the pleasure then which I demand, is, that
you will (...) secretly to tarry here with my mother, until I return from
Modena, which shall be with so great expedition as I can: and the cause why I
desire the same, is, for that I intend to make a fair and acceptable present
of you unto your husband in the presence of yt principal of this City. The
gentlewoman knowing hirself to be greatly bound to the Knight, and that his
request was honest; disposed her self to do what he demanded. Albeit she
desired earnestly to rejoice her friends (...) her recovered life, and so
promised upon her faith. And uneaths had she ended her talk, but she felt the
pain of childbirth: wherefore with the aid of the mother of master Gentil, she
tarried not long before she was delivered of a fair son, which greatly
augme^ted the (...) of master Gentil and her. Master Gentil commanded that
she should have all things that were necessary ministered unto her, and that she
should be used as though she were his own wife. Then he (...) returned to
Modena, where when he had a while supplied his office, he returned to Bologna,
and prepared a great feast at his house, the same morning that he arrived, for
diverse gentlemen of the city, amongs (...) Nicholas Chasennemie was one. When
the company of the (...) guests (...), (the gentlewoman in so good health and
liking as (...) she was, and her child well and lusty, he sat down amongs
the^, doing unto them incomparable mirthe and pastime, and served them
bountifully with diverse fortes of meats. When dinner was almost done, having
before told the Gentlewoman what be meant to do, and in what manner she
should behave her self, he began thus to say. My masters, I do remember
that whilom I have heard tell that in the Country of Persia, there was a
goodly custom (as me seems) that when some one was disposed to do great
honor unto his friend, he bad him home to his house, and there showed him the
thing which he loved best, were it wife, woman, daughter, or what so ever it
were: affirming that like as he disdained not to show the same, which
outwardly he loved best, even so he would if it were possible, willingly
discover his own heart: which custom I purpose to observe in this city. Ye
of your (...) have (...) to do me so great honor, as to repair unto this my
simple (...), which (...) I will recompense after the Persian manner, by showing
unto you the thing which I love most dearly above any in this world, or
hereafter shall be able to love so long as my life endures: but before I do the
same, I pray you to tell me your opinion in a doubt which I shall propose.
There was a certain person which in his house had a good and faithful
servant, who became extremely sick, that person without attending the end of
his diseased servant, caused him to be carried into ye midst of the (...)
without any further care for him: In the mean time there (...) a stranger by,
who moved by compassion of the sick servant, bare him home to his own house,
where with great care and diligence, sparing no cost or charge, made him (...)
recover his former health. I would now fain know of you, whither for (...) and
(...) the service of that servant, his first master by good (...) (...)
complain upon the second, (...) he should demannd him again, or by demanding
of him again, the second not disposed to restore him, might (...) any damage.
The gentlemen after many opinions and arguments debated too and (...) amongs
them, and at length all concluding in one mind, gave charge (...) Nicholas
Chasennemie (because he was an eloquent talker) to make the answer: who first
(...) the (...) custom, said that he was, (with the rest) of this opinion,
that the first master had no further title in his servant, having in such
necessity not only forsaken him, but thrown him into the (...), and that for
the good turns which the second master had done him, he ought by good right
to be his: wherefore by keeping him, he did no wrong, (...), or (...) to the
first. All the rest at the Table (whith were right honest persons) said all
together that they were of his opinion. The Knight content with that answer,
and specially because Nicholas Chasonnemie had pronou^ted it, affirmed that he
was likewise of that mind, and afterward he said: Time it is then that I
render unto you the honor which you have done me, in manner accordinglye as I
have promised. Then he called unto him two of his servants, and sent them to
the Gentlewoman, whom he had caused to be apparelled and (...) very
gorgeously, praying her by her presence to content and satisfy all the
company. And she taking in her arms, her little fair son, came into the
hall, accompanied with the two servants, and was placed (as it pleased the
Knight) bisides a very honest Gentleman, and then he said: (...), behold the
thing whyth I love best, and purpose to love aboud all worldly things, whither
I have occasion so to do, your eyes may be judges.

The (...) doing (...) reverence unto her, greatly praised her, and said to the
Knight that there was good reason why she ought to be beloved, Upon which
commendations they began more attentively to behold her, and many of them
would have said and sworn that it had been she in deed if it had not been
thought that she had been dead. But Nicholas beheld her more than the rest,
who very desirous to know what she was, could not forbear (when he saw that
the Knight was a little departed from the place) to ask her whyther she was of
Bologna, or a stranger. When the gentlewoman saw her husband to ask her that
question, she could scarce forbear from making answer, notwithstanding to
atchieue that which was purposed, she held her peace. Another asked her if
that little Boy was hirs: and another if she were the wife of master Gentil, or
any kin unto him: unto whom she gave no answer at all. But when master Gentil
came in, one of the strangers said unto him. Sir this gentle woman is a very
goodly creature, but she seems to be (...). Is it true or not? Sirs said
master Gentil, that is but a little argument of her virtue, for this time to
hold her peace. Tell us then (said he) what is she? That will I do very gladly
said the Knight, under condition that none of you shall remove out of his place
for any thing I speak, until I have ended my tale: which request being
granted, and the table taken up, master Gentil which was set down by the
gentlewoman, said: My masters, this gentlewoman is the loyal and faithful
servant, of whom (...). I propounded the question, whom I have relieved from
amids the street, whither her kin, little caring for her, threw her as a vile
and unprofitable thing: and have by my great care brought to pass, that I
have discharged her from death, upon an affection which God knows to be so
pure and perfect, as of a lump of dead loathsome flesh he has revived so fair
and fresh as you see: but to the intent you may more plainly understand how it
is come to pass, I will open the same in few words. And beginning at the day
when he fell in love with her, he particularly told them, what had (...) til
that time, to the great marvel and admiration of them that heard him, and then
he added these words: By means whereof, if your mind be not changed within
this little time, and specially master Nicholas, of good right she is my wife,
and none by just title can claim her. Whereunto none at al made answer, loking
that he should have proceeded further. In the mean while Nicholas and the rest
that were there, fell into earnest weping. But master Gentil rising from the
board, and taking in his arms the little child, and the gentlewoman by the
hand, went toward Nicholas, and said unto him: Rise up sir gossip, I do not
restore unto thee thy wife, whom thy friends and household did cast into the
strecte, but I will give thee this gentlewoman my gossip, with the little child,
yt is, as I am assured begotten of thee, for whom at the christening I made
answer and promise, and called him Gentil, and do pray thee that she be no
less esteemed of thee (for being in my house almost three months) than she
was before. For I swear by the almighty God, who made me in love with her,
(peradventure that my love might be the cause of her preservation) that she
never lived more honestly with her father, mother, or with thee, than she has
done in company of my mother. When he had said so, he returned toward the
gentlewoman, and said unto her: Mistress, from this time forth, I discharge
you of the promise which you have made me, and leave you to your husband frank
and free. And when he had bestowed the gentlewoman, and the child in the
fathers arms, he returned to his place again. Nicholas joyfully received his
wife and child, for the which so much the more he reioysed, as he was furthest
of from hope of her recovery, rendering innumerable thanks to the Knight and
the rest, who moved with compassion wept for company, greatly praising master
Gentil for that act, who was commended of each man that heard the report
thereof. The Gentlewoman was received into her house with marvelous joy. And
long time after she was gazed upon by the Citizens of Bologna, as a thing to
their great wonder revived again.

Afterward master Gentil continued still a friend unto Nicholas, and unto his
wife and children.

Of M. Thorello and Saladine
SALADINI in the habit of a Merchant, was honorably received into the house
of master THORELLO, who went over the sea, in company of the Christians, and
assigned a term to his wife when she should marry again. He was taken, and
carried to the SOVLDAN to be his Falconer, who knowing him, and suffering him
self to be known, did him great honor. Master THORELLO fell sick, and by
Magique Art, was carried in a night to PAVII, where he found his wife about to
mary again, who knowing him, returned home with him to his own house.

The. xx. Nouel.
VEry comely it is (says Cicero in the second book of his Offices,) that
Noble men's houses should (...) be open to Noble guests and strangers. A
saying by the honorable and other estates to be fixed in sure remembrance,
and accordingly practiced. For hospitality and household intertainment,
heapeth up double gain and commodity. The guest it linketh and knitteth in
fast band of perfect friendship, common familiarity, disport of mind and
pleasant recreation, the poor and needy it feeds, it cherishes, it
provoke in them devout prayers, godly blessings, and service in time of need.
Hospitality is a thing so divine, as in the law of Nature and Christ, it was
well and brotherly observed. Loathe disdained not to receive the Angels, which
were strangers unto him, and by reason of his common use thereof, and their
friendly interteinement, he and his household was delivered from the danger of
the City, escaped temporal fire, and obtained heavenly reward. Abraham was a
friendly host to strangers, and therefore in his old days, and in the
barrein age of his wife Sara, he begat Isaac. Ietro albeit he was an Ethnicke
and unbelieving man, yet liberally entertained Moses, and married him to
Sephora, one of his daughters. The poor widow of Sarepta interteined Helias,
and Simon the Currior disdained not Peter, nor Lydia the purple silk woman
Paul and his fellows. Forget not Hospitality (says the said Apostle
Paul,) for with the same diverse have pleased Angels by receiving them into
their houses. If Paul the true preacher of eternal health, has so commended
keeping of good houses, which by the former term we call hospitality, then it
is a thing to be used amongs those that be able to maintain the same: who
ought with liberal hand frankly to reach bread and victuals to their
acquaintance, but specially to strangers: which wandering in foreign places, be
use^ unable to help them selves, and peradventure in such need, as without
such courtesy, do perish. For the further amplification of which virtue, what
shall I need to remember strange and profane Histories? as of Cimon of
Athens, who was so famous in the same, as the tyrant Crytias, when he wished
for the riches of the Scopades, the victories of Agesilaus, forgatte not also
to crave the liberality of Cimon. Pacuuius also, the Prince of Campania, so
friendly entertained Annibal, as when his son to do the Romans a good turn,
would have killed him as he sat at supper, was stayde by his fathers request
(whom he made privy of his intent before they sat down.) Pacuuius had he not
more regarded the office of hospitality, than the safety of his country,
might full well by that murder, have defended the same from the destruction,
whereunto afterward it fell. Homere reports, that Menelaus fighting a combat
with Paris of Troy made invocation and prayer unto the Gods, that he might be
revenged upon him for the rape of his wife Helena, to the intent the posterity
hearing of his punishment, might fear to polute friendly household
interteinment. Wherefore, since hospitality has been thus put in use in elder
time, practiced in all ages, and the poluters of the same detested and
accurssed, and has notorious commodities incident unto it, I deem it so
worthy to be frequented in noble men and all degrees, as their palaces and
great houses should swarm with guests, and their gates clustring with whole
multitudes of the poor to be satisfied with relief. Such has been the sacred
use and reverent care of ancient time. Such has been the zealous love of
those, whose fields and barnes, closets, and chestes have been stored and
stuffed with worldely wealth, that comparing that golden age, glistering with
piety and virtue, to these our worsse than copper days, cancred with all
corruption, we shall find the match so like, as dark and light, dirt and
Angel gold. Ceasing then of further discourse hereof, this history following
shall elucidate and displaye the mutual benevolence of two noble personages,
the one a mighty Souldan, an ennimie of God, but yet a friend to those that
favored good entertainment and housekeping, the other a gentleman of Pauie, a
rich and liberal merchant, and a friendly welcomer of strangers. The Souldan
demanding the way to Pauie, somewhat digressing from the same, is not only
honorably conveyed to Pauie, and feasted there, but also (...) cherished,
banketted, and rewarded by the said Merchant before his coming thither. The
merchant man desirous to be one of the holy voyage, intended by christian
Princes, passed over the seas, who put to his shifts there through the adverse
luck, received by the Christians, became the Souldans Fawconer, and afterward
known unto him by certain marks and signs, is with greater honor
entertained of the Souldan, and more richly guerdoned, sent home again by
Magike Art to anticipate the marriage of his wife, unto whom he had prefixed a
certain date and term to mary again, if before that time, he did not return.
All which Noble entertainment, and the circumstances thereof, in this manner do
begin.

In the time of the Emperor Frederick the first, the Christians to recover
the Holy land, made a general voyage and passage over the Sea. Saladine a
most virtuous Prince, then Souldan of Babylon, having intelligence thereof, a
certain time before, determined in his own person to see and epsy the
preparation which the Christian Princes made for that passage, the better to
provide for his own, and having put order for his affairs in Egypt, making as
though he would go on Pilgrimage, took his journey in the habit of a
Merchant, accompanied only with two of his chiefest and (...) counselors, and
three servant. And when he had searched and traveled many christian
provinces, and riding through Lombardie to pass over the Mountains, it
chanced that between Millan and Pauie, somewhat late he met with a Gentleman
named master Thorello (...) Istria of Pauie, who with his household, his dogs
and hawks, for his pleasure went to soiorne in one of his manors, that was
delectably placed upon the river of Tesino. And when master Thorello saw them
come, thinking that they were certain gentlemen strangers, he desired to do
them honor. Wherefore Saladine dema^unding of one of master Thorello his men,
how far it was from thence to Pauie, and whether they might come thither time
enough to go in, master Thorello would not suffer his man to speak, but he
him self made answer, saying: Sirs, ye cannot get in to Pauie in time, for
that the gates will be shut before your coming. Than said Saladine: tell us
then we pray you, because we be strangers, where we may lodge this night.
Master Thorello said, that will I willingly do, I was about even presently to
send one of my men that be here, so far as Pauie, about certain business,
him will I appoint to be your guide to a place where you shall have very good
lodging. And calling one of his wysest men unto him, he gave him charge of that
he had to do, and sent him with them, after whom he followed: where
incontinentlye in so good order as he could, caused to be made ready a sumptuous
supper, and the tables to be covered in a pleasant garden. Afterward he went
him self to entertain them. The servant talking with the Gentlemen of many
things, co^ducted them at leisure somewhat out of the way to protract the time,
to his masters house: and so soon as master Thorello espied them, he went to
bid them welcome, saying to them with smiling countenance: Masters ye be
heartily welcome.

Saladine which was a very wise man, well perceived that the Gentleman doubted
they would not have come unto him if he had invited them at their first
meeting, and for that cause, to the intent they should not refuse (...) lodge
at his house, he had pollitiquely caused them to be conducted thither, and
answering to his greeting, said: Sir, if a man may quarrel with them that be
courteous, we may complain of you, who leaving aparte our way which you have
caused somewhat to be lengthened, without deserving your good will, otherwise
than by one only salutation, you have constrained us to take and receive this
your so great courtesy. The wise and well spoken Knight, said: Sir, this
courtesy which you receive of me, in respect of that which belongs unto you,
as by your countenance I may well (...), is very small, but truly out of
Pauie ye could have got no lodging that had been good: and therefore be not
displeased I pray you to be carried out of the way, to have a little better
interteinment: and saying so, his men came forth to receive those strangers,
and when they were lighted, their horses were taken and conveyed into the
stables, and master Thorello carried the three Gentlemen to their chambres,
which he had prepared for them, where their boots were pulled of, and
excellent wine brought forth, somewhat to refresh them before supper: then he
held them with pleasant talk until the hour of supper was come. Saladine and
they which were with him, could all speak Latin, and therefore well
understood, and they likewise understood ache man, by means whereof every of
the^ thought that the Gentleman was the most courteous and best co^ditioned
personage, endued with the most eloquent talk that ever they saw. On the
other side it seemed to master Thorello, that they were the noblest and
Princelike personages, and far more worthy of estimation then he thought
before. Wherefore, he was very angry with him self, that he had no greater
company and better interteinment for them that night, which he purposed to
recompense the next day at dinner. Wherefore he sent one of his me^ to Pauie,
which was not far of from thence, to his wife, which was a very wise and noble
gentlewoman, and afterward he brought them into the garden, where he
curteouslye demanded what they were. To whom Saladine answered: we be
merchants of Cypres, travailing to Paris (...) our business. Then said master
Thorello: I would to God that this country brought forth such gentlemen as the
land of Cypres makes merchants: and so from one talk to a another, until
supper time came. Wherefore he to honor them the better, caused them to sit
down at the Table, every of them according to his degree and place. And there
they were exceadingly well entreated and served in good order, their supper
being far more bountiful than they (...) for. And they sat not long after
that the table was taken away, but master Thorello supposing them to be weary,
caused them to be lodged in gorgeous and costly beds: and he likewise within a
while after went to bed. The servant sent to Pauie, did the message to his
mistress, who not like a woman, with a womanish heart, but like one of
Princely mind, incontinently caused many of her husbands friends and
servant to be sent for. Afterward she made ready a great feast, and invited
the noblest and cheifest Citizens of the City, apparelling her house with
clothe of gold and silk, tapistrie and other furnitures, putting in order all
that which her husband had commanded. The next day in the morning the
Gentlemen rose, with whom master Thorello mounted on horseback, and carrying
with him his Hawks, he brought them to the river, and showed them diverse
flightes. But Saladine demanding where the best lodging was in Pauie, master
Thorello said: I will show you my self, for that I have occasion to go
thither. They believing him, were contented, and rode on their way, and being
about nine of the clock, arrived at the City, thinking they should have been
brought to the best Inn of the town: but master Thorello conveyed them to his
own house, where fifty of the chiefest Citizens, ready to receive them,
suddenly appeared before them. Which Saladine, and they that were with him
perceiving, co^iectured by and by what that did mean, and said: Master
Thorello, this is not the request which we demanded, your entertainment
yesternight was to sumptuous and more than we desired, wherefore give us leave
we pray you to depart. Whom master Thorello answered: My masters, for that
which ye received yesternight I will give thanks to Fortune, and not to you: for
I ouertaking you by the way, forced you in a manner, to make your repair unto
my homely house: but for this morning voyage, I have my self prepared, and
likewise the Gentlemen about you, with whom to refuse to dine, if you think
it courtesy, do as ye please. (...) and his companions vanquished with such
persuasion, lighted, and being received by the gentlemen in loving and courteous
order, were conveyed to their chambers, which were richly furnished for them,
and having put of their riding apparel, and somewhat refreshed them selves,
they came into the hall, where all things were in readiness in triumphant sort.
Then water was brought them to wash, and they placed at the Table, were served
with many delicate meats in magnificent and royal order, in such wise, as if
the Emperor himself had been there, he could not have been better
entertained. And albeit that Saladine and his companio^s were great Lords, and
accustomed to see marvelous things, yet they wondered very much at this,
considering the degree of the Knight, whom they knew to be but a Citizen and
no Prince or great Lord. When dinner was done, and that they had talked a
little together, ye weather waring very hot, the gentlemen of Pauie, (as it
pleased master Thorello) went to take their rest, and he remained with his
three guests: with whom he went into a chamber, where to the intent ye nothing
which he had and loved might be unseen, caused his honest wife to be called
forth: who being very beautiful and well favored, clothed in rich and costly
array, accompanied with her two young sons, which were like to Angels, came
before them, and graciously saluted them. When they saw her, they rose up, and
reverently received her, then they caused her to sit down in the mids of the^,
sporting and dalying with her two fair sons. But after she had pleasantly
entered in talk, she asked the^ of whence they were, and whither they were
going? To whom the Gentlemen made the same answer that they had done before to
master Thorello. Then the gentlewoman said unto them with smiling cheer: I
perceive then, that mine advise being a woman, is come well to pass. And
therefore I pray you, that of your special grace you will do me this pleasure, as
not to refuse or disdain the little present that I shall bring before you, but
that you take it, in consideration that women according to their little
ability, give little things, and that ye regard more the good affection of the
person which offreth the gift, then the balue of the given thing. And causing
to be brought before every of them two fair roabes, the one lined with silk,
and the other with Meneuair, not in fashion of a citizin, or of a merchant, but
Noblemanlike, and (...). Turkey gowns with sleues of taffata, lined with linne^
cloth, she said unto the^: Take I pray you these roabes, with the like whereof
this day I apparelled my husband, and the other things may also serve your
turns, although they be little worth, considering ye ye be far from your
(...), and the greatness of your journey, which you have taken, and have yet to
make, and also for that merchant men love to be neat and (...) in things
appertinent to their bodies. The Gentlemen much marvelled, and plainly knew
that master Thorello was disposed not to sorget any one part of courtesy
toward them, and doubted (by reason of the beauty and richesse of the robes
not marchantlike,) that they should not be known of master Thorello,
notwithstanding one of them answered the Gentlewoman: These be (Gentlewoman)
very great gifts, and ought not lightly to be accepted, if your entreaty did
not constrayne us, against which no denial ought to be made. That done, when
master Thorello returned into the chamber, the Gentlewoman (...) them a Dieu,
and went her way: and then she furnished the servant with diverse other things
necessary for them, and master Thorello obtained by earnest request, that they
should (...) all that day. Wherefore after they had reasted them selves a
while, they did put on their robes, and walked forth on horseback into the
City: and when supper time was come, they were bountifully feasted in
honorable company: and when bed time approached, went to rest. And so soon as
it was day, they rose, and found in stead of their weary hackneyes, three fat
and fair (...), and also the like number of fresh and mighty horses for
their servant: Which Saladine seeing, turned toward his companions, and said
unto the^: I swear by God that there was never a more liberal Gentleman, more
courteous or better conditioned than this is. And if Christian kings for their
part be such, I mean endued with such kingly qualities as this gentleman is,
the Souldan of Babylon shall have enough to do to deal with one, and not to
attend for all those which we see to be in preparation for invasion of his
Country. But seeing that to refuse them or render them again, served to no
purpose, they thanked him very humbly, and got upon their horse, Master
Thorello with many of his friends, accompanied them out of the City a great
piece of the way: And albeit that it much grieved Saladine to depart from
master Thorello (so far he was already in love with him,) yet being
constrained to forgo his company, he prayed him to return, who although very
loath to depart, said unto them: Syrs, I will be gone, since it is your pleasure
I shall so do, and yet I say unto you, that I know not what you be, ne yet
demand to know, but so far as pleases you. But what soever ye be, you shall
not make me believe at this time, that ye be marchantes, and so I bid you
farewell. Saladine having taken his leave of all them that were in company
with master Thorello, answered him: Sir, it may come to pass, that we may
let you see our merchandise, the better to confirm your belefe: And fare you
also heartily well. Saladine then and his companions being departed, assuredly
determined if he lived, and that the wars he looked for did not let him, to
do no less honor to master Thorello, then he had done to him, and fell into
great talk with his companions of him, of his wife and of his things, acts
and deeds, greatly praising all his entertainment. But after he had serched by
great travail all the West parts, imbarking him self and his company, he
returned to Alexandria, and thoroughly informed of his enemies endeavors,
prepared for his defense. Master Thorello returned to Pauie, and mused a long
time what these three were, but he never drew nere, ne yet arrived to (...)
truth. When the time of the appointed passage made by the Christians was come,
and that great preparation generally was made, master Thorello notwithstanding
the (...) and prayers of his wife, was fully bent to go thither, and having
set all things in order for that voyage, and ready to get on horsbacke, he said
unto her whom he perfectlye loved. Sweet wife, I am going as thou see, this
journey, as well for mine honor sake, as for health of my soul. I recommende
unto you our goods and honor. And because I am not so certain of return,
for a thousand accidents that may chance, as I am sure to go, I pray thee to
do me this pleasure, that what so ever chances of me, if thou have no
certain news of my life, that yet thou tarry one year, one month, and one
day before thou marry again, the same term to begin at the day of my
departure. The Gentlewoman which bitterly wept, answered: I know not dear
husband how I shall be able to bear the sorrow wherein you leave me, if you go
away. But if my life be more strong and sharp, than sorrow it self: and whether
you live or die, or what so ever come of you, I will live and die the wife of
master Thorello, and the only spouse of his remembrance. Whereunto master
Thorello said: Sweet wife, I am more than assured that touching your self, it
will prove as you do promise. But you be a young woman, fair, and well allied,
and your virtue is great and well known throughout the Country: by reason
whereof I doubt not, but that many great personages and Gentlemen (if any
suspicion be conceived of my death) will make requests to your brethren and
kindred, from whose pursuit (although you be not disposed,) you can not defend
your self, and it behooves that of force, you please their will, which is the
only reason that moves me to demand that term, and no longer time. The
Gentlewoman said: I will do what I can for fulfilling of my promise. And
albeit in end that I shall be constrained to do otherwise, be assured that I
will obey you in the charge which now you have given me: I humbly thank
almightye God, for that he never brought us into these terms before this time.
Their talk ended, the Gentlewoman weeping, embraced master Thorello, and
drawing a ring from her finger, she gave it him, saying: If it chance that I
die before I see you, remember me when you shall behold the same.

He receiving the ring, got up upon his horse, and taking his leave, went on
his voyage, and arrived at Geuoua, he shipped him self in a Galley, and took
his way, whereunto wind and weather so favored, as within few days he
landed at Acres, and joined with the army of the Christians: wherein began a
great mortality and Plague, during which infection (what so ever was the
cause) either by the industry or fortune of Saladine, the rest of the
Christians that escaped were almost taken and surprised by him, without any
fight or blow stricken. All which were imprisoned in many Cities, and divided
into diverse places, amongs which prisoners master Thorello was one, who was
carried prisoner to Alexandria where being not known, and fearing to be known,
forced of necessity, gave himself to the keeping of Hawks, a quality
wherein he had very good skill, whereby in the end he grew to the acquaintance
of the Souldan, who for that occasion (not knowing him that time) took him out
of prison, and retained him for his Fawconer. Master Thorello which was called
of the Souldan by none other name than Christian, whom he neither knew, ne
yet the Souldan him, had none other thing in his mind and remembrance but
Pauie, and many times assayed to escape and run away. But he never came to the
point. Wherefore diverse Ambassadoures from Genoua being come to Saladine, to
ransom certain of their prisoners, and being ready to return, he thought to
write unto his wife, to let her know that he was alive, and that he would come
home so soon as he could, praying her to tarry his return. Which was the
effect of his letter: very earnestly desiring one of the ambassadoures of his
acquaintance to do so much for him as safely to deliver those letters to yt
hands of the Abbot of S. Pietro in ciel Doro, which was his uncle. And master
Thorello standing upon these terms, it chanced upon a day as Saladine was
talking with him of his Hawks, master Thorello began to smile and to make a
(...) with his mouth, which Saladine being at his house at Pauie did very well
note, by which act Saladine began to remember master Thorello, and earnestly to
view him, and thought that it was he in deed. Wherefore leaving his former
talk, he said: Tell me Christian, of what country art thou in the West parts?
Spy said master Thorello, I am a Lombarde, of a City called Pauie, a poor man
and of mean estate. So soon as Saladine heard that, as assured whereof he
doubted, said to him self: God has given me a time to let this man know how
thankfully I accepted his courtesy that he used toward me, and without any
more words, having caused all his apparel in a chamber to be set in order, he
brought him into the same and said: behold Christian, if amongs al these
roabes, there be any one which thou have seen before. Master Thorello began to
look upon them, and saw those which his wife had given to Saladine: but he
could not believe that it was possible that they should be the same,
notwithstanding he answered: Sir I know them not, albeit my mind gives me
that these twain do resemble the roabes which sometimes I ware, and caused
them to be given to three merchant men that were lodged at my house. Then
Saladine not able to forbear any longer, te^derly embraced him, saying: you be
master Thorello de Istria, and I am one of the three marchantes to whom your
wife gave those roabes: and now the time is come to make you certainly believe
what my merchandise is, as I told you when I departed (...) you that it might
come to pass. Master Thorello hearing those words, began to be both joyful
and ashamed, joyful for that he had entertained such a guest, and ashamed that
his fare and lodging was so simple. To whom Saladine said: master Thorello,
(...) it has pleased God to send you hither, think from henceforth that you
be Lord of this place and not I, and making great cheer, and rejoicing one
with an other, he caused him to be clothed in royal vestures, and brought him
into the presence of all the Noble men of his country: and after he had
rehearsed many things of his valor and commendation, commanded him to be
honored as his own person, of all those which desired to have his favor.
Which thing every man did from that time forth: but above the rest, the two
Lords that were in company with Saladine at his house. The greatness of the
sodein glory wherein master Thorello saw him self, did remove out of his mind
his affairs of Lombardie, and specially, because he hoped that his letters
should trustely be delivered to the hands of his uncle. Now there was in the
camp of the Christians the day wherein they were taken by Saladine, a Gentleman
of Province, which died and was buried, called master Thorello de Dignes, a man
of great estimation: whereby (master Thorello of Istria, known throughout ye
whole army for his nobility and prowess) every man that heard tell that master
Thorello was dead, believed that it was master Thorello de Istria, and not he de
Dignes, and by reason of his taking, the truth whether of them was dead, was
unknown. Wherefore many Italians returned with those news, amongs whom some
were so presumptuous, as they took upon them to say and affirm that they saw
him dead, and were at his burial. Which known to his wife and his friends,
was an occasion of very great and inestimable sorrow, not only to them: but to
all other that knew him.

Uery long it were to tell in what sort, and how great sorrow, heaviness, and
lamentings his wife did utter, who certain months after she had continually
so tormented her self, (and when her grief began to decrease, being demanded
of many great personages of Lombardie,) was counseled by her brothers, and
other of her kin, to mary again. Which thing after she had many times refused,
in very great anguishe and dolor, finally being constrained thereunto, she must
needs follow the minds of her parents. But yet upon condition, that the
nuptials should not be celebrate until such time as she had performed her
promise made to master Thorello. Whilst the affairs of this Gentlewoman were
in those terms at Pauie and the time of her appointment within eight days
approached, it chanced that master Thorello upon a day espied a man in
Alexandria, (which he had seen before, in the company of the Ambassadors of
Genoua,) going into the galley that was bound with them to Genoua: wherefore
causing him to be called, he demanded what voyage they had made, and asked him
when they arrived at Genoua? To whom he said: Sir the Galley made a: very ill
voyage as I heard say in Creta, where I remained behind them, for being near
the coast of Dicilia, there arose a marvelous tempest, which drove the galley
upon the shore of Barbary, and not one of them within board escaped, amongs
whom two of my brethren were likewise drowned. Master Thorello giuyng credit
to the words of this fellow, which were very true, and remembering him self
that the term which he had couenaunted with his wife was almost expired, and
thinking that they could hardly come by the knowledge of any news of him or of
his state, believed verily that his wife was married again, for sorrow whereof he
fell into such melancholy, as he had no lust to eat or drink, and laying him
down upon his bed, determined to die: which so soon as Saladine, (who greatly
loved him) did understand, he came to visit him, and after that he had
(through instant request) known the occasion of his heaviness and disease, he
blamed him very much for that he did no sooner disclose unto him his conceit.
And afterward prayed him to be of good cheer, assuring him if he would, so to
provide, as he should be at Pauie, just at the term which he had assigned to
his wife: and declared unto him the order how. Master Thorello giving credit to
the words of Saladine, and having many times heard say, that it was possible,
and that the like had been many times done, began to comfort him self, and to
use the company of Saladine, who determined fully upon his voyage and return
to Pauie. Then Saladine commanded one of his Necromancers, (whose science
already he had well experienced) that he should devise the means how master
Thorello might be borne to Pauie in one night, upon a bed. Whereunto the
Necromancer answered, that it should be done, but that it behooved for the
better doing thereof, that he should be cast into a sleep. And when Saladine
had given order thereunto, he returned to master Thorello, and finding him fully
purposed to be at Pauie if it were possible at the term which he had assigned;
or if not, to die: said thus unto him.

Master Thorello, if you do heartily love your wife, and doubt least she be
married to an other, God forbid that I should stay you by any manner of means,
because of all the women that ever I saw, she is for manners, comely behavior;
and decent order of apparel, (not remembering her beauty, which is but a
fading flower) me think most worthy to be praised and loved. A gladsome thing
it would have been to me (since fortune sent you hither) that the time which you
and I have to live in this world, we might have spent together, and lived
Lords of the kingdom which I possess, and if God be minded not to do me
that grace, at least (...) since you be determined either to die or to return
to Pauie, at the term which you have appointed, my great desire is, that I
might have known the same in time, to the intent you might have been conducted
thither with such honor and train as your virtues do deserve. Which since God
will not that it be brought to pass, and that you will needs be there
presently, I will send you as I can in manner before expressed. Whereunto master
Thorello said: Sir, the effect (bisides your words) has done me sufficient
knowledge of your good will, which I never deserved, and that which you told
me, I can not believe, so long as life is in me, and therefore am most certain
to die. But since I am so determined, I beseech you to do that which you have
promised out of hand: because to morrow is the last day of the appointment
assigned to my wife. Saladine said, that for a truth the same should be done:
And the next day the Souldan purposing to send him the night following, he
caused to be made ready in a great hall a very fair and rich bed, all quilted
according to their manner (with velvet and clothe of gold, and caused to be
laid over the same, a Couerlet wrought over with borders of very great pearls,
and rich precious stones: which ever afterward was deemed to be an infinite
treasure, and two pillowes sutelike unto that bed: that done, he commanded
that they should inuest master Thorello, (who now was (...)) with a
Sarazineroabe, the richest and fairest thing that ever any man saw, and upon
his head one of his longest bands, wreathen according to their manner, and
being already late in the Evening, he and diverse of his Barons went into the
chamber where master Thorello was, and being set down bisides him, in weeping
wise he began to say: Master Thorello, the time of our separation does now
approach, and because that I am not able to accompany you, ne cause you to be
waited upon, for the quality of the way which you have to pass, I must take
my leave here in this chamber, for which purpose I am come hither. Wherefore
before I bid you farewell, I pray you for the love and friendship that is
between us, that you do remember me if it be possible before our days do end,
after you have given order to your affairs in Lombardie, to come again to see
me before I die, to the end that I being rejoiced with your second visitation,
may be satisfied of the pleasure which I loose this day for your untimely have:
and trusting that it shall come to pass, I pray you let it not be tedious unto
you to visit me with your letters, and to require me in things wherein it may
like you to command, which assuredly I shall accomplish more frankly for
you, than for any other living man.

Master Thorello was not able to retain his tears: wherefore to stay the
same, he answered him in few words, that it was impossible that ever he
should forget his benefits, and his worthy friendship extended upon him, and
that without default he would accomplish what he had commanded, if God did lend
him life and leisure Then Saladine lovingly embracing and kissing him, pouring
forth many tears, bad him farewell, and so went out of the chamber. And all
the other Noble men afterward took their leave likewise of him, and departed
with Saladine into the hall where he had prepared the bed, but being already
late, and the Necromancer attending, and hasting his dispatch, a Physician
brought him a drink, and made him believe that it would fortify and strengthen
him in his journey, causing him to drink the same: which being done, within a
while after he fell a sleep, and so sleeping was borne by the commandment of
Saladine, and laid upon the fair bed, whereupon he placed a rich and goodly
crown of passing price and valor, upon the which he had engraven so plain an
inscription, as afterward it was known that the same was sent by Saladine to
the wife of master Thorello.

After that he put a King upon his finger, which was beset with a Diamonde, so
shining, as it seemed like a flaming torche, the value whereof was hard to be
esteemed. Then he caused to be girte about him, a sword, the furniture and
garnishing whereof, could not easily he valued: and bisides all this, he hong
upon his (...) a Tablet or Brooche beset with stones and Pearls, that the like
was never seen. And afterward he placed on either of his sides, two exceeding
great Golden basens, full of double Ducates, and many Cords of Pearls and
rings, girdles, and other things to tedious to rehearse, wherewith he bedecked
the place about him. Which done, (...) kissed him again, and wylled the
Necromancer to make have. Wherefore incontinently master Thorello, and the bed
in the presence of Saladine was carried out of sight, and Saladine tarried still,
devising and talking of him amongs his Barons. Master Thorello being now laid
in S. Peter's Church at Pauie, according to his request, with all his Jewels and
habillime^ts aforesaid about him, and yet fast a sleep, the Sexten to ring to
Mattens, entered the Church with light in his hand: and chauncing suddenly to
epsy the rich bed, did not only marvel thereat, but also ran away in great
fear. And when the Abbot and the Monks saw that he made such have away, they
were abashed, and asked the cause why he ran so fast? The Sexten told them the
matter. Why how now said the Abbot? Thou art not such a Babe, ne yet so newly
come unto the Church, as thou ought so lightly to be afraid. But let us
go and see what bugge has so terribly frayed thee. And then they lighted many
Torches. And when the Abbot and his Monks were entered the Church, they saw
that wonderful rich bed, and the Gentleman sleeping upon the same. And as they
were in this doubt and fear, beholding the goodly Jewels, and durst not go
near the bed, it chanced that master Thorello awaked, (...) a great sighe.
The Monks so soon as they saw that, and the Abbot with them, ran all away
crying out, God help us, our Lord have mercy upon us.

Master Thorello opened his eyes, and plainly knew by looking round about him,
that he was in the place where he demanded to be of Saladine whereof he was
very glad, and rising up, and viewing particularlye, what he had about him,
albeit he knew before the magnificence of Saladine, now he thought it greater
and better understood the same, than before. But seeing the Monks run away,
and knowing the cause wherefore, he began to call the Abbot by his name, and
entreat him not to be afraid. For he was master Thorello his Neuewe. The
Abbot hearing that, was driven into a greater fear, because he was accounted
to be dead diverse months before: but afterward by diverse arguments,
assured that he was master Thorello, and so often called by his name (making a
sign of the Cross) he went unto him. To whom master Thorello said: Whereof
be you afraid good father? I am alive I thank God, and from beyond the Sea
returned hither. The Abbot (although he had a great bearde, and apparelled
after the guise of Arabie) crossed him self again, and was well assured that
it was he. Then he took him by the hand, and said unto him as follows.

My son thou art welcome home, and marvel not, that we were afraid: for
there is none in all this City, but does certainly believe that thou art dead.
In so much as madame Adalietta thy wife, vanquished with the prayers and
threats of her friends and kin, against her will is betrouthed again, and
this day the espousals shall be done. For the marriage, and all the preparation
necessary for the feast, is ready. Master Thorello rising out of the rich bed,
and rejoicing with the Abbot and all his Monks, prayed every of them not to
speak one word of his coming home, until he had done what he was disposed.

Afterward placing all his rich Jewels in surety and sauegard, he discoursed
unto his uncle what had chanced unto him, till that time. The Abbot joyful for
his fortune, gave thanks to God. Then master Thorello demanded of his uncle,
what he was that was betrouthed to his wife. The Abbot told him. To whom
master Thorello said: Before my return be known, I am desirous to see what
countenance my wife will make at the marriage. And therefore, albeit that the
religious do not use to repair to such feasses, yet I pray you for my sake
take pain to go thither. The Abbot answered that he would willingly do so.
And so soon as it was day, he sent word to the bridegroom, that he, and a
friend of his, would be at the marriage: whereunto the gentleman answered that he
was very glad thereof. When dinner time was come, master Thorello in the habit
and apparel wherein he was, went with the Lord Abbot to the wedding dinner,
where every of them that saw him, did maruellously behold him, but no man knew
him, because the Abbot answered them that inquired, that he was a Sarazene,
sent Ambassador from the Souldan to the French king. Master Thorello was then
placed at a table which was right over against his wife, whom he beheld with
great pleasure and delight, and perceived very well by her face that she was not
well content with that marriage. She likewise beheld him sometimes, not for any
knowledge she had of him, for his great beard and strange attire: the firm
credit and general opinion also that he was dead, chiefly hindered that. But
when master Thorello thought time to prove whether she had any remembrance of
him, be secretly conveyed into his hand, ye ring which she gave him at his
departure, and called a little boy that waited upon her, and said unto him: Go
tell the bride in my behalf, that the custom of my country is, that when any
Stranger (as I am here) is hydden by any new married woman (as she is now,)
for a token of his welcome, she sends unto him the cup wherein she drinks
full of wine, whereof after the stranger has drunk what pleases him, he
covers the cup again, and sends the same to the bryde, who drinks the
rest that remains. The page did his message unto the bride, who like a wise
Gentlewoman well brought up, thinking he had been some great personage, to
declare yt he was welcome, commanded a standing cup all gilt, standing before
her, to be washed clean, and to be filled full of wine, and carried to the
Gentleman, which accordingly was done. Master Thorello having put into his
mouth the aforesaid ring, secretly let fall the same into the cup as he was
drinking, not perceived of any man, to the intent that she drinking the latter
draught, might espy the ring. When he had drunk, he returned the cup unto the
bride, who thankfully received the same. And for that the manner of his
country might be accomplished, when the cup was delivered unto her, she
uncovered the same, and pledging the rest of the wine, beheld the ring, and
without speaking any word, well viewed the same, and knowing that it was the
very ring which she had given to master Thorello, when he departed, took it
out. And (...) (...) mark and look upon him, whom she supposed to be a
stranger, and already knowing him, tried out as though she had been straught
of her wits, throwing down the Table before her: this is my Lord and
husband, this is of troth Master Thorello: and running to the Table where he
sat, without respect to his apparel of cloth of gold, or to any thing that
was upon the table, preassing so near him as she could, embraced him very
hard, not able to remove her hands from about his neck for any thing-that
could be said or done by the company that was there, until Master Thorello
required her to forbear for that present, for so much as she should have
leysur enough to use her further imbracements. Then she left him, and contented
her self for the time: but the (...) and marriage was wholly troubled and
appalled for that sudden chance, and the most part of the guests exceedingly
reioysed for the return of that Noble knight. Then the company being entreated
to sit still, and not to remove, Master Thorello rehearsed in open audience
what had chanced unto him from the day of his departure until that time,
concluding with a petition to the Bridegroom, that had newly espoused his wife,
that he would not be displeased if he took her again. The new married
Gentleman, albeit it grieved him very sore, and thought him self to be mocked,
answered liberally and like a friend, that it was in his power to do with his
own what he thought best. The Gentlewoman drawing of the rings and garland
which she had received of her new husband, did put upon her finger the ring
which she found within the cup, and likewise the Crown that was sent unto her
by Saladine. And the whole troop and assembly leaving the house where they
were, went home with master Thorello and his wife, and there the kin and
friends, and all the Citizens which haunted the same, and regarded it for a
miracle, were with long feasting and great cheer in great joy and triumph.

Master Thorello departing some of his precious Jewels to him that had been at
the cost of the marriage, likewise to the Lord Abbot and diverse others, and
having done Saladine to understand his happy repair home to his (...),
recommending him self for ever to his commandment, lived with his wife
afterward many prosperous years, using the virtue of courtesy more than ever
he did before.

Such was the end of the troubles of master Thorello, and his well-beloved wife,
and the recompense of their frank and honest courtesies.

Anne the Queen of Hungary
A Gentleman of mean calling and reputation, does fall in love with ANNs, the
Queen of HVNGARIS, whom she (...) royally and liberally requited.

The. xxj. Nouel.
Following the preceding arguments treated in certain of yt former Nouels: I
will now discourse the princely kindness and courtesy done to a poor
Gentleman, by a Lady of later days, Anne the Queen of Hungary, which
Gentleman, though beyond his reach to catch what he aspired, fell in love with
that bountiful and virtuous Gentlewoman, thinking (bylike) that she in end
would have abased her Majesty, to recline to his vain and doting travail. But
she like a Queen, not despising ye poor man's love, vouchsafed by familiar
speech to pour some drops of comfort into his loving mind, and once to
prove, on whom he fixed his fancy, reached him a nosegay, and prayed him to
bestow it upon whom he liked best. All which familiar dealings she used, to
keep the poor pacient from despair, that so highly had placed him self. But
in end perceiving his continuance, would not reject and give him over, or with
scorns and floutes contemn the amorous gentleman: and that long love might
gain some deserved guerdon, she never left him until she had preferred him to
a Noble office in Spain. The noble disposition of this chaste and gentle
Queen, I thought good to adioyne next to that of master Thorello and Saladine:
who for courtesy and passing mutual kindness, are worthy of remembrance. And
for you noble Dames for a Crystal to sharpen your sights, and view the
recompense of love, done by a Queen of passing beauty, and yet most chaste and
virtuous, that it might somewhat touch your squeymish stomakes and haultie
hearts, and lenifie that corrosiue humor, which with frowning face, forces you
to ouerperke your humble suppliants. A helping preservative I hope this
History shall be to imbolden you to yield your noble endeavors to Gentlemen, that
love you, in suits and petitions to their prince and sovereign. An
incoragement (I hope) to be mediators for such, as by service and warfare have
confirmed their faithful deuoirs for defense of their Country. Remember the
care the Roman matrones had for those that deserved well of their Common
wealth: as how they mourned for Lucius Brutus one whole years space, for his
good revenge over the rauishers of Lucrece: and for Martius Coriolanus, for his
piety and mothers sake, discharging his Country from the enemies siege. Let
mistress Paolina of the privy chamber to this Queen Anne, render example for
preferme^t of such as be worthy to be cherished and esteemed. O how Liberality
be seems a Queen, no less (as one makes comparison) than the bright beams
the Sun, or the twinkling stars in the firmament. Oh how diligence in
Gentlewomen, advanced to Princes chambres, no less than the green leaves to
braunched trees, or diverse colored flowers in Nosegayes. So flourishing be the
fruits that bud from liberality, and fresh the benifites that (...) of the
painful travails sustained in the suites of serviceable Gentlemen. This
Philippo whom the Queen preferred, and liberally rewarded, was a mean
Gentleman, but yet learned and well furnished with commendable qualities. His
deserved aduau^cement may stir up each Gitle heart, to merit and serve in
Common wealth. His learning and other virtues may awake the sluggish courtier,
from loytering on Carpets, and doing things unseemly: His diligence also
revive the blockish sprites of some that route their time in sluggish sleep,
or wash the day in hariotrie and other (...) exercise. Whose exam ple if they
practice, or imitate such commentable life as becomes their estates, then
glory will follow their deeds, as the shadow does the body. Then welfare and
liuelihoode abundantly shall be ministered to supply want of patrimony or
defect of parents portion. And thus the History does begin.

Not long since Queen Anne, the sister of Jews, that was king of Hungary,
and wife to Ferdinando Archeduke of Austriche, (which at this day is parcel of
the kingdom of Hungary and Boeme,) together with the Lady Mary daughter of
Philip king of Spain, and wife of the said Jews, went to keep her abode,
and so orne in Hispurge, a Country among the Dutche very famous, where many
times the Court of the Hungarian Princes long space remained. These two Noble
Queens remained within the Palace of king Maximilian, Emperor at that time
elected, which Palace is so near adjoining to the Cathedral Church, as
without sight of the people at their pleasure they might by a secret Gallerie
pass to the Church to hear divine service accustomably celebrated there.
Which use they daily observed with their Ladies and Gentlewomen, and other
Lords and Gentlemen of the Court. In which Church was made and erected a high
place in manner of a Closet gorgeously wrought, and in royal manner apparelled
of such amplitude as it was hable to receive the whole train and company
attendant upon the Persons of the two Queens. Now it came to pass that a
Gentleman of Cromona in Italy called Philippo di Nicuoli, which in those days
by reason of the recovery of the Duchy of Milane, by the French, departed
Lombardie, and went to Hispurge, and was Secretary to Signor Andrea Borgo,
because he was well learned, and could write very fair, and therewithal a
proper and very handsome man. This young Gentleman very much frequenting the
Church, and seeing the beauty of Queen Anne to excel all the reast of the
Ladies, adorned and garnished with Princely behauioure and Queen like
qualities, not foreseeing (when he beheld her) the nature of love which once
being possessed, never leaves the pacient till it has infebled his state,
like the quality of poison, distilling through the veins, even to the heart.
Which loving venim this Gentleman did drink with the looks of his eyes, to
satisfy and content his desired mind by viewing and intentife considering her
wonderful beauty, that rapt beyond measure, he was miserably entangled with
the snares of blind and deceitful love, wherewith he was so cruelly inflamed,
that he was like to sort out of the bounds of reason and wit. And the more
he did behold the highness of her Majesty, and the excellency of so great a
Lady, and there withal did weigh and consider his base degree and lignage, and
the poor state whereunto srowarde (...) that time had brought him, yt more he
thought him self (...) and void of hope, and the more the yerillous flames of
love did assail and fire his amorous heart, kindling his inward parts with
love so deeply ingraffed, as it was impossible to be rooted out. Master
Philippo then in this manner (as you have heard) knotted and intrapped within
the fillets and laces of love, supposing all labor which he should employ to
be lost and consumed, thoroughly bent him self, with all care and diligence to
atchieue this high and honorable enterprise, what so ever should come of it:
which effectually he pursued. For always when yt (...) were at church to hear
divine service, he failed not to be there. And having done his (...) reverence,
which very comely he could do, he (...) to bestow him self (...) over against
her: where deliting in the beauty of the Queen, which daily more and more
inflamed his heart, (...) not depart from thence, till the Queens were
disposed to go. And if perchance for some occasion, the Queens went not to
Church, master Philippo for all that (were his business never so great and
needeful) would vouchsafe at least wise to visit the place, where he was wont
to see his Lady. Such is the ordinary force of love, that although liberty
of sight and talk be deprived from the pacient, yet it does him good, to
tread in the steps of that ground where his mistress does usually haunt, or
to see the place upon which she eased her tender corpse, or leaned her delicate
elbowes. This young man baited and fed in amorous toys and devises, now armed
with hope, and by and by disarmed by despair, reuolued in his mind a thousand
thoughts and cogitations. And although he knew that his ladder had not steps
(...) to clime so high, yet from his determined purpose he was not able to
remove: but rather the more difficult and dangerous his enterprise seemed to
be, the more grew desire to prosecute and object him self to all dangers. If
peradventure the Queens for their disport and pastime were disposed to walk
into the fields or gardens of the City of Hispurge, he failed not in company
of other Courtiers to make one of the troop, being no hour at rest and (...)
if he were not in the sight of Queen Anne, or near yt place where she was. At
that time there were many Gentlemen departed from Lombardie to Hispurge, which
for the most part followed the Lord Francesco Sforza the second, by whom they
hoped, when the Duchy of Milane was recovered, to be restored to their
Country. There was also Chamberlain to the said Lord Francesco, one master
Girolamo Borgo of Verona, between whom and master Philippo, was very near
friendship and familiarity. And because it chauncethvery seldom, that seruent
love, can be kept so secret and covert, but in some part it will discover it
self, master Borgo easily did perceive the passion wherewith master Philippo
was inflamed. And one master Philippo Baldo many times being in the company of
master Borgo and Philippo, did mark and perceive his love, and yet was
ignorant of the truth, or void of conjecture with what Gentlewoman he was
inamored. But seeing him contrary to wonted custom altered, and from usual
mirth transported, fetching many sighs and strainings from his stomach, and
marking how many times he would steal from the company he was in, and withdraw
him self alone, to muse upon his thoughts, brought thereby into a melancholy
and mean estate, having lost his sleep, and (...) of eating meat: judged that
the amorous worms of (...) (...) bitterly gnawe and tear his heart with the
nebs of their forked heads. They three then being upon a time together,
debating of diverse things amo^gs them selves, chanced to fall in argument of
love, and (...) Baldo and Borgo, the other gentlemen, said to master Philippo,
how they were well assured that he was strau^gely attached with that passion,
by marking and considering the new life, which lately he led contrary to former
use, entreating him very earnestly, that he would manifest his love to them,
that were his dear and faithful friends, telling him that as in weighty
matters otherwise he was already sure what they were, eue^ so in this he might
hardily repose his hope and confidence, promising him all their help and
favor, if therein their endeavor and travail might minister aid and comfort.
He then like one raised from a trance, or lately revived from an (...), after
he had composed his countenance and gesture, with tears and multitude of
sobbes, began to say these words: My well-beloved friends and trusty
companiens, being right well assured that ye (whose sidelitie I have already
proved, and whose secret mouths be recommended amongs the wise and virtuous,
(will keep close and covert the thing which you shall hear me utter, as of
such importance, that if the young (...) Gentleman Papyrius had been here, for
all his silence of grave matters required by his mother, I would uneaths have
disclosed the same unto him. In deed I cannot deny, but must needs consesse
that I am in love, and that very ardently, which I cannot in such wise
conceal, but that the blind must needs clearly and evidently perceive. And
although my mouth would (...) keep close, in what plight my passions do
constrain my inward affections, yet my face and strange manner of life,
which for a certain time and space I have led, do witness, that I am not the
man I was (...) to be. So that if shortly I do not amend, I trust to arrive to
that end whereunto every Creature is borne, and that my bitter and paynefull
life shall take end, if I may call it a life, and not rather a living death. I
was resolved and thoroughly determined, never to discover to any man the cause
of my cruel torment, being not able to manifest the same to her, whom I do
only love, thinking better by conceling it through love, to make humble suit to
Lady Atropos, that she would cut of the threede of my dolorous life.
Nevertheless to you, from whom I ought to keep nothing secret, I will
disgarboile and (...) the very secrets of my mind, not for that I hope to
find comfort and relief, or that my passions by declaration of them, will
lessen and diminishe, but that ye, knowing the occasion of my death, may make
report thereof to her, that is the only mistress of my life, that she
understanding the extreme panges of the truest lover that ever lived, may
mourn and wail his loss: which thing if my seely ghost may know, no doubt
where so ever it do wander, shall receive great joy and comfort. Be it known
unto you therefore, the first day that mine eyes beheld the divine beauty and
incomparable sauer of that superexcellent Lady Queen Anne of Hungary, and
that I (more than wisdom required) did meditate and consider the singular
behauior and notable (...) and other innumerable gifts wherewith she is endued,
the same beyond measure did so inflame my heart, that impossible it was for me
to quench the fervent love, or extinguish the least part of my conceived
torment. I have done what I can to macerate and mortify my unbridled desire,
but all in vain. My force and puissaunce is to weak to match with so mighty
an (...). (...) (...), I know what ye will obiecte against me, ye will say
that mine ignobilitie, my birth and stock be no meet matches for such a
personage, and that my love is to highly placed, to suck relief: And the same
I do (...) so well as you. I do acknowledge my condition and state too base, I
confess that my love (nay rather I may term it folly) does presume beyond the
bounds of order. For the first time that I felt my self wrapped in those
snares, I knew her to bear the port amo^gs the chiefest Queens, and to be the
(...) princess of Christendom Again, I knew my self the poorest Gentleman of
the world and the most miserable exile. I thought moreover it to be very
unseemly for me to direct my mind upon a wight so honorable, and of so great
estate. But who can rain the bridle, or prescribe laws to love? What is he
that in love has free will and choice? Truly I believe no man, because love
the more it does seem to accord in pleasure and delight, the further from the
mark he shoots his bolte, having no respect to degree or state. Have not
many excellent and worthy personages, yea Dukes, Emperors and Kings, been
inflamed with the love of Ladies, and women of base and vile degree? Have not
most honorable dames, and women of greatest renoume despised the honor of their
states, abandoned the company of their husbands, and neglected the love of
their children, for the ardent love that they have borne to men of inferior
sort? All Histories be full of examples of that purpose. The memories of our
ancestors be yet in fresh remembrance, whereof if they were ignorant unto you
that be of great experience, I could adnouche assured testimony. Yet thus much
I say unto you, that it seem no new thing for a man to be overcome by his own
affection: It is not the Nobility of her state, or for that she is a Queen,
it is not the consideration of one part or other, that moved me first
hereunto. But love it is, that is of greater force than we our selves be of,
which many times makes that to seem lawful, which altogether is times, and
by subduing reason makes the great potentate and lord tributarie to his will
and pleasure, whose force is far greater than the laws of Nature. And albeit
that I never hope to attain to prosperous end of this (...) and stately love,
which more and more does seem unfortunate, yet I can not for my life else where
apply yt same, or alter it to other place. And consuming still through
faithful and fervent love borne to the Queen, I have forced and constrained
my self by all possible means to give over that fond and foolish enterprise,
and to place my mind else where: but mine endeavor and all my labor and
resistance is employed in vain. Yea and if it were not for fear of eternal
damnation, and the loss of my poor afflicted soul (which God forbid) mine
own hands before this time had ended my desires. I am therefore determined
(since that I can attain to no success of love, and that god does suffer me to
be inspired with that most honorable and courteous Lady, beyond al order and
estimation) to content my self with the sight of those her fair and glistring
eyes, far excelling yt sparcling glimpse of the Diamonde or Sapphire, and to
serve love and honor her, so long as life does last within this feeble corpse.
Upon whose radiant and excelling beauty, my hope shall continually feed: and
yet I am not so far void of understanding, but that I do most evidently know
none other to be the guide of this unmeasurable love, but folly most extreme.
Upon the end of those words he let fall many tears, and stayed with sobbes
and sighs was able to speak no more. And in very deed he that had seen him,
would have thought that his heart had been tormented with most bitter and
painful passions. Now they being very attentive to his pitiful oration, were
attached with incredible sorrow, thinking they had been in a (...) by hering of
this discourse, and stood still a while one loking upon an other, without
speaking word. Afterward coming to themselves, distraught almost, for the
greatadmiration and wonder to hear him speak those words, master Girolamo and
Baldo, with suasible arguments went about to persuade him to withdraw his (...)
and foolish mind, praying him to place the same elsewhere, showing him the
impossibility of his enterprise, and the great peril that might succeed
thereof. But they spoke to a man that seemed to be deaf, who replied, that he
neither could or would give over his love, that had already made too deep
impression, what so ever came of it. Notwithstanding, they ceased not still with
sharp (...) to beat into his head, the fond beginning of his foolish love: and
not only at that time, but continually when they were together, they did their
best by often repetition of his vain conceit, to let him understand his
manifest error: but their labor and friendly lessons were to no purpose.
Wherefore master Borgo and master Baldo, determined to give him over, and to
attend what would succeed thereof. Master Philippo continuing his pursuit, never
failing to be at church, when he knew the Queens to be there, at length it
chanced that they began to epsy his love, for that both of them did mark his
order, gesture and demeanure, and did note his often freque^tation of the places
where they continually haunted, and his manner in placing himself at the church
directly over against them, and his common use in beholding and loking upon
their faces, iudgyng thereby that without doubt he was in love with one of
them, or at least with some Gentlewoman in their company, whereof the two
Queens began to use some talk, although not certain upon whom his love was
(...). Never thelesse they were desirous to know the truth, and expected (...)
sometime to dissolve that doubt. In the mean while master Philippo thought by
gazing on their beauty, to remove the fire that miserably did consume the suck
and marow of his bones, seeking comfort and relief for his afflicted heart,
the more I say he sought for ease, the greater he felt his pain. And truly al
they that fervently do love, aspire to that, which otherwise they would eschew,
by sight of them whom they do love, not remembering that ye more they do
contemplate the beloved beauty, the more increases desire, and with desire
(...) and bitter smart. Master Philippo then lost no occasion or time still to
behold Madame ye Queen, were it in the church or court, or were she disposed
for disport and recreation to walk abroad. It chanced now while things were at
this point, ye ladies very desirous to know upon who^ master Philippo did
expe^d his love, ye fortune opened unto the^ a mean to understand the same. It
was then about that time of ye year, wherein all flowers and roses were by
Titans force constrained to (...) and deck each gardens and place of pleasure,
and with their fragrant smells and odors, to scent the same. In the month of
May it was when ye Twins were disposed to shroud themselves amo^gs the
hawthorn boughs and honysuckles that yield to every wight gretest store of
delights, at what time roses and other flowers at their first budding be very
rare and scant, saving in Kings Courts and princes palaces, where such
rarieties by art and industry be most abundant, and all men have delight to
present such novelties to the best and principal ladies. Upon a day Queen
Anne had in her hands certain flowers in due order couched in a Nosegay, and
for her disport walked up and down a very fair and gorgeous garden, in the
company of queen Mary, and other Ladies and gentlewomen, about that time of the
day that the Sun werie of travail, went to hide him self in the back side of
ye western mou^tains: where amo^gs other of the Court was master Philippo.
Queen Anne when she had espied him, determined to make proof, with what lady
amongs them all, master Philippo was in love, and sporting her self with
soft walks up and down the garden, pleasantly jesting with diverse there
attendante, (as the manner is of like ladies) with trim and pleasant talk, at
length happed upon master Philippo, who although he was in communication with
certain Italian Gentlemen, nevertheless his mind and eyes were fired upon the
Queen, that when (...) she appeared before him, his eyes and sace were so
firmly bent upon her, as the beholder might easily perceive, that the visage
of the Queen was the undoubted harborough of his thought. Philippo, seeing the
Queen come toward him, did honor her with gentle and dutiful reverence, in
such humble wise, as he seemed at her hands pitifully to crave mercy. And
truly who soever does love with secret and perfect heart, seems to utter
more words to his Lady with his eyes, than he is able to speak with tongue. The
Queen being come unto him with a grace right grave and demure, said unto him:
You Gentleman of Lombardie, if these flowers which we have in our hands were
given unto you, liberally to use at your pleasure, and required to make some
courteous present of the same to one of us the ladies here that liked you best,
tell me I pray you, to whether of us would ye give the same, or what would you
do or say? Speak frankely we beseech you, and tell your mind without
respect: for thereby you shall do to us very great pleasure, and we shall know
to whether of us you bear your chiefest love. For it is not to be supposed,
that you being a young man, can spend your time without love, being a natural
quality in every creature. When master Philippo felt the sweet voice of the
Queen pleasantly to pierce his ears, and heard that he was commanded for
the love of her that he loved, not only to tell whom he loved best and most
entierly, but also her who^ he worshipped and served in heart, was almost
bysides himself, such was the ioylitie and pleasure that he felt in his heart,
whose face was tainted with a thousand colors and what for superfluous love and
joy, whereof the like he never tasted before, fell into an ecstasy, not able to
render answer. But when he had recovered stomach, so well as he could with soft
and trembling voice, he answered the Queen in this wise: Since your majesty
(to whom I I yield mine humble thanks for that courtesy) has vouchsafed to
command me (besides the infinite pleasure and honor, for which eternally I
shall stand bound to your highness) I am ready sincerely and truly to
disclose my mind, being promised by your majesty in opening of the same, to
deserve great thanks. Wherefore your pleasure being such, I do say then, with all due reverence, that not only here at this time, but at all times and places
where it shall please God to appoint me, being not able to bestow them in
other sort than they be, but were they more precious and fair, the more
joyful I should be of them. These flowers I say shall of me right humbly be
presented to your majesty, not bicanse you be a Queen and of a royal race
(which notwithstanding is a great virtue) but because you be a Phoenix, a rare
Lady, and of all the troop the fairest, garnished with infinite gifts, and
passing virtues, for your merits worthy to be honored with far more
excellent gifts, than these simple flowers be, as she that (above al other
ladies that live at this day) is the honor and only glory of all womanhoode
of our age, as she that is the Paragon peerless of the universal world:
when he had said those words, he held his peace. The Queen with great
delight hearing the ready answer of the young Gentleman, said unto him: And we
do give you thanks for the great honor and commendation done unto us. When she
had said so, without further talk, she went forth, using pleasant talk and
sport with diverse that waited upon her. Queen Anne now understood, and so
likewise did Queen (...), which of them the young Lombard (...) did accept for
his souerain Lady, whose love she disdained not, but in (...) mind rather
commended, esteming him better than ever she did before: and like a discrete
and wise Lady gave him infinite praise. She did not now as other women woonte
to do, who when they see them selves of birth more noble, or of degree more
ample than their lovers be (which gift they receive through the favor of the
heavens) do not only despise the^, but mock them, and their faithful service,
and many times with fained countenance and dissembled words do extol them and
set them up aloft, and by and by almost with one breath, exchanging their
fained praise into rebuke, they thrust them down headlong from the tipe of
hope and comfort, to the bottomless pit of despair: and the fuller she is of
floutes, the finer girl esteemed. But far better is she to be regarded, that
not findyng in her heart to love her suter, will frankely tell him at the
first, that she can not like him, and fashion her mind to love him, requiring
him not to feed his mind with vain hope, or (...) the time with words and
lokes, and pray him to seek some other that can better fancy his person than
she. And although perchance a man do very fervently love a woman, and that it
were great sorrow and grief unto him to be cast of, and receive such
refusal, yet in mine opinion it were less grief openly to receive that
repulse, than to be (...) upon, and flattered with fained talk, and for the
time choked with the bait of vain hope, and afterward become ridiculous,
and gired by the scornful. I am assured, that the woman which gives her
servant such repulse, shall be counted much more cruel, than Maistresse
Helena was to the scholar of Paris, after he was returned from the university,
to Florence, written by Boccaccio in his Decamerone, and hereafter in place
described. But let us return to master Philippo, who although he could
not imagine ne conceive the intent, wherefore Queen Anne made that demand,
yet the same was very dear and acceptable unto him, upon which he never
thought, but felt great co^tentation in his mind, and was more iocunde and
pleasant than he was wont to be. On the other side, the Queen, which was
very discrete and wise, when she saw Master Philippo, at the Church or other
place, to make obeysaunce unto her, very courteously requited the same, bowyng
her head to him again, (which she never used but to Barons and Knights of
great reputation) declaryng thereby how well in worth she regarded his
reverence made unto her. Whereat he received marvelous pleasure and delight,
(...) for none other recompense at her hands, than continuance of such
courtesies and honorable (...). Amongs certain Italians that were upon a day
assembled in the presence chaumber of Queen Anne, waiting there upon Madonna
Barbara, the wise of master Pietro Martire Stampa, who with her two daughters
were gone to salute the two Queens that were that time together. There was also
master Philippo, with whom Borgo and Baldo, reasoned of diverse matters: And
as they were in talk, both the Queens came forth, which was the occasion,
that all the Lords and Gentlemen, attended, upon whose approach, each man rose
up, and (...) expected whyther the Queens would go. Queen. Anne (...) a
(...) of Italians together, (...) Queen (...), and went straight to them, and
very gently (...) of diverse of the Gentlemen, their names, and of what parts
of Italy they were, then she came to the place where they. iii. were standing
together, and courteously asked first master Girolamo, what his name was, of
what country, and whether he were a Gentleman? To whom reucrentely he said,
that his name was Girolamo Borgo, a Gentleman of Verona. Master Baldo likewise
being demanded the same, answered so well as he could, that he was a
Gentleman borne, of an ancient house in Milane, and that his name was Philippo
Baldo. When she had received their answer, with cheerful and smiling
countenance she turned to Master Philippo, inquiring of him also his name and
country, and whether he were a Gentleman or not? Whom master Philippo after
his duty done reverently answered: Madame, my sovereign Lady and only
maistresse, I am a Gentleman, and am called by the name of Philippo de i
Nicuoli, of Cremona. The Queen making no further demaundes of any of the other
Gentlemen, said to Master Philippo: You say true sir, I dare warrant that you
be a Gentleman in deed, and he that said (...) contrary, should declare him
self to be void of judgment, what a Gentleman is. She said no more, but
from thence with Queen Mary and the whole train she went to Church. All they
that heard the Queen speak those words, did wonder, and could not (...) what
she meant by them, notwithstanding (...) man thought that the Queen bare to
master Philippo singular good will and (...). He (as it was his custom) full
of diverse cogitations, whose (...) was building of great cities, went to
Church, (...) him self in his (...) place, tossyng in his mind the Queens
words spoken unto him. And although he (...) not perceive to what end that
honorable (...) had spoken them: yet he thought that her majesty had done him
great honor. And verily the humanity and curtesse of a Lady so excellent and
(...) is (...) to be (...) with infinite praise and commendation, who being of
high (...) and ligneage, and the wife of so great a Prince that proceeded of
the (...) Imperial, not only did not (...) to be beloved of a man of so base
degree, and banished from his own house, but also with great care and
diligence did devise, and in effect declare that she was the same whom the
Italian young Gentleman did love, as partly it was evidently to be perceived,
not for other purpose doubtless, but to do some noble deed couenable for the
greatness of her estate, and incident to the seruent love of the amorous young
Gentleman, which afterward in very deed she accomplished. But how many be
there in these days, I do not speak of Queens and Princesses, but of (...)
and private Gentlewomen, that being of mean worship, endued with some show of
beauty, be without good conditions and virtue, who seeing themselves beloved
of some Gentlemen, not enriched with the goods of Fortune as they be, do scorn
and mock them, thynking them selves to good to be looked upon, or (...) moved
of virtuous love, scornfully casting their face at one side, as though the
suitors were unworthy their company: Now many likewise be possessed and
overwhelmed with pride by reason nature more propicious unto them than other,
be descended of some great parentage, that will account a great injury done
unto them, if any other gentlemen beside those that be rich, do (...) to (...)
them? Again a great number of (...) (I speak of them whose minds do not
aspire to same or honor, so that their delights and bravery be maintained) be
of this trampe, that they (...) not whether their lovers be (...), well
condicioned, (...) and gentle, but only do regard whether their pursses be
full of money, or their shapes somewhat shoutefaire, not waying the (...) and
good conditions of the mind, with a thousand other qualities that (...) to
garnishe a Gentleman, whereby all Gentlemen (...) do grow beautiful, and be
enriched with greater perfections. Some other there be that fire their minds
upon young men, that be of goodly persouage, although (...) of virtue or (...)
behavior, loving rather a piece of flesh with two eyes in his head, than an
honest man well furnyshed with virtue. Think not yet for all this, that herein
men ordinarily be wyser than women, although they ought to be endued with
greater (...) than the womankynde: but to say the truth, they be all spotted
with one kind of pitch, that warfare here in the large camp of this present
world: whereof it comes to pass, that we see little love to continue long,
because as the beginning wanted love, even so is the end altogether (...), the
knowledge whereof consumes like the beauty of the (...). And thereupon many
times it chances, that when love is not grounded but upon transitory
beauty, which does dissolve like a windy cloud, the little heat (...) does
not war more (...), but rather congoale to frost, and many times (...) into
hatred and (...). A worsse thing yet than this is in (...) practice. There be
many that will needs be (...) and called Gentlemen, because they come of
Ancient and Noble race, but growyng up to (...) state, they appear in shapes
of men, but altogether without vertuo or approved manners, utterly ignorant
what the nature of Gentle is, and do account them selves (...) (...) (...)
fellows, when in company of other as big beasts as them selves, they
contriue the day in (...) and bragges, and (...) say: (...) a woman is at my
comniaundement, and such a man's wise I do keep, such a one is my companyons
friend, whereby they bring many women, yea and of the most honest sort, into
slander and (...). Diverse (...) also be such fools, and of so simple
discretion, that although they know and clearly perceive this to be true, yat
allured with ye persenages and beauty of such (...), pass not to give the
rain to these unbridled (...), and do not foresee (lyhe (...) Woodcockes)
that in sewe days through their own (...), they (...) common shame of the
vulgar people, being pointed at in the streates as they (...): where one that
is wise and discrete, daily does fear the least suspicion that utay be
conceived. There is no woman that is wise; (...) so (...) (...) she can, will
shun and avoid all occasion whereby (...) may arise, and will choose (...)
her amongs a number, such one as (...) best please her fancy, and such (...)
as for his virtue and honesty she purposes to match (...) self with in
marriage, which is the end of all honest love. Now be it Nature has not framed
every creature of one metal, ne yet Minerua, (...) like brain: into every
head. And truly this our age does breed many (...) and worthy women, whose
conditions be good and (...), adorned with (...) qualities, the generositie,
(...) and valor of whose minds (...) deferue singular praise and estimation.
And what is he, chauncing upon a courteous and virtuous woman, that will not
give over the love of all other, to honor and love (...) for ever? But we have
digressed too long from our History, and therefore, retourning to the same
again, I say, that (...) ye guide of master Philippo, was fully determined to
bestow her favor upon him. For besides that the Queen (...) esteemed his love,
it seemed that all things were united and agreed to sort his enterprise to
happy success. The Queen (...) to (...) Gouernesse (...) Paola (...) Caualli,
a (...) of Verona, very (...) and grave (adua^ced to yt calling, by Madonna
Bianca Maria Sforza, the wife of the Emperor Maximilian) whom (...) Anne
required (...) to procure for her, such (...) in the Thoscane language, and
other Italian works, as were to be found, because her disposition was to be
(...) and familiar in that tongue, and employed great diligence to learn and
exercise the same, wherein she attained such (...), as all Italians could very
well understand her. Now (as the good luck of master Philippo would have it)
he that day went to the Court alone, continually (...) if it were possible, at
all times to be in presence of the (...): Whom so soon as Madonna Paola
espied, because she familiarly knew him, she went unto him, and said: My
well-beloved friend master Philippo, because the (...) has great delight to
learn our tongue, and therein already has (...) good towardness, as by her
common speaking of the same you may perceive, this morning at (...) vprising
she gave me a great charge to procure for her, certain Italian Rithmes, who
besides those books in that tongue already printed, gladly desires to see
some trymme devises of diverse learned (...) (...) that make in our time:
specially (...) mind is earnestly disposed upon rithmes cunningly (...),
whereof I think you have some store, by reason of your delight in that
exercise. Wherefore I thought to repair unto you, and do heartily pray you,
to make (...) Majesty partaker ofsuch as you have, wherein you shall do her
great and grateful service, and I shall remain (...) bound unto you, besides
that I do purpose when I present them unto her, to make her privy that I
received them at your hands; which because of the love she (...) to our
nation, she will favorably accept, and the same no doubt when opportunity
serves, liberally reward. Master Philippo in (...) wise thanked the
gentlewoma^, and said, that he was sorry he was not able better to satisfy her
request, because in that (...) he had small store of such desired things,
nevertheless he would make diligent search, to get so many as were possible to
be found, either amongs the Gentlemen that followed the Court, or else where
they were to be gotten. In the mean time he said that he would deliver those
few he had, and would bring them unto her that night. And praying her to
commend him to the good grace and favor of her majesty, he took his leave,
and went straight to his lodging, where diligently he began to search among
his writings (the gladdest man in the world for that occasion offered) and
found amongs the same diverse rithmes which he thought unworthy to pass into
the hands of so great a Lady, saving the third Rithme or Chapter, as we
commonly call it, made by a notable Doctor of the laws, and excellent Poet
called M. Niccolo Amanio, of Crema, who no doubt for making of vulgar rithmes,
thereby expressing the amorous affections of Lovers, was in our time without
comparison. And because the same was so apt for yt purpose of master Philippo
his love, as could be desired: he wrote the same fair (being in deed a very
fair writer) in a sheet of paper, which sounds to this (...).

Quanto piu cresce (Amor) l'aspro tormento. etc.
The more (O Love) thy bitter pangs augment,
Melting by times my sad accensed spreete,
The more to burn, I feel my self content:
And though each day a thousand times I fleet
Tvvixt hope and dread, all dolor yet and smart,
My glorious proof of enterprise makes svveete.
The fire so high, which kindled has mine heart,
As by loves flames, none ever had (I know)
So lofty source of heat in any part,
Svveete then my torments are, svvete is my vvoe,
Svvete eke of love the light, svvete the conceyte
From so high beams, fallen in my breast, groe.
Such power of port, such majesty most great
I tremble to behold, and do confess
My lotte to base, so worthy a bliss to get.
But Will herein, my Reason does suppress,
And those fair eyes, where love him self nie lies
Armed with looks of joy and gentleness,
Lokes that vpliftes my soul above the Skies,
And in each coast all clouds expelling clean,
Do teach ten thousand paths to Paradise.
My Goddess brave, Angclicall Sirene
Fairness it self, Dame Beauties sacred heir,
What mountes of joy may match my happy pain?
Whose scaling hope, how so ensue dispeire
Leaves vau^t of thoughts, which once so highly flevv,
As honor all that earth besides does bear,
Comparde to this, but baggage were to vevv.
When Master Philippo had written out these verses, immediately he returned to
the court, and caused Madonna Paola, to be called unto him by one of the Gromes
of the Chamber, to whom he said: Mistress Paola, I have brought you a ditie,
that is very trim and pretty, which I pray you deliver to the (...), and I will
do what I can to get other. Mistress Paola took them, and went into the
chamber, and finding the (...) alone, said unto her: Madame, this morning ye
commanded me to get you some Italian Rithmes, and upon inquiry I have
received these (...) verses of master Philippo, secretary to the Lord Andrea
Borgo, who has promised to bring me other. The (...) hearing her speak those
words, smiling received the paper, and read the same: the sense whereof she
liked very well, thinking that master Philippo had been the compositor of the
same, and that of purpose he had made them for her, whereby she was out of
doubt that it was she that master Philippo so fervently loved; and the better
her opinion was confirmed, because some of the words tended to the state of
her personage. And considering the valor of his mind, she blamed Nature, for
that in a man so basely borne she had sown seed that brought forth such a
Ge^tlemanlike and noble heart, greatly to her self praising the young man. Then
she conferred the whole matter with her cousin (...) Marie, which was a wise
and comely Lady, and upon that love they used many discourses, more and more
esteming the young gentleman. (...) Anne determined, when conveniently she
might, to render to master Philippo for his great love condign reward: and
studying still how to requite his courtesy, ever when she saw master Philippo,
she used him with her wonted chere and grateful salutation, (which thing only
every honest ge^tlema^ ought to (...) that is endued with reason, at yt hands
of a princess so noble and worthy, as a reward sufficient, yt inequality of
the parties considered) Whereof master Philippo was ye best contented man of the
world, and durst not hope for greater recompense, continuing his woonted life,
feeding him self still with that beloved sight: in such wise as many gentlemen
envied the favor borne unto him by ye (...), who for none other cause did use
that curtesy, but for that she saw him to be a virtuous young man, and well
learned: continually esteemyng those, that either with learning or other gifts
of the mind were indewed: and when occasion chanced, she vouchesafed to
bestow upon them courteous intertainement and liberal rewards. It fortuned
about that time that the Emperor Maximilian died, Charles his nephew (which was
the Emperor Charles, the fifthe) then being in Spain: by reason of whose death
the Lord Andrea Borgo, purposed to (...) one of his Gentlemen to king Charles,
for the confirmation of that living he enjoyed, given unto him for his long and
faithful service by the said Maximilian. Amongs all he chose this master
Philippo, for his wisdom and experience in such affairs. Which done, he
went to the (...), and gave them to understand that shortly he would send his
Secretary iuto Spain, and told them the cause, humbly praying them both, that
they would write their favorable letters in his behalf. The (...) knowing what
pain and travel he had sustained in the service of Maximilian, and what
dangers he had passed, were very willing thereunto. Now (...) Anne (...) that
she had convenient time to recompense master Philippo for his long love born
unto her. And because she was the most courteous Lady of the world, and there
withal most bountiful and liberal, and not only with comely talk and other
gesture: but also in effect willing (...) do them good, whom she honored in
mind, concluded what to do, requiring the Lord Andrea to send his Secretary
unto her, when he was ready to depart, for that besides Letters, she would by
mouth commit certain business for her to do in the Court of Spain. When the
Lord Andrea was gone, (...) Anne began to devise with the other (...) what she
might do for master Philippo, who prayed (...) Anne, after she had commended
him in letters, to suffer her to make the end and conclusion of the same. Where
upon both the Queens wrote many letters into Spain to king Charles, and to
the Lord Cha^cellour and other noble men, whom they thought to be apt and
mete ministers to bring the effect of their letters to pass. When the Lord
Andrea had put all things in order for that dispatch, he said to master
Philippo (which was now furnished with all things necessary and appertinent
for that long voyage) Philippo remember this day that you go to (...) Anne, and
tell her, that I willed you to come unto her, to know if she would command you
any service to the Catholic King, where you shall humbly offer your self, in
what it pleases her to command: you shall also tell her, what things I have
given unto you in charge by special commission. Never could more pleasant
talk sound into the ears of Master Philippo, than this, who for that he
should both see and speak unto his Lady before his departure, and for that
she would (...) unto him the doing of her affairs in Spain, was the gladdest
and best contented man of the world. The hour come when he thought good to
repair to the (...), he went unto her, and gave her to understand by one of
the privy Chamber, that he was attendant there to know her pleasure. The
(...) certified of his readiness to depart, by and by took order that he
should come into her chamber, who entering the same, with tremblyng heart, after
he had done his humble reverence, with great fear and bashfulnesse, said:
Pleases your Majesty, that my lord Borgo, being about to address me his
Secretary into Spain, to the Catholic King there, has commanded me to
wait upon your highness, to know your pleasure for certain affairs to be
done for your majesty. Wherefore may it please the same to employe me, your
humble servant, I shall think my self the happiest man of the world: A
thing so blessed and joyful unto me, as no benefit or commodity can render
unto me, greater felicity. Then he disclosed unto her the rest of his
message, which was committed unto him by his lord and master. The (...)
beholding him with merry countenance gently said unto him: And we for the trust
we have in you to do our message and other affairs in Spain, have required
you to come hither. And because we know you to be a Gentleman, and assured that
you will gladly do your endeavor in any thing that may do us pleasure, have
chosen you above any other. Our will and commandment is, that first you
deliver these letters, containing matters of great importance to the hands of
the (...) King, and that you do our humble commendations to his majesty. Then
all the rest accordingly as they be directed, which principally above other
things we pray you to dispatch upon your arrival. And if we be able to do you
any pleasure, either for your (...), or for other commodity, spare not to
write unto us pour mind and (we do assure you) the same shall be effectually
accomplished, to the (...) of our endeavor, which we do of our own motion
frankly offer unto you, in consideration of the (...), worthiness, and (...)
behavior always known to be in you. Master Philippo hering these words, was
replenished with such joy, as he thought himself rapt into the heavens, and his
heart felt such pleasure, as it seemed to flete in some deep sea of delites:
and after the best manner he could, thanked her for her courtesy: and albeit
(be said) that he knew him self unworthy of that favor, yet he dedicated the
same to her commandment, surrendering himself as a slave and faithful servant
to her majesty. Then upon his knees, to his great contentation he kissed her
hands, which of her self she offered unto him, and the^ reuere^tly he took his
leave. When he was gone out of the chamber, he met with the (...) coserer, that
(...) for him, who taking him aside, did put into his hand a purse with. 500.
crowns, and the master of the horse presented unto him a very goodly and
beautiful horse, wherewith master Philippo, was so well pleased, as he was
like to (...) out of his skin for joy. Then he took his journey and arrived at
the Court in Spain, where at (...), he delivered his Letters to King Charles,
and accomplished other business and message prescribed unto him by (...) Anne:
And when he had dispatched the (...) other letters, he attended the business
of his Lord Andrea Borgo. The King perused the contents of the letters sent
unto him by his sister and kynswoman, so did the Lord Chauncelour, (which at
that time was the lord Mercurino Gattinara) and other: to whom the (...) had
written: whereby the King was solicited to stand good Lord, to the Lord Andrea
Borgo, (...) likewise exhorted to be beneficial to master Philippo, who^ for
his good condicio^s and experience they had sent unto him in yt embassage. Upon
a day ye king moved by the lord cha^celor, caused master Philippo to com before
him, to who^ (...) before his majesty, ye king said these words: The
testimony and report so honorably made of you by the two (...), from whom you
brought us letters, and the hope which we have to find you a faithful and
profitable servant, and to be correspondent in effect to the tenor of those
letters, moves us to accept you into the number of one of our Secretaries,
wherein before our presence you shall swear unto us to be faithful and true.
Master Philippo that expected for no such dignity, marvelled at the Kings
words, and there by oath ministered unto him by the lord Chauncelour was
received into his service, and exercised that office, in singular favor of the
King, to the great satisfaction of al men. And after (...) King Charles was
elected Emperor, knowing the experience that master Philippo had in the
affairs of Italy, and specially in Lombardie, he committed unto him al matters
touching the state of yt region, which so happily came to pass to master
Philippo, as besides the ornaments of virtue and wisdom, he acquired great
riches, and yet he continually served and worshipped the Queen as his noble
patroness and worthy mistress. Tell me now ye fair Ladies and gentlewomen:
What shall we (...) of the princely behavior and noble disposition of this
Queen? Truly in my judgment, she deserves that praise and commendation that
may be attributed to the most excellent Lady of the world, who never gave
over her faithful servant till she had bountifully with her own hands and
commendation, rendered unto him a most Princely reward. And as the sun in
beauty and brightness does surmounte the other furniture of the (...), even
so magnificence and liberality in each Lady does excel al other virtues,
specially in those personages, that keep the state of Princes. But to
conclude, meet and requisite it is, that ye beautify this most courteous and
liberal Queen with due praises. For surely in my judgment, if all women
would confer their heads and wits together, and devise Hymns and Sonnets
of Liberality, they can never sufficiently be able to celebrate the praise and
glory of this Queen.

Alexander de Medices Duke of Florence.
The gentle and just act of ALEXANDER de MEDICES the first Duke of FLORENCE,
upon a Gentleman whom he favored, who having ravished the daughter of a poor
Myller, caused him to marie her, for the greater honor and celebration whereof,
he appointed her a rich and honorable dowry.

The. xxij. Novel.
IF the force of Virtue were not apparent at the sight of eye, it would be
demed to be of less value than the greatness thereof deserves (for sundry
causes rising in the minds of men) and that by performing the little which
rested for yt entier perfection of her whole united glory. Now because that
her effects be diverse, and that diversely they be used, the examples also of
such diversity, do variate and make diverse yt affections of men: some to
follow that quality and other that part, proceeding from the whole and perfect
body of virtue, which has caused some to win the price of modesty and
temperance in their deeds, other full of magnanimite (not familiar to many) have
resisted the assaults of Fortune. Many other have embraced that only honor
which is the (...) of each good act, whereby they have well ruled the state of
free cities, or guided the armies of mighty Monarchs. And such whilom ye
cities of Rome Athenes, Sparta, and the ancient monarchs of the Medes, the
Persians, and Assyrians did see. I will omit a good company of those sage and
wise men, which have (...) the troubles of Cities, the inquietations of
Palaces, the cries of Judgment seats, the dissimulation and deceiptfull
flatteries of Courts, the careful courts which the householder by government
of his house and family does sustain and feel, of purpose more frankly to
retire to the study of sapience, which alone is able to make a man happy, and
worthy to be partaker of the divinity. But above al, I will praise him which
not subject to the law, lives nevertheless like him that is most thrall
thereunto, or without respect of blood or friendship shall exercise Justice upon
his dearest and best beloved: as in old time Manlius and Torquatus at Rome,
the people of Athenes toward one Tinnagoras, who beyond the duty of an
Ambassador of a frank city, fell down on his knees and worshipped the
Persian King. And in our time the Marquize of Ferrara, by doing to death his
own son for adultery committed with his mother in law. And yet Justice may
redounde and savor of some cruelty, which rather turns to shame than
praise: as John Maria Visconte Duke of Milan, when he caused a covetous priest
to be buried quick, with ye corpse of him whom he had refused to put into the
ground without money, the history whereof is hereafter remembered. So as
mediocritie of punishment ought to be yoked with the rigor of the law, for yt
mitigation of the same. And behold, wherefore the great Dictator Julius Caesar
loved better to gain the heart of his enemies with mercy, than vanquish and
bring them to obedience, with massy manacles and gives of iron. Moreover in our
age Alphonsus of Aragon (the true sampler of a just and righteous prince) did
not he esteem (when he straightly besieged Gaiette) the victory to be more
glorious and better gotten, which is done by composition and gentleness, than
the bloody conquest, colored with the tears and blood of a poor simple
people? And truly princes and great lords, specially they which newly (without
succession received from their ancestors) ariue to the government of some
common wealth, ought continually to have before their eyes, an honest severity
for the holiness of the law, and a grave mildness, to moderate the rigor of
their formen duty. For by yt means right is maintained, the heart of man is
won, so well as by violence: and the state of government takes so good footing,
as the wind of no sedition afterward can remove the same, being founded upon a
sure stone, and framed upon a rock durable for a long time. Whereof we have an
example of fresh memory of a kind act, full both of wisdom and gentle
soueritie, in a prince of our time, who without effusion of blood punished with
rigor enough, a trespass committed, and swetely remitted the pain upon him,
which merited grievous, nay mortal punishment, as at large youshall see by the
discourse that follows. Alexander de Medices, favored by the Church of Rome,
and armed with the Papal standard) was he that first with great actiuitie and
wisdom inueyed the seniorie of Florence, immediately vsurpyng the name,
title, and prerogatives of Duke. The same albeit upon the prime face, he was
(...) to the people of Florence, wroth for losing of their ancient liberty,
and displeasant to the Senators and (...), to see them selves deprived of the
soueraintie of Justice, and of the authority they had to (...) all the
Citizens, yet for all that was he endued with; so good qualities, and governed
so well his principality, as that which at the beginning was termed Tyranny,
was received as just domination, and that which was supposed to be abused by
force, seemed to be done as it were by lawful succession. And they counted them
selves happy (when they saw their luck to be such as their common wealth must
needs obey the advice and pleasure of one Prince alone) to have a sovereign
lord, so wise so virtuous and so full of courtesy: Who albeit, in other things
he showed him self praise worthy, noble, and of gentle kind, yet vanquished
he him self in him self, and in the rest of his perfection, by that
indifferent justice, which made him wonderful, by reason he denied the same
to none, and in no one jot showed him self parcial to any, which thought by
him to be supported in their follies. And that which was more to be wondered in
him, and augmented the praise of his integrity in judgment, was, that he
punished in an other the thing, which by reason he ought to have pardoned and
remitted, he being attainted and well beaten with that disease. But the good
Lord applied to reason, to time, and to the gravity of the fact and quality
of the offended persons. For where the greatness of the deed surpasses all
occasion of pardon and mercy, the Prince, Judge, or Magistrate ought to
dispoile and put of his swetest affections, to apparel himself with rigor,
which reaches the knyfe into the hand of him that rules, of purpose that so
private familiarity, do not in the end raise in the subjects heart a contempt
of their superiors, and an (...) license, lawless to live at their pleasure.
Now the thing which I mean to tell, consists in the proof of a rare and
exquisite prudence, which seldom or never, harbors in young age, the heates
whereof, can not but with great difficulty, feel the coldness and correction
of reason: And likewise the causes from whence wisdoms force proceeds, do
rest in long experience of things, whereby men wax old in ripeness of wit
and their deeds become worthy of praise. Then Duke Alexander ordered so well his
estates, and kept such a goodly and plentiful Court, as the same gave place to
no Prince of Italic, how great or rich so ever it was, and that he did as well
for his own guard and honor as to show the natural stoutnesse of his courage,
not using for all that any insolency or unseemly dealing against the heinous
and ancient enemies of his house. Amongs this goodly troop of courtiers,
which ordinarily followed the Duke, there was a Florentine gentleman, very near
the Duke, and the best beloved of them all. This young Gentleman had a Manor
hard by Florence, where he was very well and stately lodged, which caused him
many times to forsake the City, with two of his companions, to recreate him
self in that pleasant place. It chanced upon a day, he being in his fieldish
house, bisides the which there was a Mill, the master whereof had a passing
fair daughter, whom the said Gentleman did well mark and behold, and with
her became straungely in love, in whom also appeared some Noble port, that
exceeded the blood and race whereof she came. But what? The heavens be not so
spare distributers of their gifts, but sometimes divide them with the least
measure, and at other times in equal weight or greatest heap, to them that be
of basest sort and popular degree, so well, as to the greatest men and of most
noble race. Rome sometimes has seen a bondsman and slave, sometimes a
runnagates son, for his wit and courage to bear the scepter in his hand, and
to decide the causes of a lofty people, who already by reason of his sleights
and practices, began to aspire the Empire of the whole world. And he that
within our Fathers remembrance desires to know what that great Tambarlane of
Tartarie was, the astonishment and ruin of all the (...) parts, shall well
perceive that his original sorted from the vulgar sort, and from the basest
place that was amongs all estates: whereby must be confessed, that the goodness
of nature is such and so great, that she will help her nourice children
(whatsoever they be,) the best she can. Not that I mean to infer hereby, but
that the blood of predecessors, with the institution of their posterity, much
augme^teth the force of the sprite, and accomplisheth that more sincerely
whereunto nature has given a beginning. Now to come to our purpose, this young
Courtier, taken and chained in the bands of love, (...) and clogged with the
beauty and good grace of that Country wench, (...) the means how he might
enjoy the thing after which he hoped. To love her, he demed it unworthy of his
degree. And yet he knew her to be such (by report of many) as had a very good
wit, tongue at will, and which is more esteemed, a Paragon and mirror of chaste
life and modesty. Which tormented this amorous Mounsier beyond mesure, and yet
changed not his affection, assuring himself, that at length he should attain
the end of his desires, and glut his insatiable hunger, which pressed him from
day to day to gather that soote and sauorous fruit which lovers so egerly sue
for at maidens hands of semblable age to this, who then was between. xbj. and.
xvtj. years. This lover did to understand to his companions his grief and
(...), who sorry for the same, assayed by all means, to make him forget it,
telling him that it was unseemly for a Gentleman of his account, to make
himself a (...) to yt people, which would come to pass if they knew how
indiscreetly he had placed his love: and that there were a number of fair and
honest gentlewomen to whom conuenably and with great contentation he might
address the same. But he which much less saw, than blind love him self yt
was his (...), and he that was more (...) of reason and advise than the Poets
feign Cupido to be naked of apparel, would not hear the good counsel, which his
companions gave him, but rather said that it was lost time for them to use
such words, for he had rather die, and to endure all the mocks and scoffs of
the world, than lose the most delicate pray (in his mind,) that could chance
into the hands of man, adding moreover, that the homeliness and rudeness of
the Country, had not so much anoyed his new beloved, but she deserved for her
beauty to be compared with the greatest Minion and finest attired gentlewoman
of the City. For this maiden had but the ornament and mynionnesse which nature
had enlarged, where other artificially force and by trumperies, usurp that
which the heavens deny them. Touching her virtue let that pass in silence,
sithe^s that she (quod he sighing) is too chaste and virtuous for one whom I
would choose to daly with all. My desire is not to make her a Lucrece, or some
of those ancient Matrones, which in elder years builded the temple of woman's
Fortune at Rome. The companions of this lover seeing how he was bent, promised
him what they were able to do, for accomplishment of his will, for the which
he thanked the^ very heartily, offering himself to like duty, where fortune
should prepare the proof of their affection and need of his (...) service. In
ye mean time, conceiving in his mind some new devise, which so sone as he
desired was not able to be brought to pass, and knowing yt the duke seldo^e
would have him out of his sight, began to muse upon lies, doing him to
understand yt he had necessary occasion, for a certain time to remain and be at
his country house. The duke which loved him, and who thought yt either he had
some secret sickness, or else some wench which he was loathe to discover
before his co^panio^s, gave him leave for a month, which so pleased the amorous
Gentleman, as he (...) for joy, and was not able to rest one hour before he
had (...) out his friends and companions, to mount on horsbacke to visit her,
that had under her power and obeisance the best portion of him, which was his
heart and his most secret thought. When he was come to his Country house,
he began to stalk abroad, and dance a round about the Mill, where his
beloved did dwell, who was not so foolish, but by and by suspected whereunto
those goings and commings of the Pilgrim tended, and for what pray he led his
Dogs in lease, and caused so many nets and cords to be displayed by hunters of
all ages and each sex, who to discover the Country, assayde to beat the
bushes, to take the beast at form. For which cause she also for (...) part,
began to fly the snares of such Birders, and raunging of the Dogs that vented
after her, and strayed not (...) the house of the good man her father: whereof
(...) poor lover conceived great despair, not knowing by what means he
might rouse the pray after which he hunted, ne find the means to do her to
understand his plaints and unmeasured grief of heart, the firm love and
sincere mind wherewith he was so earnestly bent, both to (...) and love her
above all other. And that which most of all increased his pain, was, that of so
great a troop of messages which he had sent, with gifts and promises the
better to atchieue his purpose, no one was able to take placeor force (never so
little) the chastity of that sober and modest maid. It chanced one day as the
Gentleman walking along a wood side newly felled, hard adjoining to his house,
by which there was a clear and goodly fountain shadowed between two thick
and lofty Maple trees, the Millers daughter went thither for water, and as she
had set down her pailes upon the fountains (...), her lover came unto her,
little thinking of such a joyful meeting, which he well declared by these
words: Praised be God, that when I hoped least of this good hap, he has
sent me hither, to see the only substance of my joy. Then tourning his face
toward the maiden, said unto her. Is it true that thou art here (or do I
dream) and so near to him yt most desires to gratify thee in any thing
wherein it may please thee to command him? Will thou not have pity upon the
pains and griefs which continually I endure for the extreme love I bear thee?
And saying so, he would have embraced her. But the maid which cared no more for
his flatteries, than before she did for his presents and messages, seeing the
same to tend to nothing else but to her ruin and great dishonor, with stout
countenance, and by her lively color declaring the chaste and virtuous motion
of her blood, said to this valiant Gentleman: How now (...), do you think
that the vileness of mine apparel, holds hidden less virtue, than the rich
and sumptuous ornaments of the greatest Ladies? Do you suppose that my
bringing up has bred in me such gross blood, as for your only pleasure, I
should corrupt the perfection of my mind, and blot the honor which hither to
so carefully I have kept and religiously preserved? Be sure that sooner death
shall separate the soul from my body, than willingly I would suffer the
overthrow and violation of my virginity. It is not the part of a Gentleman as
you be, thus to espy and subtely pursue us poor country maids to charm us
with your sleights and (...) talk. It is not the duty of a Gentleman to (...)
such vaunte currors to discover and put in peril, the honor of maidens and
honest wives, as heretofore you have done to me. It ought to suffice that you
received shame by repulse of your messa^gers, and not to come your self to be
partakers of their shame and confusion. And that is it that ought to (...) you
sweet heart (answered he) to take pity upon my grief, so plainly seeing that
unfeignedly I do love you, and ye my love is so well planted, as rather had I
suffer death, than occasion ye (...) offense that may displease you. Only I
beseech you, not to (...) your self so cruel unto him, who (...) all other,
has made you so frank an offer both of him self and of all that he has to
command. The maid not greatly trusting his words, feared that he prolo^ged the
time to make (...) stay til his servants came to steal her away. And therefore
without further answer, she taking up her pailes, and half running til she came
near the Mil, escaped his (...), telling her father no part of that talk
between them: who began already to doubt the treason, devised by the gentle
man, against the pudicitie of his daughter, unto whom he never disclosed his
suspicion, were it that he knew her to be virtuous enough, and constant to
resist the luring assaults of love, or considered the imbecillitie of our
flesh, and the malice of ye same, which daily aspireth to things thereunto
defended, and by laws limited and prescribed, which laws it ought not to
exceed, and yet thereof wishes the abolishment. And the goodman also did
fear that she did not care for the words, that he had said unto her, as already
resolved in opinion, that she wished and desired the love and acquaintance of
him whom she hated to death, and that vanquished by despite (for the little
regard had of her chastity) she would not give over her lover, which neyed
after none other prouender. Who seeing that the maide^ (...) forsaken him, and
little esteemed his amorous onset, outraged for love, and (...) with choler
bothtogether, (...) with him self, said. Ah foolish and dastard lover, what
(...) thou mean when thou had her so nere thee, in a place so commodious,
and was not able, ne durst gainesay thee? And what know thou if she came to
ease thy pain and finish thy troublesome travels? Surely I suppose she did so,
but that shame and duty forced her to use such words, to make me think, that
lightly she would not be overcome by my persuasions. And put the case that it
were not so, who could have let me to take by force that, whereunto willingly
she would not accord. But what is she, to be revenged of such an injury? She
is for conclusion the daughter of a Miller, and may make her vaunte, that she
has mocked a Gentleman, who being alone with her, and burning with love,
durst not staunche his thirst (although full dry) so near the fountain. And
by God (said he, rising from a green bank near the fountains side) if I die
therefore, I will have it either by love or force. In this wicked and tyrannical
mind, he returned to his place, where his companyons seeing him so out of
quiet, said unto him: Is this the guise of gentle mind, to abase it self to
the pursuit of so simple a wench? Do not you know the malice of that sex, and
the guiles wherewith those Serpents poysen men? Care you so little for a woman
as she does for you, and then will she embrace you and make much of you, her
only study is (which I believe) to frame her self against all that, for which
humble suit is made. But admit, that a woman has some quality to draw men to
love her, honor and serve her, truly that office and duetifull deuoire ought
to be employed in service of them, that be honorable, in sprite and judgment
of gentle kind, which no doubt will (...) the merit of the suter. And
certesse I am of opinion that a man may vainly consume a year or two in
pursuit and service of this mealy Country wenche, so well as address his
love in the obedience of some fair and honest Gentlewoman: which courteously
and with some favor will recompense, the travails of her servant, where
that rude and sottish gyrle, by pride will vaunt and look a lofte, at the
honor done unto her, despise them whose worthiness she knows not, and
whom neither she nor the best of her led, be worthy to serve in any respect:
will you know then what I think best for you to do? Mine advise is then, that
one of thief euenings, she be trussed up in a male and brought hither, or else
in place where you think good, that you may enjoy at pleasure the beauty of
her whom you do praise and wonder at so much. And afterward let her
dissemble if she lust, and make a Jewel of her chastity and modesty when she
has not to triumph over you, by bearing away the victory of your pursutes. Ah
my good friend, answered the desperate lover, how rightly you touch the most
dangerous place of all my wound, and how sovereign a salve and plaster you
apply thereunto. I had thought truly to entreat you of that, whereof even now
you have made the ouerture, but fearing to offend you, or too much usurp upon
your friendship, rather had I suffer a death continual, than raise one point
of offense, or discontentation in them, which so frankly have offered to do me
pleasure, whereof (by Gods assistance) I hope to be acquieted with all duty and
office of friendship. Now (...) it, to put in proof, the effect of your
devise, and that so shortly as I can. In like manner you see that the term of
my here abode, will shortly be expired, and if we be once at the Court,
impossible it is for me to recover so good occasion, and peradventure she will
be married, or some other shall carry away the pray, after I have beaten the
bushe. The plot then of this maidens rape, was resolved upon, and the first
espied occasion taken. But the lover which feared least this heat of his
companio^s would cool, solicited them so much, as the execution was ordained
the following night: which they did, not so much for the pleasure of their
friend, to whom in such adventures they ought to deny all help, (since
friendeship ought not to pass, Sed (...) ad ar as, as Pericles the Athenian
said, so far as was sufferable by the laws of God) as for that they were of
nature of the self same tramp, which their passionate companion was, and would
have made no conscience to enterprise the same for themselves, although the
other had not told them his affections. These also be the fruits of unruled
youth, wherein only the verdure and greenness of the age bears greatest sway,
the will whereof reason can not restrain, which easily waltreth and tosseth
sooner to the carnal part, than to that which tends to the pasture and
co^tentation of the mind. The next night after, they. (...). came accompanied
with. v. or. vj. servants (so honest as their masters) in armure and weapons
well appointed to defend and hurt, that if any resistance were made, they might
be able to repel their adversaries. Thus about two of the clock in the night
repaired they to the Mill, the heavens having thrown their mantell over the
vaporous earth, and (...) her face with their veil obscure and dark, and yet
not such, but that the air was cloudy clear, and when no man doubted of so
great offe^se, and of such unhappy rape, they brake into the pore millers
house, between whose arms they took away his daughter dear, and almost dead
for fear, piteously began to cry for help, defending her self so well as she
could from these Thieves and Murderers. The desolate father, raging with no
less fury than the Hircanian Tigre, when her Faucons be killed or taken away,
ran first to one, and then to another, to let them from carrying of her away,
for whom they came. In the end the amorous rauisher of his daughter said unto
him: Father, Father, I advise thee to get thee hence if thou love thy life, for
thy force is too weak to resist so many, the least of whom is able to cool
this thy foolish heat and choler, for the which I would be sorry, for the great
love I bear unto thy daughter, who (I hope) before she depart my company, shall
have wherewith to be contented, and thou cause to pacify this immoderate rage
which in vain you yalpest forth against this troop. Ah false knave and thief,
(said the honest poor man) is it thou then, which by thine infamous
filthiness and insaciable knauerie, do dishonor the commendable fame of my
daughter, and by like means (...) the hoped years of me her poor unhappy
father, losing through thy wickedness, the staff and stay of mine old aged
life? Think thou Traitor that living till this day (for all my poverty) in
reputation of an honest man in mine old days, will become an unshamefast and
vile minister and Chapman of my daughters maidenhoode and virginity? No knave,
think not that I forget the wrong received of thee, for which by some means
or other, I will purchase just revenge either upon thee or thine. The Gentleman
caring little or nothing for the old man's words, having in hand his desired
spoil, commanded his men to march before with the maiden, leaving behind
the pore old man which thundered against them a thousand (...) and cursses,
threatening and reuiling them, by all the terms he could devise, desirous (as I
think) to have them turn back to kill him. But thereunto they gave so little
heed, as when he demanded to leave his daughter behind them: to whom the
amorouse courtier addressing himself, began to make much of her and kiss her,
and assayed by all means with pleasant words and many sweet promises to
comfort her: but yt pore wench knowing full well, that they went about to play
the butchers with her chastity and shamefastness, and to commit murder with
the flower of her virginity, (...) to cry so piteously with dolorous voice, as
she would have moved to compassion the hardest hearts that ever were, except the
same which craved nothing more tha^ the spoil of that his swetest enemy, who
her self detected and blasphemed her unhappy fate and constellation. When she
saw her virtue ready to be spoiled by one, who (not in marriage joined) went
about to violat and possess the same, and knew yt afterward he would vaunt
himself for the victory of such a precious price, Alas (said she) is it
possible that the sovereign justice of God can abide a mischief so great and
curssed, and that the voice of a pore wretched (...) maid cannot be heard in
the presence of the mighty Lord above? Why may not I now rather suffer death
than the infamy which I see to wander before mine eyes? O yt good old man my
dear and loving father, how far better had it been for thee to have slain
me with thy dagger, between the hands of these most wicked thieves, than to let
me go to be the enemies pray of my virtue and thy reputation. O happy a
hundred hundred times be ye, which have already passed the inevitable tract of
death when ye were in cradle, and I pore unhappy we^ch no less blessed had I
been if partaker of your joy, where now I rest alive to feel the smart and
anguish of that death more egre to support, than that which deuideth the body
and soul. The Gentleman offended with those complaints, began to threaten that
he would make her forget that her disordered behauioure, saying that she must
change an other tune, and that her plaints were to no purpose amongs them which
cared not, or yet were bent to stay upon those her womanishe tears,
lamentations and cries. The poor Maiden hearing that, and seeing that she
dysparckled her voice into the air in vain, began to hold her peace, which
caused the Lover to speak unto her these words: And what my wench? do you
think it now so (...) or strange, if the heat of love that I bear to you,
forces me to use such violence? Alas it is not malice or evil will that
causes me to do the same, it is love which ca^ not be enclosed, but must
needs manifest his force. Ah that you had felt, what I do suffer and endure
for love of you, I believe then you would not be so hard hearted, but have pity
upon the grief whereof you should have proved the vehemency. Whereunto the
maid answered nothing but tears and sighs, wringing her arms and hands, and
sometimes making warrevpon her fair hair. But all these feminine fashions
nothing moved this galla^t, and less removed his former desire to have her,
which he achieved in dispite of her teeth, so soon as he arrived at his own
house. The re^nant of the night they lay together, where he used her with all
such kind of flattering and loving speech, as a lover of long time a suter
could devise to do to her, whom at length he did possess. Now, all these
flattering follies tended only to make her his own, to keep her in his
Country house for his pleasure. She that for her age (as before is said) was
of condition sage, and of gentle mind, began subtilely to dissemble and feign
to take pleasure in that which was to her more bitter than any Aloes or wood
of Myrrha and more against her heart than remembrance of death, which still
she wished for remedy of her grief, and voluntarily would have killed her self
like a Lucrece, if the fear of God and dreadful loss of body and soul had
not turned her mind, and also hoped in God that the rauisher should repair
the fault which he had committed, and bear the penance for his temeritie,
whereof she was no whit deceived, as well ye shall perceive, by that which
immediately does follow.

Now whilst the rauisher (...) his pleasure with his rape, the miserable
father made the air to sound with his complaints, accusing fortune for
letting the whorish varlet so to pass, without doing him to feel the
lustiness of his age, and the force that yet reasted in his furrowed face, and
corpse withered with length of years. In the end knowing that his plaintes,
curses, and desire, were thrown forth in vain, perceiving also his force
unequal to deal with such an enemy, and to get again by violence his stolen
daughter, or to recover her by that means whereby she was taken away, he
determined the next day to go and complain to the Duke: and upon that
determination he laid him down to sleep under the trees, which joined to the
fountain, where sometimes the Courtier had talked with his daughter. And
seeing that the element began to show some bryghtnesse interpaled with colors
of White, Yealow and Red, signs preceding the rising of fresh Aurora, started
from his sleep, and took his way to Florence whither he came, upon the opening
of the City gates. Then going to the Palace of the Duke, he tarried until he
saw the Prince go forth to service. The good man seeing him of whom he
attended to receive succoure, favor and justice, began to freat and rage for
remembrance of his received wrong, and was ashamed to see himself in place not
accustomed: and albeit it grieved his heart with hardy speech to presume in
presence of so many, yet the just anger and desire of vengeance emboldned him
so much, as kneling upon his knees before the Majesty of the Duke, aloud he
spoke these words: Alas (my sovereign Lord) if ever your grace had pity upon
a desolate man, and full of despair, I humbly beseech the same that now you
do regard the misory which on every side assaileth me. Have pity upon the
poverty of that unfortunate old man against whom one has done such wrong, as
I hope by force of your virtue and accustomed justice, you will not leave a
sin so detestable without deserved punishment, for respect of mischiefs that
may ensue where such wickedness shall be dissembled and suffered without due
correction: Saying so, the great tears ran down his grislye beard, and by
reason of his interrupted sighs and continual sobbes, the panting of his
stomach might easily have been perceived all riueld for age, and Sunneburned
with heat and continual Country travail: and that which moved most the
standers by, was the ruefull look of the good old man, who casting his looks
here and there, beheld each one with his holow and dolorous eyes, in such wise
as if he had not spoken any word, his countenance would have moved the Lords
to have compassion upon his misery, and his tears were of such force, as the
Duke which was a wise man, and who measured things by reasons guide, provided
with wisdom, and foreseeing not without timely judgment, would know the cause
which made that man so to make his playnt, and notwithstanding assailed (with
what suspicion I know not) would not have him openly to tell his tale, but
leading the old man aside, he said unto him: My friend, (...) that grievous
faults and of great importance, ought grievously and openly to be punished,
yet it chances oftentimes, that he which in a heat and choler does
execution for the guilt, (although that justly after he has disgested his
rage, at leisure he repents his rigor and over sudden severity, (offense
being natural in man) may sometime (where slander is not evident) by mild and
merciful means forget the same without infringing or violating the holy and
civil constitutions of Lawmakers. I speak thus much because my heart does
throbbe that some of my house have done some filthy fault against thee or some
of thine. Now I would not that they openly should be slaundered, and yet less
pretend I to leave their faults unpunished, specially such as by offensive
crime the common peace is molested, wherein my desire is, that my people do
live. For which purpose God has constituted Princes and Potestates as
shepherds and guids of his (...), to the end that the (...) fury of the
vicious, might, not destroy, devour, and scatter the impotent (...) of no
valor if it be forsaken and left forlorn by the mighty arms of
Principalities and Monarchies. A singular modesty doubtless, and an incredible
example of clemency in him, whom his Citizens thought to be a Tyrant and
unjust usurper of a free Seigniorie, who so privily, and with such
familiarity, as the friend could wish of his companion, hearkened to the
cause of a poor Country man, and moreover his modesty so great, as he would
it not to be known what fault it was, or else that the offenders should
publicly be accused, offering for all that to be the revenger of the wrong
done unto the poor, and the punisher of the injury exercised against ye
desolate; a woork certainly worthy of a true christian Prince, and which
establishes kingdoms decayed, conserueth those that be, rendering the Prince
to be beloved of God, and feared of his Subjects. The pore old man seeing the
Duke in so good mind, and that accordingly he demanded to know the wrong
done unto him, the name of the factor, and that also he had promised him his
help and ryghtfull correction due unto the deserved fault, the good old man I
say conceiving courage, recited from point to point the whole discourse of the
rape, and the violence done upon his poor virtuous daughter, (...) claring
besides the name and surname of those which accompanied the Gentleman, the
author of that conspiracy, who (as we have already said) was one that was in
greatest favor with the Duke: who not withstanding the love that he bare to the
accused, hearing the unworthiness of a deed so execrable, said: As God lives
this is a detestable fact, and well deserves a sharp and cruel punishment.
Not withstanding (...) take good heed that you do not mistake ye same, by
accusing one for an other, for the Gentleman whom thou haste named to be the
rauisher of thy daughter, is of all men deemed to be very honest, and do well
assure thee that if I find thee a liar, thy head shall answer for example to
each false accuser and slaunderer in time to come. But if the matter be so true
as thou have said, I promise thee by the faith I bear to God, so well to
redress thy wrong, as thou shall have cause to be thoroughly satisfied with my
justice. To whom the good old man thus answered. My Lord the matter is so
true, as at this day he keeps my daughter (like a common strumpet) in his
house. And if it please your highness to send thither, you shall know that I
do use no false accusation or lying words before you, my Lord and Prince, in
presence of whom as before the minister and lieuetenant of God, man ought not
to speak but truly and religiously. Since it is so, said the Duke get thee
home to thy house where God willing I will be this day at dinner, but take heed
upon thy life, thou say nothing to any man what so ever it be: for the rest let
me alone, I will provide according to reason. The good man almost so glad for
his good exploit, as the day before he was sorrowful for his loss, joyfully
went home to his homely house and Country cabaue, which he (...) to be made
ready so well as he could, attending the coming of his deliverer, succor,
support, and judge, who when he had heard service, commanded his horse to be
sadled: for (said he) I hear say there is a wild Boar haunting hereby, so
well lodged as is possible to see, we will go thither to wake him from his
sleep and ease, and use that pass time til dinner be ready. So departing from
Florence, he rode straight unto yt Mil where his dinner was made ready by his
servants. There he dined very soberly, and using few words unto his
company, sat still all pensive, musing upon that he had to do. For on the
one side the gravity of yt (...) moved him rigorously to chastise him which
had committed the sante with all cruelty and insolency. On the other side the
love which he bare him (mollifying his heart) made him change his mind, and to
moderate his sentence. The Princes mind thus wandering between love and
rigor, one brought him word that the Dogs had rousde the great est Heart that
ever he saw: which news pleased him very much, for by that means he sent
away the multitude of his Gentlemen to follow yt chase, retaining with him his
most familiar friends, and those that were of his privy and secret council,
whom he would to be witnesses of that which he intended to do, and causing
his host to come before him, he said: My friend, thou must bring us to the
place whereof this morning thou toldest me, that I may discharge my promise. The
Courtiers wo^dred at those words, ignorant whereunto yt same were spoken: but
the good man whose heart lept for joy, as already feeling some great benefit at
hand, and honor prepared for the beautifying of his house, seeing the Duke on
horse back, ran bisides him in stead of his Lackey, with whom the Prince
held much pleasant talk all along the way as they went together, (...) they
had not gone sarre, but the Gentleman the (...), with his Companions,
understanding that the Duke hunted there aboutes, came to do him (...): and
his Fortune was such, as he nor any of his friends perceived the old man: by
means whereof the Duke pursued the pray whereof they nothing doubted. For that
cause the said (...) said to his Prince: My Lord, if fortune had so much
favored me, as I might have known of your coming into these quarters, I
would have done my duty to entertain you, not as appertains to the
greatness of your excellency, but according to the ability of the least, and
yet the most obedient of your (...). To whom the Duke dissembling his anger
said: Sir, I dined here hard by within my tents, not knowing that your house
was so near us, but since that I have met you upon your (...) Marches and
(...), I will not go hence before I see your lodging: for so far as I can
judge by the outward part of this goodly building, me thinks the workman
has not forgotten any thing that should serve for the setting forth and
ornament of this part of the house, which for the quantity is one of the
fairest plottes that I have seen.

So approaching the Castle, yt Duke lighted, to view the commodities of the
place, and specially the image, for which alone he was departed from his City,
whereof the Master of the house (drunk with the sudden pleasure to see the
Duke there) thought nothing. So descending into the (...) Court, they saw a
Marble fountain that discharged the water in four great gutters, received by
four naked Nymphs, and by them poured forth into (...), (...) wrought with
(...), where was an armed Knight, lying under an high and broad tree, which
ouershadowed the Fountain. And hard by, they espied a little door which showed
the way into (...) singular and well planted a Garden, as ever the delicious
and pleasant Gardens were of Alcinoe. For in the same (bysides the Artificial
(...), and ordinary travel of the gardener) nature produced four Fountains in
the four corners, making the place and plain of the Garden equally parted in
fouresquare form. Now these fountains watered all the fair knots of the
same, without any pain to the gardener, except to open certain little (...),
whereby the water sprang and ran, where he thought it needful. I will here
leave to speak of the Trees and fruits divided in flue form order, the
Laberynthes subtilely and finely made: the sweet Herbers yelding such
contentation to the eye, as if the Duke had had no greater respect to the wrong
done to the Millers daughter, than incited with the gentleness of the master
of the house, and the singularity of the place, perchance he might have
forgotten himself within that little earthly Paradise. And to perform the
excellency of the place, the working hand and industry of man, helped by the
benefit of Nature, had wrought a (...) or (...) very deep, wherein were
bestowed a good number of (...), and wherein the immortal voice of an Echo
answered their talk with a triple voice in that profound and earthly place:
which moved the Duke to call the Gentleman unto him, unto whom he said: If it
be so, that the rest of the house do mat (...) with that which I have already
seen, I am out of doubt it is one of the (...) and most delectable (...) at
(...) (...) (...) the whole compass of Italy. Wherefore my friend, I pray thee
that we may see the hole, (...) for the conte^tation of our minds, and also
that I may make some vaunt that I have seen the rarest and best furnished
little house that is within all the jurisdiction of Florence. The Gentleman
bathed in ease and full of pleasure, seeing that the Duke liked so well his
house, brought him from chamber to chamber, which was enriched either with
stately tapissarie of Turkey making, or with rich Tables divinely wrought, with
vtensils so neat and fit, as the Duke could cast his (...) upon none of them,
but he was driven into an admiration and wonder. And the further he went, the
greater he saw the increase, and almost a regeneration, or as I may say, a new
birth of rare things, which made yt littleness of the place more stately and
wonderful: wherefore he greatly esteemed him in his mind which had devised
the magnificence of such a furniture. After then that he had visited the
Portals, Galleries, Parlers, Chambers, Garrets, Wardrobes, Closets, and
chiefest places of that house, they came into a gallerie, which had a direct
prospect upon the Garden, at the end whereof there was a chamber shut, over
which there was such Antike and Imbossed work, as it was marvel to behold,
and upon the garden side in like workmanship, ye might have viewed a troop of
Nymphs flying (a (...) the side of a wood adjoining upon a great river) an
hierde of Satires, making as though they would have ouerrunne them: a pleasure
it was to see their (...) mouths, their eyes fixed upon the place where (...)
clouenfooted pursuters were, and the countenance of them which so well
expressed their fear, as there (...) nothing but speech. Moreover a better
sight it was to behold the Satire Bucks, with displayed throfe, and their
fingers pointing at the bast of those fearful (...), as though they mocked
their (...) flyghte. Within a while after ye might have seen Hercules lying a
bed with his wife, toward whom a Eaunus came thinking to enjoy the beauty and
embraceme^ts of the sleeping dame. But fayrer it was to see how that strong
(...) gave him the mock, and strained him so hard, as he thought his belly
would burst. The Duke beholding as he thought, the fairest place of the house so
shut, by and by suspected the truth of the cause. For the Gentleman knowing
the coming of the Duke, had withdrawn his woman into the same, for that it
was the most secret chamber of his house, and the furdest from all ordinary
service. And therefore said the Duke: wherefore is not this chamber opened
unto us so well as the rest? I suppose the same to be your treasure house, and
the storehouse of your most delicat things: but you may be assured that we be
not come hither to trouble you, but only (as we think) to do you pleasure. My
Lord (said the Gentleman) the place is to far out of order, at this time to
show your grace. Moreover I know not where the keys be, for this morning the
keeper of my house is gone unto the city, and I can not tell to whom he has
delivered the same. The Duke which heard the end of his excuse, not accepting
the same for the price which the courtier would and thought to have sold it,
was sure then of that which before he did suspect. Wherefore with furious
countenance he said unto him: Go too, go too, either with the key, or (...)
it, let this door be opened, that I may see all thy secrets within. The
rauisher seeing yt Duke to be earnest, could not tell at the first face, of what
wood to make his arrows, and stood (...) (...), and surprised with a new
fear. In the end notwithstanding, playing the good fellow, he went unto
(...) Duke, in whose (...) smiling he whispered (because he knew right well
that the Duke was an indifferent good companion, and loved so well his
neighbors wife as his own.) And said: My Lord there is a pretty which within,
whom I do keep, and would not show her to any living man but to you. That is
the cause I ask, (said the Duke) let us see her that I may give judgment of
her beauty, and tell you whither she be worthy of keeping or not. The master
of yt house opened the chamber door, thinking to have gained much, and supposed
to insummate himself the better into the favor of the Duke, but immediately he
saw himself far deceived of his account. For the ravished and shamefast
maiden coming for the of the Chamber with her hair about her eyes, and her
garments berent and torn, her stomach and breast all naked and discovered, her
face and eyes all blubbered with tears, like a desperate woman threw her self
at the Princes feet, saying: Ah (my Lord) behold here, and have pity upon
the most unfortunate wenche of all most wretched caytife women, who shamefully
and (...) has been abused and defloured by him, which impudently dares to
bring you into the place the witness of his abominable and wicked life. The
Duke seeing this sight, and having compassion upon the maiden, turned his face
toward the Gentleman and his Companions (which by chance were come thither,
as the Duke was entered into the Gallerie) not with mild and pleasant
countenance as he showed from the beginning, but with a look so grave and
severe, as the hardest of the company could not tell what to do, or what answer
to make him. Upon them then began the righteous Prince to vomit his
displeasure, saying: (...) this the (...) of the blood whereof thou art
descended, to rauishe thy neighbors daughters under mine obeisance and
protection? Do thou thus abuse the familiarity which hitherto I have showed
unto thee? Think thou that the laws be perverted by seeing some change in
the common wealth of Florence? No I assure thee, for so long as the soul shall
reside within my body, I will be he that shall pursue the wicked with all
extremity, and shall not endure the oppressyon of the poor, enough afflicted
with their own proper misery. O God could I have thought that a Gentleman of
my house, would have been so prodigal of his honor, as to soil his hands
so (...) by rauishing of them which ought to be required, and to dishonor
them in place where their virtue ought to serve for a general example? I
cannot tell what stays me from cutting of those curssed heads of yours from
your shoulders like arrant traitors and thieves as you be. Get ye hence ye
infamous villains and beastly Ruffians, the troublers of your neighbors rest,
and the spoylers of the same of her, that is more worth than all ye together.
Then speaking to the Maid he said: Rise up my wench, and on me repose thy
comfort, for I promise thee by the Faith of a Gentleman, that I will do thee
such reason, and use thee so uprightly, as both my Consciente shall be
quieted, thou contented, and thine honor restored for the wrong and injury
which it has received of these Gallantes. And by and by he commanded the
Miller to come before him, and all those whom he had brought with him to
assist his doings, before whom he caused to be brought both the ravished
maiden, and the condemned of the rape: unto whom he said: This is the pray my
friends that I determined to take, which I have done without toils, nets, or
chaunting of the Dogs. Behold, I pray you the honor which my household
servants do unto my house, as to ouerrun the simple Country people, and
ravish their daughters between the arms of their proper parents, as to break,
beat down, and overthrow the doors of their houses, who living under the
laws of our city, ought to enjoy like privilege of liberty and franchize. If
one respect (which I will not disclose) did not impeche and stay me, I would do
such cruel justice upon the offenders, as the posterity should make report
thereof. Notwithstanding it shall suffice that they receive this shame before
you all, by (...) themselves banquished of a crime, which for expiation and
revenge, deserves most shameful death and to receive of me for proof of my
mercy, an undeserved pardon of their fault, with condition nevertheless that
thou (speaking to the Gentleman rauisher) shall take this maiden to wife, (for
otherwise thou art not able to repair the honor thou have taken from her) and
shall love her so dearly, as fondly (...) she was beloved of thee. I give her
unto thee to esteem and love her so much, as if she were the very sister of me
the Duke of Florence, who commands thee for the ransom and redemption of
thy head, presently to marry her. I will moreover, and ordain by reason of her
fathers poverty, that for the wrong which he has received of you three, his
daughter shall be endowed with two thousand Crowns by him that marries her,
and with a thousand of either of the two other, to the intent that if her
husband die (without heir,) she have wherewith honestly to maintain her
degree, and the honest port of her house. And hereof I will that without delay
a contract be made, and a public instrument of good record in rolled,
swearing once again before thee, that if I understand that thou use her
otherwise, tha^ a wife ought to be by her husband, I will deal such punishment
and correction over thee, as all men in time to come shall take example. The
Gentleman which expected no better meede than death, joyful of that sentence,
fell down prostrate before the Duke in sign of consent, and the like did his
Companions. But the joy of the Miller and his daughter can not be expressed,
who extolled the virtue and justice of their Prince up into the heavens: to
whom with such humility they rendered their humble thanks, as he would do that
saw him self in so great calamity, and brought to such dishonor as erst they
were seen to be, by means of him that acknowledged one of them for his son,
and the other for her lawful spouse. Thus was the marriage made in presence of
the Duke, with so great joy and contentation of all parts, as there was rage
and trouble for yt rape of the Bride. The Duke being returned to Florence, the
brute of this act incontinently was (...) almost throughout the Region of
Italy, and this judgment no less praised, than the sentence which king
Solomon gave upon yt controversy of the two harlots for the living child,
which either of them claimed for her own. And for this cause was he commended
above any other Prince or Lord which in times passed did command or rule the
Common wealth in all the Country of Thuscan. In this wise that modesty made
him worthy of the Principality, which almost against all right he had
usurped, and of a praise which shall no less continue, than the memory of man
is able to extend the same from one generation to an other, and which Covetous
of the praise of a Prince so virtuous, just and modest, shall not cease to
illustrate and gloriously advance him in open evidence, to the end that his
like exercise the same in like things, or of greater consequence, for not
sufferyng venomous and unprofitable herbs to grow in their Common wealth.
Within the Garden whereof, a little nuldew or untimely rain, is able to mar
and corrupt all the good seeds and plants sown and grifted before.
Considering that wicked weeds and dangerous impes take deeper root than
those that bear a good and sauorous fruit, for the conservation whereof, the
diligent husbandman imployeth almost all the seasons of the year.

The Duchess of Malfi.
The Unfortunate marriage of a Gentleman, called ANTONIO BOLOGNA, with the
Duchess of MALFI, and the pitiful death of them both.

The. xxiij. Nouel.
THe greater Honor and authority men have in this world. and the greater their
estimation is, the more sensible and notorious are the faults by them
committed, and the greater is their (...). In like manner more difficult it is
for yt man to tolerate and sustain Fortune, which all the days of his life
has lived at his (...), if (...) chance he fall into any great necessity,
than for him which ncuer felt but woe, mishappe, and adversity. Dyonisius the
Tyrant of Sicilia, felt greater pain when he was expelled his kingdom, than
Milo did, being vanished from Rome. For so much as the one was a Sovereign
Lord, the son of a King, a Iusticiarie on earth, and the other but a simple
Citizen of a City, wherein the people had Laws, and the laws of Magistrates
had in reverence. So likewise the fall of a high and lofty Tree, makes a
greater noise, than that which is low and little. High Towers and stately
Palaces of Princes be seen further off, than the poor Cabans and hontely
shephierds Sheepecotes. The Walls of lofty Cities salute the viewers of the
same farther of, than the simple caves, which the poor do dig below the
Mountain rocks. Wherefore it behooves the Noble, and such as have charge of
Common wealth, to live an honest life, and bear their port vpryght, that none
have cause to take ill example upon dyscourse of their deeds and naughty
life. And above all, that modesty ought to be kept by women, whom as their
race, Noble birth, authority and name, makes them more famous, eue^ so their
virtue, honesty, chastity, and continency more praise worthy. And behouefull
it is, that like as they wish to be honored above all other, so their life do
make them worthy of that honor, without disgracing their name by deed or
word, or blemishing that brightness which may commend the same. I greatly
fear that all the Princely factes, the exploits and conquests done by the
Babylonian Queen Semyramis, never was reco^mended with such praise, as her
vice had shame, in records by those which left remembrance of ancient acts.
Thus I say, because a woman being as it were the Image of sweetness, courtesy
and shame fastness, so soon as she steppeth out of the right trade, and
leaves the smell of her duty and modesty, bisides the denigration of her
honor, thrusts her self into infinite troubles and causes the ruin of such
which should be honored and praised, if women's allurement solicited them not to
folly. I will not here endeavor my self to seek for examples of Samson, Solomon
or other, which suffered the^ selves fondly to be abused by women: and who by
mean of them be tumbled into great faults, and have incurred greater perils.
Contenting my self to recite a right pitiful History done almost in our time,
when the French under the leading of that notable (...) Gaston de Foix,
vanquished the force of Spain and Naples at the journey of Rauenna in the time
of ye French king called Jews the twelfth, who married the Lady Marie,
daughter to king Henry the seventh, and sister to the victorious Prince of
worthy memory king Henry the eight, wife (after the death of the said Jews)
to the puissant Gentleman Charles, late Duke of Suffolk.

In that very time then lived a Gentleman of Naples, called Antonio Bologna,
who having been Master of household to, Federicke of Aragon, sometime King of
Naples, after the French had expelled those of Aragon out of that City, the
said Bologna retired into France, and thereby recovered the goods, which he
possessed in his country. The Gentleman bisides that he was valiant of his
person, a good man of war, and well esteemed amongs the best, had a passing
number of good graces, which made him to be beloved and cherished of every
wight: and for riding and managing of great horse, he had not his fellow in
Italy: he could also play exceeding well and trim upon the Lute, whose faining
voice so well agreed thereunto, that the most melancholic persons would forget
their heaviness, upon hearing of his heavenly noise: and bisides these
qualities, he was of personage comely, and of good proportion. To be short,
Nature having travailed and dispoyled her Treasure house for enriching of him,
he had by Art gotten that, which made him most happy and worthy of praise,
which was, the knowledge of good letters, wherein he was so well trained, as by
talk and dispute thereof, he made those to blushe that were of that state and
profession. Antonio Bologna having left Federicke of Aragon in France, who
expulsed out of Naples was retired to king Jews, went home to his house to
live at rest and to avoid trouble, forgetting the delicates of Courts and
houses of great men, to be the only husband of his own revenue. But what: It
is impossible to eschew that which the heavens have determined upon us: and
less the unhappy, which seems to follow us, as it were naturally proceeding
from our mothers womb: In such wise as many times, he which seems the wisest
man, guided by misfortune, hastes himself with stouping head to fall headlong
into his death and ruin. Even so it chanced to this Neapolitane Gentleman:
for in the very same place where he attained his adua^cement, he received also
his diminution and decay, and by that house which preferred him to what he had,
he was deprived, both of his estate and life: the discourse whereof you shall
understand. I have told you already, that this Gentleman was Master of the
King of Naples household, and being a gentle person, a good Courtier, well
trained up, and wise for government of himself in the Court and in ye service
of Princes, the Duchess of Malfi thought to entreat him that he would serve
her, in that office which he served the king. This Duchess was of the house of
Aragon, and sister to yt Cardinal of Aragon, which the^ was a rich and puissant
personage. Being thus resolved, was well assured yt she was not deceived: for so
much as she was persuaded, yt Bologna was devoutly affected to ye house of
Aragon, as one brought up there from a child. Wherefore sending for him home to
his house, she used unto him these, or like words: Master Bologna, since your
ill fortune, nay rather ye unhap of our whole house is such, as your good Lord
and master has forgon his state and dignity, and yt you therwithall have lost
a good Master, without other recompense but the praise which every man gives
you for your good service, I have thought good to entreat you to do me yt
honor, as to take charge of the government of my house, and to use the same, as
you did that of the king your master. I know well that the office is to
unworthy for your calling: notwithstanding you be not ignorant what I am, and
how near to him in blood, to who^ you be so faithful and loving a servant:
and albeit ye that I am no Queen, endued with great revenue, yet with that
little I have, I bear a Princely heart: and such as you by experience do know
what I have done, and daily do to those which depart my service, reco^pensing
them according to their pain and travail: magnificence is observed as well in
the Courts of poor Princes, as in the stately Palaces of great Kings and
monarchs. I do remember that I have red of a certain noble gentleman, a
Persian borne, called Ariobarzanes, who used great examples of courtesy and
stoutnes toward king Artaxerxes; wherewith ye king wondered at his magnifice^ce,
and confessed himself to be vanquished: you shall take advise of this request,
and I in the mean time do think you will not refuse ye same, as well for that
my demand is just, as also being assured, ye our house and race is so well
imprinted in your heart, as it is impossible yt the memory thereof can be
defaced. The gentleman hearing yt courteous demand of the Duchess, knowing
himself how deeply bound he was to yt name of Aragon, and led by sour
unknown provocation to his great ill luck, answered her in this wise: I would
to god madame, yt with so good reason and equity I were able to make denial of
your (...), as justly you require the same: wherefore for yt bounden duty which
I owe to yt name and memory of the house of Aragon, I make promise yt I shall
not only sustain ye trauail, but also the danger of my life, daily ready to be
offered for your service: but I feel in mind I know not what, which (...) me
to (...) my self to live alone at home at my house, and to be content with the
little I have, forgoing the su^ptuouse charge of Princes houses, which life
would be well liked of my self, were it not for the fear that you madame should
be discontented with my refusal, and that you should conceive, yt I disdained
your offered charge, or co^tempne your Court for respect of the great Office I
bare in the Court of the King; my Lord and Master. For I cannot receive more
honor; than to serve her, which is of that stock and royal race. Therefore at
all adue^tures I am resolved to obey your will, and humbly to satisfy yt duty of
yt charge wherein it pleases you to employ me, more to pleasure you for
avoiding of displeasure: the^ for desire I have to live an honorable life in yt
greatest princes house of yt world, since I am discharged from him in whose name
rests my (...) and only stay, thinking to have lived a solitary life, and to
pass my (...) in rest, except it were in ye pore ability of my service to yt
house, whereunto I am bound continually to be a faithful servant. Thus Madame,
you see me to be the rediest man of the world, to fulfill the request, and
accomplish such other service wherein it shall please you to employ me. The
Duchess thanked him very heartily, and gave him charge of all her household
train, commanding (...) person to do him such reverence as to her self, and
to obey him as the chief of all her family. This Lady was a widow, but a
passing fair Gentlewoman, fine and very young, having a young son under her
guard and keeping, left by the deceased Duke her husband, together with the
Duchy, the inheritance of her child. Now consider her personage being such,
her easy life and delicate bringing up, and daily seeing the youthely trade and
manner of Courtiers life, whether she felt her (...) pricked with any desire,
which burned her heart yt more incessantly, as the flames were hidden and
covert: from the outward show whereof she stayed her self so well as she could.
But she following best advise, rather esteemed the proof of marriage, than to
burn with so little fire, or to incur the exchange of lovers, as many
unshame fast stru^pets do, which be rather given over, tha^ satisfied with
pleasure of love. And to say the truth, they be not guided by wisdoms lore,
which suffer a maiden ripe for marriage to be long unwedded, or yo^g wife long
to live in widows state, what assurance so ever they make of their chaste and
stayed life. For books be so full of such enterprises, and houses stored with
examples of such stolen and secret practices, as there need no further proof
for assurance of our cause, the same of it self being so plain and manifest.
And a great folly it is to build the fa^tasies of chastity, amid the follies
of worldly pleasures. I will not go about to make those matters impossible, ne
yet will judge at large, but that there be some maidens and wives, which wisely
can contain themselves amongs the troop of amorous suitors. But what? the
experience is very hard, and the proof no less dangerous, and perchance in
a moment the mind of some perverted, which all their living days have closed
their ears from the words of those that have made offer of loving service, we
need not run to forayne Histories, ne yet to seek records that be ancient,
since we may see the daily effects of the like, (...) in Noble houses, and
Courts of Kings and Princes. That this is true, example of this fair Duchess,
who was moved with that desire which pricketh others that be of Flesh and bone.
This Lady waxed very weary of lying alone, and grieved her heart to be without
a match, (...) in the night, when the secret silence and darkness of the same
presented before the eyes of her mind, the Image of the pleasure which she
felt in the life time of her deceased Lord and husband, whereof now feeling her
self despoiled, she felt a continual combat, and durst not attempt that
which she desired most, but eschued ye thing whereof her mind liked best. Alas
(said she) is it possible after the (...) of the value of honest obedience
which the wife owes unto her husband, that I should desire to suffer the heat
which burns and alters the martired minds of those that subdue them selves
(...) love? Can such attempt pierce the heart of me to become amorous by
forgetting and straying from the limittes of honest life? But what desire is
this? I have a certain unacquainted lust, and yet very well know not what it
is that moves me, and to whom I shall vow the spoil thereof. I am truly
more fond and foolish than ever. Narcislus was, for there is neither shadow
nor (...), upon which I can well stay my sight, nor yet simple Imagination of
any worldly man, whereupon I can arrest the conceit of my unstayed heart, and
the desires which provoke my mind. Pygmalion loved once a Marble pillar, and I
have but one desire, the color whereof is more pale than death. There is
nothing which can give the same so much as one spot of vermilion rud. If I do
discover these appetites to any wight, perhaps they will mock me for my labor,
and for all the beauty and Noble birth yt is in me, they will make no
conscience to deem me for their jesting stock, and to solace themselves with
rehersall of my fond conceits. But since there is no enemy in the field, and
that but simple suspicion does assail us, we must break of the same, and
deface the entier remembrance of the lightness of my brain. It appertains
unto me to show my self, as issued forth of the Noble house of Aragon. To me it
does belong to take heed how I err or degenerate from the royal blood
whereof I came. In this sort that fair widow and young Princess fantasied in the
night upon the discourse of her appetites. But when the day was come, seeing
the great multitude of the Neapolitan Lords and gentlemen which marched up and
down the City, eying and beholding their best beloved, or using talk of mirth
with the^ whose servant they were, all that which she thought upon in the
night, vanished so sone as yt flame of burned straw, or the powder of the Canon
shot, and purposed for any respect to live no longer in yt sort, but promised
the conquest of some friend that was lusty and discreet. But the difficulty
rested in that she knew not, upon whom to fix her love, fearing to be
slaundered, and also that the light disposition and manner of most part of youth
were to be suspected, in such wise as giving over all them which vauted upon
their Gennets, Turkey Palfreis, and other Coursers along ye City of Naples,
she purposed to take repast of other Uenison, than of that fond and wanton
troop. So her mishap began already to spin the threede which choked the air
and breath of her (...) life. Ye have heard before yt M. Bologna was one of ye
wisest and most perfect gentlemen that the land of Naples yt time brought
forth, and for his beauty, proportion, galantnesse, valiance, and good grace
without comparison. His favor was so sweet and pleasant, as they which kept
him company, had somewhat to do to abstain their affection. Who then could
blame this fair Princess, if (pressed with desire of match, to (...) ye
ticklish instigations of her wa^ton flesh, and having in her presence a man so
wise) she did set her mind on him, or fantasy to mary him? would not yt party
for calming of his thirst and hunger, being set at the table before sundry
sorts of delicate viands, ease his hunger? Me think the person does greatly
forget himself, which having ha^dfast upon occasion, suffers ye same to vanish
and fly away, since it is well known ye she being bald behind, has no place
to sease upon, when desire moves us to lay hold upon her. Which was the cause
yt the Duchess becam extremely in love with ye master of her house. In such
wise as before al men, she spared not to praise ye great perfectio^s wherewith
he was enriched, who^ she desired to be altogether hirs. And so she was (...),
that it was as possible to see yt night to be void of darkness, as yt Duchess
without the presence of her Bologna, or else by talk of words to set forth his
praise, ye continual remembrance of whom (for that she loved him as her self)
was her only minds repast. The gentleman yt was full wise, and had at other
times felt the great force of ye passion which proceeds from extreme love,
immediately did mark yt cou^tena^ce of the Duchess, and perceived ye same so
nere, as unfeignedly he knew yt very arde^tly yt Lady was in love we him: and
albeit he saw ye inequality and difference between the^ both, she being sorted
out of ye royal blood, yet knowing love to have no (...) (...) state or dignity
determined to follow his fortune and (...) serve (...), which so lovingly showed
her self to him. Then suddenly reproving his fond conceit, he said unto
himself: What folly is that I enterprise, to yt great prejudice and peril of
mine honor and life? Dught the wisdom of a Gentleman to straie and wandre
through the assaults of an appetite rising of sensuality, and that reason give
place to yt which does participate with brute beasts deprived of all reason
by subduing the mind to the affections of the body? No no, a virtuous man
ought to let shine in him self the force of the generositie of his mind. This
is not to live according to the spirit, when pleasure shall make us forget our
duty and sauegard of our Conscience. The reputation of a wise Gentleman
rests not only to be valiant, and skillful in feats of arms, or in service
of the Noble: But needful it is for him by discretion to make himself praise
worthy, and by vanquishing of him self to open the gate to fame, whereby he may
everlastingly make himself glorious to all posterity. Love pricketh and
provoke the spirit to do well, I do confess, but that affection ought to be
addressed to some virtuous end, tending to marriage, for otherwise that virtuous
image shall be soyled with the villainy of beastly pleasure. Alas said he, how
easy it is to dispute, when the thing is absent, which can both force and
violently assail the bulwarks of most constant hearts. I full well do see the
trothe, and do feel the thing that is good, and know what behooves me to
follow: but when I view that divine beauty of my Lady, her graces, wisdom,
behauior and courtesy, when I see her to cast so loving an eye upon me, that
she uses so great familiarity, that she forgets the greatness of her
house to abase her self for my respect: how is it possible that I should be so
foolish to despise a duty so rare and precious and to set light by that which
the Noblest would pursue with all reverence and endeavor? Shall I be so much
void of wisdom to suffer the young Princess, to see her self contempned of
me, to convert her love to tears, by setting her mind upon an other, to seek
mine overthrow? Who knows not yt fury of a woman? specially of the Noble
dame, by seeing her self despised? No, no, she loves me, and I will be her
servant, and use the fortune proffred. Shall I be the first simple Gentleman
that has married or loved a Princess? Is it not more honorable for me to
settle my mind upon a place so high, than upon some simple wenche by whom I
shall neither attain profit, or advancement? Baldouine of Flaunders, did not
he a Noble enterprise when he carried away Judith the daughter of the French
King, as she was passing upon yt seas into England, to be married to the king
of that Country? I am neither Pirat nor aduenturer, for that the Lady loves
me. What wrong do I then to any person by yelding love again? Is not she at
liberty? To whom ought she to make account of her deeds and doings, but to
God alone and to her own conscience? I will love her, and carry like affection
for the love which I know and see that she bears unto me, being assured yt
the same is directed to good end, and that a woman so wise as she is, will not
commit a fault so filthy, as to blemish and spot her honor. Thus Bologna framed
the plot to intertaine the Duchess (albeit her love already was fully bent upon
him) and fortified him self against all mishap and perilous chance that might
(...), as ordinarily you see that lovers conceive all things for their
advantage, and fantasy dreams agreeable to that which they most desire,
resembling the mad and (...) persons, which have before their eyes, the figured
fancies which cause the conceit of their fury, and stay themselves upon the
vision of that, which most troubles their offended brain. On the other side,
ye Duchess was in no less care of her lover, the will of whom was hid and
secret, which more did vex and torment her, than yt fire of love yt burned
her so ferue^tly. She could not tell what way to hold, to do him understand her
heart and affection. She feared to discover ye same unto him, doubting either
of some fond and rigorous answer, or of reueling of her mind to him, whose
presence pleased her more than all yt men of the world. Alas said she, am I
happed into so strange misery, yt with mine own mouth I must make request to
him, which with all humility ought to offer me his service? Shall a Lady of
such blood as I am, be constrained to sue, where all other be required by
importunat insta^ce of their suitors? Ah love, love, what so ever he was yt
clothed thee with such puissa^ce, I dare say he was the cruel enemy of man's
fredom. It is impossible that thou had thy being in heaven, since yt clemency
and courteous influence of ye same, (...) man with better benefits, than to
suffer her nourse children to be entreated with such rigor. He lies which
says yt Venus is thy mother, for the sweetness and good grace yt rests in
yt pitiful Goddess, who takes no pleasure to see lovers perced with so egre
trauails as that which afflicts my heart. It was some fierce cogitatio^ of
Saturn, that brought thee forth, and sent thee into the world to break the
(...) of them which live at rest without any passion or grief. Pardon me Love,
if I blaspheme thy majesty, for the stresse and endless grief wherein I am
plunged, makes me thus to roue at large, and the doubts which I conceive, do
take away the health and sou^dnesse of my mind, the (...) experience in thy
schole causes this amaze in me, to be solicited with desire yt countersayeth
the duty, honor, and reputation of my state: the party whom I love, is a
Gentleman, virtuous, valiant, sage, and of good grace. In this there is no
cause to blame Love of blindness, for all yt inequality of our houses,
apparent upon the first sight and show of the same. But from whence issue the
Monarchs, Princes and greater Lords, but from the natural and common moss of
earth, whereof other men do come? what makes these differences between those
yt love each other, if not the sottish opinion which we conceive of greatness,
and pre-eminence: as though natural affections be like to that ordained by the
fantasy of men in their laws extreme. And what greater right have (...) to
ioyn with a simple gentlewoman, than ye Princess to mary a Gentleman, and such
as Anthonio Bologna is, in whom heaven and nature have forgotten nothing to
make him equal with them which march amongs the greatest. I think we be the
daily slaves of the fo^d and cruel fantasy of those Tyraunts, which say they
have puissance over us: and that straining our will to their tirannie, we be
still bound to the chain like the galley slave. No no, Bologna shall be my
husband, for of a friend I purpose to make him my loyal and lawful husband,
meaning thereby not to offend God and men together, and pretend to live without
offe^se of conscience, whereby my soul shall not be hindered for any thing I do,
by marying him who^ I so strau^gely love. I am sure not to be deceived in Love.
He loves me so much or more as I do him, but he dares not disclose the same,
fearing to be refused and cast off with shame. Thus two united wills, and two
hearts tied togithers we equal knot cannot choose but bring forth fruits
worthy of such society. Let men say what they list, I will do none otherwise
than my head and mind have already (...). Semblably I need not make account to
any (...) for my fact, my body, and reputation being in full liberty and
freedom. The bond of marriage made, shall cover the fault which men would
deem, and leaving mine estate, I shall do no wrong but to the greatness of my
house, which makes me amo^gs men right honorable. But these honors be nothing
worth, where the mind is void of contentation, and where the heart pricked
forward by desire leaves the body and mind restless without quiet. Thus the
Duchess founded her enterprise, determining to mary her household Master,
seeking for occasion and time, meet for disclosing of the same, and albeit
that a certain natural shame (...), which of (...) accompanies Ladies, did
close her mouth, and made her to defer for a certain time the effect of her
resolved mind. Yet in the end vanquished with love and impacience, she was
forced to break of silence, and to assure her self in him, (...) fear
conceived of shame, to make her way to pleasure, which she lusted more tha^
marriage, the same serving her, but for a Mask and couerture to hide her
follies and shameless lusts, for which she did the penance that her folly
deserved. For no colorable deed or deceitful trompery can serve the excuse of
any notable wickedness. She then thoroughly persuaded in her intent, dreamyng
and thinking of naught else, but upon the unbracement of her Bologna, ended and
determined her conceits and pretended follies: and upon a time sent for him up
into her chamber, as commonly she did for the affairs and matters of her
house, and taking him a side unto a (...), having prospect into a garden, she
knew not how to begin her talk: (for the heart being seized, ye mind troubled,
and the wits out of course, the tongue failed to do his office,) in such
wise, as of long time she was unable to (...) one only word. He surprised
with like affection, was more asto^ned by seeing the alteration of his Lady.
So the two Lovers stood still like Images beholding one another, without any
meuing at all, until the Lady the hardiest of them both, as feeling the most
vehement and greatest grief, took Bologna by the hand, and dissembling what
she thought, used this or such like language: If any other bisides your self
(Gentleman) should understand the secrets which now I purpose to disclose, I
doubt what speech were necessary to color my words: But being assured of
your discretion and wisdom, and with what perfection nature has endued you,
and Art, having accomplished that in you, which nature did begin to work, as
one bred and brought up in the royal Court of the second Alphonse, of
Ferdinando and Federick of Aragon my cousins, I will make no doubt at all to
manifest to you the hidden secrets of my heart, being well persuaded that,
when you shall both hear and (...) my reasons, and taste yt light which I bring
for the for me, easily you may (...) that mine (...) cannot be other, than just
and reasonable. But if your conceits shall straye from that which I shall speak,
and deem not good of that which I determine, I shall be forced to think and
say that they which esteem you wise and sage, and to be a man of good and
ready (...), be maruelously deceived. Notwithstanding my heart foretells that
it is impossible for master Bologna, to wandre so far from equity, but that
by and by he will enter the lystes, and discern the white from black, and the
wrong from that which is just and right. For so much as hitherto I never saw
thing done by you, which preposterated or perverted ye good judgment that all
the world esteems to shine in you, the same well manifested and declared by
your tongue, the right judge of the mind: you know and see how I am a widow
through the death of that noble Gentleman of good remembrance, the Duke my Lord
and husband: you be not ignorant also, that I have lived and governed my self
in such wise in my widow state, as there is no man so hard and severe of
judgment, that can blason reproach of me in yt which appertains to the
honesty and reputation of such a Lady as I am, bearing my port so right, as my
conscience yeldeth no remorse, supposing that no man has where with to bite
and accuse me. Louching the order of the goods of the Duke my son, I have
used them with such diligence and discretion, as bisides the dettes which I
have discharged since the death of my Lord, I have purchased a goodly Manor
in Calabria, and have annexed the same to the Dukedom of his heir: and at this
day do not owe one penny to any creditor that lent money to the Duke, which he
took up to furnish the charges in the wars, which he sustained in the service
of the Kings our sovereign Lords in the late wars for the kingdom of Naples.
I have as I suppose by this means stopped the slanderous mouth, and given
cause unto my son, during his life to account himself bound unto his mother.
Now having till this time lived for other, and made my self subject more than
Nature could bear, I am intended to change both my life and condition. I have
till this time run, travailed, and removed to the Castles and Lordships of the
Dukedom, to Naples and other places, being in mind to tarry as I am a widow.
But what? new affairs and new council has possessed my mind. I have travailed
and pained my self enough, I have too long abidden a widows life, I am
determined therefore to provide a husband, who by loving me, shall honor and
cherish me, according to the love which I shall bear to him, and my desert. For
to love a man without marriage, God defend my heart should ever think, and shall
rather die a hundred thousand deaths, tha^ a desire so wicked shald soil my
conscience, knowing well yt a woman which sets her honor to sale, is less
than nothing, and deserves not yt the common air should breathe upon her, for
all the reverence yt men do bear or make them. I accuse no person, albeit yt
many noble women have their forheds marked, with the blame of dishonest life,
and being honored of some, be nevertheless the common fable of ye people. To
the intent then yt such mishap happen not to me, and perceiving my self unable
still thus to live, being young as I am, and (God be thanked) neither deformed
nor yet painted, I had rather be the loving wife of a simple feere, than yt
Concubine of a king or great Prince. And what? is the mighty Monarche able to
wash away the fault of his wife which has aba^doned him contrary to yt duty
and honest which ye undefiled bed requires? no les the^ Princesses yt whilom
trespassed with those which were of baser stuff than themselves. Messalina we her
imperial robe could not so well cover her faults, but yt the Historia^s do
defame her with yt name and title of a common woman. Faustina the wife of yt
sage Monarch Marcus Aurelius, gained like report by rendering her self to others
pleasure, bisides her lawful spouse. To mary my self to one that is mine
equal, it is impossible, for so much as there is no Lord in all this Country
meet for my degree, but is to old of age, yt rest being dead in these later
wars. To mary a husband that yet is but a child, is folly extreme, for the
inconveniences which daily chance thereby, and the evil entreaty yt Ladies do
receive when they come to age, and their nature wax cold, by reason whereof,
imbracements be not so favorable, and their husbands glutted with ordinary meat
use to ru^ in excha^ge. Wherefore I am resolved without respite or delay, to
choose some well qualitied and renoumed Gentleman, that has more virtue than
richesse, of good Fame and brute, to the intent I may make him my Lord,
espouse, and husband. For I cannot employ my love upon treasure, which may be
taken away, where richesse of the mind do fail, and shall be better content
to see an honest Gentleman with little revenue to be praised and commended of
every man for his good deeds, than a rich carle curssed and detested of all
the world. Thus much I say, and it is the sum of all my secrets, wherein I
pray your Council and advise. I know that some will be offended with my choice,
and the Lords my brothers, specially the Cardinal will think it strange, and
receive the same with ill digesture, that much a do shall I have to be agreed
with them and to remove the grief which they shall conceive against me for this
mine enterprise: wherefore I would the same should secretly be kept, until
without peril and danger either of my self or of him, whom I pretend to
mary, I may publish and manifest, not my love but the marriage which I hope in
God shall soon be consummate and accomplished with one, whom I do love better
than my self, and who as I full well do know, does love me better than his
own proper life. Master Bologna, which till then harkned to the Dration of
the Duchess without moving, feeling himself touched so near, and hearing yt
his Lady had made her approach for marriage, stood still astonned, his tongue
not able to frame one word, only fantasied a thousand (...) in the air, and
formed like number of imaginations in his mind, not able to conjecture what
he was, to whom the Duchess had vowed her love, and the possession of her
beauty. He could not think that this joy was prepared for himself for yt his
Lady spoke no word of him, and he less durst open his mouth, and yet was well
assured that she loved him beyond measure. Not withstanding knowing the
fickleness and unstable heart of women, he said unto himself that she would
change her mind, for seeing him to be so great a Cowarde, as not to offer his
service to a Lady by whom he saw himself so many times both want only
looked upon, and entertained with some secrecy more tha^ familiar. The
Duchess which was a fine and subtle dame, seeing her friend rapt with the
passion, and standing still immovable through fear, pale and amazed, as if he
had been accused and condemned to die, knew by that countenance and
astonishment of Bologna, yt she was perfectly beloved of him: and so meaning
not to suffer him any longer to continue in that amaze, ne yet to further fear
him, with her dissembled and fained marriage of any other but with him, she took
him by the hand, and beholding him with a wa^ton and luring eye, (in such sort
as the curious Philosophers themselves would awake, if such a La^pe and torch
did shine within their studies,) she said thus unto him: Seignor Anthonio, I
pray you be of good cheer, and torment not your self for any thing yt I have
said: I know well, and of long time have perceived what good and faithful love
you bear me, and with what affection you have served me, since first you
used my company. Think me not to be so ignorant, but that I know full well by
outward signs, what secrets be hid in the inner heart: and that conjectures
many times do give me true and certain knowledge of concealed things. And am
not so foolish to think you to be so indiscreet, but that you have marked my
countenance and manner, and thereby have known that I have been more
affectioned to you, than to any other. For that cause (said she, straining him
by ye hand very lovingly, and with cherefull color in her face) I swear unto
you, and do promise yt if you so think meet, it shall be none other but your
self whom I will have, and desire to take to husband and lawful spouse,
assuring my self so much of you, as the love which so long time has been hidden
and covered in our hearts, shall appear by so evident proof, as only death
shall end and undo the same. The gentleman hearing such sudden talk, and the
assurance of yt which he most wished for, albeit he saw yt danger extreme
whereunto he lau^ched himself by espousing this great Lady, and the enemies he
should get by entering such aliance: notwithstanding building upon vain hope,
and thinking at length that the choler of the Aragon brother would pass away
if they understood yt marriage, determined to pursue yt purpose, and not to
refuse that great preferment, being so prodigally offered, for which cause he
answered his Lady in this manner. If it were in my power madame, to bring to
pass yt, which I desire for your service by acknowledging of ye benefits and
favors which you depart unto me, as my mind presents thanks for the same, I
would think my self the happiest Gentleman yt lives, and you the best served
Princess of the world. For one better beloved (I dare presume to say, and so
long as I live will affirm) is not to be found. If til this time I delayed to
open that which now I discover unto you, I beseech you Madame to impute it to
the greatness of your estate, and to the duty of my calling and office in
your house, being not seemly for a servant to talk of such secrets with his
Lady and mistress. And truly yt pain which I have endured to hold my peace,
and to hide my grief, has been more noisome to me than one hundred thousand
like sorrows together, although it had been lawful to have revealed the^ to
some trusty friend: I do not deny madame, but of long time you did perceive my
folly and presumption, by addressing my mind so high, as to the Aragon blood,
and to such a Princess as you be. And who ca^ beguile the eye of a Lover,
specially of her, whose Paragon for good mind, wisdom and gentleness is not?
And I confess to you bisides, that I have most evidently perceived how certain
love has lodged in your gracious heart, wherewith you bare me greater
affection, tha^ you did to any other within the compass of your family. But
what? Great Ladies hearts be fraught with secrets and conceits of other effects,
than the minds of simple women, which caused me to hope for none other guerdon
of my loyal and faithful affection, than death, and the same very short, Since
yt little hope accompanied with great, nay rather extreme passion, is not able
to give sufficient force, both to suffer and to stablish my heart with
constancy. Now for so much as of your motion, grace, courtesy and liberality
the same is offered, and that it pleases you to accept me for yours, I humbly
beseech you to dispose of me not as husband, but of one which is, and shall be
your servant for ever, and such as is more ready to obey, tha^ you to
command. It rests now Madame, to consider how, and in what wise our affairs
are to be directed, yt things being in assurance, you may so live without peril
and brute of slanderous tongues, as your good fame and honest port may
continue without spot or blemish.

Behold the first Act of the Tragedy, and the provision of the fare which
afterward sent them both to their grave, who immediately gave their mutual
faith: and the hour was assigned the next day, that the fair Princess should
be in her chamber alone, attended upon with one only Gentlewoman which had been
brought up with ye Duchess from her cradle, and was made privy to the heavy
marriage of those two lovers which was consummate in her presence. And for the
present time they passed yt same in words, for ratificatio^ whereof they went to
bed together. But yt pain in the end was greater than the pleasure, and had been
better for them both, yea and also for the third, that they had showed them
selves so wise in the deed, as discrete in keeping silence of that which was
done. For albeit their marriage was secret, and thereby politikely governed them
selves in their stelthes and robberies of love, and that Bologna more often held
the state of the steward of the house by day, than of Lord of ye same, and by
night supplied that place, yet in ye end, the thing was perceived which they
desired to be closely kept. And as it is impossible to till and culture a
fertile ground, but yt the same must yield some fruit, even so the Duchess
after many pleasures (being ripe and plentiful) became with child, which at the
first astonned the married couple: nevertheless the same so well was provided
for, as the first childbedde was kept secret, and (...) did know thereof. The
child was nourced in the town, and the father desired to have him named
Federick, for remembrance of the parents of his wife. Now fortune which lies
in daily wait and ambushment, and likes not yt men should long loiter in
pleasure and passetime, being envious of such prosperity, cramped so the legs
of our two lovers, as they must needs change their game, and learn some other
practice: for so much as the Duchess being great with child again, and
delivered of a girl, the business of the same was not so secretly done, but
that it was discovered. And it suffised not that the brute was noised through
Naples, but that the sound flew further off. As each man does know that rumor
has many mouths, who with the multitude of his tongues and Trumps,
proclaims in diverse and sundry places, the things which chance in all the
regions of the earth. Even so that babbling fool, carried the news of that
second childbed to the ears of the Cardinal of Aragon the Duchess brother,
being then at Rome. Think what joy and pleasure the Aragon brothers had, by
hearing the report of their sisters fact. I dare presume to say, that albeit
they were extremely wroth with this happened (...), and with yt dishonest fame
which yt Duchess had gotten throughout Italy, yet far greater was their
sorrow and grief, for that they did not know what he was, that so courteously
was allied to their house, and in their love had increased their ligneage. And
therefore swelling with despite, and rapt with fury to see themselves so
defamed by one of their blood, they purposed by all means whatsoever it cost
them, to know the lucky lover that had so well tilled the Duchess their sisters
field. Thus desirous to remove that shame from before their eyes, and to be
revenged of a wrong so notable, they sent espial round about, and scoutes to
Naples, to view and spy the behauior and talk of the Duchess, to settle some
certain judgment of him, which stealingly was become their brother in law.
The Duchess Court being in this trouble, she did continually perceive in her
house, her brothers men to mark her countenance, and to note those that came
thither to visit her, and to whom she used greatest familiarity, because it
is impossible but that the fire, although it be raked under the ashes, must
give some heat. And albeit the two lovers used each others company, without
showing any sign of their affection, yet they purposed to change their estate
for a time, by yelding truce to their pleasures. Yea, and although Bologna was
a wise and prouide^t personage, fearing to be surprised upon the fact, or that
the Gentlewoman of the Chamber corrupted with Money, or forced by fear, should
pronounce any matter to his hinderance or disauantage, determined to absent
himself from Naples, yet not so suddenly but that he made the Duchess his
faithful Lady and companion privy of his intent. And as they were secretly
in their chamber together, he used these or such like words: Madame, albeit
the right good intent and unstained conscience, is free from fault, yet the
judgment of men has further relation to yt exterior appearance, than to
virtues force and innocence it self, as ignorant of the secrets of the
thought: and so in things that be well done, we must of necessity fall into the
sentence of those, whom beastly affection rauisheth more, than ruled reason.
You see the solemn watch and guard which the servant of the Lords your
brothers do within your house, and the suspicion which they have conceived by
reason of your second childbed, and by what means they labor truly to know
how your affairs proceed, and things do pass. I fear not death where your
service may be aduau^ced, but if herein the maiden of your chamber be not
secret, if she be corrupted, and if she keep not close that which she ought to
do, it is not ignorant to you that it is ye loss of my life, and shall die
suspected to be a whoremonger and varlet, even I, (I say) shall incur that
peril, which am your true and lawful husband. This separation chances not
by Justice or desert, since the cause is too righteous for us: but rather your
brethren will procure my death, when I shall think the same in greatest
assurance. If I had to do but with one or two, I would not change the place, ne
march one step from Naples, but be assured, that a great band, and the same well
armed will set upon me. I pray you madame suffer me to retire for a time, for I
am assured that when I am absent, they will never soil their hands, or imbrue
their, sweards in your blood. If I doubted any thing at al of, peril touching
your own person, I had rather a hundred hundred times die in your company,
than live to see you no more. But out of doubt I am, yt if the things were
discovered, and they knew you to be begotten with child by me, you should be
safe, where I should sustain the penance of yt fact, committed without fault or
sin. And therefore I am determined to go from Naples, to order mine affairs,
and to cause my Revenue to be brought to the place of mine abode, and from
thence to Ancona, until it pleases God to mitigate the rage of your brethren,
and recover their good wills to consent to our marriage. But I mean not to do
or conclude any thing without your advise. And if this intent do not like you,
give me council Madame, what I were best to do, that both in life and death
you may know your faithful servant and loving husband is ready to obey and
please you.

This good Lady hearing her husbands discourse, uncertain what to do, wept
bitterly, as well for grief to lose his presence, as for that she felt her self
with child the third time. The sighs and tears, the sobbes and heavy looks,
which she threw forth upon her sorrowful husband, gave sufficient witness of
her pain and grief. And if none had heard her, I think her playntes would
have well expressed her inward smarte of mind. But like a wise Lady, seeing
the alleged reasons of her husband, licensed him, although against her mind,
not without utterance of these few words, before he went out of her Chamber:
Dear husband, if I were so well assured of the affection of my brethren, as I
am of my maids fidelity, I would entreat you not to leave me alone: specially
in the case I am, being with child. But knowing that to be just and true which
you have said, I am content to force my will for a certain time, that hereafter
we may live at rest together, joining our selves in the company of our
children and family, void of those troubles, which great Courts ordinarily
bear within the compass of their Palaces. Of one thing I must entreat you,
that so often as you can by trusty messenger, you send me word and
intelligence of your health and state, because the same shall bring unto me
greater pleasure and contentation, than the welfare of mine own: and because
also, upon such occurrentes as shall chance, I may provide for mine own
affairs, the surety of my self, and of our children. In saying so, she
embraced him very amorously, and he kissed her with so great sorrow and grief
of heart, as the soul thought in that ecstasy out of his body to take her
flight, sorrowful beyond mesure so to leave her whom he loved, for the great
courtesies and honor which he had received at her hands. In the end, fearing
that the Aragon espials would come and perceive them in those priuities, Bologna
took his leave, and bad his Lady and spouse Farewell.

And thus was the second Act of this Tragical History, to see a fugitife
husband secretly to mary, especially her, upon whom he ought not so much as to
look but with fear and reverence. Behold here (O ye foolish lovers) a Glass
of your lightness, and ye women, the course of your fond behauior. It
behooves not the wise suddenly to execute their first motions and desires of
their heart, for so much as they may be assured that pleasure is pursued so
near with a repentance so sharp to be suffered, and hard to be digested, as
their voluptuausnesse shall utterly discontent them. True it is, that marriages
be done in Heaven, and performed in earth, but that saying may not be applied
to fools, which govern themselves by carnal desires, whose scope is but
pleasure, and the reward many times equal to their folly. Shall I be of
opinion that a household servant ought to solicit, nay rather suborne the
daughter of his Lord without punishment, or that a vile and abject person dare
to mount upon a Princes bed? No no, policy requires order in all, and each
wight ought to be matched according to their quality, without making a pastime
of it to cover our follies, and know not of what force love and desteny be,
except the same be resisted. A goodly thing it is to love, but where reason
loses his place, love is without his effect, and the sequel rage and
madness. Leave we yt discourse of those which believe that they be constrained
to follow the force of their mind, and may easily subdue themselves to ye
laws of virtue and honesty, like one that thrusts his head into a sack, and
thinks he can not get out, such people do please themselves in their loss, and
think all well that is noisome to their health, daily following their contrary.
Come we again then to sir Bologna, who after he had left his wife in her
Castle, went to Naples, and having sessed a rent upon his lands, and levied a
good sum of money, he repaired to Ancona, a City of the patrimony of the
Roman Church, whither he carried his two children, which he had of the
Duchess, causing the same to be brought up with such diligence and care, as is
to be thought a father well affectioned to his wife would do, and who delighted
to see a branch of the tree, that to him was the best beloved fruit of ye
world. There he hired a house for his train, and for those that waited upon his
wife, who in the mean time was in great care, and could not tell of what wood
to make her arowes, perceiving that her belly began to (...) and grow to the
time of her delivery, seeing that from day to day, her brothers servant were
at her back, (...) of council and advise, if one evening she had not spoken to
the Gentlewoman of her chamber, touching the douts and peril wherein she was,
not knowing how she might be delivered from the same. That maiden was gentle
and of a good mind and stomach, and loved her mistress very derely, and
seeing her so amazed and tormenting her self to death, minding to fray her no
further, ne to reprove her of her fault, which could not be amended, but rather
to provide for ye danger whereunto she had hedlong cast her self, gave her this
advise: How now Madame (said she,) is that wisdom which from your childhode
has been so familiar in you, dislodged from your breast in time, when it ought
chiefly to rest for incountring of those mishaps yt are coming upon us? Think
you to avoid ye dangers, by thus tormenting your self, except you set your
hands to the work, thereby to give the repulse to adverse fortune? I have heard
you many times speak of the constancy and force of mind, which ought to
shine in the deeds of Princesses, more clearly than amo^gs those dames of baser
house, and which ought to make the^ appear like the sun amid yt little
stars. And yet I see you now astonned, as though you had never forseene, yt
adversity chances so well to catch the great within his clouches, as yt base
and simple sort. Is it but now, yt you have called to remembrance, yt which
might ensue your marriage with sir Bologna? Did his only presence assure you
against the waits of fortune, and was it the thought of pains, fears and
frights, which now turmoileth your dolorous mind? Ought you thus to vex your
self, when need it is to think how to save both your honor, and the fruit
within your (...)? If your sorrow be so great over sir Bologna, and if you fear
your childbed will be descried, why seek you not means to attempt some voyage,
for covering of the sad, to (...) the eyes of them which so diligently do watch
you? Does your heart fail you in that matter? Whereof do you dream? Why sweat
and freat you before you make me answer? Ah sweet heart (answered the
Duchess,) if thou feltest the pain which I do suffer, thy tongue would not be
so much at will, as thou show it now to be for reprofe of my small
constancy, I do sorrow specially for yt causes which thou alleagest, and above
all, for that I know well, that if my brethren had never so little intelligence
of my being with child, I were undone and my life at an end, and peradventure
poor wench, thou should bear the penance for my sin. But what way can I
take, that still these ca^dles may not give light, and I may be voided of the
train which ought to wayt upon my brethren? I think if I should descend into
Hell, they would know, whither any shadow there were in love with me. Now guess
if I should travail the Realm, or retire to any other place, whither they
would leave me at peace? Nothing less, since they would suddenly suspect, that
the cause of my departure proceeded of desire to live at liberty, to dally
with him, whom they suspect to be other than my lawful husband. And it may
be as they be wicked and suspicious, and will doubt of my greatness, so shall
I be far more unfortunate by trauailyng, than here in misery amidde mine
anguishe: and you the rest that be keepers of my Council, shall fall into
greater danger, upon whom no doubt they will be revenged, and flesh themselves
for your unhappy waiting and attendance upon us. Madame said the bold maiden,
be not afraid, and follow mine advise, For I hope that it shall be the means
both to see your spouse, and to rid those troublesome verlets out of your
house, and in like manner safely to deliver you into good assurance. Say your
mind said the Lady, for it may be, that I will govern my self according to
the same. Mine advise is then, said yt Gentlewoman, to let your household
understand, that you have made a vow to visit the holy Temple of our Lady of
Loretto, (a famous place of Pilgrimage in Italy) and that you command your
train to make themselves ready to wait upon you for acco^plishment of your
devotion, and from thence you shall take your journey to soiorne at Ancona,
whither before you depart, you shall send your moueables and plate, with such
money as you shall think necessary. And afterward God will perform the
rest, and through his holy mercy will guide and direct all your affairs. The
Duchess hearing the mayde^ speak those words, and amazed of her sudden
invention, could not forbear to embrace and kiss her, blessing the hour
wherein she was borne, and that ever she chanced into her company, to whom
afterward she said. My we^ch, I had well determined to give over mine estate
and noble port, joyfully to live like a simple Gentlewoman with my dear and
well-beloved husband, but I could not devise how I should conveniently depart
this Country without suspicion of some folly: and since that thou have so well
instructed me for bringing yt same to pass, I promise thee that so diligently
thy counsel shall be performed, as I see the same to be right good and
necessary. For rather had I see my husband, being alone without title of
Duchess or great Lady, than to live without him beautified with the graces and
foolish names of honor and pre-eminence. This devised (...) was no sooner
grounded, but she gave such order for execution of the same, and brought it to
pass with such (...), as yt Lady in less than. viij. days had conveyed and
sent the most part of her moueables, and specially the chiefest and best to
Ancona, taking in yt mean time her way toward Loretto after she had bruted
her solemn vow made for that Pilgrimage. It was not sufficient for this
foolish woman to take a husband, more to glut her libidinous appetite, than for
other occasion, except she added to her sin, an other execrable impiety,
making holy places and duties of devotion, to be as it were the ministers of
her folly. But let us consider the force of Lovers rage, which so soon as it
has seized upon the minds of men, we see how maruelious be the effects
thereof, and with what straint and puissaunce that madness subdueth the wise
and strongest worldlings. Who would think that a great Lady would have abandoned
her estate, her goods and child, would have misprised her honor and
reputation, to follow like a vagabond, a pore and simple Gentleman, and him
bisides that was the household servant of her Court? And yet you see this great
and mighty Duchess trot and run after the male, like a female Wolf or
Lioness (when they go to sault,) and forget the Noble blood of Aragon whereof
she was descended, to couple her self almost with the simplest person of all
the trimmest Gentlemen of Naples. But turn we not the example of follies, to
be a matter of consequence: for if one or two become bankrupt of their honor,
it follows not good Ladies, that their fact should serve for a match to your
deserts, and much less a patron for you to follow. These Histories be not
written to train and trap you, to pursue the thousand thousand slippery
sleightes of Loves gallantise, but rather carefully to warn you to behold the
semblable faults, and to serve for a drugge to discharge the poison which
gnaweth and fretteth the integrity and sou^dnesse of the soul. The wise and
skillful Apothecary or compositor of drugges, dresseth Uipers flesh to purge
the patient from hot corrupted blood, which conceiueth and engenders
Leprosy within his body. In like manner, the fond love, and wicked ribauldrie
of Semiramis, Pasiphae, (...), Faustina, and Romida is showed in wryt, that
every of you should fear to be numbered and recorded amo^gs such common and
dishonorable women. You Princes and great Lords read the follies of Paris, the
adulteries of Hercules, the dainty and effeminate life of Sardanapalus, the
tirannie of Phalaris Busiris, or Dionysius of Scicile, and see the History of
Tiberius, Nero Caligula, Domitian and Heliogabalus, and spare not to number
them amongs our (...) youths which soil themselves with such villainies more
filthily than the swine do in the dirt. All this intends it an instruction for
your youth to follow the infection and whoredom of those (...) Better it were
all those books were dre^ched in botto^lesse depth of seas, than christian life
by their means should be corrupted: but the example of yt wicked is induced for
to eschew and avoid them as yt life of the good and honest is remembered to
frame and address our behauior in this world to be praise worthy and
co^me^ded. Otherwise ye holiness of sacred (...) should (...) for an argument
to ye unthrifty and luxurious to confirm and approve their heastly and
licencious wickedness. Come we again the^ to our purpose: the good Pilgrim of
Loretto went forth her voyage to atchieue her devotions, and to visit the
Saint for whose Relics she was departed yt Country of yt Duke her son.
When she had done her suffrages at (...), her people thought yt the voyage was
at an end, and that she would have returned again into her Country. But she
said unto them: that since she was so near (...), being but. xv. miles off, she
would not return before she had seen yt ancient and goodly city, which diverse
Histories do greatly reco^mend, as well for the antiquity, as for the pleasant
(...) thereof. All were of her advise, and went to see yt antiquities of Ancona,
and she to renew ye pleasures which she had before begone with her Bologna, who
was advertised of all her determination, resting now like a God, possessed with
the jewels and richesse of the Duchess, and had taken a fair palace in the
great streat of the City, by yt gate whereof the train of his Lady must pass.
The Harbinger of the Duchess posted before to take up lodging for the train:
but Bologna offered unto him his Palace for the Lady. So Bologna which was
already well-beloved in Ancona, and entered new amity and great acquaintance with
the Gentlemen of the City, with a goodly troop of them, went forth to (...)
his wife, to whom he (...) his house, and besought her that she and her train
would vouchsafe to lodge with him. She received the same very tha^kfully, and
withdrew her self unto his house, who conducted (...) thither, not as a
Husband, but like him that was her humble and affectionate servant. But what
needs much discourse of words? The Duchess knowing that it was impossible
but each man must be (...) to her fact, and know what secrets has passed
between her and her Husband, to the end that no other opinion of her
Childebed should be conceived, but that which was good and honest, and done
since the accomplishment of the marriage, the morrow after her arrival to
Ancona, assembled all her train in the Hall, of purpose no longer to keep
secret that sir Bologna was her Husband, and that already she had had two
Children by him, and again was great with child. And when they were come
together after dinner, in yt presence of her husband, she spoke unto the^ these
(...): Gentlemen, and al ye my trusty and loving servants, high time it is to
manifest to every of you, the thing which has been done before the face, and in
ye presence of him who knows the most obscure and hydde^ secrets of our
thoughts. And needful it is not to keep silent yt which is neither evil done
ne hurtful to any person. If things could be kept secret and still remain
unknown, except they were declared by the doers of the^, yet would not I commit
the wrong in co^cealing that, which to discover unto you does greatly delight
me, and delivers my mind (...) exceeding grief, in such wise as if yt flames
of my desire could break out with such violence, as the fire has taken heat
within my mind, ye should see the smoke mount up with greater smoulder than that
which the mount Gibel does vomit forth at certain seasons of the year. And
to the intent I may not keep you long in this suspect, this secret fire
within my heart, and that which I will cause to flame in open air, is a
certain opinion which I conceive for a marriage by me made certain years past,
at what time I chose and wedded a husband to my fantasy and liking, desirous
no longer to live in widow state, and unwilling to do the thing that should
(...) and hurt my conscience. The same is done, and yet in one thing I have
offended, which is by long keeping secret the performed marriage: for the
wicked brute dispearsed through the realm by reason of my childbed, one year
past, has displeased some, howbeit my conscience (...) comfort, for that the
same is free from fault or blot. Now know ye therefore what he is, whom I
acknowledge for my Lord and spouse, and who it is that lawfully has me
espoused in the presence of this Gentle woman whom you see, which is the
witness of our Nuptials and accord of marriage. This gentleman here present
Antonio Bologna, is he to whom I have sworn and given my faith, and he again
to me has engaged his own. He it is whom I account for my spouse and husband,
(and with whom henceforth) I mean to rest and continue. In consideration
whereof, if there be any here amongs you all, that shall mislike of my choice,
and is willing to wait upon my son the Duke, I mean not to let them of their
intent, praying them faithfully to serve him and to be careful of his person,
and to be unto him so honest and loyal, as they have been to me so long as I
was their mistress. But if any of you desire still to make your abode with me,
and to be partakers of my wealth and woe, I will so entertain him, as he shall
have good cause to be contented, if not, depart ye hence to Malfi, and the
steward shall provide for either of you according to your degree: for touching
my self I do mind no more to be termed an infamous Duchess: rather had I be
honored with the title of a simple Gentle woman, or with that estate which she
can have that has an honest husband, and with whom she holds faithful and
loyal company, than reuere^ced with the glory of a Princess, subject to the
despite of slanderous tongues. Ye know (said she to Bologna) what has passed
between us, and God is the witness of the integrity of my Conscience,
wherefore I pray you bring forth our children, yt each man may behold the
fruits raised of our alliance. Having spoken those words, and the children
brought forth into the hall, all the company stood still so astonned with that
new success and tale, as though horns suddenly had started forth their
heads, and rested immovable and amazed, like the great marble pillar of Rome
called Pasquile, for so much as they never thought, ne coniectured that Bologna
was the successor of the Duke of Malfi in his marriage bed.

This was the preparatiue of the Catastrophe and bloody end of this Tragedy.
For of all the Duchess servant, there was not one that was willing to
continue with their ancient mistress, who with the faithful maiden of her
chamber remained at Ancona, enjoying the joyful embracements of her husband, in all such pleasure and delights as they do, which having lived in fear, be set
at liberty, and out of al suspicion, plunged in a sea of joy, and fleting in
the quiet calm of al passetime, where Bologna had none other care, but how to
please his best beloved, and she studied nothing else but how to love and obey
him, as the wife ought to do her husband. But this fair weather lasted not
long, for although yt joys of me^ do not long endure, and wast in little time,
yet delights of lovers be less firm and steadfast, and pass away almost in
one moment of an hour. Now the servant of the Duchess which were retired,
and durst tarry no longer with her, fearing the fury of the Cardinal of Aragon
brother to the Lady, the very day they departed from Ancona, devised amongs
themselves yt one of them should ride in post to Rome, to advertise the Cardinal
of the Ladies marriage, to the intent that the Aragon brethren should conceive no
cause to accuse the^ of felony and treason. That determination spedily was
accomplished, one posting toward Rome, and the rest galloping to the Country
and Castles of the Duke. These news reported to the Cardinal and his brother,
it may be considered how grievously they took yt same, and for that they were
not able to digest the^ with (...), the yo^gest of the brethren, yelled forth a
thousand cursses and despites, against ye simple sere of woma^kind. Ha said yt
Prince (tra^sported with choler, and driven in to deadly fury,) what law is
able to punish or restrain ye foolish indiscretio^ of a woman, that yeldeth her
self to her own desires? What shame is able to bridle and withdraw her from
her mind and madness? Or with what sear is it possible to snaffle the^ from
execution of their (...)? There is no beast be he never so wild, but man
sometime may tame, and bring to his lure and order. The force and diligence of
man is able to make mild the strong and proud, and to overtake the swiftest
beast and foul, or otherwise to attain the highest and deepest thing of the
world: but this incarnate devilish beast the woman, no force can surmount her,
no swiftness can approach her mobilitie, no good mind can prevent her sleights
and deceites, they seem to be procreated and borne against all order of
nature, and to live without law, which governs all other things endued with
some reason and understanding. But what a great abomination is this, that a
Gentlewoman of such a house as ours is, has forgotten her estate, and the
greatness of her aliance, besides the nobility of her deceased husband, with
the hope of the toward youth of the Duke her son and our Nephew. Ah false
and vile bitch, I swear by the almighty God and by his blessed wounds, that
if I can catch thee, and that wicked knave thy chosen mate, I will pipe ye both
such a galiarde, as ye never felt the like joy and mirthe. I will make ye
dance such a bloody bargenet, as your whorish heat for ever shall be cooled.
What abuse have they committed under title of marriage, which was so secretly
done, as their Children do witness their filthy: embracements, but their
promise of faith was made in open air, and serves for a cloak and visarde for
their most filthy whoredoine. And what if marriage was concluded, be we of so
little respect, as the carrion beast would not vouchsafe to (...) us of her
intent? Or is Bologna a man worthy to be allied or mingled with the royal
blood of Aragon and Castille? No no, be he never so good a Gentleman, his race
agrees not with kingly state. But I make to God a vewe, that never will I take
one sound and restfull sleep, until I have dispatched that infamous fact from
our blood, and that the caitife whoremonger be used according to his desert.
The Cardinal also was ont of quiet, grinding his teeth together, chattering
forth Jacke an Apes Pater noster, promising no better usage to their Bologna
than his younger brother did. And the better to entrap them both (without
further stir for that time) they sent to yt Lord Gismondo Gonsago the
Cardinal of Mantua then Legate for Pope Julius the second at Ancona, at whose
hands they enjoyed such friendship, as Bologna and all his family were
commanded spedily to avoid ye City. But for all ye the Legate was able to do,
of long time he could not prevail. Bologna had so great intelligence wtin
Ancona. Nevertheless whiles he differed his departure, (...) caused the most
part of his train, his children and goods to be conveyed to Siena, an ancient
City of Thoscane, which for the state and liberties, had long time been at
wars with the Florentines, in such wise as the very same day that news came
to Bologna that he should depart the City within. xv. days, he was ready,
and mounted on horseback to take his flight to Siena, which brake for sorrow
the hearts of the Aragon brethren, seeing that they were deceived and frustrate
of their intent, because they purposed by the way to apprehend Bologna, and to
cut him in pieces. But what? the time of his hard luck was not yet expired, and
so ye march from Ancona, served not for the Theater of those two unfortunate
lovers overthrow, who certain months lived in peace in Thoscane. The Cardinal
night nor day did sleep, and his brother still did wayt to perform his oath of
revenge. And seeing their enemy out of fear, they dispatched a post to
Alfonso Castruccio, the Cardinal of Siena, that he might entreat the Lord
Borgliese, chief of the seignorie there, that their sister and Bologna should
be banished the Country and limits of that City, which with small suit was
brought to pass. These two unfortunate, husband and wife, were chased from al
places, and so unlucky as whilom Acasta was, or Oedipus, after his fathers
death and incestuous marriage with his mother, uncertain to what Saint to vow
themselves, and to what place to take their flight. In the end they determined
to go to Venice, and to take their flight to Ramagua, there to imbarke
themselves for to retire to the sauegarde of the City, enuironned with the sea
Adriaticum, the richest in Europa. But the poor souls made their reconing
there without their host, failing half the price of their banquet. For being
upon the territory of Forly, one of the train a far off, did see a troop of
horsenien galloping toward their company, which by their countenance showed
no sign of peace or amity at all, which made them consider that it was some
ambush of their enemies. The (...) Gentleman seeing the onset bending upon
them, began to fear death, not for that he cared at all for his mishap and
ruin, but his heart began to cleave for heaviness to see his wife and little
children ready to be murdered, and serve for the passetime of the Aragon
brethrens eyes, for whose sakes he knew himself already predestinate to die,
and that for despite of him, and to accelerate his death by the overthrow of
his, he was assured that they would kill his children before his face and (...).
But what is there to be done, where counsel and means to escape do fail? Full
of tears therefore, astonishment and fear, he expected death so cruel as man
could devise, and was already determined to suffer the same (...) good courage,
for any thing yt the Duchess could say (...) him. He might well have saved
himself and his eldest son by flight, being both well mounted upon two good
Turkey horses, which ran so fast, as yt quarrel discharged forth of a croshow.
But he loved too much his wife and children, and would keep them company both
in life and death. In the end the good Lady said unto him: or for all the
joys and pleasures which you can do me, for Gods sake save your self and the
little infant next you, who can well endure ye galloping of the horse. For sure
I am, yt you being out of our company, we shall not need to fear any hurt. But
if you do tarry, you will be ye cause of the ruin and overthrow of us all, and
receive thereby no profit or aduau^tage: take this purse therefore, and save your
self, attending better Fortune in time to come. The poor gentleman Bologna
knowing that his wife had pronounced reason, and perceiving yt it was
impossible from that time forth that she or her train could escape their
hands, taking leave of her, and kissing his children not forgetting the money
which she offered unto him, willed his servants to save themselves by such
means as they thought best. So giving spurrs unto his horse, he began to flee
amain, and his eldest son seeing his father gone, began to follow in like
sort. And so for that time they two were saved by breaking of the intended ill
luck like to light upon them. And in a place to rescue himself at Venice, he
turned another way, and in great iourneys arrived at Millan. In the mean time
the horsemen were approached (...) the Duchess, who seeing that Bologna had
saved himself, very courteously began to speak unto the Lady, were it that
the Aragou brethren had given them that charge, or feared that the Lady would
trouble them with her importunate cries and lamentatio^s. One therefore amongs
them said unto her: Madame, we be commanded by the Lords your brethren, to
conducte you home unto your house, that you may receive again the (...) of the
Duchy, and the order of the Duke your son, and do marvel very much at your
folly, for giving your self thus to wander the Country after a man of so small
reputation as Bologna is, who when he has glutted his lusting lecherous mind
with the comeliness of your Noble personage, will despoil you of your goods and
honor, and then take his legs into some strange country. The simple Lady,
albeit grievous it was unto her to hear such speech of her husband, yet held
her peace and dissembled what she thought, glad and well contented with the
curtesy done unto her, fearing before that they came to kill. her, and thought
her self already discharged, hoping upon their courteous dealings, that she and
her Children from that time forth should live in good assurance. But she was
greatly deceived, and knew within short space after, the good will her
brethren bare unto her. For so soon as these gallants had conducted her into
the kingdom of Naples, to one of the Castles of her son, she was committed
to prison with her children, and she also that was the secretary of her
unfortunate marriage. Till this time Fortune was contented to proceed with
indifferent quiet (...) those Lovers, but benceforth ye shall hear the issue
of their little prosperous love, and how pleasure having blinded them, never
forsook them until it (...) given them the (...). It booteth not here to
recite fables or histories, contiting my self that ladies do read without too
many weping tears, the pitiful end of that miserable princess, who seeing her
self a prisoner in the company of her little children and well-beloved Maiden,
patiently lived in hope to see her brethren appaised, comforting her self for
the escape of her husband out of yt hands of his mortal foes. But her assurance
was changed into an horrible fear, and her hope to no expectation of surety,
when certain days after her (...), her Jailer came in, and said unto her:
Madame I do advise you henceforth to consider upon your conscience, for so much
as I suppose that even this very day your life shall be taken from you. I leave
for you to think what horror and trance assailed the feeble heart of this
pore Lady, and with what ears she received those cruel news, but her cries
and mones together with her sighs and lamentations, declared with what cheer
she received that advertisement. Alas (said she) is it possible that my
brethren should so far forget themselves, as for a fact nothing prejudicial
unto them, cruelly to put to death their innocent sister, and to imbrue the
memory of their fact, in the blood of one which never did offend them? Must I
against all right and equity be put to death before the Judge or Magistrate
have made trial of my life, and known the unright eousnesse of my cause? Ah God
most righteous, and bountiful father, behold the malice of my brethren, and
the tyrannous crucltie of those which wrongfully do seek my blood. Is it a
sin to mary? Is it a fault to fly and avoid the sin of whoredom? What
laws be these, where marriage bed and joined matrimony is pursued with like
severity, as murder, theft and aduoutrie? And what Christianity in a
Cardinal, to shed yt blood which he ought to (...)? What profession is this,
to assail the innocent by the hie way side, in place to punish thieves and
murderers? O Lord God thou art just, and do al things right cously, I see
well that I have trespassed against thy Majesty in some other notorious crime
than by marriage: I most humbly therefore beseech thee to have compassion upon
me, and to pardon mine (...), accepting the confession and repentance of me
thine (...) (...) for satisfaction of my sins, which it pleased thee to wash
away in the precious blood of thy son our Savior, that being so purified, I
might appear at ye holy banquet in thy glorious kingdom. When she had thus
(...) her prayer, two or three of the ministers which had taken her (...)
Forly, came in, and said unto her: Now Madame make ready your self to go to
God, for behold your hour is come. Praised be that God (said she) for the
wealth and woe which it pleases him to send us. But I beseech you my friends
to have pity upon these little children and innocent creatures. Let the^ not
feel the smarte which I am assured my brethren bear against their poor
unhappy father. Well well Madame said they, we will convey them to such a
place, as they shall not want. I also reco^mend unto you (quod she) this poor
maiden, and entreat her well, in consideration of her good service done to the
unfortunate Duchess of (...). As she had ended those words, yt two Ruffians
did (...) a cord about her neck, and strangled her. The maiden (...) the
piteous tragedy commensed upon her (...), cried out a main, and cursed the
cruel malice of those tormenters, and besought God to be witness of yt (...),
and crying (...) upon his divine Majesty, she besought him to (...) his
judgment against them which causeless (being no (...),) had killed such
innocent. creatures. Reason it is (said one of the tyrants) that thou be
partaker of the joy of thy mistress innocence, since (...) have been so
faithful a minister, and messanger of her follies. And suddenly caught her by
the hair of the head, and in stead of a carcanet placed a roape about her
neck. How now (quod she,) is this the promised faith which you made unto my
Lady? But those words flew into the air with her soul, in company of the
miserable Duchess.

But hearken now the most sorrowful scene of all yt tragedy. The little
children which had seen all the furious game done upon their mother and her
maid, as nature provoked the^, or as some presage of their mishap led them
thereunto, kneled upon their knees before those tyrants, and embracing their
legs, wailed in such wise, as I think that any other, except a pitilesse heart
spoiled of all humanity, would have had compassion. And impossible it was for
them, to unfold the embraceme^ts of those innocent creatures, which seemed to
forethink their death by the wild lokes and countenance of those roisters.
Whereby I think that needs it must be confessed, that nature has in her self,
and upon us imprinted some sign of divination, and specially at the hour and
time of death, in such wise as yt very beasts feel some co^ceits, although
they see neither sword nor staff, and endeavor to avoid the cruel passage of
a thing so fearful, as the separation of two things so nearly united, even the
body and soul, which for the motion yt chau^ceth at the very instant, she weth
how nature is constrained in that monstrous separation, and more than horrible
overthrow. But who can appease a heart determined to do evil, and has sworn
the death of another forced the runto by some special commandment? The Aragon
brethren meant hereby nothing else, but to root out yt whole name and race of
Bologna. And therefore the two ministers of iniquity did like murder and
slaughter upon those two tender babes, as they committed upon their mother, not
without some motion of horror, for doing of an act so detestable. Behold here
how far the cruelty of man exte^deth, when it coueteth nothing else but
vengeance, and mark what excessive choler the mind of the^ produces, which
suffer themselves to be forced and overwhelmed with fury. Leave we apart the
cruelty of Euchrates, the son of the king of Bactria, and of Phraates the
son of the Persian Prince, of Timon of Athens, and of an infinite nu^bre of
those which were rulers and gouerners of the Empire of Rome: and let us match
with these Aragon brethren, one Vitoldus Duke of Litudnia, the cruelty of
whom, constrained his own subjects to hang themselves, for fear least they
should fall into his furious and bloody hands. We may confess also these brutal
brethren to be more butcherly tha^ ever Otho earl of Monferrato, and prince of
Vrbin. was, who caused a yeoman of his chamber to be wrapped in a sheet
poudred with sulpher and brimsto^, and afterward kindled with a candle, was
scalded and consumed to death, because only he waked not at an hour by him
appointed. Let us not excuse them also from some affinity with Maufredus the
son of Henry yt second Emperor, who smoldered his own father, being an old
man, between y. couerleds. These former furies might have some excuse to cover
their cruelty, but these had no other cause but a certain beastly madness
which moved the^ to kill those little children their neuews, who by no means
could prejudice or anoy ye duke of Malfi or his title, in ye succession of his
Duchy, the mother having wtdrawn her goods, and was assigned her dowry: but a
wicked heart must needs bring forth semblable works according to his malice. In
the time of these murders, the unfortunate (...) kept himself at Millan with
his son Federick, and vowed himself to yt Lord Siluio Sauello, who that time
belieged the Castle of Millan, in the behalf of Maximilian Sforcia, which in
the end he conquered and recovered by composition with ye French within. But
that charge being archieued, the general Sauello marched from thence to
Cremona with his camp, whither Bologna durst not follow, but repaired to the
Marquize of Bitonte, in which time yt Aragon brethren so wrought, as his goods
were confiscate at Naples, and he driven to his shifts to use the golden
Duckates which the Duchess gave him to relieve him self at Millan, whose Death
although it was advertised by many, yet he could not be persuaded to believe
the same, for that diverse which went about to betray him, and feared he should
fly from Millan, kept his beak in the water, (as the Proverb is,) and
assured him both of the life and welfare of his spouse, and that shortly his
brethren in law would be reconciled, because that many Noble me^ favored him
well, and desired his return home to his Country. Fed and filled with that
vain hope, he remained more than a year at Millan, frequenting the company,
and well entertained of the richest Merchants and Gentlemen of the City: and
above all other, he had familiar access to the house of the Lady Hippolita
Bentiuoglia, where upon a day after dinner, taking his Lute in hand, whereon he
could exceedingly well play, he began to sing a certain Sonnet, which he had
composed upon the discourse of his misfortune, the tenor whereof is this.

The song of Antonio Bologna, the husband of the Duchess of Malfi.
If love, the death, or tract of time, have measured my distress,
Or if my beating sorrows may my languor well express:
Then love come sone to visit me, which most my heart desires,
And so my dolor finds some ease, through flames of fancies fires.
The time runs out his rolling course, for to prolong mine ease,
To thend I shall enjoy my love, and heart himself appease.
A cruel Darte brings happy death, my soul then rest shall find:
And sleping body under tomb, shall dream time out of mind.
And yet the Love, the time, nor Death, lokes not how I decrease:
Nor gives ear to any thing of this my woeful peace.
Full far I am from my good hap, or half the joy I crave,
whereby I (...) my state with tears, and draw full nere my grave.
The courteous Gods that gives me life, now moves the Planets all:
For to arrest my groaning ghost, and hence my sprite to call.
Yet from them still I am separd, by things unequal here,
Not me^t the Gods may be unjust, that bredes my cha^ging chere.
For they provide by their foresight, that none shall do me harm:
But she whose blasing beuty bright, has brought me in a charm.
My mistress has the power alone, to rid me from this woe:
whose thrall I am, for whom I die, to whom my sprite shall go.
Away my soul, go from the griefs, that thee oppresses still,
And let thy dolor witness bear, how much I want my will.
For since that love and death himself, delights in guiltless blood,
Let time tra^sport my troubled sprite, where destny seems good.
His song ended, the poor Gentleman could not forbear from pouring forth his
luke warm tears, which abundantly ran down his heavy face, and his panting
sighs truly discovered yt alteration of his mind, which moved each wight of
that assembly to pity his mournful state: and one specially of small
acquaintance, and yet knew the devises which the Aragon brethren had trained
and conspired against him: that unacquainted Gentleman his name was Delio, one
very well learned and of (...) invention, and very excellently has endited in
the Iralion vulgar tongue. Who knowing the Gentleman to be husband to the
deceased Duchess of (...) came unto him, and taking him aside, said: Sir,
albeit I have no great acquaintance with you, this being the first time that
ever I saw you, to my remembrance, so it is, that virtue has such force, and
makes gentle minds so amorous of their like, as when they do behold (...)
other, they feel themselves coupled as it were in a band of minds, that
impossible it is to divide the same. Now knowing what you be, and the good and
commendable qualities in you, I compte it my duty to reveal that which may
chance to breed you damage. Know you then, that I of late was in company
with a Noble man of Naples, which is in this City, banded with a certain
company of horsemen, who told me that he had a special charge to kill you,
and therefore prayed me (as he seemed) to require you not to come in his sight,
to the intent he might not be constrained to do that, which should offend
his Conscience, and grieve the same all the days of his life. Moreover I have
worse tidings to tell you, which are, that the Duchess your wife is dead by
violent hand in prison, and the most part of them that were in her company.
Besides this assure your self, that if you do not take heed to that which
this Neapolitane captain has differred, other will do and execute the same.
This much I have thought good to tell you, because it would very much grieve
me, that a Gentleman so excellent as you be, should be murdered in that
miserable wife, and would deem my self unworthy of life, if knowing these
practices I should dissemble the same. Whereunto Bologna answered: Sir Delio I
am greatly bound unto you, and give you hearty thanks for the good will you
bear me. But of the conspiracy of the brethren of Aragon, and the death of my
Lady, you be deceived, and some have given you wrong intelligence. For within
these two days I received letters from Naples, wherein I am advertised, that
the right honorable and (...) Cardinal and his brother be almost appeased, and
that my goods shall be rendered again; and my dear wife restored. Ah sir said
Delio, how you be beguiled and fed with follies, and nourished with sleights
of Court. Assure your self that they which write these tristes, make such
shameful sale of you, as the Butcher does of his flesh in the shambles, and
so wickedly betray you, as impossible it is to invent a Treason more
detestable: but be think you well thereof. When he had said so, he took his
leave, and joined himself in company of five and pregnant wits, there
assembled together. In the mean time, the cruel spryte of the Aragon brethren
were not yet appeased with the former murders, but needs must finish the last
act of Bologna his Tragedy by loss of his life, to keep his wife and
Children company, so well in an other world, as he was united with them in
Love in this frail and transitory passage. The Neapolitan gentleman before
spoken of by Delio, which had taken an enterprise to satisfy the barbarous
Cardinal, to bericue his Countreyman of life, having changes his mind, and
differring from day to day to sort the same to effect, which he had taken in
hand, it chanced that a Lombarde of larger conscience than the other,
inuegled with Covetousness, and hired for ready money, practiced the death of
the Duchess pore husband. This bloody beast was called Daniel de Bozola that
had charge of a certain band of footmen in Millan. This new Judas and
assured manqueller, within certain days after, knowing that Bologna
oftentimes repaired to hear service at the Church and covent of S. Fraunces,
secretly conveyed himself in ambush, hard bisides the church of S. James
whether he came, (being accompanied with a certain troop of souldioures) to
assail the unfortunate Bologna, who was sooner slain than he was able to
think upon defense, and whose mishap was such, that he which killed him had
good leisure to save himself by reason of the little pursuit made after him.
Behold here the Noble fact of a Cardinal, and what sauer it has of
Christian purity, to commit a slaughter for a fact done many years past upon
a poor Gentleman which never thought him hurt. Is this the sweet observation
of the Apostles, of whom they vaunt themselves to be the successors and
folowers? And yet we cannot find nor read, that the Apostles, or those that
slept in their trace, hired Kuffians and Murderers to cut the throtes of them
which did the^ hurt. But what? It was in the time of Julius the second, who was
more marshall than christian, and loved better to shed blood than give blessing
to the people. Such end had the unfortunate marriage of him, which ought to
have contented himself with that degree and honor that he had acquired by his
deeds and glory of his virtues, so much by each wight reco^mended. We ought
never to clime higher than our force permits, ne yet surmount the bounds of
duty, and less suffer our selves to be haled (...) forth with desire of
brutal sensuality. The sin being of such nature, that he never gives over
yt party whom he mastereth, until he has brought him to the (...) of some
Notable folly. You see the miserable discourse of a Princess love, that was
not very wise, and of a gentleman that had forgotten his estate, which ought to
serve for a loking glass to them which be over hardy in making of
enterprises, and do not measure their ability with the greatness of their
attemptes: where they ought to maintain themselves in reputation, and bear
the title of well advised: foreseeing their ruin to be example to all
posterity, as may be seen by the death of Bologna, and of all them which
sprang of him, and of his unfortunate spouse his Lady and mistress.

But we have discoursed inoughe hereof, since diversity of other Histories do
call us to bring the same in place, which were not much more happy than those,
whose History ye have already tasted.

The Countess of Celant.
The disordered life of the Countess of CELANT, and how she (causing the
County of MASINO to be murdered,) was beheaded at MILLAN.

The. xxiiij. Nouel.
NOt without cause of long time have wise and discrete men prudently governed,
and given great heed over their Daughters, and those whom they have chosen to
be their wives, not in using them like bo^dwemen and slaves, bereuing them of
all liberty, but rather to avoid the murmur and secret slanderous speech
of the common people, and occasions offered for infection and marring of youth,
specially circumspect of the assaults bent against maidens, being yet in the
first flames of fire, kindled by nature in the hearts, (...) of those that be
the wisest. Some persons (...) it to be very strange, that such (...) guard
should be observed of those which ought to live at liberty, and do not
consider how liberty and licentious bridle let slip unto youth, bread unto the
same most strong and tedious bondage, that better it had been the same to have
been chained and closed in some obscure prison, than marked with those blottes
of infamy, which willingly such license and liberty do conduce. If England
do not by experience see maidens of Noble houses infamed through too much
unbridled and frank manner of life, and their parents desolate for such
villainy, and the name of their houses fabulous and ridiculous to the people,
yet that manner of espiall and watch over children, may be noted in nations not
very far co^fining from us, where men be jealous of the very fantasy of
the^, whom they think to be of good grace, and who dare with one very look
give atteint unto their Daughters. But where examples be evident, where folly
is more than manifest, where all the world is assured of that which they see by
daily experience, and that the fruits of the disordered, break out into light,
it behooves no more to attend the dangerous customs of a Country, and to
condescend to the sottishe opinion of them, which say that youth too narrowly
looked unto, is trained up in such grosenesse and blockishnesse of mind, as
impossible it is afterward the same should do any thing praise worthy. The
Roman maide^s (...) were cloistered within their fathers Palaces, still at
their mothers elbowes, and notwithstanding were so well brought up, yt those of
best ciuility and finest trained up in our age, shall not be the second to one
of the least perfect in yt City. But who can learn civility and virtue in
these our days? our daughters nousled in companies, whose mouths run over with
whorish and filthy talk, with (...) full of ribauldrie, and many times (...)
with facts less honest tha^ word is able to express. I do not pretend hereby
to deprive that sex of honest and seemly talk and company, and less of
exercise amongs the Noble Gentlemen of our English soil, ne yet of the
liberty received from our ancestors, only (me think) that requisite it were
to contemplate the manners and inclination of wills, and refrain those that be
prone to wantonness, and by like means to rejoice the minds of them that be
bent to heaviness, divided from courtesy and ciuility, by attending of which
choice and considering of that difference, impossible it is but virtue must
shine more bright in Noble houses than homeliness in cabanes of pesants and
country carles: who oftentimes better observe the Discipline of our
predecessors in education of their children, than they which presume to praise
themselves for good skill in use and government of that age, more troublesome
and painful to rule, than any other time of man's life.

Therefore the good and wise Emperor Marcus Aurelius would not have his
daughters to be brought up in Courts. For (quod he) what profit shall the
nurse receive by learning her maiden honesty and virtue, when our works entice
them to dalliance, and to learn the folly of those that be amorous? I make
this discourse, not that I am so (...) a judge for our maidens of England, that
I wish them so reformed, as to see and be seen should be forbidden, being
assured that virtue in what place so ever she be, cannot but open things yt
shall savor of the taste thereof. But to talk of an Italian dame, who so long as
her first husband (knowing her inclination) kept her subject, she lived in
reputation of a modest and sober wife. Nothing is seen in her that can defame
her (...). And so soon as the shadow of that free captivity was passed by the
death of her husband, God knows what pageant she played, and how she soyled
both her own renoume, and the honor of her second husband, as ye shall
understand if with patience ye vouchsafe to read the discourse of this present
History.

Cafall, (as it is not unknown) is a City of Piedmont, and subject to the
Marquize of Montferrato, where dwelled one yt was very rich, although of base
birth, named Giachomo Scappardone, who being grown to be rich, more by wicked
Art and usury, to much manifest, than by other his own diligence, took to
wife a young Greek maiden, which the Marchioness of Montferrato mother of
Marquize Guglielmo, had brought home with her from yt voyage that she made
into Grecia with her husband, when the Turks ouerran yt country of Macedonia,
and seized upon the City of Modena which is in Morea. Of that maiden
Scappardone had a daughter indifferent fair, but in behauior lively and
pleasant, who by name was called Bianca Maria. The father died within a while
after her birth, as one that was of good years, and had been greatly turmoiled
in getting of riches, whose value amou^ted above one hundred thousand Crowns.
Bianca Maria arrived to the age of. xvj. or. (...). years, was required of
many, as well for her beauty, gentleness and good grace, as for her great
riches. In the end she was married to the vicecount Hermes, the son of one of
the chiefest houses in Millan, who incontinently after the marriage, conveyed
her home to his house, leaving his (...) mother to govern the vsuries (...) by
her dead husband. The Gentleman which amo^gs two green, knew one that was
ripe, having for a certain time well used and learned the manners of his wife,
saw yt it behooved him rather to deal with the bit and bridle than the spur,
seeing her to be wanton, full of desire, and coueted nothing so much as fond
and disordered liberty, and therefore without cruel dealing, disquiet, or
trouble, he used by little and little to keep her in, and cherished her more
than his nature willingly would suffer, of purpose to hold her within the
bounds of duty. And although ye (...) (...) have almost like liberties that
ours have, yet the Lord Hermes kept her within doors, and suffered her to
frequent none other house and company, but the Lady Hippolita Sforcia, who
upon a day demanded of him wherefore he kept in his wife so short, and
persuaded him to give her somewhat more the bridle because diverse already
murmured of this order, as too strait and froward, esteeming hint either to be
too much fond over her, or else to jealous. Madame said the Millanoise, they
which at pleasure so speak of me, know not yet the nature of my wife, who I
had rather should be somewhat restrained, than run at rouers to her dishonor
and my shame. I remember well madame the proper saying of Paulus Emilius that
Notable Roman, Who being demanded wherefore he refused his wife being a
Gentlewoman so fair and beautiful. O (quod he and lifted up his leg whereupon
was a new pair of buskins) ye see this fair buskin meet and seemly for this
leg to outward appearance not grievous or noisome, but in what place it hurts
me, or where it wringeth ye do neither see nor yet consider. So I Madame, do
feel in what place my hose does hurt and wring my leg. I know Madame what
it is to grant to so wa^ton a Dame as my wife is, her will, and how far I
ought to let go the bridle: Jealous I am not upon the faith that I bear unto
God, but I know that which I would not, if it be possible that it chance unto
me. And by my troth Madame, I give her license to repair to pou both day and
night, and at whatsoever hour, being assured of the (...) company which haunte
your house: otherwise my palace shall suffice her pleasure for the common joy of
us both, and therefore would wish no more talk to be hereof, least too
importunate suits do offend my nature, and make me think that to be true which
of good will I am loath to suspect, contenting my self with her chastity, for
fear least too much liberty do corrupt her. These words were not spoken without
cause, and the wise husband saw well that such beasts, albeit rudely they ought
not to be used, yet to be halde^ short, and not suffered too much to wander at
will. And verily his Prophecy was too true for respect of that which followed.
For they had not been married full. vj. years, but the good (...) Hermes,
departed this world, whereof she was very sorry, because she loved him derely,
having as yet not tasted the licorous baits of such liberty, as afterward
she drank in Gluttonous draughtes, when after her husbands obsequies, (...)
retired to Montferrato, and then to Cafal to her Fathers house, her mother
being also dead, and she a lone woman to joy at pleasure the fruit of her
desires, she bent her only study to gay and (...) apparel, and employed the
mornings with the Uermilion rudde to color her cheeks by greater curiosity
than the most shameless Curtisan of Rome, firing her eyes upon every man,
gyring and laughing with open mouth, and pleasantly disposed to talk and
reason with (...) Gentleman that passed through the streate. This was the way
to attain the glorious feast of her triumpha^t filthiness, who wanne the
price above the most famous women which in her time made profession of those
arms, wherewith Venus once dispoyled Mars, and took from him the strongest and
best (...) armure of all his furniture. Think not fair maids, that talk and
clattering with youth is of small regard. For a City is half (...) when they
within demand for Parle, loath then they be to endure the Canon shot. So
when the ear of a (...) wife or maid is pliant to lascivious talk, (...) in
wanton words, albeit her chastity receive no damage, yet occasion of speech is
ministered to the people, and perchance in such disadvantage, as never after
her good name is recovered. Wherefore needful it is, not only to avoid the
effect of evil, but also yt least suspicion: For good fame is so requisite for
women as honest life. The great captain Julius Caesar, (which first of all
reduced the common wealth of Rome in form of Monarchy) being once demanded
wherefore he had refused his wife, before it was proved that she had offended
with Clodius, the night of the sacrifices done to the Goddess Bona, answered
so wisely as truly, that the house of Caesar ought not only to be void of
whordome, but of suspicion thereof. Behold wherefore I have said, and yet do
say, that ye ought to take great (...) to your selves, and to laugh in time,
not bending your ears to uncomely talk, but rather to follow the nature of
the Serpent, that stops his ear with his tail, to avoid the Charms and
Sorceries of the Enchaunter. So long then as Bianca Maria was sued unto, and
pursued of many at Cafull that desired her to wife, two amongs ye rest did
profer themselves, which were the Lord Gismondo Gonzaga, the near kinsman of
the Duke of Mantua, and the County of Celant, a great Baron of Sauoy, whose
lands lie in the vale of Agosta. A great pastime it was to this fine
Gentlewoman to feed her self with the Drations of those two Lords, and a joy
it was to her, to use her own discourse and answers thereunto, expressing with
right good grace sundry amorous countenances, intermingling therwithall sighs,
sobbes, alteration of cheer, that full well it might have been said, of love
tricks that she was the only dame and mistress. The Marchioness of
Montferrato desirous to gratify the Lord of Mantua his son in Law, endeavored
to induce this wa^ton Lady to take for spouse Gismondo Gonzaga, and the sut e
so well proceeded, as almost the marriage had been concluded if yt Sauoy Earl
had not come betwixt, and showed forth his Nobleness of mind, when he
understood how things did pass, and that an other was ready to bear away the
price, and recover his mistress. For yt cause he came to visit the Lady, who
entertained him well, as of custom she did all other. He that would not employ
his time in vain, having found her alone and at convenient leisure, began to
preach unto her in this wise with such countenance, as she perceived yt
County to be far in love with her.

The Oration of the Count of Celant to his Lady.
I Am in doubt Madame, of whom chiefly I ought to make complaint, whether of
you, or of my self, or rather of fortune which guides and brings us
together. I see well that you receive some wrong, and that my cause is not very
just, you taking no regard unto my passion which is outrageous, and less
hearkening unto that which many times I have given you to understand of the
honest love I bear you. But I am bisides this, more to be accused for
suffering an other to march so far over my game and soil, as I have almost
lost the tract of the pray which I most desire, and specially do condemn my
Fortune, for that I am in danger to lose the thing which I deserve, and you in
peril to pass into that place where your captivity shall be worse (...) the
slaves by the Portugales condemned to the mines of India. does it not suffice
you that the Lord Hermes closed you up the space of. v. or. vi. years in his
chamber, but will you needs attempt the rest of your youthly days amid the
Mantuanes, whose suspicious heads are full of hammers working in the same?
Better it were madame, that we being nearer the gallant guise of France,
should live after the liberty of that Country, rather than be captive to an
Italian house, which will restrain you with like bondage, as at other times you
have felt ye experience. Moreover ye see what opinion is like to be conceived
of you, (...) it shall be bruted ye for the Marquize fear, you have married the
Ma^tuan Lord. And I know well ye you like not to be esteemed as a pupil, your
nature cannot abide compulsion, you be free from her authority, it were no
reason you should be constrained. And not to stay in framing of orations, or
stand upon discourse of words, I (...) beseech you to behold the cs^ta^t love I
bear you, and being a gentleman so wealthy as I am, none other cause induces
me to make this suit, but your good grace and bringing up, which force me to
love you above any other Ge^tlewoman yt lives. And although I might allege
other reasons to prove my saying, yet refer I my self to the experience and
bou^ty of your mind, and to the equitic of your judgment. If my passion were
not vehement, and my torment without comparison, I would wish my fained griefs
to be laughed to scorn, and my vissibled pain rewarded (...) flouts. But my
love being sincere and pure, my trauail co^tuiuall, and my griefs endless, for
pity sake I beseech you madame to consider my faithful deserts with your
duetiful courtesy, and then shall you see how much I ought to be preferred
before them, which under the shadow of an other man's puissance, do seek to
purchase power to command you: where I do faithfully bind and tie my word and
deed continually to love and serve you, with promise al ye days of my life to
accomplish your commandment. Behold if it please you what I am, and with what
affection I make mine humble plaint, regard ye messanger, love it is himself ye
holds me within your snares, and makes me captive to your beauty and divine
graces, which have no piere. But if you refuse my suit, and cause me breath my
words into ye air, you shall be accused of cruelty, ye shall see ye entier
defaict of a gentleman which loves you better tha^ love himself is able to
yield flame and fire to force any wight to love mortal creature. But I think the
heavens have departed in me such abounda^ce, to ye (...) in loving you with
(...) so great, you might also think ye it is I which ought to be the friend and
spouse of that gentle and courteous Lady Bianca Maria, which alone may call her
self ye mistress of my heart.

The Lady which before was mocked and (...) with ye Count his demands,
hearing that last discourse, and remembering her first marriage, and the
natural iealosie of (...), half won without making other countenance,
answered the Count in this manner:

Sir Count, albeit yt I am obedient to the will and commandment of Madame the
Marchioness, and am loath to displease her, yet I will not so far gage my
liberty, but still do reserve one point to say what reasteth in my thought.
And what should let me to choose such one, to whom I shall be both his life and
death? And of whom being once possessed, it is impossible to be rid and
acquitted? I assure you, if I feared not the speech and suspicion of malicious
minds, and the venime of slanderous tongues, never husband should bring me
more to bondage. And if I thought that he whom I pretend to choose, would be so
cruel to me, as others whom I know, I would presently refuse marriage for ever.
I thank you nevertheless, both of your aduertisements given me, and of the
honor you do me, you desiring to accomplish that honor by marriage to be
celebrated between us. For ye (...) of which your talk, and the little
dissimulatio^ I see to be in you, I promise you that there is no Gentleman in
this country to whom I give more puissance over me, than to you, if I chance
to mary, and thereof make you so good assurance, as if it were already done. The
Count seeing so good an entry would not suffer the time so to (...), but
beating the bushes until the pray was ready to spring, said unto her. And
since you know what thing is profitable, and what is hurtful, and that the
benefit of liberty is so much recommended, why do you not perform yt which
may redound to your honor? Assure me of your word, and promise me the Faith and
loyalty of marriage, then let me alone to deal with the rest, for I hope to
attain the effect without offense and displeasure of any. And seeing her to
remain in a muse without speaking word, he took her by the hand, and kissing
ye same a million of times, added these words: How now Madame, be you appalled
for so pleasant an assault, wherein your adversary confesses himself to be
vanquished? Courage madame, I say courage, and behold him here which humbly
prays you to receive him for your lawful husband, and who swears unto you
all such amity and reverence that husband owes to his loyal spouse. Ah sir
Count said she, and what will the Marquize say, unto whom I have wholly
referred my self for marriage? Shall not she have just occasion to frown upon
me, and frowardly to use me for the little respect I bear unto her? God be my
witness, if I would not that Gonzaga had never come into this country: for
although I loved him not, yet I have almost made him a promise, which I can not
keep. And since there is nothing done (said the Sauoy Lord) what need you to
torment your self? Will the Marquess wreke her tyranny over the will of her
subjects, and force ladies of her land to marry against their lust? I think
that so wise a princess, so well nurtured, will not so far forget her self,
as to strain that which God has left at liberty to every wight. Promise me
only marriage, and leave me to dcale with the rest, other things shall be well
provided for. Bianca Maria vanquished with that importunity, and fearyng
again to fall into servitude, hoping that the Count would maintain such
liberty as he had (...), agreed unto him. and plighted unto him her faith, and
for the time used mutual promises by words respectively one to another. And
the better to confirm the fact, and to let the knotte from breking, they
bedded themselves togethers. The Count very joyful for that encountre, yielded
such good beginning by his countenance, and by familiar and continual haunte
with Bianca. Maria, as shortly after the matter was known; and came to the
Marquess cares, that the daughter of Scappardone had married the Count of
Celant. The good lady albeit that she was wroth beyond mesure, and willingly
would have been revenged upon the bride, yet having respect to the Count,
which was a noble man of great authority, swallowed down that pille without
chewing, and prayed the Lord Gonzaga not to be offended, who (...) the light
behavior of the Lady, laughed at the matter, and praised God for that the
thing was so well broken off: for he did for see almost already what (...) that
Comedy would have, being very familiar for certain days in ye house of Bia^ca
Maria. This marriage then was published, and the solemnity of ye nuptials done
very princely, according to ye nobility of him which had married her: but ye
augurie and presage was heavy, and the melancolike face of the season (which
was (...) darkened about ye time they should go to church) declared that the
mirth and joy should not long continue in the house of the County, according
to the common saying: He that looks not before he leapeth, may chance to
siumble before he sleapeth. For the Lord of (...) being retired home into his
daleys of the Sauoy mountains, began to look about his business, and
perceived that his wife surpassed al others in light behauior and unbridled
desires, whereupon he resolved to take order and stop her passage before she
had won the field, and that fra^kly she should go seek her ventures where she
list, (...) she would not be ruled by his advise. The foolish (...) seeing that
her husband well espied her fond and foolish behauior, and that wisely he
went about to remedy the same, was no whit astonnied, or regarded his advise,
but rather by forging complaints did cast him in ye teeth sometimes (...) her
riches that she brought him, sometime she thwited him with those who^ she had
refused for his sake, and with who^ far of the liurd like a savage beast amid
yt mountain deserts and baren dales of Sauoy, and told him that by no means
she minded to be closed and shut up like a tamelesse beast. The Count which
was wise, and would not break the Ele upon his knee, prouidently admonished
her in what wise a Lady ought to esteem her honor, and how the lightest faults
of noble sorts appeared mortal sins before the people. That it was not
sufficient for a Gitlewoma^ to have her body chaste, if her spech were not
according, and the mind (...) to (...) outward sembla^ce, and the conversation
not agreeable to ye secret conceits of mind: and I shall be full sorry sweet
wife (said the Count) to give you any cause of disco^tentation: for where you
shall be vexed and molested, I shall receive no joy or pleasure, you being such one
as ought to be ye second my self, determining by gods grace to keep my promise,
and use you like a wife, if so be you do regard me as you ought to do your
husband. For reason will not that the head obey (...) (...) and endeavor their
relief and succor, if they show not themselves to be such as depend upon ye
health and life of it. The husband being the wives chief, ought to be obeyed in
(...) which reason requires: and she referring her self to the pleasure of her
head, (...) him to whom she is adjoined, to do and assay all travail and pain
for her sake. Of one thing I must needs accuse you, which is, that for a trifle
you frame complaint, and the mind occupied in folly, lusts for nothing more
than vain things, and those that be of little prosite, specially where the
pleasure of the body is only considered: but (...) mind which follows reason,
dissembleth his griefs, with words full of wisdom, and in knowing much, (...)
not withstanding a subtle and honest ignorance: but I may be much deceived
herin, by thinking ye a woman fraught with (...) opinions may recline her ears
to what so ever thing, except to ye which deliteth her mind and plea seth
(...) desires framed in her foolish fa^tasie. Let not this speech be strange
unto you, for your words uttered without discretion, make me use this
language. More over you shall do me pleasure and a great good turn to your self,
if you take heed to my request, and thereby follow mine advise. The Coutesse
which was so fine and malicious as the (...) was good and wise, dissembling her
grief, and covering the venom hidden in her mind, began so well to play the
hypocrite before her husband, and to counterfaict the simple dame, as albeit
he was right politic, yet he was within her snare intrapt, and flattered him
with so fair words, as she won him to go to Casal, to visit the lands of
her inheritance. We see whereunto the intent of this false woman tended and what
checkmate she meant to give both to her husband, and her honor: whereby we
know, that when a woman is disposed to give her self to wickedness, her
mind is void of no malice or invention to bring to end any danger or peril
offered unto her. The facts of one Medea (if credit may be given to Poets) and
of Phaedra, the woman of Theseus, well declare with what beastly zeal they
began and ended their attemptes. The Eagles flight is not so high, as the
foolish desires and conceits of a woman which trusts in her own opinion,
and treads out of the tract of duty and way of wisdom. Pardon me good
Ladies, if I speak so largely, and think not that I mean to display any
other but such as forget the degree wherein their ancestors have placed them,
and digress from the true path of those which have immortalized the memory of
them selves, and of their husbands, and the houses also whereof they came. I am
very loath to take upon me the office of a slanderer, and no less do mean to
flatter those, whom I see to their great shame, offend openly in the sight
of the world. But why should I dissemble that which I know your selves would
not conceyle, if in conscience ye were required thereunto? It were extreme
folly and (...) to deck and clothe vice with the holy garment of virtue, and
to call that Courtesy and Civility, which is manifest whooredom: Let us term
each thing by his due name, let us not blot and deface that which of it self
is fair and pure, let us not also stain the renoume of those, whom their own
virtue do recommende, This gentle Countess being at Casal, making much of her
husband, and kissing him with the kiss of treason, and of him being
unfeignedly beloved and cherished, not able to forget his sermons, and much
less her own filthy life, seeing that with her Count it was impossible for
her to live and glut her lecherous lust, who in deed was the true possessor of
the same, determined to run away and seek her adventure: for the bringing to
pass whereof, she had already taken order for money, the interest growing to
her daily profit at Millan. And having levied a good sum of Ducates in
hand, until her other rents were ready, she fled away in the night in
company of certain of her men which were privy to her doings. Her retire was
to Pauie, a City subject to the state and Duchy of Millan, where she hired a
great and princely palace and aparelled the same according to her estate and
train of her husband and as her own revenue was able to bear. I leave for
you to think what buzzings entered into the Countes head, by the sudden flight
of his wife, who would have sent and gone him self after to seek her out, and
bring her home again, had he not well considered and wayed his own profit
and advantage, and knowing that her absence would rid out of his head a fardell
of suspicions which he before conceived, was in the end resolved to let her
alone, and suffer her remain in what place soever she was retired, from whence
he never minded to call her home again. I were a very fool (said he) to keep
in my house so pernicious and fearful an enemy, as that arrant whore is,
who one day before I be ware, will cause some of her russians to cut my throat,
besides the violation of her holy marriage bed: God defend that such a strumpet
by her presence should any longer profane the house of the lord of Celant, who
is well rewarded and punished for the excessive love which he bare her. Let her
go whether she list, and live a gods name at her ease, I do content my self in
knowing what women be able to do, without further attempt of fortune and other
proof of her wicked life. He added further, that the honor of so noble a
personage as he was, depended not upon a woman's mischief: and assure your self
the whole race of woma^kind was not spared by ye Count, against whom he then
inueyed more through rage (...) any reason that time in him, he considered not
the good and honest sort of women, which deface the villainy of those that
give them selves over to their own lusts, without regard of modesty and
shame, which ought to be familiar, as it were by a certain natural inclination
in all women and maidens. But come we again to Bianca Maria, holding her Court
and open house at (...), where she got so holy a (...), as mistress Lais of
Corinth sometimes was never more common in Asia than this fair dame, almost in
every corner of In (...), whose conversation was such, as her frank liberty
and familiar demeanor to each wight, well witnessed (...) abominable life. True
it was, yt her reputation there was very small, and the hired not her self, ne
yet took (...) by setting her body to sale, but for some reasonable gain and
earnest pain. Howbeit she (of whom sometimes the famous Greek orator would not
bie repentance for so (...) a price) was more excessive in sale of her
marcha^dise, but not more wanton. For (...) no sooner espied a beautiful
gentleman yt was youthly, and well made, but would presently show him so good
countenance, as he had been a very fool, which knew not after what prouender
this Colt did neigh: whose shameless gesture Messalina the Roman princess
did never surmou^t, except it were in that she visited and hau^ted common
houses: and this dame used her disports within her own house: ye other also
received (...) Carters, Galey slaves, and porters: and this half Greek did her
pastime with (...) me^ that were brave and lusty. But in one thing she well
resembled her, which was, yt (...) was sooner werie with travail, than she
satisfied with pleasure. and the (...) use of her body, like unto a sink that
receives al (...), without disgorgyng any, thrown into the same. This was the
chaste life which that good lady led, after she had taken flight from her
husband. Mark whether the Milanois that was her first husband were a gross
headed person or a fool, and whether he were not learned and skilful in ye
science of (...), and time for him to make ready ye rods to make her know her
duty, therwt to correct her wa^ton youth, and to cut of the lusty twigs and
proud sciences yt soked yt moisture and heart of yt stock and bra^ ches. It
chanced whiles she lived at Pauie, in this good and honorable port, ye Count
of (...) called Ardizzino Valperga came to the emperors service, and thereby
made his abode at Pauie with one of his brothers: the Count being a goodly
gentleman, young and trim in apparel, given to many good qualities, had but one
only fault, which was yt he was lame in one of his legs, by reason of a certain
adventure and blow received in ye wars, although yt same took away no part of
his beauty and fine behauior. The Count I say remaining certain days at Pauie,
beheld yt beauty, grace and comeliness of the Countess of (...), and stayed
with such devotion to view and gaze upon her, as many (...) he romed up and
down ye street wherein she dwelt to find means to speak unto her. His first
talk was but a Boniour, and simple salutation, such as Gentlemen commo^nly use
in company of Ladies, and at that first brunte Valperga could settle none
other judgment upon that Goddess, but that she was a wise and honest dame,
and such a one not with standing as there neded not the Emperors camp to force
the place which as he thought was not so well flanked and rampired but that a
good man of arms might easily win, and the breach so lively and sautable,
as any soldier might pass the same. He became so familiar with the Lady, and
talked with her so secretly, as upon a day being with her alone, he used this
kind of speech: Were not I of all men most blame worthy, and of greatest
folly to be reproved, so long time to be acquainted with a Lady so fair and
courteous as you be, and not to offer my service, life and goods to be disposed
as shall like you best? I speak not this Madame, for any evil and sinister
judgment that I (...) of you, for that I praise and esteem you above any
Gentlewoma^ that ever I knew til this day, but rather for that I am so
wonderfully attached with your love, as wrong I should do unto your honesty and
my loyal service toward you, if I continued (...), and did conceyle that which
incessantly would consume my heart with infinite number of ardent desires, and
wast mine intrailes for the extreme (...) burning love I bear you. I do
require you to put no credit in me, if I do not all that which it shall please
you to command me. Wherefore Madame, I humbly beseech you to accept me for
your own, and to favor me as such one, which with all fidelity hops to
pass his time in your company. The Countess although she knew well enough
that the fire was not so lively kindeled in the stomach of the Count as he
went about to make her believe, and that his words were too eloquent, and
countenance, too joyful for so earnest a lover as he seemed to be: yet for
that he was a valiant Gentleman, young, lusty, and strongly made, minded to
retain him, and for a time to stay her stomach by appeasing her gluttonous
appetite in matters of love, with a morsel so dainty, as was this mynion and
lusty young Lord: and when the courage of him began to cool, another should
enter the listes. And therefore she said unto him: Although I (knowing the use
and manners of men, and with what baits they hook for Ladies, if they take not
heed, having proved their malice and little love,) determined never to love
other tha^ mine affection, ne yet to favor man, except it be by showing some
familiar manner to hear their talk, and for pastime to hearken the brave
requests of those which say they burn for love, in the mids of some brook of
delites. And albeit I think you no better tha^ other be, ne more faithful, more
affectionate, or otherwise moved than the rest, yet I am content for respect of
your honor, somewhat to believe you, and to accept you for mine own, since your
discretion is such (I trust) as so Noble a Gentleman as you be, will himself
declare in those affairs, and when I see the effect of my hope, I can not be so
unkind, but with all honesty shall assay to satisfy yt your love. The Count
seeing her alone, and receiving the Ladies language for his advantage, and that
her countenance by alteration of her mind did add a certain beauty to her
face, and perceiving a desire in her that he should not use delay, or be too
squeimish, she demau^ding naught else but execution, took the present offered
time, forgetting all ceremonies and reverence, he embraced her and kissed her a
hundred thousand times. And albeit she made a certain simple and provoking
resistance, yet the lover seeing the^ to be but preparatiues for the sport of
love, he strayed from the bounds of honesty, and threw her upon a field bed
within the Chamber, where he solaced himself with his long desired suit. And
finding her worthy to be beloved, and she him a courteous gentleman, consulted
together for continuance of their amity, in such wise as the Lord Ardizzino
spoke no more but by ye mouth of Bianca Maria, and did nothing but what she
commanded, being so bewrapped with the heavy mantell of beastly Love, as he
still above night and day in the house of his beloved: whereby the brute was
noised throughout the City, and the songs of their Love more common in each
Citizens mouth, than the Stanze or Sonnets of Petrarch, played and sained upon
the Gittorne, Lute or Harp of these of Noble house, more fine and witty than
those unsavory (...) that be tuned and chaunted in the mouths of the foolish
common sort. Behold an Earl well served and dressed by enjoying so false a
woman, which had already falsified the faith betrouthed to her husband, who was
more honest, mild and virtuous, than she deserved. Behold ye Noble Gentlemen,
the simplicity of this good Earl, how it was deceived by a false and filthy
strumpet, whose stinking life and common use of body would have withdrawn
each simple creature from mixture of their own with such a Carrion. A lesson
to learn all youth to refrain the whoorishe looks and light conditioned
Dames, a number (the more to be pitied) showing forth them selves to the
portsale of every cheapener, that list demand the price, the grosenesse
whereof before considered, were worthy to be defied and loathed. This Lady
seeing her Lover noussed in her lust, dandled him with a thousand trumperies,
and made him hold the Mule, while other enjoyed the secret sport which erst
he used himself. This acquaintance was so dangerous to the Count, as she her
self was shameless to the Count of Celant. For the one bare the arms of
Cornwall, and became a second Acteon, and the other wickedly led his life, and
lost the chiefest of that he looked for in the service of great princes, by the
treason of an arrant common (...).

Whiles this Love continued in all pleasure and like contentation of either
parts: Fortune that was ready to mount the stage, and show in sight that her
mobilitie was no more stable than a woman's will: (For under such habit and
sere Painters and Poets describe her) made Ardizzino suspecte what desire she
had of change: and within a while after, saw himself so far misliked of his
Lady, as though he had never been acquainted. The cause of that recoile was,
for that the Countess was not contented with one kind of fare, and whose eyes
were more gredie than her stomach able to digest, and above all desired
change, not seeking means to find him that was worthy to be beloved and
entertained of so great a Lady, as she esteemed her self to be, and as such
women of their own opinion think themselves, who counterfaicte more gravity
and reputation than they do, whom nature and virtue for their majesty and
holiness of life make Noble and praise worthy. That desire deceived her
nothing at all: for a certain time after that Ardizzino possessed the forte of
this fair Countess, there came to Pauia, one Roberto Sanseuerino Earl of
Gaiazzo, a young fair and valiant Gentleman, whose Country lies on this side
the Mountains, and very familiar with the Earl of Massino.

This unfaithful Alcina and cruel Medea had no sonet cast her eye upon Signor
di Gaiazzo, but was pierced with his love in such wise, as if forthwith she
had not attained her desires, she would have run mad, because that Gentleman
bare a certain stately representation in his face, and promised such
dexterity in his deeds, as suddenly she thought him to be yt man that was
able to staunch her filthy thirst. And therefore so gentlely as she could, gave
over her Ardizzino, with whom she utterly refused to speak, and shunned his
company when she saw him, and by shutting the gates against him, the Noble man
was not able to forbear from throwing forth some words of choler, whereby she
took occasion both to expel him, and also to bear him such displeasure, as
then she co^spired his death, as afterward you shall perceive. This great
hatred was the cause that she being fallen in Love as you have heard with the
Count of Gaiazzo, showed unto him all sign of amity: and seeing that he
made no great suit unto her, she wrote unto him in this manner.

The Letter of Bianca Maria to the Count of Gaiazzo.
SIr
I doubt not by knowing the state of my degree, but that ye be abashed to see
the violence of my mind, when passing the limits of modesty, which ought to
guard such a Lady as I am, I am forced (uncertain of the cause) to do you
understand the grief that does torment me, which is of such constraint, as if
of courtesy ye do not vouchsafe to visit me, you shall commit two faults,
the one leaving the thing worthy for you to love and regard, and which
deserves not to be cast off, the other in causing the death of her, that for
Love of you, is bereft of rest. And so love has very little in me to sease
upon either of heart or liberty, but yt ease of grief proceeds from your
only grace, which is able to vanquishe her, whose victorious hap has conquered
all other, and who atte^ding your resolut answer, shall rest under ye merciful
refuge of hope, which deceiving her, shall see by that very means the wretched
end of her that is all your own.

Bianca Maria Countess of Celant.


The young Lord much marvelled at this message, were it for that already he
was in love with her, and yt for love of his friend Ardizzino, would not be
known thereof, or for that he feared she would be straught of wits, if she were
despised, he determined to go unto her, yet stayed and thought it not to be ye
part of a faithful companion to deceive his friend. But in end pleasure
surmounting reason, and the beauty joined with the good grace of the Lady
having blinded him, and bewitched his wits so well as Ardizzino, he took his way
toward her house who waited for him with good devotion, whither being arrived,
he failed not to use like speech that Valperga did, either of them (after
certain reuerences and other few words) minding and desiring one kind of
intertainment. This practice dured certain months, and the Countess was so
far rapt with her new lover, as she only employed her self to please him,
and he showed himself so affected as she thought to bridle him in all things:
whereof she was afterward deceived, as you shall understand the manner.
Ardizzino seeing himself wholly abandoned ye presence and love of his Lady,
knowing ye she railed upon him in all places where she came, departed Pauia
half out out of his wits for anger, and so strayed from (...) order by reason
of his rage, as he displayed the Countess three times more lively in her
colors, than she could be painted, and reproved her with yt terms of the
vilest and most (...) strumpet that (...) ran at rouers, or shot at randon.
Bianca Maria understood hereof, and was advertised of the good report that
Ardizzino spread of her throughout (...), which chafed her in such wise as she
fared like the Bedlem fury, ceasing night nor day to plain the unkindness
and folly of her reietted Lover: Sometimes saying, that she had just cause so
to do, then flattering her self, alleged, that men were made of purpose to
suffer such follies as were wrought by her, and that where they termed
themselves to be women's servants, they ought at their mistress hands to
endure what pleased them. In the end, not able any longer to restrain her
choler, ne vanquish the appetite of revenge, purposed at all adventure to
provide for the death of her ancient enemy, and that by means of him whom
she had now tangled in her nets. See the unshamefastness of this mastife
bitche, and the rage of that female Tiger, how she goes about to arm one
friend against an other, and was not content only to abuse the Count Gaiazzo,
but devised to make him yt manqueller. And as one night they were in the midst
of their embracements, she began pitifully to weep and sigh, in such wise as a
man would have thought (by the vexation of her heart) that the soul and body
would have parted. The young Lord lovingly enquired the cause of her heaviness:
and said unto her, that if any had done unto her displeasure, he would revenge
her cause to her contentation. She hearing him say so, (then in study upon the
device of her enemies death,) spoke to the Count in this manner: You know sir,
that the thing which most (...) the Gentle heart and mind that can abide no
wrong, is defamation of honor and infamous report. Thus much I say, by
reason the Lord of Massino, (who to say the troth, has been favored of me in
like sort as you be now) has not vene ashamed to publishe open (...) against
me, as though I were the arrantest whore that ever had given her self over
to the Galley slaves alongs the shore of Sicile. If he had vaunted the favor
which I have done him but to certain of his friends, I had incurred no whit
of slander, much less any little suspicion, but hearing the common reports,
the wrongful words and wicked brute that he has raised on me: I beseech you
sir, to do me reason that he may feel his offense, and the smart for his
committed fault against her that is all youres. The Lord Sanseuerino hearing
this discourse, promised her to do his best, and to teach Valperga to talk
more soberly of her, whom he was not worthy for to (...), but in thought.
Notwithstanding he said more, than he meant to do, for he knew Ardizzino to be
so honest, sage, and courteous a personage, as he would neither do nor say any
thing without good cause, and that Ardizzino had (...) quarrel against him, by
taking that from him which he loved (although it was (...) (...)
discontinuance from that place, and upon the only request of her.) Thus he
concluded in mind still to remain the friend of Ardizzino, and yet to spend
(...) (...) with the Countess, which he did, and used certain months without
quarrelling with Valperga, that (...) (...) to (...), with whom he (...) (...),
and lived (...), and (...) commonly used one table and bed together. Bianca
Maria seeing that the Lord of Gaiazzo cared not much for her, but only for his
pleasure, determined to use like practice against him, as she did to her former
lover, and to banish him from her house. So that when he came to see her,
either she was sick, or her affairs were such, as she could not keep him
company: or else her gate was shut upon him. In the end (playing double or
quit) she prayed the said Lord to show her such pleasure and friendship, as to
come no more unto her, because she was in terms to go home to her husband the
Count of Celant, who had sent for her, and feared least his servant should
find her house full of suitors, alleging that she had lived long enough in yt
most sinful life, the lightest faults whereof were to (...) for dames of her
port and calling, concluding that so long as she lived, she would bear him
good affection for the honest company and conversation had between them, and
for his courtesy used toward her. The young Earl, were it that he gave credit
unto her tale or not, made as though he did believe the same, and without longer
discourse, forbear approach unto her house, and drove out of his head all the
amorous affection which he carried to yt Piedmont Circes. And to yt end he
might have no cause to think upon her, or that his presence (...) make him
slave again to her that first pursued him, he (...) in good time to Millan: by
which retire he avoided that mishap, wherewith at length this (...) woman would
have cut him over the shinnes, even (...) his mind was least thereon. Such was
the malice and mischief of (...) heart, who ceasing to play the whort, applied
her whole (...) to murder. Gaiazzo being departed from Pauie, this Venus once
again assayed the (...) of her Ardizzino, and knew not well how to recover him
again, because she feared that the other had discovered yt enterprise of his
murder. But what dare not she attempt, whose mind is slave to sin? The first
assaies be hard, and the (...) in doubt, and conscience gnawing upon the
repentance worm, but the same once nousled in vice, and roted in the heart, is
more pleasant and gladsome for the wicked to (...), than virtue familiar to
those that follow her: So that shame separate from before the eyes of youth,
riper age noursed in (...), their sight is so daseled, as they can see nothing
that either shame or fear can make them blush, which was the cause that this
Lady continuing still in her mischief, so much pradised the friends of him,
whom she desired to kill, and made such fit excuse by her ambassades, as he was
content to speak to her, and to hear her iustifications, which were easy
enough to do, the judge being not very faulty. She promised and swore that if
the fault were proved not to be in him, never man should see Bianca Maria, (so
long as she lived) to be other than a friend and slave to the Lord Ardizzino,
wholly submitting her self unto his will and pleasure. See how peace was
capitulated between the two reconciled lovers, and what were the articles of
the same, the Lord of (...) entering possession again of the Fort that was
revolted, and was long time in the power of another. But when he was seized
again, the Lady saw full well, that her recovered friend was not so hard to
please, as the other was, and that with him she lived at greater liberty.
Continuing then their amorous dance, and Ardizzino having no more care but to
rejoice himself nor his Lady, but to cherish and make much of her friend,
behold eftsoon the desire of blood and will of murder, newly revived in that
new Megera who incited (I know not with what rage,) (...) to have him flain,
which refused to kill him, whom at this present, she loved as her self. And he
that had inquired the cause thereof, I think none other reason could be rendered,
but that a brainelesse head and reasonlesse mind, thought most notable murders
and mischief were easy to be brought to pass, and so strangely to proceed in
disordred lusts, which in fine caused miserable shame and ruin, with the death
of her self and him, whom she had stirred to yt fact, boldening him by
persuasion, to make him believe vice to be virtue, and gloriously co^me^ded him
in his follies, which you shall hear by reading at length yt discourse of this
history.

Bianca Maria seeing her self in full possession of her Ardizzino, purposed to
make him the chief executioner of the murder by her intended, upon Gaiazzo, for
yt doing whereof one night holding him between her arms, after she had long
time dalied with him, like a cunning mistress of her Art, in the end weauing
and training her treason at large, she said thus unto him: Sir of long time I
have been desirous to require a good turn at your hands, but fearing to
trouble you, and thereupon to be denied, I thought not to be importunat: and
albeit yt matter touches you, yet did I rather hold my peace the^ to here
refusal of a thing, which your self ought to profer, the same concerning you.
Madame said her lover, you know yt matter need to be heinous and of great
importance, yt I should deny you, specially if it concern the blemish of your
honor. But you say the same does touch me somewhat nearly, and therefore if
ability be in me, spare not to utter it, and I will assay your satisfaction to
the uttermost of my power. Sir said she, is the Count of Gaiazzo one of your
very friends? I think (answered Valperga) that he is one of yt surest friends I
have, and in respect of whose friendship, I will hazard my self for him no
less than for my brother, being certain yt if I have need of him, he will
not fail to do yt like for me. But wherefore do you ask me yt question? I will
tell you said yt traitresse (kissing him so swetely as ever he felt yt like of
any woman,) for so much as you be so deceived of your opinion, and frustrate of
your thought, as he is wicked in disse^bling that, which maliciously lies
hidden in his heart. And briefly to say yt effect. Assure your self he is ye
greatest and most mortal enemy yt you have in yt world. And yt you do not
think this to be some forged tale, or light invention, or yt I hard the report
thereof of some not worthy of credit, I will say nothing else but yt which
himself did tell me, when in your absence he used my company. He swear unto me
without declaration of yt cause, yt he could never be merry or his mind in rest,
before he saw you cut in pieces, and shortly would give you such assault, as
all yt days of your life, you should never have lust or mind on ladies love.
And albeit the^, I was in choler against you, and that you had ministered some
cause and reason of hatred, yet our first love had taken such force in my
heart, as I besought him not to do yt enterprise, so long as I was in place,
where you did remain, because I cannot abide (without death) to see your finger
ache, much less your life beriued from you. (...) which tale his ear was deaf,
swering still and protesting yt either he would be slain himself, or else
dispatch yt Count Ardizzino. I (...) not (quod she) ne well could as the^
advertise you thereof, for ye small access yt my scrua^ts had unto your lodging,
but now I pray you to take good heed to your self, and to prevent his devilish
purpose: for better it were for you to take his life, than he to kill and murder
you, or otherwise work you mischief, and you shall be esteemed ye wiser man, and
he pronounced a traitor to seek yt death of him, yt bare him such good will. Do
the^ according to mine abuise, and before he begin, do you kill him, whereby you
shall save your self, and do the part of a valiant Knight bisides yt
satisfying of the mind of her that above al pleasures of the world does
chiefly desire the same. Experience now will let me prove whether you love me
or not, and what you will do for her that loves you so dearly, who opens
this (...) murder, as well for your safety, as for lengthening of the life of
her, which without yours cannot endure. (...) this my suit (O friend most
dear) and suffer me not in sorrowful plight to be despoiled of thy presence.
And will thou suffer that I should die, and that yo^der (...) traitorous and
unfaithful varlet should live to laugh me to (...)? If the Lady had not added
those last words to her foolish sermon, perchance she might have provoked
Ardizzino to follow her Counsel: but (...) her so obstinately bent in her
request, and to prosecute the same with such violence, concluding upon her own
quarrel, his conscience throbbed, and his mind measured the malice of that
woman, with ye honesty of him, against whom yt tale was told, who knew his
friend to be so sound and trusty, as willingly he would not do the thing that
should offend him, and therefore would give no credit to false report without
good and apparent proof. For which cause he was persuaded that it was a
malicious tale made to please his Lady, and devised by some that went about to
sow debate between those two friendly Earls. Notwithstanding upon further
pause, and not to make her chafe, or force her into rage, he promised the
execution of her cursed will, thanking her for her advertisement, and that he
would provide for his defense and surety. And to the intent yt she might think
he went about to perform his promise, he took his leave of her to go to
Milan, which he did, not to follow the abominable will of that ravenous
mastife, but to (...) the matter to his companion, and direct the same as it
deserved. Being arrived at Milan, the (...) City of Lombardie, he imparted to
Gaiazzo from point to point the discourse of the Countess, and the (...) she
made unto him, when she had done her tale. O God (said the Lord Sanseuerino,)
who can beware ye traps of such whoores, if by thy grace our hands be not
forbidden, and our hearts and thoughts guided by thy goodness? Is it possible
that the earth can breed a mo^ster more pernicious than this most Pestilent
beast? This is truly the grift of her fathers usury, and the stench of all
her predecessors villainies. It is impossible of a Bite to make a good Sparhauk,
or Tercel gentle. This (...) no doubt is the daughter of a vilain, spro^g of
the basest race amongs the common people, whose mother was more fine than
chaste, more subtle than sober. This mynion has forsaken her husband, to
erect bloody skaffoldes of murder amid the Nobles of Italy. And were it not for
the dishonor which I should get to soil my (...) in the blood of a beast so
corrupt, I would fear her with my teethe in a hundredth thousand pieces. How
many times has she entreated me before: in how many sundry sorts with joined
hands has she besought me to kill the Lord Ardizzino? Ah my companion and
right well beloved friend, should you think me to be so traitorous and cowarde a
knave, as that I dare not tell to the^ to whom I bear displeasure, what lies
in my heart? By the faith of a Gentleman (said Ardizzino,) I would be sorry my
mind should (...) on such a folly, but I am come to you, yt the song might
sound no more wtin mine ears. It behooves us then, since God has kept us
hitherto, to avoid the air of that infection, that our brains be not
putrified, and from henceforth to fly those bloudsuckers, the scholars of
Venus, for the goodness, profit and honor that youth (...) of them. And truly
great honor would (...) to us to kill one an other for the only pastime and
sottish fancy of that mynion. I have repented me an hundred times when she
first moved me of the devise to kill you, that I did not give her a hundred
Poignaladoes with my dagger, to stop the way by that example for all other to
attempt such but cheries. For I am well assured that the malice which she
bears you, proceeds but of the delay you made for satisfaction of her
murderous desire, whereof I thank you, and yield my self in all causes to employ
my life, and that I have, to do you pleasure. Leave we of that talk (said
Gaiazzo) for I have done but my duty, and that which each Noble heart ought
to every wight doing wrong to none, but prove to help and do good to all.
Which is the true mark and badge of Nobility. Touching that malignant
strumpet, her own life shall revenge the wrongs which she has gone about to
(...) on us. In mean while let us rejoice, and think the goods and richesse
she has gotten of us, will not cause her bags much to strout and swell. To
be short, she has nothing whereby she may greatly laughe us to scorn, except
our good entertainment of her both night and day (...) peouoke her. Let other
coin the pens henceforth to fill the coafers, for of us so far as I see she
is deceived. Thus the two Lords passed for the their time, and in all
companies where they came, the greatest part of their talk and communication
was of the disordered life of the Countess of Celant: the whole (...) rang of
the sleights and means she used to trappe the Noble men, and of her policies
to be rid of them when her thirst was stanched, or diet grew loathsome for want
of change. And that which griued her most, an Italian (...) blased forth her
prowess to her great dishonor whereof, the copy I cannot get, and some say
that Ardizzino was the author. For it was composed, when he was dispossessed of
patience. And if she could have wreaked her will on the Knights, I believe in
her rage she would have made an (...) of their bones. Of which her two enemies
Ardizzino was the worsie, against whom her displeasure was the greater, for
that he was the first with whom she entered skirmish. Nothing was more frequent
in Pauie, than villainous (...) and plays upon the filthy behauior of the
Countess, which made her ashamed to (...) out of her gates. In the end she
purposed to change the air and place, hoping by that alteration to stay the
infamous brute and slander. So she came to Milan, where first she was (...)
with state of honor, in honest fame of chaste life so long as (...) Hermes
lived, and then was not pursued to staunche the thirst of those that did
ordinarily draw at her fountain.

About the time yt she departed from Pauie, Dom Pietro de Cardone a Scicilian
the bastard brother of yt Count of Colisano, whose lieutenant he was, and
their father slain at yt battle of Bicocca with a band of (...) arrived at
Milan. This Scicilian was about the age of one or two and twenty years, somewhat
black of face, but well made and stern of countenance. Whiles the Countess
soiorned at Milan, this gentleman fell in love with her, and searched al means
he could to make her his friend, and to enjoy her. Who perceiving him to be
young, and a nouice in skirmishes of love, like a Pigeon of the first coat,
determined to lure him, and to serve her turn in that which she purposed to
do on those against whom she was outragiously (...). Now yt better to entice
this young Lord unto her fa^tasy, and to catch him with her bait, if he passed
through the streat, and saluted her and sighed after the manner of the (...)
roming before his Lady, she she wed him an indifferent merry countenance, and
suddenly restrained that cheer, to make him (...) the pleasure mingled (...)
the sour of one desire, which he could not tell how to accomplish. And the more
faint was his hardiness, for that he was never practiced in daltance and
service of Lady of so great house or calling, who thinking that Ge^tlewoman to
be one of the principal of Milan, was strangely vered and tormented for her
love, in such wise as in yt night he could not rest for fantasing and thinking
upon her, and in yt day pased up and down before the door of her lodging. One
evening for his disport he went forth to walk in (...) of another gentleman,
which well could play upon the Lute, and desired him to give awake unto his
Lady, that then for jealousy was harkening at her window, both the sound of
the instrument, and the words of her amorous Knight, where the ge^tleman soong
this song:

THe death with trencha^t dart, does bread in breast such il,
As I cannot forget the smart, that thereby rises still.
Yet ne erthelesse I am the ill it self in deed,
That death with daily dolours deep, within my breast does bread.
I am my mistress thrall, and yet I do not kno,
If she bear me good will at all, or if she love or no.
My wound is made so large, with bitter woe in breast,
That still my heart prepares a place to lodge a careful guest.
O Dame that bath my life and death at thy desire.
Come (...) my mind, where facies flames does burn like Ethna fire,
For wanting thee my life is death and (...) (...),
And finding favor in thy sight, my days are happy here.
Then he began to sighe so terribly, as if already she had given sentence and
definitive Judgment of his farewell, and disputed with his fellow in such sort,
and with opinion so assured of his contempt, as if he had been in love with
some one of the infants of Sp (...). (...) which cause he began again very
pitifully to sing these verses

THat God that made my soul, and knows what I have felt,
Who causes sighs and sorrows often, the sely soul to swelt.
Does see my torments now, and what I suffer still,
And understands I taste mo griefs, than I can show by skill.
He does consent I wot, to my ill hap and woe.
And has accorded with the dame that is my pleasant foe,
To make my boiling breast abound in bitter bliss,
And so bereue me of my rest, when heart his hope shall miss.
O what are not the songs, and sighs that lovers have.
When night and day with sweet desires, they draw unto their grave,
(...) grief by friendship grows, where ruth nor (...) raines,
And so like snow against the sun, they melt away with pains.
My days must finish so, my destnie has it set,
And as the candle out I go, before her grace I get.
Before my suit be heard, my service thoroughly known,
I shall be laid in tomb full low, so cold as Marble stone.
To thee fair Dame I cry, that makes my senses arre,
And pla^test peace (...), my breast and then makes sudden war.
Yet at thy pleasure still, thou must my sour make sweet,
In granting me the favor due, for faithful lovers meet.
Which favor give me now, and to thy Noble mind,
I do (...) Galley slave, as thou by proof shall find.
And so thou shall release my heart from cruel bands,
And have his fredome at thy will that yelds into thy hands.
So rendering all to thee, the Gods may join us both
Within one law and league of love, through force of constant troth.
Then shall thou mistress be, of life, of limme and all,
My goods, my gold and honor lo, shall so be at thy call.
This gentle order of love greatly pleased the Lady, and therefore opened her
gate to let in the (...) Lord, who seeing himself favored (beyond all hope)
of his Lady, and cherefully entertained and welcomed with great courtesy,
stood so still astonnied, as if he had been fallen from the clouds. But she
which could teach him good manner, to make him the minister of her mischief,
taking him by the hand, made him sit down upon a green bed besides her,
and seeing that he was not yet imboldened, for all he was a soldier, she she
wed her self more hardy than he, and first assailed him with talk, saying:
Sir, I pray you think it not strange, if at this hour of the night, I am
bold to cause you enter my house, being of no great acquaintance with you,
but by hearing your courteous salutations: And we of this country be somewhat
more at liberty than they in those parts from whence you come. Besides it
likes me well (as I am able) to honor strange gentlemen, and to retain them
with right good willing heart, since it pleases them to honor me with repair
unto my house: so shall you be welcome still when you please to knock at my
gate, which at all times I will to be opened for you, with no less good will
than if ye were my natural brother, the same with all the things therein it
may please you to dispose as if they were your own. Dom Pictro of Cardonne
well satisfied and contented with this unlooked for kyndnesse, thanked her very
courteously, humbly praying her besides to dayne it in good part, if he were so
bold to make request of love, and that it was the only thing, which he above
all other, desired most, so that if she would receive him for her friend
and servant, she should understand him to be a Gentleman, which lightly
would promise nothing, except the accomplishment did follow: she that saw a
greater onset than she looked for answered him smilyng with a very good grace:
Sir I have known very many that have vouched slipperie promyses, and proffered
lordly services unto Ladies, the effect whereof if I might once see, I would
not think that they could vanishe so soon, and consume like smoke. Madame
(said the Scicilian) if I fail in any thing whichs you command me, I pray
to God never to receive any favor or grace of those Courtesies which I crave.
If then (quod she) you will promise to employe your self about a business
that I have to do when I make request, I will also to accept you for a
friend, and grant such secrecy as a faithful lover can desire of his Lady.
Dom Pietro which would have offered him self in Sacrifice for her, not
knowing her demand, took an oath, and promised her so lightly as madly
afterward he did put the same in proof. Behold the preparatiues of the
obsequies of their first love, and the guages of a bloody bed: the one was
prodigal of her honor, the other the tormenter of his reputation, and
neglected the duty and honor of his state, which the (...) whereof he came,
commanded him to keep.

Thus all the night he remained with Bianca Maria, who made him so well to like
(...) good entertainment and imbracementes, as he never was out of her
company. And the wary Circes fained her self so far in love with him, and
used so many toys and gametricks of her filthy science, as he not only
esteemed him self the happiest Gentleman of Scicilia, but the most fortunate
wight of all the world, and by biubing of her wine was so straungely charmed
with the pleasures of his fair mistress, as for her sake he would have taken
upon him the whole overthrow of Milan, so well as (...) of Cumes to set the
City of Rome on fire, if Tyberius Gracchus the sedicious, would have given
her leave. Such is the manner of wild and foolish youth, as which suffers it
self to be carried beyond the bounds of reason. The same in time past did
overthrow many realms, and caused the change of diverse Monarchies. And truly
unseemly it is for a man to be subdued to the will of a common strumpet. And
as it is uncomely to submit him self to such one, so not requisite to an
honest and virtuous dame, his married wife. Which unmanly deeds, be (...) that
diverse foolish women commit such filthy factes, with their inspekable
trumperies begiling the simple man, and perchance through to much losing the
bridle raines to the laufull wife, the poor man is straungely deceived by some
adulterous varlet, which at the wives commandment, when she sees
opportunity, will not shrink to hazard the honor of them both, in such wise
as they serve for an example upon a common (...) to a whole generation and
(...). I will not seek far of for examples, being satisfied with the folly
of the Bastard of Cardonne, to please the cruelty and malice of that
infernal fury the Countess, who having lulled, flatered and be witched with
her louetricks (and peradventure with some charmed drink) her new pigeon,
seeing it time to solicit his promise, to be (...) of those, which thought no
more of her conspiracies and traitrous devises, and, also when yt time was com
for punishing of her whoredom, and chastising of the breach of faith made to
her husband, and of her intended murders, and some of them put in execution,
she I say, desirous to see the end of that, which in thought she had
devised, upon a day took Dom Pietro aside, and secretly began this oration: I
take God to witness (sir) that the request which I pretend presently to
make, proceeds of desire rather that the world should know how justly I
seek means to maintain mine bonour, than for desire of revenge, knowing very
well, that there is nothing so precious and dear unto a woman, as the
preservation of that inestimable jewel, specially in a Lady of that honorable
degree which I maintain among the best. And to the intent I seem not tedious
with prolixitie of words, or use other than direct circumstances before him
that has offered just revenge for the wrongs I have received: Know you sir,
that for a certain time I continued at Pauie, keeping a house and train so
honest, as the best lords were contented with mine ordinary: It chanced that
two honest gentlemen of noble house hau^ted my palace in like sort, and with
the same intertainment, which as you see, I do receive each Gentleman, who
being well entreated and honored of me, in the end forgot themselves so
far, as without respect of my state and calling, without regard of the race
and family whereof they come, have attempted the slander of my good name, and
utter subversion of my renoune: and sufficient it was not for them thus to
deal with me poor Gentlewoman, without desert (except it were for admittyng
them to have access unto my house) but also to continue their blasphemies, to
mine extreme reproach (...) shame: and how true the same is, they that know me
can well declare, by reason whereof, the vulgar people (...) and ready to
wicked reports, have (...) such opinion of me, as for that they see me brave
and fine in apparel, and specially through the slanderous speech of those
gallantes, do deene and repute me for a common whore, whereof I crave none
other witness than your self and my conscience. And I swear unto you, that
sith I came to Milan, it is you alone that has vanquished, and made the
triumph of my chastity. And if you were absent from this City, I assure you
on my faith that I would not tarry here. (...) hours. These infamous ruffians I
say, these persecuters and termagants of my good name, have chased me out of
all good Cities, and made me to be abhorred of all honest company, that weary
I am of my life, and loathe to live any longer, except spedie redress be (...)
for reuengement of this wrong. Wherefore except I find some noble Champion
and valiant (...) to requite these villains for their spiteful speech blased
on me in every corner of town and country, and to pay them their reward and
hire that I may live at liberty and quiet, sorrow will either consume me or
mine own hands shall hasten spedy death. And in (...) those words, she began
to weep with such abundance of tears streaming down her cheeks and neck of
Alabaster hew, as the Scicilian which almost had none other God but the
Countess, said unto her: And what is he, that dare molest and slander her
that has in her puissaunce so many Soldiers and men of war. I make a vow
to God, that if I know the names of those two arrant vilaynes, the which have
so defamed my Mystresse name, the whole (...) shall not save their lives, whose
carrion bodies I will hew into so many gobbetts, as they have members upon the
same. Wherefore Madame (said he, embracing her) I pray you to grieve your
self no more, commit your wrongs to me, only tell me the names of those
Gallauntes, and afterward you shall understand what dyfference I make of
word and deed, and if I do not trymme and dress them so fynely, as
hereafter they shall have no need of Barber, never trust me any more. She,
as revived from death to life, kyssed and embraced him a thousand times,
thankyng him for his good will, and offering him all that she had. In the
end she told him that her enemies were the Counties of Massino and (...),
which but by their deaths alone were not able to amend and repair her
honor. Care not you (said he) for before that the Sun shall spread his
Beams twice. xxiiii. hours upon the earth, you shall hear news, and know
what I am able to do for the chastisement of those deuyls. As he promised, he
failed not to do: For within a while after, as Ardizzino was going to supper
into the City, he was espied by him, that had in company attendaunt upon him
five and twenty men of Arms, which waited for Ardizzino, in a lane on the
left hand of the streate called Merauegli, leadyng toward the church of
Saint James, through which the Count must needs pass. Who as he was going
very pleasantly disposed with his brother and v: or. vi. of his men, was
unmediatly assailed on every side, and not knowing what it meant, would have
fled, but the ways and passages were stopped round about: to defend him
self it auayled not, having but their single swords, and amidde the troop of
such a band that were thoroughly armed, which in a moment had murdered and cut
in pieces all that company. And although it was late, yet the Count Ardizzino
many times named Dom Pietro, which caused him to be taken, and imprisoned by
the Duke of Bourbon, that was fled out of France, and then was lieutenaunt for
the Emperor Charles the fifth in Milan. Whosoever was astonned and amazed with
that imprisonment, it is to be thought that the (...) was not greatly at his
ease and quiet, who neded no torments to force him confess, the fact, for of
his own accord (...) he disclosed the same but he said he was provoked
thereunto by the persuasion of Bianca Maria, telling the whole discourse as you
have heard before. She had already intelligence of this chance, and might
(...) fled and saved her self before the fact (by the confession of Dom
Pietro) had been discovered, and attended in some secret place til that
stromie time had been calmed and appeased. But God which is a rightful judge
would not suffer her wickedness extend any further, fith she having found out
such a nimble and wilful executioner the Count of (...) could not long have
(...) alive, who then in good time and happy hour was absent out of the
City. So soon as Dom (...) had accused the Countess the Lord of (...) sent
her to prison, and being examined, confessed the whole matter, trusting that
her infinite number of crowns would have corrupted the Duke, or those that
represented his person. But her crowns and her life passed all one way. For
the day after her imprisonment she was condemned to lose her head: And in the
mean time Dom Pictro was saved, by the diligence and suit of the captains,
and was employed in other wars, to whom the Duke gave him, for that he was
(...) to lose so notable a soldier, and the aid of his brother the Count of
Colisano. The Countess having sentence pronounced upon her, but trusting for
pardon, she would not prepare her self to die, ne yet by any means crave
forgiveness of her faults at the hands of God, until she was conveyed out of
the Castle, and led to the common place of execution, where a scaffold was
prepared for her to play the last act of her tragedy. Then the miserable
Lady began to know her self, and to confess her faults before the people,
deuoutely praying God, not to have regard to her demerites, ne yet to
determine his wrath against her, or enter with her in judgment, for so much as
if the same were decreed according to her iniquity, no salvation was to be
looked for. She besought the people to pray for her, and the Count of Gaiazzo
that was absent, to pardon her malice and treason which she had devised against
him.

Thus miserably and repentantly dyed the Countess, which in her life refused
not to embrace and follow any wickedness, no mischief she accounted evil
done, so the same were employed for her pleasure and pastime. A goodly example
truly for the youth of our present time, since the most part indifferently do
launch into the gulf of disordred life, suffering them selves to be plunged in
the puddles of their own vain conceits, without consideration of the
mischieues that may ensue. If the Lord of Cardonne had not ben beloved of his
general, into what calamity had he fallen for yelding him self a pray to
that bloody woman who had more regard to the light and wilful fancy of her,
whom he served like a slave, than to his duty and estimation? And truly
those be void of their right wittess, which think them selves beloved of a
whore. For their amity endures no longer, than they suck from their pursses
and bodies any profit or pleasure. And because almost every day semblable
examples be seen, I will leave of this discourse, to take me to a matter, not
far more pleasant than this, although founded upon better ground, and
stablished upon love, the first onset of lawful marriage, the success whereof,
chanced to murderous end, and yet the same intended by neither of the beloved:
As you shall be judge by the continuance of reding of the history ensuing.
Bear with me good Ladies (for of you alone I crave this pardon) for
introducing the whoorish life of this Countess, and her bloody enterprise:
because I know right well, that recital of murders and bloody facts werieth
the minds of those that love to live at rest, and wish for fair weather after
the troublesome storms of ragyng seas, no less than the pilote and wise
Mariner, having long time endured and cut the perilous straicts of the Ocean
sea. And albeit the corruption of our nature be so great, as folies delight us
more than ernest matters full of reason and wisdom, yet I think not that our
minds be so perverted and divided from frouthe, but sometimes we care and
seek to speak more gravely than the country Hynde, or more sobrely than
they, whose lives do bear the mark of infamy, and be to every wight
notorious for the only name of their vocation. Suffiseth us that an history,
be it never so full of sport and pleasure, do bring with it instruction of
our life, and amendment of our manners. And we ought not to be so curious or
scrupulous, to reject merry and pleasant devises that be void of harmefull
talk, or without such glee as may hinder the education of youth procliue and
ready to choose that is naught and corrupt. The very books of holy Scriptures
do describe unto us persons that be vicious and so detestable as nothing more,
whose factes unto the simple may seem unseemly, upon the least recital of
the same. And shall we therefore reject the reading, and eschew those holy
books? God forbid, but with diligence to beware, that we do not resemble those
that be remembered there for example, for so much as speedily after sin,
ensues grievous and as sudden punishment. For which cause I have selected
these histories, of purpose to advertise youth, how those that follow the way
of damnable iniquity, fail not shortly after their great offenses, and
execution of their outrageous vices, to feel the just and mighty hand of
God, who guerdoneth the good for their good works and deeds, and rewards
the evil for their wickedness and mischese. Now turn we then to the
History of two the rarest lovers that ever were, the performaunce and (...)
whereof, had it ben so prosperous as the beginning, had ioyed (...) the
fruictes of their intent, and two noble houses of one City reconciled to
perpetual friendship.

Rhomeo and Julietta
The goodly History of the true and constant Love between RHOMEO and IVLIETTA,
the one of whom died of poison, and the other of sorrow and (...): wherein be
comprised many adventures of love, and other devises touching the same.

The. xxv. Nouel.
I Am sure, that they which measure the greatenesse of Gods works, according
to the capacity of their rude and simple understanding, will not lightly
adhibite credit unto this history, so well for the va rietie of strange
accide^ts which be therein described, as for yt novelty and strangeness of so
rare and perfect amity. But they that have read Pliny, Valerius Maximus,
Plutarche, and diverse other writers, do find, that in old time a great
number of men and women have died, some of excessive joy, some of overmuch
sorrow, and some of other passions: and amongs the same, Love is not the
least, which when it seaseth upon any kind and gentle subject, and finds no
resistance to serve for a ra^part to (...) the (...) of his course, by little
and little undermines melts and (...) yt virtues of natural powers in such
wise as the sprite yelding to the burden, abandoneth yt place of life: which is
verified by the pitiful and unfortunate death of two lovers that surrendered
their last breath in one (...) at (...) a City of Italy, wherein repose yet to
this day (with great marvel) the bones and remnantes of their late loving
bodies: An history no less (...) than true. If then particular affection which
of good right every man ought to bear to the place where he was borne, do not
deceive those that travail, I think they will confess with me, that few
Cities in Italy, can surpass the said City of Verona, as well for the
Nauigable river called (...), which passes almost through the midst of the
same, and thereby a great trafique into Almaine, as also for the prospect
toward the fertile Mountains and pleasant valeis which do enuiron yt same, with
a great number of very clear and lively fountains that serve for the ease and
commodity of the place. Omitting (bisides many other singularities) four
bridges, and an infinite number of other honorable antiquities, daily apparent
unto those, that be to curious to view and look upon them. Which places I have
somewhat touched, because this most true History which I purpose hereafter to
recite, depends thereupon, the memory whereof to this day is so well known at
Verona, as vnneths their blubbred eyes, be yet dry that saw and beheld that
lamentable sight.

When the Senior Escala was Lord of Verona; there were two families in the
City, of far greater fame than the rest, as well for riches as (...): the one
called the Montesches, and the other the Capellets: but like as most commonly
there is discord amongs them which be of semblable degree in honor, even so
(...) happened a certain (...) between them: and for so much as the beginning
thereof was unlawful, and of (...) foundation, so likewise in process of time
it kindled to such flame, as by diverse and sundry devises practiced on both
sides, many lost their lives. The Lord Bartholomeu of Escala, (of whom we have
already spoken) being Lord of Verona, and seeing such disorder in his common
weal, assayed diverse and sundry ways to reco^cile those two houses, but all
in vain: for their hatred, had taken such root, as yt same could not be (...)
by any wise council or good advise: between whom no other thing could be
accorded, but giving over (...) and weapon for the time, attending some other
season more convenient, and with better leisure to appease the rest. In the
time yt these things were adoing, one of the family of Montesches called
Rho^meo, of the age of. xx. or. xxi. years, the fairest and best conditioned
Gentleman that was amongs the Veronian youth, (...) in love with a young
Gentlewoman of Verona, and in few days was so attached with her comely and
good behavior, as he abandoned all other affairs and business (...) serve
and honor her. And after many letters, (...) and presents, he determined in the
end to speak unto her, and to disclose his passions, which he did without any
other practice. But she which was virtuously brought up, knew how to make him
so good answer to cut of his (...) affections: as he had no lust after that
time to return any more, and showed her self so austere (...) sharp of speech,
as she vouchsafed not with one look to behold him. But the more yt young
Gentleman (...) her whist and silent, the more he was inflamed: and (...) he
had (...) certain months in that service without remedy of his grief, he
determined in the end to depart Verona, for proof if by change of yt place he
might alter his affection, and said to himself. What do I mean to love one
that is so unkind, and thus does disdain me, I am all her own, and yet she
flies from me. I can no longer live, except her presence I do enjoy. And she
has no contented mind, but when she is furthest from me. I will then from
henceforth (...) my self from her, for it may so come to pass by not
beholding her, that this fire in me which takes increase and nourishment by
her fair eyes, by little and little may die and quench. But minding to put in
proof what he thought, at one instant he was reduced to the contrary, who
not knowing whereupon to resolve, passed days and nights in marvelous
plaintes and Lamentacions. For Love (...) him so near, and had so well fixed
the Gentlewomans beauty within the Bowels of his heart and mind, as not able
to resist, he fainted with (...) charge, and consumed by little and little as
the Snow against the Sun. Whereof his parents and kindred did marvel greatly,
bewayling his misfortune, but above all other one of his companions of riper
age and counsel than he, began sharply to rebuke him. For the love that he
bare him was so great as he felt his Martyrdom, and was partaker of his
passion which caused him by often viewing his friends disquietnesse in amorous
pangs, to say thus unto him: Rhomeo, I marvel much that thou spendest the best
time of thine age, in (...) of a thing, from which thou (...) thy self despised
and (...), without respect either to thy prodigal dispense, to thine honor, to
thy tears, or to thy miserable life, which be able to move the most constant
to pity. Wherefore I pray thee for the Love of our ancient amity, and for
thine health sake, that thou will learn to be thine own (...), and not to
(...) thy liberty to any so ingrate as she is: for so far as I can conjecture
by things that are passed between you, either she is in love with some other,
or else determined never to love any. Thou art young, rich in goods and
fortune, and more excellent in beauty than any Gentleman in this City: thou
art well learned, and the only son of the house (...) thou co^mest. What
grief would it (...) to thy pore old father and other thy parents, to see thee
so drowned in this dongeon of vice, specially at that age wherein thou ought
rather to put them in some hope of thy virtue? Begin then from henceforth to
acknowledge thine error, wherein thou have hitherto lived, do away that
amorous veil or couerture which blinds thine eyes and lets thee to follow
the right path, wherein thine ancestors have walked: or else if thou do (...)
thy (...) so subject to thine own will, yield thy heart to (...) other place,
and choose (...) Mistress according to thy worthiness, and henceforth do not
sow thy pains in a soil so (...) whereof thou receiuest no fruit: the time
approaches when all the dames of the City shall assemble, where thou may
behold such one as shall make thee (...) thy former griefs. This young
Gentleman attentively hearing all the persuading (...) of his friend, began
somewhat to moderate that heat, and (...) acknowledge all ye exhortations which
he had made to be (...) to (...) purpose. And then determined to put them in
proof, and to be present (...) at all the feasts and assemblies of the city,
without bearing affection more to one woman than to another. And continued in
this manner of life. (...). or. (...). months, (...) by that means to quench
the sparks of ancient (...). It chanced then within (...) days after, about
the feast of Christmasse, when feasts and bankets most commonly be used, and
maskes according to the custom frequented: And because that Anthome Capellet
was the chief of that family, and one of the most principal Lords of the
City, he made a banquet, and for the better solempnization of the same, invited
all the noble me^ and dames, at what time there was the most partof yt youth of
Verona. The family of the Capellets (as we have declared in yt beginning of
this History) was at variance with the (...), which was the cause that none of
that family repaired to that banquet, but only the young Gentleman Rhomeo, who
came in a (...) after supper with certain other young Gentlemen. And after they
had remained a certain space with their visards on, at length they did put of
ye same, and Rhomeo very shamefast, withdrew himself into a corner of the Hall:
but by reason of the light of the torches which burned very bright, he was by
and by known and looked upon of the whole company, but specially of the Ladies:
for bisides his native beauty wherewith nature had adorned him, they marvelled
at his audacitie how he durst presume to enter so secretly into yt house of
those which had little cause to do him any good. Notwithstanding, the Capellets
(...) their malice, either for the honor of the company, or else for respect of
his age, did not misuse him either in word or deed. By means whereof with
free liberty he beheld and viewed the ladies at his pleasure, which he did so
well, and with grace so good, as there was (...) but did very well like the
presence of his person. And after he had particularly given judgment upon the
excellency of each one, according to his affection, he saw one gentlewoman
amongs the rest of surpassing beauty, who (although he had never seen her
tofore) pleased him above the rest, and attributed unto her in heart the (...)
place for all perfection in beauty. And feastyng her incessantly with piteous
looks, the love which he bare to his first Gentlewoman, was ouercomen with
this new fire, which took such norishement and vigor in his heart, as he was
able never to quench the same but by death only: as you may understand by one
of the strangest discourses, that ever any mortal man devised. The young Rhomeo
then feelyng himself thus tossed with this new tempest, could not tell what
countenance to use, but was so surprised and changed with these last flames,
as he had almost forgotten him self, in such wise as he had not audacitie to
enquire what she was, (...) (...) bent him self to feed his eyes with her
(...), wherewyth he moystened the sweet amorous venom, which did so empoyson
him, as he ended his days: with a kind of most cruel death. The
Gentlewoman that did put Rhomeo (...) such pain, was called Iulietta, and
was the daughter of Capellet, the master of the house where that assembly
was, who as her eyes did roll and wander too and fro, by chance espied
Rhomeo, which unto her seemed to be the goodliest Gentleman that ever she
saw. And Love which lay in wait never until that time, assailing the tender
heart of that young Gentlewoman, touched her so at the quick, as for any
resistance she could make, was not able to defend his forces. and then began
to set at naught the royalties of the feast, and felt no pleasure in her heart,
but when she had a glimpse by throwing or receiving some sight or look of
Rhomeo. And after they had contented each others troubled heart with millions of
amorous lokes which oftentimes interchangeably encountered and met together,
the burning beams gave sufficient testimony of loves privy onsettes. Love
having made the hearts breach of those two lovers, as they two sought means
to speak together, Fortune offered them a very (...) and apt occasion. A
certain lord of that troop and company took Iulietta by the hand to
dance, wherein she behaved her self so well, and with so excellent grace, as
she wanne that day the price of honor from all the maidens of Verona.
Rhomeo, having foreseen the place whereunto she minded to retire, approached
the same, and so discretely used the matter, as he found the means at her
return to sit beside her. Iulietta when the dance was finished, returned to
the very place where she was set before, and was placed between Rhomeo and
(...) other Gentleman called Mercutio, which was a (...) (...) gentleman, very
well beloved of all men, and by (...) of his plesa^t and courteous behauior was
in all (...) well entertained. Mercutio yt was of audacitie among maide^s, as a
lion is among la^bes, seized inco^tinently upon ye hand of Iulietta, whose
hands wontedly were so cold both in winter and summer as ye mountain ye,
although ye fires heat did warm ye same. Rhomeo which sat upon ye left side of
Iulietta, seeing that Mercutio held her by the right hand, took her by the
other, that he might not be deceived of his purpose, and straining the same a
little, he felt himself so pressed with that new favor, as he remained mute, not
able to answer: But she perceiving by his change of color, yt the fault
proceeded of very vehement love, desiring to speak unto him, turned her self
toward him, and with (...) voice joined with virginal shamfastnesse,
intermedled with a certain bashfulnesse, said to him: Blessid (...) ye hour of
your nere aproche: but minding to proceed in further talk, love had so closed
up her mouth, as she was not able to end her tale. Whereunto the young gentleman
all ravished with joy and contentation, sighing, asked her what was ye cause of
that right fortunate blessing. Iulietta somewhat more emboldned with pitiful
look and smiling countenance said unto him: Sir, do not marvel if I do bless
your coming hither, because sir Mercutio a good time with frosty hand has
wholly frosen mine, and you of your courtesy have warmed the same again.
Whereunto immediately Rhomeo replied: Madame if the heavens have been so
favorable to employ (...) to do you some agreeable service being repaired (...)
by chance amongs other Gentlemen, I esteem the same well bestowed, craving no
greater benefit for satisfaction of all my contentations received in this
world, than to serve, obey and honor you so long as my life does last, as
experience shall yield more ample proof when it shall please you to give
further assay. Moreover, if you have received any heat by touch of my hand,
you may be well assured that those flames be dead in respect of the lively
sparks and violent fire which sorteth from your fair eyes, which fire has so
fiercely inflamed all the most sensible parts of my body, as if I be not
succored by the favor of your divine graces, I do attend the time to be
consumed to dust. Scarce had he made an end of those last words, but the dance
of the Torche was at an end. Whereby Iulietta which wholly burnt with love,
straightly clasping her hand with his, had no leisure to make other answer,
but softly thus to say: My dear friend, I know not what other assured witness
you desire of Love, but that I let you understand that you be no more your
own, than I am yours, being ready and disposed to obey you so far as honor
shall permit, beseeching you for the present time to content your self with
this answer, until some other season meeter to Communicate more secretly of
our affairs. Rhomeo seeing himself pressed to part with the company, and for
that he knew not by what means he might see her again that was his life
and death, demanded of one of his friends what she was, who made answer that
she was the daughter of Capellet, the Lord of the house, and master of that
days feast (who wroth beyond measure that fortune had sent him to so
dangerous a place, thought it impossible to bring to end his enterprise
begone.) Iulietta covetous on the other (...), to know what young Gentleman he
was which had so courteously intertaigned her that night, and of whom she felt
the new wound in her heart, called an old Gentlewoman of honor which had
nurssed her and brought her up, unto whom she said, leaning upon her shoulder:
Mother, what two young Gentlemen be they which first go forth with the two
torches before them. Unto whom the old Gentlewoman told the name of the
houses whereof they came. Then she asked her again, what young Gentleman is
that which holds the visarde in his hand, with the Damask cloak about him.
It is (quod she) Rhomeo Montesche, the son of your Fathers capital enemy and
deadly (...) to all your kin. But the maiden at the only name of Montesche
was altogether amazed, dispairing for ever to attain to husband her great
affectioned friend Rhomeo, for the ancient hatreds between those two families.
Nevertheless she knew so well (...) to dissemble her grief and discontented
mind, as the old Gentlewoman perceived nothing, who then began to persuade
her to retire into her chamber: whom she obeyed: and being in her bed,
thinking to take her wonted rest, a great (...) of diverse thoughts began to
enuiron and trouble her mind, in such wise as she was not able to close her
eyes, but turning here and there, fa^tasied diverse things in her thought,
sometimes purposed to cut of the whole attempt of that amorous practice,
sometimes to continue the same. Thus was the poor pucell (...) with two
contraries, the one comforted her to pursue her intent, the other proposed the
imminent peril whereunto indiscreetly she headlong threw her self. And after
she had wandered of long time in this amorous Laberinth, she knew not whereupon
to resolve, but wept incessantly, and accused her self, saying: Ah Caitife and
miserable creature, from whence do rise these unaccustomed travails which I
(...) in mind, provoking me to loose my rest: but unfortunate wretch, what do
I know if that young Gentleman do love me as he says. It may be under the
veil of sugared words he goes about to steal away mine honor, to be
revenged of my Parents which have offended his, and by that means to my
everlasting reproach to make me the fable of the Verona people. Afterward
suddenly as she condemned that which she suspected in the beginning, said: Is
it possible that under such beauty and rare comeliness, disloyalty and
Treason may have their siedge and lodging? If it be true that the face is the
faithful messanger of the minds conceit, I may be assured that he does love
me: for I marked so many changed colors in his face in time of his talk
with me, and saw him so transported and bisides himself, as I cannot wish any
other more certain luck of love, wherein I will persist immutable to the (...)
gasp of life, to the intent I may have him to be my husband. For it may so
come to pass, as this new alliance shall (...) a perpetual peace and amity
between his house and mine. Aresting then upon this determination still, as she
saw Rhomeo passing before her Fathers gate, she showed her self with merry
countenance, and (...) him so with look of eye, until she had lost his sight.
And continuing this manner of life for certain days, Rhomeo not able to
content himself with looks, daily did behold and mark the situation of the
house, and one day amongs others he espied Iulietta at her chamber window,
bounding upon a narow lane, right over against which Chamber he had a gardeine,
which was the cause that Rhomeo fearing discovery of their love, began then in
the day time to pass no more before the gate, but so soon as the night with
his brown mantell had covered the earth, he walked alone up and down that
little streat. And after he had been there many times, missing the chiefest
cause of his coming, Iulietta impacient of her evil, one night repaired to
her (...), and perceived through the brightness of the Moon her friend Rhomeo
hard under her window, no less attended for, than he himself was waighting.
Then she secretly with tears in her eyes, and with voice interrupted by
sighs, said: Signior Rhomeo, me think that you hazard your person too much,
and commit the same into great danger at this time of the night, to protrude
your self to the mercy of the^ which mean you little good. Who if they had
taken you, would have cut you in pieces, and mine honor (which I esteem dearer
than my life,) hindered and suspected for ever. Madame answered Rhomeo, my life
is in the hand of God, who only ca^ dispose the same: (...) if any man had
sought means to berieue me of life, I should (in the presence of you) have
made him known what mine ability had (...) to defend yt (...). Notwithstanding
life is not so dear, and of (...) (...)^ unto me, but that I could (...) to
(...) the same for your sake: and although my (...) (...) ben so great, as to
be dispatched in that place, yet (...) I no cause to be sorry therefore, except
it had been by loosing of means, the same to forgo, the way how to make you
understand the good will and duty which I bear you: desiring not to conserve
the same for any commodity yt I hope to have thereby, nor for any other
respect, but only to love, serve, and honor you, so (...) as breath shall
remain in (...). So soon as he had made an end of his talk, love and pity
began to sease upon the heart of Iulictta, and leaning her head upon her (...),
having her face all besprent with tears, she said (...) Rhomeo: Sir Rhomeo, I
pray you not to renew those things again: for the only memory of such (...),
makes me to cou^terpoise between death and life, my heart being so united with
(...), as you cannot receive the least injury in this world, wherein I shall not
be so great a partaker as your self: beseeching you for conclusion, that if you
desire your own health and (...), to declare unto me in few words, what your
determination is to attain: for if you covet any other secret thing at my
hands, more than mine honor can well allow, you are maruelously deceived: but
if your desire be godly, and that the friendship which you (...) (...) to bear
me, be founded upon virtue, and to be concluded by marriage, receiuyng me for
your wife and lawful spouse, you shall have such part in me, as (...) any
regard to the obedience and reverence that I owe to my parents, or to the
ancient enimitie of our family, (...) will make you the only Lord and
master over me, and of all things that I possess, being pressed and ready in
all points to follow your commandment. But if your intent be otherwise, and
think to reap the fruit of my virginity, under pretense of wanton (...), you
be greatly deceived, and do pray you to avoid and suffer me from henceforth
to live in rest amongs mine equals. Rhomeo which looked for none other thing
holding up his hands to the heavens, with incredible joy and contentation,
answered: Madame for so much as it has pleased you to do me that honor to
accept me for such a one, I accord and consent to your request, and do offer
unto you the best part of my heart, which shall remain with you for guage and
sure testimony of my saying, until such time as God shall give me leave to
make you the entier owner and possessor of the same. And to yt intent I may
begin mine enterprise, to morrow I will to Friar Laurence for (...) the same, who
bisides that he is my ghostly Father, is accustomed to give me instruction in
all my other secret affairs, and fail not (if you please) to meet me again
in this place at this very hour, to the intent I may give you to understand
the devise between him and me, which she liked very well, and ended their talk
for that time. Rhomeo receiving none other favor at her hands for that night,
but only words. This friar Laurence of whom hereafter we shall make more ample
mention, was an ancient Doctor of Divinity, of the order of the friars
Minors, who bisides the happy profession which he had made in study of holy
writ, was very skilful in Philosophy, and a great searcher of nature secrets,
and exceeding famous in Magike knowledge, and other hidden and secret sciences,
which nothing diminished his reputation, because he did not abuse the same. And
this Friar through his virtue and pietic, had so well won the citizens hearts of
(...), (...) he was almost the confessor to them all, and of al men generally
reverenced and beloved: and many times for his great prudence was called by the
lords of the City, to the weighty affairs of the same. And among other he
was greatly favored by the lord of (...), that time the principal governor of
Verona, and of al yt family of (...), and of the Capellets, and of many other.
The young Rhomeo (as we have already declared) from his tender age, bare a
certain particle amity to friar Laure^ce, and departed to him his secrets, by
means whereof so soon as he was gone from (...), (...) straight to ye Friars
Fra^ciscans, where from point to point he discoursed ye success of his love to
yt good father, and the conclusion of the marriage between him and (...), adding
upon the end of talk, yt he would rather choose shameful death, (...) to fail
her of his promise. To who^ the good (...) after he had debated diverse matters,
and proposed (...) the inconveniences of that secret marriage, exhorted him to
more mature deliberation of the same: notwithstanding, all the alleged
persuasio^s were not able to revoke his promise. Wherefore the Friar vanquished
with his stubbornness, and also forecasting in his mind that the marriage might
be some (...) of reco^ciliatio^ of those two houses, in the end agreed to his
request, (...) him, that he might have one delayed day for (...) to (...) what
was best to be done. But if Rhomeo for his part was careful to provide for
his affairs, Iulietta like wise did her (...). For seeing yt (...) had none
about her to discover her passions, she devised to impart the whole to her
nurse which lay in her (...), appointed to (...) upon her, to whom she
committed the intier secrets of ye love between Rhomeo and her. And although yt
old woman in the beginning resisted Iu hetta her intent, yet in yt end she
knew so well how to persuade and win her, that she promised in all that she was
able to do, to be at her commandment. And then she sent her with all diligence
to speak to Rhomeo, and to know of him by what means they might be married,
and yt he would (...) her to understand the determination between friar
Laurence and him. Who^ (...) answered, how ye (...) day wherein he had informed
friar Laurence of ye matter, ye said friar deferred answer until the next,
which was the very same, and that it was not past one hour (...) he returned
with final resolution, and that Friar Laurence and he had devised, that she the
Saturday following, should desire leave of her mother to go to confession, and
to repair to the church of saint Francis, where in a certain chapel secretly
they should be married, praying her in any wise not to fail to be there. Which
thing she brought to pass with such discretion, as her mother agreed to her
(...): and accompanied only with her gouernesse, and a young maiden, she
repaired thither at the determined day and time. And so soon as she was entered
yt church, called for the good (...) friar Laurence, unto who^ answer was made
yt he was in the shriuing chapel, and (...) advertisement was given him of her
coming. So soon as friar Laurence was certified of Iulietta, he went into the
body of the Church, and willed the old woman and young (...) to go hear
service, and that when he had heard the confession of Iulietta, he would send
for them again to wait upon her. Iulietta being entered a little Cell with Friar
Laurence, he (...) (...) the door as he was wont to do, where Rhomeo and he
had been together fast shut in, the space of one whole hour before. Then Friar
Laurence after that he had (...) them, said to Iulietta: Daughter, as Rhomeo
here present has certified me, you be agreed and contented to take him to
husband, and he like wise you (...) his espouse and wife. Do you now still
persist and continue in that mind? The Lovers answered that they desired none
other thing. The Friar seeing their conformed and agreeable wills, after he had
discoursed somewhat upon the (...) of marriage dignity, pronounced the usual
words of the Church, and (...) having received the ryng from Rhomeo, they rose
(...) before the Friar, who said unto them: If you have any other thing to
confer together, do the same with speed: for I purpose that Rhomeo shall go
from hence so secretly as he can. Rhomeo sorry to go from Iulietta said
secretly unto her, that she should send unto him after diner the old woman,
and that he (...) (...) to be made a corded ladder the same evening, thereby to
climb up to her chamber window, where at more leisure they would devise of
their affairs. Things determined between them, either of them retired to their
house with incredible contentation, attendyng the happy hour for consummation
of their marriage. When Rhomeo was come home to his house, he declared wholly
what had passed between him and Iulietta, unto a servant of his called Pietro,
whose (...) he had so greatly tried, as he durst have trusted him with his
life, and commanded him with expedition to provide a ladder of cords with.
(...). strong hooks of iron fastened to both ends, which he easily did, because
they were much used in Italy. Iulietta did not forget in the evening about
five of the clock, to send the old woman to Rhomeo, who having prepared all
things necessary, caused the ladder to be delivered unto her, and prayed her
to require Iulietta ye same evening not fail to be at the accustomed place.
But if this journey (...) long to these two passioned lovers, let other judge
that have at other times assayed the like: for every minute of an hour seemed
to them a thousand years, so that if they had had power to command the
heavens (as (...) did the (...)) the earth had incontinently been shadowed with
darkest clouds. The appointed hour come, Rhomeo put on the most sumptuous
apparel he had, and conducted by good fortune near to the place where his
heart took life, was so fully determined of his purpose, as easily he (...) up
the garden wall. Being arrived hard to the window, he perceived Iulietta, who
had already so well fastened the corded ladder to draw him up, as without any
danger at all he entered her chamber, which was so clear as ye day, by reason of
the tapers of virgin (...), which Iulietta had caused to be lighted, yt she
might the better behold her Rhomeo. (...) for her part, was but in her night
kerchief: who so soon as she perceived him, colled him about the neck, and
after she had kissed and rekissed him a million of times, began to embrace him
between her arms, having no power to speak unto him, but by sighs only,
holding her mouth close against his, and being in this trance beheld him with
pitiful eye, wiche made him to live and die together. And afterward somewhat
come to her self, she said with sighs depely fetched from the bottom of her
heart: Ah Rhomeo, the exampler of all virtue and gentleness, you be most
heartily welcome to this place, wherein for your lack and absence, and for fear
of your person, I have gushed forth so many tears, as the spryng is almost
dry: but now that I hold you between my arms, let death and fortune do
what they (...), for I count my self more than satisfied of all my sorrows
(...), by the favor alone of your presence: whom Rhomeo with weping eye,
giving over silence answered: Madame (...) as I never received so much of
fortunes grace, as to make you feel by lively experience what power you had
over me, and the torment every minute of yt day sustained for your occasion, I
do assure you ye least (...) yt vexes me for your absence, is a thousand times
more painful than death, which long time or this had cut of yt threede of my
life, if the hope of this happy (...) had not been, which paying me now the
just tribute of (...) wepings past, makes me better content and more glad,
than if the whole world were at my (...), beseeching you (without further
memory of ancient grief) to take advise in time to come how we may content our
passionate hearts, and to sort our affairs with such wisdom and discretion
as our enemies without advantage may let us continue the remnant of our days
in rest and quiet. And as Iulietta was about to make answer, the old woman
came in the mean time, and said unto them: He that wastes time in talk,
receuereth the same to late. But for so much as either of you has endured such
mutual pains, behold (quod she) a camp which I have made ready, (showing
them the field (...) which she had prepared and furnished,) whereunto they (...)
agreed, and being the^ between the sheets in priny bed, after they had gladded
and cherished themselves with all kind of delicate (...) which love was able
to devise, Rhomeo unloosing the holy lines of virginity, took possession of
the place, which was not yet besieged with such joy and contentation as they
ca^ judge which have assayed like delites. Their marriage thus (...), (...)
perceiving the morning make too hasty approach, took his leave, making
promise that he would not fail within a day or two to resort again to the
place by like means and semblable time, until Fortune had provided sure
occasion vnfearfully to manifest their marriage to yt whole world. And thus a
month or twain, they continued their joyful minds to their incredible
satisfaction, until Lady fortune envious of their (...), (...) her (...) to
tumble them into such a botto^lesse pit, as they paid her usury for their
plesures past, by a certain most (...) and pitiful death, as you shall
understand hereafter by ye discourse that follows. Now as we have before
declared, the Capellets and the Montesches were not so well reconciled by the
Lord of Verona, but that there rested in them such sparks of ancient
displeasures, as either parts waited but for some light occasion to draw
togithers, which they did in the Easter holy days, (as bloody men commonly be
most willingly disposed after a good time to commit some nefarious deed)
bisides the gate of Boursarie leading to the old castle of Verona, (...)
troop of the (...) rencountred with certain of the Montesches, and without
other words began to set upon them. And the Capellets had for chief of their
glorious (...) one called Thibault cousin German to Iulietta, a young man
strongly made, and of good experience in arms, who exhorted his Companions
with stout stomakes to repress the boldness of the (...), that there should
from that time forth no memory of them be left at all. And the rumoure of this
fray was increased throughoute all the corners of Verona, that succoure should
come from all parts of the City to depart the same. Whereof Rhomeo
aduertized, who walked alonges the City with certain of his companions,
hasted him spedily to the place where the slaughter of his Parents and alies
were committed: and after he had well advised and beholden many wounded and
hurt on both sides, he said to his companions: My friends let us part the^, for
they be so flesht one upon an other, as they will all be (...) to pieces before
the game be done. And saying so, (...) thrust himself amids the troop, and did
no more but part the blows on either side, crying upon them aloud. My friends,
no more it is time henceforth yt our quarrel cease. For bisides the provocation
of Gods just wrath, our two families be slanderous to the whole world, and
cause this common wealth to grow unto disorder. But they were so egre and
furious one against the other, as they gave no audience to Rhomeo his council,
and bent themselves to kill, disme^ber, and tear each other in pieces. And the
fight was so cruel and outrageous between them, as they which looked on, were
amassed to see them endure those blows, for the ground was al covered with
arms, legs, thighs, and blood, wherein no sign of cowardnesse appeared, and
maintained their fight so long, that none was able to judge who had the better,
until that Thibault cousin to Iulietta inflamed with ire and rage, turned
toward Rhomeo, thinking with a foine to run him through. But he was so well
armed and defended with a privy coat which he wore ordinarily for the doubt
he had of the Capellets, as the prick rebounded: unto whom Rhomeo made
answer: Thibault thou may know by the patience which I have had until this
present time, that I came not hither to fight with thee or thine, but to (...)
peace and attoneme^t between us, and if thou think that for default of
courage I have failed mine endeavor, thou do great wrong to my reputation. And
impute this my suffrance to some other particular respect, rather than to want
of stomach. Wherefore abuse me not, but be content with this great effusion of
blood, and murders already committed, and provoke me not I beseech thee to
pass the bounds of my good will and mind. Ah Traitor, said Thibault, thou
think to save thy self by the plot of thy pleasant tongue, but see that thou
defend thy self, else presently I will make thee feel that thy tongue shall not
guard thy corpse, nor yet be the buckler to defend the same from present death.
And saying so, he gave him a blow with such fury, as had not other warded the
same, he had cut of his head from his shoulders. And the one was no readier to
lend, but the other incontinently was able to pay again, for he being not only
wroth with the blow that he had received, but offended with the injury which
the other had done, began to pursue his enemy with such courage and viuacitie,
as at the third blow with his sweard, he caused him to fall backewarde stark
dead upon the ground, with a prick vehemently thrust into his throat, which
he followed till his swearde appeared through the hinder part of the same, by
reason whereof the conflict ceased. For bisides that Thibault was the chief of
his company, he was also borne of one of the Noblest houses within the City,
which caused the potestate to assemble his Soldiers with diligence for the
apprehension and imprisonment of Rhomeo, who seeing ill fortune at hand, in
secret wise conveyed him self to Friar Laurence, at the Friars Franciscanes.
And the Friar understanding of his fact, kept him in a certain secret place
of his Covent, until Fortune did otherwise provide for his safe going abroad.
The brute spread throughout the City, of this chance done upon the Lord
Thibault, the Capellets in mourning weeds caused the dead body to be carried
before the signory of Verona, so well to move them to pity, as to demand
justice for the murder: before whom came also the Montesches, declaring the
innocence of Rhomeo, and the wilful assault of the other. The Counsel
assembled and witnesses heard on both parts, a straight commandment was given
by the Lord of the City to give over their weapons, and touching the offense
of Rhomeo because he had killed the other in his own (...), he was banished
Verona for (...). This common misfortune published throughout the City, was
generally sorowed and lamented. Some complained the death of the Lord Thibault,
so well for his dexterity in arms, as for the hope of his great good service
in time to come, if he had not been prevented by such cruel death. Other
bewailed (specially the Ladies and Gentlewomen) the overthrow of young Rhomeo,)
who bisides his beauty and good grace wherewith he was enriched, had a certain
natural allurement, by virtue whereof he drew unto him the hearts of each man,
like as the stony Adamant does the cancred iron, in such wise as the whole
nation and people of Verona lamented his mischance: but above al, unfortunate
Iulietta, who advertised both of the death of her cousin Thibault, and of the
banishment of her husband, made the air sound with infinite number of
mornefull plaints and miserable lamentations. Then feeling her self too much
outraged with extreme passion, she went into her chamber, and overcome with
sorrow threw her self upon her bed, where she began to reinforce her dolor after
so strange fashion, as the most constant would have been moved to pity. Then
like one out of her wits, she gazed here and there, and by Fortune
beholding the window whereat Rhomeo was wont to enter into her chamber, cried
out: Oh unhappy window, Oh entry most unlucky, wherein were wouen the bitter
toil of my former missehaps, if by thy means I have received at other times
some (...) pleasure or transitory contentation, thou now make me pay a
tribute so rigorous and painful, as my tender body not able any longer to
support yt same, shall henceforth open the gate to that life where the ghost
discharged from this mortal burden, shall seek in some place else more
assured rest. Ah Rhomeo, Rhomeo, when acquaintance first began between us, and
I reclined mine ears unto thy suborned promises, confirmed with so many
oaths, I would never have believed that in place of our continued amity, and in
appeasing of the hatred of our houses, thou (...) dest have sought occasion to
break the same by an act so vituperious and shameful, whereby thy fame shall
be spotted for ever, and I miserable wretch desolate of spouse and companion.
But if thou had been so greadie after the Capellets blood, wherefore did
thou spare the dear blood of mine own heart when so many times, and in such
secret place the same was at the mercy of thy cruel hands? The victory
which thou should have gotten over me, had it not been glorious enough for
thine ambitious mind, but for more triumphant solempnitie to be crowned with
the (...) of my dearest kinsman? Now get thee hence therefore into sonte other
place to deceive some other, so unhappy as my self. Never come again in place
where I am, for no excuse shall hereafter take hold to assuage mine offended
mind. In the mean time I shall lament the rest of my heavy life, with such
store of tears, as my body dried up from all humiditie, shall shortly search
relief in earth. And having made an end of those her words, her heart was so
grievously strained, as she could neither weep nor speak, and stood so
(...), as if she had been in a trance. Then being somewhat come again unto
her self, with (...) voice she said: Ah (...) tongue of other men's (...), how
(...) thou so (...) to speak of him whom his very enemies do commend and
praise? How presumest thou to impute the blame upon Rhomeo, whose vngiltinesse
and innocent deed every man allows? Where from henceforth shall be his
refuge? since she which ought to be the only bulwark, and assured ra^pire of
his distress, does pursue and defame him? Receive, receive then Rhomeo, the
satisfaction of mine ingratitude by yt sacrifice which I shall make of my
proper life, and so the fault which I have committed against thy loyalty,
shall be made open to the world, thou being revenged and my self punished. And
thinking to use some further talk, all the powers of her body failed her with
signs of present death. But the good old woman which could not imagine yt
cause of Iulietta her long absence, doubted very much that she suffered some
passion, and sought her up and down in every place within her fathers palace,
until at length she found her lying a long upon her bed, all the outward parts
of her body so cold as Marble. But the good old woman which thought her to be
dead, began to cry like one out of her wits, saying: Ah dear daughter and
(...), how much does thy death now grieve me at the very heart? And as she
was seeling all the parts of her body, she perceived some spark of life to be
yet within the same, which caused her to call her many times by her name, till
at length she brought her out of her sound. Then she said unto her: Why
Iulietta mine own dear dareling, what mean you by this turmoiling of your
self? I can not tell from whence this your behauior and that immoderate
heaviness do proceed, but well I wot that within this hour I thought to have
accompanied you to the grave. Alas good mother (answered woeful Iulietta) do
you not most evidently perceive and see what just cause I have to sorrow and
complain, losing at one instant two persons of the world which were unto me
most dear? Me think answered the good woman, that it is not semely for a
Gentlewoman of your degree to fall into such extremity. For in time of
tribulation (...) should most prevail. And if the Lord Thibault be dead, do
you think to get him again by tears? What is he that does not accuse his
overmuch presumption? would you that Rhomeo had done that wrong to him, and his
house, to suffer himself outraged and assailed by one, to whom in manhood and
prowess he is not inferior? Suffiseth you that Rhomeo is alive, and his
affairs in such estate, who in time may be called home again from banishment,
for he is a great lord, and as you know well allied and favored of all men:
wherefore arm your self from henceforth with patience. For albeit that Fortune
does (...) him from you for a time, yet sure I am, that hereafter she will
restore him unto you again with greater joy and contentation than before. And
to the end that we be better assured in what state he is, if you will promise
me to give over your heaviness, I will to day know of Friar Laurence whether
he is gone. To which request Iulietta agreed, and then the good woman repaired
to S. Frauncis, where she found Friar Laurence, who told her that the same
night Rhomeo would not fail at his accustomed hour to visit Iulietta, and
there to do her to understand what he purposed to do in time to come. This
journey then fared like the voyages of mariners, who after they have been tossed by
great and troublous tempest, seeing some Sun (...) pierce the heavens to
lighten the land, assure them selves again, and thynkyng to have avoided
shipwreck, and suddenly the seas begin to swell, the waves do roar, with such
vehemence and noise, as if they were fallen again into greater danger than
before. The assigned hour come, Rhomeo failed not according to his promise to
be in his Garden, where he found his furniture pressed to mount the chamber of
Iulietta, who with displayed arms, began so straightly to embrace him, as it
seemed that the soul would have abandoned her body. And they two more than a
large quarter of an hour were in such agony, as they were not able to
pronounce one word, and wettyng each others face fast closed together, the
tears trickeled down in such abundaunce, as they seemed to be thoroughlye
bathed therein. Which Rhomeo perceiving, and thynkyng to stay those
immoderate tears, said unto her: Mine own dearest friend Iulietta, I am not
now determined to recite the particulars of the strange happes of frail and
inconstaunte Fortune, who in a (...) hoystethe a man up to the highest degree
of her wheel, and by and by, in less space than in the twynckelyng of an eye,
she throws him down again so low, as more misery is prepared for him in
one day, than favor in one hundred years: which I now prove, and hauc
experience in my self, which have been nourished delicately among my
friends, and mainteyned in such prosperous state, as you do little know,
(hopyng for the full perfection of my felicity) by means of our marriage to
have reconciled our parents and friends; and to conducte the residue of my
life, according to the scope and lotte determined by Almighty GOD: and
nevertheless all mine enterprises be put back, and my purposes turned
clean contrary, in such wise as from henceforthe I must wander like a
vagabonde thorough diverse (...), and sequestrate my self from my friends,
without assured place of mine abode, which I desire to let you wete, to the
intent you may be exhorted, in time to come, pacientely to bear so well mine
absence, as that which it shall please God to appointe. But Iulietta, all
affrighted with tears and mortal agonies, woulds not suffer him to pass any
further, but interruptyng his purpose, said unto him: Rhomeo, how can thou
be so hard hearted and void of all pity, to leave me here alone, besieged
with so many deadly myseries? There is neither hour nor Minute, wherein Death
does not appear a thousand times before me: and yet my missehappe is such,
as I can not dye, and therefore do manyfestelye perceive, that the same Death
preserves my life, of purpose to delyghte in my griefs, and triumph over my
euyls. And thou like the mynister and tyrant of her cruelty, do make no
conscience (for ought that I can see) having achieved the sum of thy
desires and pleasures on me, to abandon and forsake me. Whereby I well
perceive, that all the laws of Amity are dead and utterly extinguished, for
so much as he, in whom I had greatest hope and confidence, and for whose
sake I am become an enemy to my self, does disdain and contemn me. No no
Rhomeo, thou must fully resolve thy self upon one of these. (...). points,
either to see me incontinently thrown down hedlong from this high window after
thee: or else to suffer me to acco^panie thee into that country or place
whither Fortune shall guide thee: for my heart is so much transformed into
thine, that so soon as I shall understand of thy departure, presently my life
will depart this woeful body: the continuance whereof I do not desire for any
other purpose, but only to delight my self in thy presence, and to be
partaker of thy missefortunes. And therefore if ever there lodged any pity in
the heart of Gentleman, I beseech (...) Rhomeo with all humility, that it may
now find place in thee, and that thou will vouchsafe to receive me (...); thy
servant, and the faithful companion of thy (...). And if thou think that thou
can not conveniently receive me in the estate and habit of a wife, who shall
let me to change mine apparel? Shall I be the first that have used like
shifts, to escape the tirannie of parents? Do thou doubt that my service
will not be so good unto thee as that of Petre thy servant? Will my loyalty
and fidelity be less than his? My beauty which at other times thou have so
greatly commended, is it not esteemed of thee? My tears, my love, and the
ancient pleasures and delights that you have taken in me, shall they be in
oblivion? Rhomeo seeing (...) in these alteratio^s, fearing that worsse
inconvenience would chance, took her again between his arms, and kissyng
her amorously, said: Iulietta, the only mistress of my heart, I pray thee in
the name of God, and for the fervent love which thou bear unto me, to (...)
and do away those vain cogitations, except (...) mean to seek and hazard the
destruction of us both: for if thou persevere in this determination, there is no
remedy but we must both perish: for so soon as thine (...) shall be known, thy
father will make such ernest pursuit after us, that we can not choose but be
descried and taken, and in the end cruelly punished. I as a (...) and stealer
of thee, and thou as a disobedient daughter to her father: and so in stead of
pleasant and quiet life, our days shall be abridged by most shameful death. But
if thou will recline thy self to reason, (the right rule of humane life,) and
for the time abandon our mutual delights, I will take such order in the time of
my banishment, as within. (...). or. (...). months without any delay, I shall be
revoked home again. But if it fall out otherwise (as I trust not,) how so ever
it happen, I will come again unto thee, and with the help of my friends will
fetch thee from Verona by strong hand, not in counterfeit apparel as a
stranger, but like my spouse and perpetual companion. In the mean time quiet
your self, and be sure that nothing else but death shall divide and put us
asunder. The reasons of Rhomeo so much prevailed with Iulietta, as she made him
this answer: My dear friend I will do nothing contrary to your will and
pleasure. And to what place so ever you repair, my heart shall be your own, in
like sort as you have given yours to be mine. In the mean while I pray you
not to fail oftentimes to advertise me by Friar Laurence, in what state your
affairs be, and specially of the place of your abode. Thus these two pore
lovers passed the night together, until the day began to appear, which did
separate them, to their extreme sorrow and grief. Rhomeo having taken leave of
Iulietta, went to S. Fraunces, and after he had advertised Friar Laurence of
his affairs, departed from Verona in the habit of a Merchant stranger, and
used such expedition, as without hurt he arrived at Mantona, (accompanied only
with Petre his servant, whom he hastily sent back again to Verona, to
serve his Father) where he took a house: and living in honorable company,
assayed certain months to put away the grief which so tormented him. But
during the time of his absence, miserable Iulietta could not so cloak her
sorrow, but that through the evil color of her face, her inward passion was
discried. By reason whereof her mother, who heard her oftentimes sighing, and
incessantly complaining, could not forbear to say unto her: Daughter if you
continue long after this sort, you will hasten the death of your good Father
and me, who love you so dearly as our own lives: wherefore henceforth
moderate your heaviness, and endeavor your self to be merry: think no more upon
the death of your cousin Thibault, whom (since it please^d God to call away) do
you think to revoke with tears, and to withstand his almighty will? But the
pore Gentlewoman not able to dissemble her grief, said unto her: Madame long
time it is since the last tears for Thibault were poured forth, and I believe
that the fountain is so well soked and dried up, as no more will spring in
that place. The mother which could not tell to what effect those words were
spoken held her peace, for fear she should trouble her daughter: and certain
days after seeing her to continue in heaviness and continual griefs, assayed
by all means possible to know, as well of her, as of other the household
servant, the occasion of her sorrow, but al in vain: wherewith the pore mother
(...) beyond measure, purposed to let the Lord Antonio her husband to
understand the case of her daughter. And upon a day seeing (...) at convenient
leisure, she said unto him: My Lord, if you have marked the countenance of our
daughter, and her kind of behauior since the death of the Lord Thibault her
cousin, you shall perceive so strange mutation in her, as it will make you to
marvel: for she is not only contented to forgo meat, drink and sleep, but
she spends her time in nothing else but in weeping and lamentation,
delighting to keep her self solitary within her chamber, where she torme^teth
her self so out ragiously, as if we take not heed, her life is to be doubted,
and not able to know the original of her pain, the more difficult shall be the
remedy: for albeit that I have sought means by all extremity, yet cannot I
learn the cause of her sickness. And where I thought in the beginning, that
it proceeded upon the death of her cousin, now I do manifestly perceive yt
contrary, specially when she her self did assure me that she had already wept
and shed the last tears for him, that she was minded to do. And uncertain
whereupon to resolve, I do think verily that she mourns for some despite, to
see the most part of her companions married, and she yet unprovided, persuading
with her self (it may be) that we her parents do not care for her. Wherefore
dear husband, I heartely beseech you for our rest and her quiet, that
hereafter ye be careful to provide for her some marriage worthy of our state:
whereunto the Lord Antonio willingly agreed, saying unto her: Wife, I have many
times thought upon that whereof you speak, notwithstanding since as yet she is
not attained to the age of. (...). years, I thought to provide a husband at
leisure. Nevertheless things being come to these terms, and knowing yt
virgins chastity is a dangerous treasure, I will be mindful of yt same to your
contentation, and she matched in such wise, as she shall think the time
hitherto well delayed. In the mean while mark diligently whither she be in
love with any to the end yt we have not so great regard to goods, or to yt
nobility of yt house wherein we mean to (...) her, as to yt life and health of
our daughter, who is to me so dear as I (...) rather (...) a beggar without lands
or goods, than to bestow her upon one which shall use and entreat her ill.
Certain days after that the Lord Antonio had bruted the marriage of his
Daughter, many Gentlemen were suitors, so well for yt excellency of her beauty,
as for her great richesse and revenue. But above all others the aliance of a
young Earl named Paris, the Count of Lodronne liked the Lord Antonio: unto
whom liberally he gave his consent, and told his wife the party upon whom he
did mean to bestow his daughter. The mother very joyful yt they had found so
honest a Gentleman for their daughter: caused her secretly to be called before
her, doing her to understand what things had passed between her father and the
Count Paris, discoursing unto her the beauty and good grace of that young
Count, yt virtues for which he was commended of al men, joining thereunto for
conclusion yt great richesse and favor which he had in ye goods of fortune, by
means whereof she and her friends should live in eternal honor. But Iulietta
which had rather to have been torn in pieces than to agree to yt marriage,
answered her mother with a more tha^ accustomed stoutnesse: Madame, I much
marvel, and therwithal am asto^ned yt you being a Lady discreet and honorable,
will be so liberal over your daughter as to commit her to yt pleasure and will of
an other before, you do know how her mind is bent: you may do as it pleases
you, but of one thing I do well assure you, that if you bring it to pass, it
shall be against my will. And touching the regard and estimation of Count
Paris, I shall first loose my life before he shall have power to touch any part
of my body: which being done, it is you that shall be counted the murderer, by
delivering me into the hands of him, whom I neither can, will, or know which
way to love. Wherefore I pray you to suffer me henceforth thus to live, without
taking any further care of me, for so much as my cruel fortune has otherwise
disposed of me.

The dolorous mother which knew not what judgment to fire upon her daughters
answer, like a woman confused and bisides her self went to seek the Lord
Antonio, unto whom without conceyling any part of her daughters talk, she did
him understand the whole. The good old man offended beyond measure, commanded
her incontine^tly by force to be brought before him, if of her own good will she
would not come. So soon as she came before her father, her eyes full of tears,
fell down at his feet, which she bathed with the luke warm drops that distilled
from her eyes in great abundance, and thinking to open her mouth to cry him
mercy, the sobbes and sighs many times stopped her speech, that she remained
dumb not able to frame a word. But the old man nothing moved with his
daughters tears, said unto her in great rage: Come hither thou unkind and
disobedient daughter, have thou already forgotten how many times thou have
heard spoken at the table, of the puissance and authority our ancient Roman
fathers had over their children? unto whom it was not only lawful to sell,
guage, and otherwise dispose them (in (...) necessity) at their pleasure, but
also which is more, they had absolute power over their death and life? With
what yrons, with what torments, with what racks would those good fathers chasten
and correct thee if they were alive again, to see that ingratitude, misbehauor
and disobedience which thou use toward thy father, who with many prayers and
requests has provided one of the greatest lords of this province to be thy
husband, a gentleman of best renoume, and endued with all kind of virtues, of
whom thou and I be unworthy, both for the notable mass of goods and
substance wherewith he is enriched, as also for the honor and generositie of
the house whereof he is descended, and yet thou playest the part of an
obstinate and rebellious child against thy fathers will, I take the
omnipotency of that almighty God to witness, which has (...) to bring thee
forth into this world, that if upon Tuesday next thou failest to prepare thy
self to be at my castle of (...), where the Count Paris purposes to mete us,
and there give thy consent to that which thy mother and I have agreed upon, I
will not only deprive thee of my worldly goods, but also will make thee
espouse and marie a prison so straight and sharp, as a thousand times thou
shall curse the day and time wherein thou wast borne. Wherefore from hence forth
take aduisement what thou do, for except the promise be kept which I have
made to the Count Paris, I will make thee feel how great the just choler of
an offended father is against a child unkind. And without staying for other
answer of his daughter, the old man departed the chamber, and (...) her upon
her knees. Iulietta knowing the fury of her father, fearing to incur his
indignation, or to (...) his further wrath, retired for that day into her
chamber, and contrived the whole night more in weeping than sleeping. And the
next morning faining to go hear service, she went forth with the woman of her
chamber to the friars, where she caused father Laurence to be called unto her,
and prayed him to hear her confession. And when she was upon her knees before
him, she began her confession with tears, tellyng him the great mischief that
was prepared for her, by ye marriage accorded between her father, and the
Count Paris. And for conclusion said unto him: Sir, for so much as you know
that I can not by Gods law be married twice, and that I have but one God, one
husband, and one faith, I am determined (when I am from (...)) with these two
hands which you see joined before you, this day to end my sorrowful life, that
my soul may bear witness in the heavens, and my blood upon the earth of my
faith and loyalty preserved. Then having ended her talk, she looked about
her, and seemed by her wild countenance, as though she had devised some (...)
purpose. Wherefore Friar Laurence, astonned beyond mesure, fearing lest she
would have executed that which she was determined, said unto her: Mistress
Iulietta, I pray you in the name of God by little and little to moderate your
conceived grief, and to content your self whilst you be here, until I have
provided what is best for you to do, for before you part from hence, I will give
you such consolation and remedy for your afflictions, as you shall remain
satisfied and contented. And resolved upon this good mind, he speedily went
out of the Church unto his chamber, where he began to consider of many things,
his conscience being moved to hinder the marriage between the Count Paris and
her, knowing that by his means she had espoused an other, and calling to
remembrance what a dangerous enterprise he had begone, by committyng himself
to the mercy of a simple damsel, and that if she failed to be wise and
secret, all their doings should be discried, he defamed, and Rhomeo her spouse
punished. He then after he had well debated upon an infinite number of
devises, was in the end overcome with pity, and determined rather to hazard
his honor, than to suffer the adultery of Count Paris with Iulietta. And
(...) determined hereupon, opened his closet, and taking a vyoll in his hand,
returned again to Iulietta, whom he found like one that was in a trance,
waiting for news, either of life, or death.

Of whom the good old father demanded upon what day her marriage was
appointed. The first day of that appointment (quod she) is upon wednesday,
which is the day ordained for my (...) of marriage accorded between my father
and Count Paris, but the nuptial solemnity is not before the. x. day of
September. Well then (quod the religious father) be of good cheer daughter, for
our Lord God has opened a way unto me both to deliver you and Rhomeo from the
prepared thraldom. I have known your husband from his cradle, and he has
daily committed unto me the greatest secrets of his conscience, and I have so
dearly loved him again, as if he had been mine own son. Wherefore my heart can
not abide that any man should do him wrong in that specially wherein my counsel
may stand him instead. And for so much as you are his wife, I ought likewise
to love you, and seek means to deliver you from the martyrdom and anguish
wherewith I see your heart besieged. Understande then (good daughter) of a
secret which I purpose to manifest unto you, and take heed above all things,
that you declare it to no living creature, for therein consists your life and
death. Ye be not ignorant by the common report of the citizens of this City,
and by the same published of me, that I have travailed thorough all the
Provinces of the habitable earth, whereby during the continual time of. xx.
years, I have sought no rest for my wearied body, (...) rather have mani times
protruded ye same to ye mercy of brute beasts in ye wilderness, and many times
also to the mercylesse waves of the seas, and to the pity of common pirates
together with a thousand other dangers and shipwracks upon sea and land. So
it is good daughter that all my wandryng voyages have not been altogethers
unprofitable. For besides the incredible contentation received ordinarily in
mind, I have gathered some particular fruit, whereof by the grace of God you
shall shortly feel some experience. I have proved the secret properties of
stones, of plants, metals, and other things hidden within the bowels of the
earth, wherewith I am able to help my self against the common law of men,
when necessity does serve: specially in things wherein I know mine eternal
God to be least offended. For as thou know I being approached as it were,
even to the brimme of my grane, and that the time draws near for yelding of
mine account before the auditor of all auditors, I ought therefore to have some
deep knowledge and apprehe^sion of Gods judgment more than I had when yt heat
of inconsidered youth did boil within my lusty body. Know you therefore good
daughter, that with those graces and favors which the heavens prodigally have
bestowed upon me, I have learned and proved of long time the composition of a
certain paaste, which I make of diverse soporiferous simples, which beaten
afterward to poudre, and drunk with a quantity of water, within a quarter of
an hour after, brings the receiver into such a sleep, and burieth so
deeply the senses and other sprites of life, that the cunningest Physician will
judge the party dead: and besides that it has a more marvelous effect, for
the person which uses the same feels no kind of grief, and according to the
quantity of the dough, the (...) remains in a sweet sleep, but when the
operation is perfect and done, he returns into his first estate. Now then
Iulietta receive mine instruction, and put of all feminine affection by taking
upon you a manly stomach, for by the only courage of your mind consists ye
(...) or mishap of your affairs. Behold here I give you a viole which you
shall keep as your own propre heart, and the night before your marriage, or in
the morning before day, you shall fill the same up with water, and drink so much
as is contained therein. And then you shall feel a certain kind of pleasant
sleep, which incroching by little and little all the parts of your body, will
constrain the^ in such wise, as (...) they shall remain: and by not doing their
accustomed duties, shall loose their natural feelings, and you abide in such
ecstasy the space of xl. hours at the least without any beating of poulse or
other perceptible motion, which shall so asto^ne them yt come to see you, as
they will judge you to be dead, and according to the custom of our City, you
shall be carried to the churchyard hard by our Church, where you shall be
intombed in the common monument of the (...) your ancestors, and in the mean
time we will send word to the Lord Rhomeo by a special messanger of the effect
of our devise, who now abides at Mantua. And the night following I am sure he
will not fail to be here, then he and I together will open the grave, and
lift up your body, and after the operation of the powder is past, he shall
convey you secretly to Mantua, unknown to all your Parents and friends.
Afterward (it may be) Time the mother of truth shall cause concord between
the offended City of Verona and Rhomeo. At which time your common cause may be
made open to the general contentation of all your friends. The words of the
good Father ended, new joy surprised the heart of Iulietta, who was so
attentive to his talk as she forgate no one point of her (...). Then she said
unto him: Father, doubt not at all that my heart shall fail in performance of
your commandment: for were it the strongest poison or most (...) venom,
rather would I thrust it into my body, than to consent to fall in the hands of
him, whom I utterly (...): with a right strong reason then may I for (...) my
self, and offer my body to any kind of mortal danger to approach and draw
near to him, upon whom wholly depends my life and all the contentation I
have in this world. Go your ways then my daughter (quod the Friar) the mighty
hand of God keep you, and his surpassing power defend you, and confirm that
will and good mind of yours, for the accomplishment of this work. Iulietta
departed from Friar Laurence, and returned home to her fathers palace about.
xi. of the clock, where she found her mother at the gate attending for her:
and in good devotion demanded if she continued still in her former follies? But
Iulietta with more gladsome cheer than she was wont to use, not suffering her
mother to ask again, said unto her: Madame I come from S. Frauncis Church,
where I have tarried longer peradventure than my duty requires: how be it not
without fruit and great rest to my afflicted conscience, by reason of the godly
persuasions of our ghostly father Friar Laurence, unto whom I have made a
large declaration of my life. And chiefly have communicated unto him in
confession, that which has past between my Lord my father and you, upon the
marriage of Count Paris and me. But the good man has reconciled me by his holy
words and commendable exhortations, that where I had mind never to mary, now
I am well disposed to obey your pleasure and commandment. Wherefore (...) I
be seeche you to recover the favor and good will of my father, ask pardon in
my behalf, and say unto him (if it please you) that by obeying his Fatherly
request, I am ready to meet the Count Paris at Villafranco, and there in your
presence to accept him for my Lord and husband: in assurance whereof, by your
patience, I mean to repair into my closet, to make choice of my most precious
jewels, that I being richly adorned and decked, may (...) before him more
agreeable to his mind and pleasure. The good mother rapte with exceeding great
joy, was not able to answer a word, but rather made speed to seek out her
husband the Lord Antonio, unto whom she reported the good will of her
daughter, and how by means of Friar Laurence her mind was changed. Whereof
the good old man marvelous joyful, praised God in heart, saying: wife this
is not yt first good turn which we have received of that holy man, unto whom
every Citizen of this Common wealth is dearly (...). I would to God that I had
redeemed. xx. of his years (...) the third part of my goods, so grievous is to
me his extreme old age. The self same hour the Lord Antonio went to seek the
Count Paris, whom he thought to persuade to go to Villafranco. But the
Count told him again, that the charge would be to great, and that better it
were to reserve that cost to the marriage day, for the better celebration of the
same. Notwithstanding if it were his pleasure, he would himself go visit
Iulietta: and so they went together. The mother advertised of his coming,
caused her Daughter to make her self ready, and to spare no costly jewels for
adorning of her beauty against the Countes coming, which she bestowed so well
for garnishing of her personage, that before the Count parted from the house,
she had so stolen away his heart, as he lived not from that time forth, but
upon meditation of her beauty, and slacked no time for acceleration (...) yt
marriage day ceasing not to be importunate upon father and mother for the end
and consummation thereof: And thus with joy inoughe passed forth this day and
many others until ye day before the marriage, against which time the mother of
Iulietta did so well provide, that there wanted nothing to set forth the
magnificence and nobility of their house. Villafranco whereof we have made
mention, was a place of pleasure, where the lord Antonio was wont many times
to recreate him self a mile or two from Veronna, there the dynner was prepared,
for so much as the ordinary solemnity of necessity must be done at
Veronna. Iulietta perceiving her time to approach, dissembled the matter so
well as she could: and when time forced her to retire to her chamber, her
woman would have waited upon her, and have lain in her chamber, as her custom
was: But Iulietta said unto her: Good and faithful mother, you know that to
morrow is my marriage day, and for that I would spend the most part of the
night in prayer, I pray you for this time to let me alone, and to morrow in the
morning about. (...). of the clock come to me again to help me make me
ready. The good old woman willing to follow her mind, suffered her alone, and
doubted nothing of that which she did mean to do. Iulietta being within her
chamber having an eawer full of water standing upon the table filled the viole
which the Friar gave her: and after she had made the mixture, she set it by her
bed side, and went to bed. And being laid, new thoughts began to assail her,
with a conceit of grievous death, which brought her into such case as she
could not tell what to do, but playning incessantly said: Am not I the most
unhappy and desperate creature, that ever was borne o^ woman? for me there is
nothing left in this wretched world but mishap, misery, and mortal woe, my
distress has brought me to such extremity, as to save mine honor and
conscience, I am forced to devour the drink whereof I know not the virtue: but
what know I (said she) whether the operation of this powder will be to soon or
to late, or not correspondent to the due time, and that my fault being
discovered, I shall remain a jesting stock and fable to the people? what know
I moreover, if the serpents and other venomous and crauling worms, which
commonly frequent the graves and pittes of the earth will hurt me, thinkyng
that I am dead? But how shall I endure the stinche of so many carions and bones
of mine ancestors which rest in the grave, if by fortune I do awake before
Rhomeo and Friar Laurence do come to help me? And as she was thus plunged in
the deep conte^plation of things, she thought that she saw a certain vision
or fancy of her cousin Thibault, in the very same sort as she saw him wounded
and imbrued with blood, and musyng how that she must be buried quick amongs
so many dead carcases and deadly naked bones, her tender and delicate body
began to shake and tremble, and her yelowe locks to stare for fear, in such
wise as frighted with terror, a cold sweat began to pierce her heart, and
bedew the rest of all her members, in such wise as she thought that an hundred
thousand deaths did stand about her, haling her on every side, and plucking
her in pieces, and feelyng that her forces diminyshed by little and little,
fearing that through to great debilitie she was not able to do her enterprise,
like a furious and insensate woman, without further care, gulped up the water
within the viol, then crossing her arms upon her stomach, she lost at that
instant all the powers of her body, and remained in a trance. And when the
morning light began to thrust his head out of his Orient, her chamber woman
which had lockte her in with the key, did open the door, and thinking to awake
her, called her many times, and said unto her: Mistress, you sleep to long,
the Count Paris will come to raise you. The poor old woman spoke unto the
wall, and (...) a song unto the deaf. For if all the horrible and tempestuous
soundes of the world had been canoned forth out of the greatest bombardes,
and sounded through her delicate ears, her spirits of life were so fast bound
and stopped, as she by no means could awake, wherewith the poor old woman
amazed, began (...) shake her by the arms and hands, which she found so
cold as marble stone. Then puttyng hand unto her mouth, suddenly perceived
that she was dead, for she perceived no breath in her. Wherefore like a woman
out of her wits, she ran to tell her mother, who so mad as Tigre, bereft
of her faons, hyed her self into her daughters chaumber, and in that pitiful
state beholding her daughter, thinking her to be dead, cried out: Ah cruel
death, which have ended all my joy and bliss, use thy last scourge of thy
wrathful ire against me, least by suffering me to live the rest of my woeful
days, my tormente do increase: then she began to fetchsuch straining sighs as
her heart did seem to cleave in pieces. And as her cries began to increase,
behold the father, the Count Paris, and a great troop of Gentlemen and
Ladies, which were come to honor the feast, hearing no sooner tell of that
which chanced, were stroke into such sorrowful dumpes as he which had beheld
their faces would easily have judged yt the same had be^ a day of ire and pity,
specially the lord Antonio, whose heart was frapped with such surpassing woe, as
neither tear nor word could issue forth, and knowing not what to do, straight
way sent to seek yt most expert physicians of the town, who after they had
inquired of the life past of Iulietta, deemed by common report, that
melancholy was the cause of that sudden death, and then their sorrows began to
renew a (...). And if ever day was lamentable, piteous unhappy and fatal,
truly it was that wherein Iulietta her death was published in Verona: for she
was so bewailed of great and small, that by the common plaintes the common
wealth seemed to be in danger, and not without cause. For besides her natural
beauty accompanied with many virtues wherewith nature had enriched her) she
was else so humble, wise and debonaire, as for that humility and courtesy she
had stolen away the hearts of every wight, and there was none but did lamente
her misfortune. And whilst these things were in this lamented state, Friar
Laurence with diligence dispatched a Friar of his Covent, named Friar Anselme,
whom he trusted as himself, and delivered him a letter written with his own
hand, commanding him expressly not to give the same to any other but to
Rhomeo, wherein was contained the chance which had passed between him and
Iulietta, specially yt virtue of the powder, and commanded him the next
ensuing night to speed him self to Verona, for that the operation of the
powder that time would take end, and that he should carry with him back again
to Mantua his (...) Iulietta, in dissembled apparel, until Fortune bad
otherwise provided for them. The friar made such have as (too late) he arrived
at Mantua, within a while after. And because the manner of Italy is, that the
Friar travailing abroad ought to take a companion of his covent to do his
affairs within the City, the Friar went into his covent, but because he was
entered in, it was not lawful for him to come out again that day, for that
certain days before, one religious of that covent as it was said, did die of
the plague. Wherefore the magistrates appointed for the health and visitation
of the sick, commanded the warden of the house that no Friars should wander
abroad the City, or talk with any citizen, until they were licenced by the
officers in that behalf appointed, which was the cause of the great mishap,
which you shall hear hereafter. The Friar being in this perplexity, not able
to go forth, and not knowing what was contained in the letter, deferred his
journey for that day. Whilst things were in this plight, preparation was made
at Veronna, to do the obsequies of Iulietta. There is a custom also (which is
common in Italy,) to place all the best of one lignage and family in one
Tomb, whereby Iulietta was laid in the ordinary grave of the (...), in a
Churcheyarde, hard by the Church of the Friars, where also the Lord Thibault
was interred. And her obsequies honorably done, every man returned: whereunto
Pietro, the servant of Rhomeo, gave his assistance. For as we have before
declared, his master sent him back again from Mantua to Verona, to do his
father service, and to advertise him of that which should chance in his
absence there: who seeing the body of Iulietta, enclosed in tomb, thinkyng
with the rest that she had been dead in deed, incontinently took post horse,
and with diligence rode to Mantua, where he found his master in his wonted
house, to whom he said, with his eyes full of tears: Sir, there is chanced
unto you so strange a matter, as if so be you do not arm your self with
constancy, I am afraid that I shall be the cruel minister of your death. Be
it known unto you sir, yt yesterday morning my mistress Iulietta left her
life in this world to seek rest in an other: and with these eyes I saw her
buried in the Churchyard of S. Frauncis. At the sound of which heavy
message, Rhomeo began woefully to (...), as though his spirits grieved with the
(...) of his passion at that instant would have abandoned his body. But
strong Love which would not permit him to faint until the extremity,
framed a thought in his fantasy, that if it were possible for him to dye
besides her, his death should be more glorious, and (...) (as he thought)
better contented. By reason whereof, after (...) had washed his face for (...)
to discover his sorrow, he went out of his chamber, and commanded his man to
(...) behind him, that he might walk thorough out all the corners of the
City, to find propre remedy (if it were possible) for his grief. And (...)
others, beholding an Apoticaries shop of little furniture and less store of
boxes and other things requisite for that science, thought that the very
poverty of the master Apothecarye would make him wyllyngly yield to that
which he pretended to demand. And after he had taken him aside, secretly
he said unto him: Sir, if you be the master of the house, as I think you be,
behold here Fifty Ducates, which I give you, to the intent you deliver me
some strong and (...) poison that within a quarter of an hour is able to
procure death unto him that shall use it. The covetous Apothecarie entised by
gain, agreed to his request, and saynyng to give him some other medicine
before the peoples face, he speedily made ready a strong and cruel poison,
afterward he said unto him softely: Sir, I (...) you more than is needful,
for the one half in an hours space is able to destroy the strongest manne of
the world: who after he had received the poison, returned home, where he
commanded his man to depart with diligence to Veronna, and that he should make
provision of candels, 'a tynder box, and other instruments meet for the
opening of the grave of Iulietta, and that above all things he should not
fail to attend his coming besides the Churchyard of S. Frauncis, and upon
pain of life to keep his intent in scilence. Which Pietro obeyed in order as
his master had commanded him, and made therein such expedition, as he arrived
in good time to Verona, taking order for all things that were commanded him.
(...) in the mean while being solicited with mortal thoughts, caused incke
and paper to be brought unto him, and in few words put in writing all the
(...) of his love, the marriage of him and Iulietta the mean observed for
consummation of the same, the help that he had of Friar Laurence, the buying
of his poison, and last of all his death. Afterward, having finished his
heavy tragedy, he closed the letters, and sealed the same with his seal,
and directed the Superscription thereof to his father: and puttyng the letters
into his pursse, he mounted on horseback, and used such diligence, that he
arrived upon dark night at the City of Veronna, before the gates were shut,
where he found his servant tarying for him there, with a Lantern and
instruments beforesayd, meet for the openyng of the grave, unto whom he
said: Pietro, help me to open this Tomb, and so soon as it is open, I
command thee upon pain of thy life, not to come near me, nor to stay me
from the thing I purpose to do. Behold, there is a letter which thou shall
present to morrow in the morning to my father at his vprisyng, which
peradventure shall please him better than thou thynkest. Pietro, not able to
imagine what was his masters intent, stood somewhat aloof to behold his
masters gestes and (...). And when (...) had opened the vaulte, Rhomeo
descended down two (...), holdyng the candell in his hand, and began to
behold with pitiful eye, the body of her, which was the organ of his life,
and washed the same with the tears of his eyes, and kyst it tenderly, holding
it hard between his arms, and not able to satisfy him self with her (...),
put his fearful hands upon the cold stomach of Iulietta. And after he had
touched her in many places, and not able to feel any certain (...) of life,
he drew the poison out of his box, and swalowyng down a great quantity of
the same, cried out: O Iulietta, of whom the world was unworthy, what death
is it possible my heart could choose out more agreeable than that which it
suffers hard by thee? What grave more glorious, than to be buried in thy
tomb? What more worthy or excellent Epitaph can be vowed for memory, than
the mutual and pitiful sacrifice of our lives? And thinking to renew his
sorrow, his heart began to frette thorough the violence of the poison, which
by little and little assailed the same, and lookyng about him, espied the body
of the Lord Thibault, lying next unto Iulietta, which as yet was not
altogether putrified, and speaking to the body, as though it had been alive,
said: In what place so ever thou art (O cousyn Thibault) I most heartily do
cry thee mercy for the offense which I have done by depriuyng of thy life:
and if thy ghost (...) wyshe and cry out for vengeance upon me, what
greater or more cruel satisfaction canste thou desire to have, or henceforth
hope for, than to see him which murdered thee, to be empoysoned with his own
hands, and buried by thy side? Then endyng his talk, feling by little and little
that his life began to fail falling prostrate upon his knees, with feeble
voice he softly said: O my Lord God, which to redeem me did (...) from the
bosom of thy father, and tokest humane flesh in the womb of the virgin, I
acknowledge and confess, that this body of mine is nothing else but earth and
dust. Then seized upon with desperate sorrow, he fell down upon the body of
Iulietta with such veheme^ce, as the heart faint and attenuated with too great
torment, not able to bear so hard a violence, was aba^doned of all his sense
and natural powers, in such fort as the siege of his soul failed him at that
instant, and his members stretched forth, remained stiff and cold. Friar
Laurence which knew the certain time of the pouders operation, marvelled that
he had no answer of the letter which he sent to Rhomeo by his fellow Friar
Anselme, departed from S. Frauncis, and with instruments for the purpose,
determined to open the grave to let in air to Iulietta, which was ready to wake:
and approaching yt place, he espied a light within, which made him afraid,
until that Pietro which was hard by, had certified him that Rhomeo was within,
and had not ceased there to lament and complain the space of half an hour.
And then they two were entered the grave, and finding Rhomeo without life, made
such sorrow as they can well conceive which love their dear friend with like
perfection. And as they were making their complaints, Iulietta rising out of
her trance, and beholding light within the tomb, uncertain whether it were a
dream or fantasy that appeared before her eyes, coming again to her self,
knew Friar Laurence, unto whom she said: Father I pray thee in the name of God
(...) perform thy promise, for I am almost dead. And then Friar Laurence
concealing nothing from her, (because he feared to be taken through his too
long abode in that place) faithfully rehearsed unto her, how he had sent Friar
Anselme to Rhomeo at Mantua, from whom as yet he had received no answer.
Notwithstanding he found Rhomeo dead in the grave, whose body he pointed unto,
lying hard by her, praying her since it was so, patiently to bear that sudden
misfortune, and that if it pleased her, he would convey her into some monastery
of women where she might in time moderate her sorrow, and give rest unto her
mind. Iulietta had no sooner cast eye upon the dead corpse of Rhomeo, but
began to break the fountain pipes of gushing tears, which ran forth in such
abundance, as not able to support the furor of her grief, she breathed without
ceasing upon his mouth, and then throwing her self upon his body, and (...) it
very hard, seemed that by force of sighs and sobs, she would have revived, and
brought him again to life, and after she had kissed and rekissed him a million
of times, she cried out: Ah the sweet rest of my cares, and the only port of
all my pleasures and pastymes, had thou (...) sure a heart to choose thy
Churchyard in this place between the arms of thy perfect lover, and to end
the course of thy life for my sake in the flower of thy youth when life to thee
should have been most dear and delectable? how had this tender body power to
resist ye furious co^bat of death, very death it self being here present? How
could thy fe^der and delicate youth willingly permit that thou should
approach into this filthy and infected place, where from henceforth thou shall
be ye pasture of worms unworthy of thee? Alas, alas, by what means shall I now
renew my plaints, which time and long patience ought to have buried and clearly
quenched? Ah I miserable and caitife wretch, thinking to find remedy for my
griefs, I have sharpened the knife that has (...) me this cruel blow, whereof I
receive the cause of mortal wound. Ah happy and fortunate grave which shall
serve in world to come for witness of the most perfect alia^ce that ever was
between two most fortunate lovers, receive now the last sobbing sighs, and
intertainment of the most cruel of all the cruel subjects of ire and death.
And as she thought to continue her complaints, Pietro advertised Friar Laurence
ye he heard a noise bisides the citadel, wherewith being afraid, they (...)
departed, fearing to be taken. And then Iulietta seeing her self alone, and in
full liberty, took again Rhomeo between her arms, kissing him with such
affection, as she seemed to be more attainted with love tha^ death, and drawing
out ye dagger which Rhomeo ware by his side, she pricked her self with many
blows against the heart, saying with feeble and pitiful voice: Ah death ye end
of sorrow, and beginning of felicity, thou art most heartily welcome: fear not
at this time to sharpen thy dart: give no longer delay of life, for fear that
my sprite travail not to find Rhomeos ghost among such number of carrion
corpses. And thou my dear Lord and loyal husband Rhomeo, if there rest in
thee any knowledge, receive her whom thou have so faithfully loved, the only
cause of thy violent death, which frankely offreth up her soul that none but
thou shall joy the love whereof thou have made so lawful conquest. And that our
souls passing from this light, may eternally live together in the place of
everlasting joy: and when she had ended those words she yielded up her ghost.
While these things thus were done, the guard and watch of the City by chance
passed by, and seeing light wtin the grave, suspected straight ye they were
Necroma^cers which had opened ye (...) to abuse the dead bodies for aid of
their art: and desirous to know what it me^t, went down into ye vaut, where
they (...) Rhomeo and Iulietta, with their arms embracing (...) others neck, as
though there had been some toke^ of life. And after they had well viewed them at
leisure, they knew in what case they were. And the^ all amazed they sought for
the thieves which (as they thought) had done the murder, and in the end found
the good father Friar Laurence and Pietro ye servant of dead Rhomeo (which had
hid themselves under a stall) whom they carried to prison, and advertised the
Lord of Escala, and the Magistrates of Verona of that horrible murder, which by
and by was published throughout the City. Then flocked together all the
Citezens, women and children, leaving their houses, to look upon that pitiful
sight, and to the end that in presence of the whole City, ye murder should be
known, the Magistrates ordained that the two dead bodies should be erected
upon a stage to the view and sight of the whole world, in such sort and manner
as they were found within the grave, and that Pietro and Friar Laurence should
publicly be examined, that afterward there might be no murmr or other
pretended cause of ignorance. And this good old Friar being upon the scaffold,
having a white beard all wet and bathed with tears, the judges commanded to
declare unto them who were the authors of that murder, since at untimely hour
he was apprehended with certain irons bisides the grave. Friar Laurence a
round and frank man of talk, nothing moved with that accusation, said unto
them with stout and bold voice: My masters, there is none of you all (if you
have respect unto my forepassed life, and to my aged years, and therewithal
have consideration of this heavy spectacle, whereunto unhappy fortune has
presently brought me) but does greatly marvel of so sudden mutation and
change unlooked for, for so much as these three score and ten or twelve years
since I came into this world, and began to prove the vanities thereof, I was
never suspected, touched, or found gilty of any crime which was able to make me
blush, or hide my face, although (before God) I do confess my self to be the
greatest and most abominable sinner of all the redeemed flock of Christ. So it
is notwithstanding, that since I am pressed and ready to render mine account, and
that death, the grave and worms do daily summo^ this wretched corpse of mine
(...) appear before the justice seat of God, still waighting and (...) to be
carried to my hoped grave, this is the hour I say, as you likewise may think
wherein I am fallen to the greatest damage and prejudice of my life and honest
port, and that which has inge^dred this sinister opinion of me, may
peradventure be these great tears which in abundance trickle down my face, as
though the holy scriptures do not witness, that Jesus Christ moved with humane
pity and compassion, did weep and pour forth tears, and that many times
tears be the faithful messengers of a man's innocence. Or else the most likely
evidence and presumption, is the suspected hour, which (as the magistrate does
say) do make me culpable of the murder, as though all hours were not
indifferently made equal by God their creattor, who in his own person
declares unto us ye there be twelve hours in the day, showing thereby that
there is no exception of hours nor of minutes, but that one may do either
good or ill at all times indifferently, as the party is guided or forsaken by
the sprite of God: touching the yrons which were found about me, needful it
is not now to let you understand for what use Iron was first made, and that of
it self it is not able to increase in man either good or evil, if not by the
mischeuous mind of him which does abuse it. Thus much I have thought good to
tell you, to the intent that neither tears, nor iron, ne yet suspected hour,
are able to make me guilty of the murder, or make me otherwise than I am, but
only the witness of mine own conscience, which alone if I were guilty should
be the accuser, the witness, and the hangman, which (by reason of mine age and
the reputation I have had amongs you, and the little time that I have to live in
this world should more torment me within, than all the mortal pains that
could be devised. But (thanks be to mine eternal God) I feel no worm that
gnaweth, nor any remorse that pricketh me touching that fact, for which I see
you all troubled and amazed. And to set your hearts at rest, and to remove the
doubts which hereafter may torment your consciences, I swear unto you by all
the heavenly parts wherein I hope to be, that forth with I will disclose from
first to last the entire discourse of this pitiful tragedy, which
peradventure shall drive you into no less wondre and amaze, than those two
pore passionate lovers were strong and pacient, to expone themselves to the
mercy of death, for the fervent and indissoluble love between them. Then the
Fatherly Friar began to repeat the beginning of the love between Iuhetta and
Rhomeo, which by certain space of time confirmed, was prosecuted by words at
the first, then by mutual promise of marriage, unknown to the world. And as
within few days after, the two lovers feeling themselves sharpened and incited
with stronger onset, repaired unto him under color of confession, protesting
by oath that they were both married, and that if he would not solempnize that
marriage in the face of the Church, they should be constrained to offend God to
live in disordred lust. In consideration whereof, and specially seeing their
alliance to be good and conformable in dignity, richesse and Nobility on both
sides, hoping by that means perchance to reconcile the Montesches and
Capcllets, and that by doing such an acceptable work to God, he gave them the
Churches blessing in a certain Chapel of the Friars Church, whereof the
night following, they did consummate the marriage fruits in the Palace of the
Capellets. For testimony of which copulation, the woman of Iuliettaes chamber
was able to depose: Adding moreover, the murder of Thibault, which was cousin to
Iulietta: by reason whereof the banishment of Rhomeo did (...), and how in the
absence of the said Rhomeo, the marriage being kept secret between them, a new
Matrimony was entreated with the Count Paris, which misliked by Iulietta, she
fell down prostrate at his feet in a Chapel of S. Frauncis Church, with
full determination to have killed her self with her own hands, if he gave her
not council how she should avoid the marriage agreed between her father and the
Count Paris. For conclusion, he said, that although he was resolved by reason
of his age and nearenesse of death to (...) all secret Sciences, wherein in
his younger years he had delight, notwithstanding, pressed with importunity,
and moved with pity, fearing least Iulietta should do some cruelty against
her self, he stained his conscience, and chose rather with some little fault to
grieve his mind, than to suffer the young Gentlewoman to destroy her body, and
hazard the danger of her soul. And therefore he opened some part of his
ancient cunning, and gave her a certain powder to make her sleep, by means
whereof she was thought to be (...). Then he told them how he had sent Friar
Anselme to carry letters to Rhomeo of their enterprise, whereof hitherto he had
no answer. Then briefly he concluded how he found Rhomeo dead within the
grave, who as it is most likely did impoison himself, or was otherwise
smothered or suffocated with (...) by finding Iulietta in that state, thinking
she had been dead. Then he told them how Iulietta did kill her self with the
dagger of Rhomeo, to bear him company after his death, and how it was
impossible for them to save her for the noise of the watch which forced them
to flee from thence. And for more ample approbation of his saying, he humbly
besought the Lord of (...) and the Magistrates to send to Mantua for Friar
Anselme to know the cause of his (...) return, that the content of the letter
sent to Rhomeo might be seen. To examine the woman of the chamber of Iulietta,
and and Pietro the servant of Rhomeo, who not attending for (...) request,
said unto them: My Lords when Rhomeo entered the grave, he gave me this (...),
written as I suppose with his own hand, who gave me express commandment to
deliver them to his father. The packet opened, they found the whole (...) of
this story, specially the Apothecaries name, which sold him the poison, the
price, and the cause wherefore he used it, and all appeared to be so clear and
evident, as there rested nothing for further verification of the same, but
their presence at the doing of the particulers thereof, for the whole was so well
declared in order, as they were out of doubt that the same was true. And then
the Lord Bartholomew of (...), after he had debated with yt Magistrates of
these events, decreed yt the woman of Iulietta her chamber should be (...),
because she did conceyle that privy marriage from the father of Rhomeo, which
if it had been known in time, had bred to the whole City an universal
benefit. Pietro because he obeyed his masters commandment, and kept close his
lawful secrets, according to the well (...) nature of a trusty (...), was set at
liberty. The Poticarie taken, rackt, and found guilty, was hanged. The good
old man Friar Laurence (as well for respect of his ancient service which he
had done to the common wealth of Veronna, as also for his (...) life (for the
which he was specially reco^mended) was let go in peace, without any note of
infamy. Notwithstanding by reason of his age, he voluntarily gave over the
world, and closed him self in a hermitage, two miles from Veronna, where he
lived. v. or. vj. years, and spente his time in continual prayer, until he
was called out of this transitory world, into the blisfull state of
everlasting joy. And for the compassion of so strange an infortune, the
Montesches and Capellettes poured forth such abundance of tears, as with the
same they did euacuate their ancient grudge and choler, whereby they were then
reconciled. And they which could not be brought to atonement by any
wisdom or humane council, were in the end vanquished and made friends by
pity. And to immortalizate the memory of so intier and perfect amity, the
lord of Veronna ordained, that the two bodies of those miraculous lovers should
be (...) intombed in the grave where they ended their (...), where was erected
a high marble (...), honored with an infinite number of excellent (...), which
(...) this day be apparent, with such noble memory, as amongs all the rare
excellencies, wherewith the City is furnished, there is none more famous than
the monument of Rhomeo and Iulietta.

Two Gentlewomen of Venice.
Two Gentlemen of VENICE were honorably deceived of their wives, whose notable
practices, and secret conference for archieuing their desire, occasioned
diverse accidents, and engendered double benefit: wherein also is recited an
eloquent oration, made by one of them, pronounced before the Duke and state of
that City: with other chances and acts concerning the same.

The. xxvj. Nouel.
HEre have I thought good to summon. y. gentlewomen of Venice to apeare in
place, and to mount on stage among other Italian dames to show cause of
their bold incountrie against the folly of their two husbands, that
uncharitably against order of neighbourhode, went about to assail the
honesty of eythers wife, and weening they had enjoyed others felicity, by the
women's prudence, foresyghte and ware government, were both deceived, and yet
attained the chiefest benefit that marriage state does look for: so that if
search be made among antiquities, it is to be doubted whether greater
chastity, and better policy could be found for (...) of an intended
purpose. Many deeds have been done by women for sauegarde of their husbands
lives, as that of Minyae, a sort of women whose husbands were imprisoned at
Lacedaemon, and for treason condemned who to save their husbands, entered into
prison the night before they should die, and by exchange of apparel, delivered
them, and remained there to suffer for them. Hipsicratea also ye Queen and wife
of (...) king of Pontus, spared not her noble beauty and golden locks to
manure her self in the use of arms to keep her husband company in perils and
dangers: and being overcome by Pompeius, and flying away, never left him
vnacco^panied, ne forsook such travel as he him self sustained. The like also
of Aemilia, Turia, (...), Portia, and other Roman dames. But that such have
prevented their husbands folly, seldom we read, saving of Queen Marie, ye
wife of Don Pietro king of Arragon, who marking the folly of her husband, and
sorry for his disordred life, honest jealousy opening her co^tine^t eyes,
forced her to seek means to remove his wanton acts, or at lestwise by policy
and wise foresight to make him husband and culture his own soil, that for want
of seasonable tillage was barren and void of fruit. Wherefore consulting with
the lord Chamberlain, who of custom brought whom the King liked best, was in
place of his woman, bestowed in his bed, and of her that night begat the young
Prince Giacomo, that afterward proved a valiant and wise King. These passing
good policies of women many times abolish the frantik lecherous fits of
husbands given to superfluous lusts, when first by their chaste behauior and
woma^ly patience they (...) that, which they be loathe to see or hear of, and
then demanding counsel of sobriety and wisdom, excogitate sleightes to
shun folly, and expel discurtesie, by husbands careless use. Such
practyses and devises, these two Gentlewomen whom I now bring forth, disclose
in this discourse ensuing.

In the City of Venice, (which for riches and fair women excels al other
within the region of Italy) in the time that Francesco Foscari, a very wise
Prince, did govern the state, there were two young gentlemen, the one called
Girolamo Bembo, and the other Anselmo Barbadico, between whom as many times
chances amongs other, grew such great hatred and cruel hostility, as each of
them by secret and al possible means devised to do other shame and
displeasure, which kindled to such out rage, as it was thought impossible to be
pacified. It chanced that at one time both of them did marie two noble young
Gentlewomen, excellent and fair, both brought up under one nurse, and loved
each other like two sisters, and as though they had been both born of one body.
The wise of Anselmo, called Isotta, was the daughter of Messer (...) Gradenigo,
a man of great estimation in that city, one of the procuratours of San Marco,
whereof there were not so great number in those days as there be now, because
the wisest men and best approved of life were chosen to that great and noble
dignity, none allotted thereunto by bribe or ambition. The wife of Girolamo
Bembo was called Lucia, yt daughter of Messer Gian Francesco Valerio Caualiere,
a Gentleman very well learned, and many times sent by the State, ambassador
into diverse countries, and after he had been Drator with the Pope, for his
wisdom in the execution of the same was in great estima tion with the whole
city. The two Gentlewomen after they were married, and heard of the hatred
between their husbands, were very sorrowful and pensive, because they thought
the friendshyppe and love between them twain, continued from their tender
years, could not be, but with great difficulty kept, or else altogether
dissolved and broken. Not withstanding being discrete and wise, for avoiding
occasion of their husbands offense, determined to cease their accustomed
conversation and loving familiarity, and not to frequent each others company,
but at places and times convenient. To whom Fortune was so favorable, as not
only their houses were near together but also joining, in the backsides whereof
their gardens also co^fined, separated only with a little hedge, yt every day
they might see one another, and many times talk together: Moreover the
servants and people of either houses were friendly and familiar, which did
greatly content the two loving Ge^tlewomen, because they also in the absence of
their husbands, might at pleasure in their gardens disport themselves. And
continuing this order yt space of. iij. years neither of the^ both were with
child. In which space Anselmo many times vicwing and casting his eyes upon
Madonna Lucia, fell earnestly in love with her, and was not that day well at
ease, wherein he had not beholden her excellent beauty: (...) that was of
sprite and wit subtle, marked the lokes and manner of Anselmo, who neither for
(...), ne other cause did render like lokes on him, but to see to what end his
loving cheer and countenance would (...). Not (...) she seemed rather (...) to
behold him, tha^ elswher to employ her lokes. On the other side the good (...),
the wise order and pleasant beauty of Madonna Isotta was so excellent and
plausible in the sight of master Girolamo, as no lover in the world was better
pleased with his Lady than (...) with her: who not able to live without the
sweet sight of Isotta (yt was a crafty and wily we^ch) was (...) her quickly
perceived. She being right honest and wise, and loving her husband very dearly,
did bear that (...) to Girolamo, that she generally did to any of the (...),
or to other stranger yt she never saw before. But her (...) more and more
inflamed, having lost yt liberty of him self, wounded and pierced with the
amorous arowes of Love, could not convert his mind to any other (...) to
mistress Lucia. These two women wonted to hear service every day ordinarily
at the church of (...), because they lay long a bed in the mornings, and
commonly service in yt church was said somewhat late: their pewes also somewhat
distant one from an other. Whether their y. amorous husbands continually used
to follow the^ (...) off, and to place themselves where either of the^ might
(...) view his beloved: by which custom they seemed to the common people to be
jealous over their wives. But they prosecuted yt matter in such wise, as either
of the^ weout shipping, sought to send other into Cornouale. It came to pass
then, yt these. (...). beloved ge^tlewome^ one knowing nothing of another,
determined to consider better of this love, because ye great good will long time
borne, should not be interrupted, Upon a certain day when their (...) were
abroad, resorting together to talk at their garden hedge according to their
wo^ted manner, they (...) to be (...) and merry: and after loving salutations,
mistress Lucia spoke these words unto her companion. Isotta my dear beloved
sister, I have a tale to tell you of your husband, yt perchanuce will seem
stranger tha^ any news that ever you heard. And I (answered mistress Isotta)
have a story to tell you, yt will make you no less to wonder tha^ I at yt which
you have to say, and it may be will put you into some choler and chafe. What is
that quod yt one and other. In the end either of the^ told what (...) and love
their husbands went about. Whereat although they were in great rage with their
husbands, yet for yt time they laughed out the matter, and thought yt they were
sufficient (as in very deed they were, a thing not to be doubted) and able to
satisfy their husbands hunger and therwithal began to blame them, and to say
yt they deserved to learn to play of the Cornets, if they had no greater fear
of God, and care of honesty tha^ their husbands had. Then after much talk of
this matter, concluded that they should do well to expect what their husbands
would demand. Having taken order as they thought meet, they agreed daily to
epsy what should chance, and purposed first with sweet and pleasant looks
to bait and lure each other feere, to put them in hope there (...) that they
should satisfy their desires, which done for that time they departed. And when
at the Church of Sanfantino or other place in Venice, they (...) to meet their
lovers, they showed unto them cheerful and merry countenance: which the
lovers well noting, were the gladdest men of the world: and seeing that it was
impossible in speech to utter their minds, they purposed by letters to
signify the same. And having found Purciuaunts to go between parties,
(whereof this City was wont to be full) either of them wrote an amorous letter
to his beloved, the content whereof was, that they were very desirous secretly
to talk with them, thereby to express the burning affections that inwardly
they bare them, which without declaration and utterance by mouth in their own
presence, would breed them torments more bitter than death. And within few
days after ((...) great difference of time between,) they wrote their
letters. But Girolamo Bembo having a pregnant wit, who could well endite both
in prose and (...), wrote an excellent song in the praise of his darling in
Italian Meter, and with his letter sent the same unto her, the effect whereof
both follow.

ALiuely face and pearcing beauty bright
Has linkt in love my sely senses all:
A comely port, a goodly shaped wight
Has made me slide that never thought to fall:
Her eyes, her grace, her deeds and manners mild,
So strains my heart, that love has wit begilde.
But not one darte of Cupide did me wound,
A hundred shafts lights all on me at ones:
As though dame kind some new devise had found,
To tear my flesh, and crash a two my bones:
And yet I feel such joy in these my woes
That as I die, my sprite to pleasure goes.
These new found fits, such change in me do breed,
I hate the day, and draw to darkness lo:
Yet by the lamp of beauty do I feed
In dimmest days and darkest nights also,
Thus altring state and changing diet still,
I feel and know the force of Venus will.
The best I find, is that I do confess,
I love you dame, whose beauty does excel:
But yet a toy does bread me some distress,
For that I dread you will not love me well,
That love ye wot shall rest in me alone:
And fleshly breast, shall bear a heart of slone.
O Goddess mine, yet hear my voice of ruthe,
And pity him, that heart presents to thee:
And if thou want a witness for my truth
Let sighs and tears my judge and record be,
Unto the end a day may come in have,
To make me think I spend no time in wast.
For nonght preuailes in love to serve and sue
If full effect join not with words at need,
What is desire or any fancies new
More than the wind? that spreades abroad in (...)
My words and works, shall both in one agree
To pleasure her, whose servant would I be.
The subtle dames receiving those amorous letters and song disdainfully, at
the first (...) to take them at the bringers hands, as they had determined, yet
afterward they showed better countenance. These letters were tossed one from
an other, whereat they made great pastime, and thought that the same would come
to very good success, either of them keeping still their husbands letter, and
agreeing without injury done one to an other trunly to deceive their
husbands. The manner how, you shall perceive anon. They devised to send word
to their lovers, that they were ready at all times to satisfy their suits, if
the same might be secretly done, and safely might make repair unto their
houses, when their husbands were absent, which in any wise they said, must be
done in the night, for fear least in the day time they were discried. Again
these provident and subtle women had taken order with their maids, whom they
made privy to their practice, that through their gardens they should enter
into others house, and be shut in their chambers without light, there to tarry
for their husbands, and by any means not to be seen or known. This order
prescribed and given, Mistress Lucia first did her lover to understand, that
the night ensuing at. iiij. of the clock at the posterne door, which should be
left open, he should come unto her house, where her maid should be ready to
bring him up into the chaumbre, because her husband master Girolamo would
that night imbarke himself to go to Padoua. The like mistress Isotta did to
master Girolamo, appointing him at. v. of the clock which she said was a very
convenient time, because master Anselmo that night would sup and lie with
certain of his friends at Murano, a place besides Venice. Upon these ne was,
the two lovers thought them selves the most valiant and fortunate of the world,
no enterprise now there was but seemed easy for them to bring to pass, yea if
it were to expel the Sarace^s out of (...), or to deprive the great Turk of his
kingdom of Constantinople. Their joy was such, as they could not tell where
they were, thinking every hour a whole day before night came. At length the
time was come so long desired, and the husbands accordingly gave diligent
attendance, and let their wives to understand, (or at lest wise believed they
had) that they could not come home that night for matters of great importance.
The women that were very wise, seeing their ship sail with so prosperous
wind, fained them selves to credit all that they offered. These young men took
either of them his Gondola (or as we term it their barge) to disport
themselves, and having supped abroad, rowed in the Canali, which is yt water
that passes through diverse streets of the city, expecting their appointed
hour. The women ready at. iij. of the clock, repaired into their gardens, and
after they had talked and laughed together a pretty while, went one into an
others house, and were by yt maids brought up to yt cha^bres. There either of
them yt candle being light, began diligently to view yt order and situation of
the place, and by little and little marked the chiefest things they looked for,
committing yt same to memory. Afterward they put out yt candle, and both in
trembling manner expected ye coming of their husbands. And (...) at. iiij. of
yt clock ye maiden of Mado^na Lucia stood at the door to wait for yt coming of
master Anselmo, who win a while after came, and gladly was let in by yt maid,
and by her co^ducted up to ye chamber eue^ to the bed side. The place there was
so dark as hell, and impossible for him to know his wife. The. ij. wives were so
like of bigness and spech, as by dark without great difficulty they could,
be known. When Anselmo had put of his clothes, he was of his wife amorously
entertained, thynking the wife of (...) had received him between her arms, who
above (...). M. times kissed her very swetely, and she for her part sweetly
rendered again to him so many. What followed it were folly to describe. Girolamo
likewise at. v. of the clock appeared, and was by the maid conveyed up to the
chamber, where he lay with his own wife, to their great contentations. Now
these. (...). husbands thinking they had be^ embraced by their beloved ladies,
to seem brave and valiant men of war, made greater proof of their manhod,
than they were wont to do. At what time their wives (as it pleased God to
manifest by their delivery) were begoten with child of. (...). fair (...), and
they ye best contented women of yt world. This practice continued between the^
many times, few wekes passing but in this sort they lay together. Neither of
them for all this, perceived themselves to be deluded, or conceived any
suspision of collusion by reason yt chamber was still without light, and in the
day ye women commonly failed not to be together. The time was not long but
their bellies began to swel, whereat their husbands were exceeding ioiful,
believing verily that one of them had fixed horns upon an others head. Nowbeit
ye pore me^ for all their false belief had bestowed their labor up on their own
soil, watered only with ye course of their propre fou^tain. These. (...). ioly
we^ches seeing the^selfs by this amorous practice to be with child, began to
devise how they might break of the same, doubting lest some slander and ill
talk should rise: and thereby the hatrede and malice between their husbands
increase to greater fury. And as they were about this devise, an occasion
chanced, utterly to dissolve their (...) meetings but not in that sort as they
would have had it. For the women determined as merrily they had begone so iocundly
to end: but Fortune the guide of humane life disposes all enterprises after
her own pleasure, who like a puissant Lady carries with her the success of
each attempt. The beginning she offers freely to him that list, the end she
calls for, as a ransom or tribute payable unto her. In ye same streate, or as
they call it Rio, and Canale, not far from their houses, there dwelled a young
woman very fair and comely, not fully xx. years of age, which then was a
widow, and a little before the wife of M. Niccolo Delphino, and the daughter of
M. Giouanni Moro, called Gismonda. She besides her fathers dowry (which was
more tha^ a thousand (...)) had left her by her husband, a great portion of
money, jewels, plate, and household furnitures. With her fell in love Aloisio
Foscari, the nephew of the Duke, who making great suit to have her to wife,
consumed the time in beholding his Lady, and at length had brought the matter
to so good pass, as one night she was contented at one of the windows of her
house directly over against a little lane to hear him speak. Aloisio
marvelous glad of those desired news (...) appointed night about v. or. vj.
of the clock with a ladder made of roapes (because the window was very high,
went thither alone. Being at the place making a sign concluded upon between
them, attended when the gentle woman should throw down a little cord to draw
up the ladder accordingly as was appointed, which not long after was done.
Gismonda when she had received the end of the ladder, tied it fast to the
iawme of the window, and gave a token to her lover to mount, he by force of
love being very venturous, lively and lustely scaled the window. And when he
was upon the top of the same, desirous to cast himself in, to embrace his
Lady, and she not ready to receive him, or else upon other occasion, he fell
down backward, thinking as he fell to have saved himself twice or thrice by
catching hold upon the ladder, but it would not be. Notwithstanding, as God would
have it, the poise of his body fell not upon the pauement of the streate fully,
but was stayed by some lets in the fall, which had it not been so, no doubt he
had been slain out of hand, but yet his bones were sore bruised, and his head
deeply wounded. The unfortunate Lover seeing himself sore hurt with that
pitiful fall, albeit he thought that he had received his deaths wound, and
impossible to live any longer, yet the love that he bare to the widow, did so
far surmou^t the pain by him sustained and the grief of his body sore crushed
and broken, that so well as he could, he raised himself up, and with his hands
stayed the blood that ran from his head, to the intent it might not raise
some slander upon the widow that he loved so well: and (...) alongs the streat
toward the houses of Girolamo and Anselmo aforsaid. Being come thither with
great difficulty, not able to go any further for very pain and grief, he
fainted and fell down as dead, where the blood issued in such abundance, as
the ground therewith was greatly imbrued and arrayed, and every one that saw him
thought him to be void of life. Mistress Gismonda exceeding sorrowful for this
mischaunce, doubted that he had broken his neck, but when she saw him depart,
she comforted him so well as she could, and drew up the ladder into her chamber.
Such chances happen to earnest lovers, who when they think they have scaled ye
top of their felicity suddenly to^ble down into the pit of shame or reproach,
that better it had been for them leisurely to expect the grace of their Ladies
at convenient place and hour, tha^ hardily without providence to adventure like
desperate soldiers to clim the top of the vamure, without measuring the height
of the walls, or viewing the substance of their ladders, do receive in the end
cruel repulse, and fall down hedlong either by present death or mortal wou^d,
to receive everlasting reproach and shame. But turn we again now to this
disgraced Lover, who lay gasping between life and death. And as he was in this
sorrowful state, one of the captains, a Noble man appointed to see orders
observed in the night, with his band (which they call Zaffi) came thither. And
finding him lying upon the ground, knew that it was Aloisio Foscari, and
causing him to be taken up from the place where he lay, thinking he had been
dead, commanded that he should be conveyed into the Church hard adjoining,
which immediately was done. And when he had well considered the place where he
was found, he doubted that either Girolamo Bembo or Anselmo Barbadico, before
whose doors he thought the murder committed, had killed him, which afterward
he believed to be true, because he heard a certain noise of men's feet at one
of their doors. Wherefore he divided his company, placing some on the one side
of their houses, and some on the other besieging the same so well as he could.
And as fortune would, he found by negligence of the maids, the doors of the. ij.
houses open. It chanced also that night that the two lovers one in others
house were gone to lie with their Ladies, who hearing the hurly burly, and stur
made in the house by ye sergeants suddenly the women lept out of their beds,
and bearing their apparel upon their shoulders, went home to their houses
throughtheir gardens unseen of any, and in fearful wise did atte^d what
should be the end of ye same. Girolamo and Anselmo not knowing what rumor and
noise that was, although they made have in ye dark to cloth themselves, were
by the officers without any field fought, apprehended in each others chamber, and
remained prisoners at their mercy: whereat the captain and his band did greatly
marvel, knowing the hatred between them. But when Torches and lights were
brought, and the two Gentlemen carried out of doors, the wonder was the greater
for that they perceived them almost naked, and prisoners taken in each others
house. And besides this admiration, such murmur and slander was raised, as the
quality of every vulgar head could secretly devise or imagine, but specially
of the innocent women, who how faultlesse they were, every man by what is said
before may conceive, and yet the cancred stomakes of that troop conceived such
malice against them, as they (...) and brawled against them like curres at
strange Dogs whom they never saw before. The Gentlemen immediately were
carried to prison, ignorant upon what occasion. Afterward understanding that
they were committed for the murder of Aloisio Foscari, and imprisoned like
thieves, albeit they knew themselves guiltless of murder or Theft, yet their
grief and serowe was very great, being certain that all Venice should
understand how they between whom had been mortal hatred, were now become
copartners of that which none but the true professors ought to (...). And
although they could not abide to speak together, like those that deadly did
hate one another, yet both their minds were fixed upon one thought. In ye end,
co^ceiuing fury and despite against their wives, the place being so dark yt no
light or sun could pierce into the same, whereby without shame or disdain
one of them began to speak to another, and with terrible oaths they gave their
faith to disclose ye trothe in what sort either of them was taken in others
chamber, and fra^kly told the way and mean how each of them enjoyed his
pleasure of others wife: whereupon the whole matter (according to their
knowledge) was altogether by little and little manifest and known. Then they
accounted their wives to be the most arrant stru^pets wtin the whole City, by
dispraising of whom their old ra^cor began to be forgotten, and they agreed
together like two friends, who thought yt for shame they should never be able to
look me^ in the face, ne yet to show themselves openly within the City, for
sorrow whereof they deemed death the greatest good turn and benefit yt could
chance unto them of any thing in yt world. To be short, seeing no means or
occasion to comfort and relieve their pensive and heavy states, they fell into
extreme despair, who ashamed to live any longer, devised way to rid
themselves of life, concluding to make themselves guilty of the murder of
Aloiso Foscari. And after much talk vttred between them of that cruel
determination, still approving the same to be their best refuge, they expected
nothing else, but when they should be examined before the Magistrates.

Foscari as is before declared was laid into yt Church for dead, and yt Priest
straightly charged with the keeping of the same, who caused him to be conveyed into
ye mids of the church, setting. (...). torches a light, yt one at his head, and
the other at his feet, and when the company was gone, he determined to go to
bed the remnant of the night to take his rest. But before he went, seeing yt
the Torches were but short, and could not last past. ij. or. iij. hours, he
lighted two other, and set them in the others place, for that it should seem
to his friends, if any chanced to come, what care and worship he bestowed upon
him. The priest ready to depart, perceived the body somewhat to move, with
that looking upon his face, espied his eyes a little to begin to open.
Wherewithal somewhat afraid, he crying out, ran away: Notwithstanding his
courage began to come to him again, and laying his hand upon his breast,
perceived his heart to beat, and then was out of doubt that he was not dead,
although by reason of loss of his blood, he thought little life to remain in
him. Wherefore he with one of his fellow priests which was a bed, and the clerk
of the parish, carried master Foscari so tenderly as they could into the
priests chamber, which adioined next the church. Then he sent for a surgeon
that dwelt hard by, and required him diligently to search the wound, who so
well as he could, purged the same from the corrupt blood, and perceiving it
not to be mortal, so dressed it with oiles and other precious ointments, as
Aloisio came again to himself. And when he had anointed that recovered body
with certain precious and comfortable oils, he suffered him to take his rest.
The priest also went to bed and slepte till it was day, who so soon as he
was up, went to seek the Captain to tell him of the good news that master
Aloisio Foscari was recovered again, who by the (...) Captain was committed
to him in charge. The Captain at that time was gone to the palace at San
Marco, to give the Duke advertisement of this chance, after whom the priest
went, and was let in to the dukes chamber, to whom he declared what he had done
to master Aloisio. The Duke very glad to hear tell of his nephews life,
although then very pensive for the news brought unto him by the Captain,
entreated one of the Signor de notte, to take with him two of the best
surgions, and to call him that had already dressed his nephew, to go visit
the wounded Gentleman, that he might be certified of the truth of that chance.
All which together repaired to the priests chamber, where finding him not a
sleep, and the wound fair enough to heal, did thereunto what their cunning
thought meet and convenient. And then they began to inquire of him, that was
not yet full recovered to perfect speech, how that chance happended,
tellyng him that he might frankly confess unto them the truth. The more
diligent they were in this demauude, because the Surgeon that dressed him
first, alleged, that the wound was not made with sword, but received by some
great fall or blow with mace or clubbe, or rather seemed to come of some high
fall from a wyndowe, by reason his head was so grievously bruised. Aloisio
hearing the Surgeons sudden demand, presentely answered, that he fell down
from a window, and named also the house. And he had no sooner spoken those
words, but he was very angry with him self and sorry: And therewithal his
dismayde spirits began to revive in such wise, as suddenly he chose rather to
die than to speak any thing to the dishonor of mistress Gismonda. Then the
Signior di notte, asked him what he did there about that time of the night,
and wherefore he did climb up to the window, being of so great a height:
which he could not keep secret, by reason of the authority of the Magistrate
that demanded the question, (...) he thought that if his tongue (...) run
at large, and committed a (...) by rash speaking, his body should therefore
suffer the smart. Wherefore before he would in any wise spot the name of (...),
whom he loved better than his own life, determined to hazard his life and
honor, to the mercy of Justice, and said: I declared even now, which I can
not deny, that I fell down from the window of mistress Gisinonda Mora. The
cause thereof (being now at state, wherein I know not whether I shall live or
die) I will truly disclose. Mistress Gismonda being a widow, and a young woman,
without any man in her house, because by report she is very rych of jewels
and money, I purposed to rob and dispoyle. Wherefore I devised a ladder to
climb up to her wyndowe, with mind full bent to kill all those that should
resist me. But my (...) was such, as the ladder being not well fastened fell,
and I my self therwithall, and thinking to recover home to my lodgyng with my
ladder made of cord, my (...) began to fail, and fell down I wotte not
where. The Signor de notte, whose name was Domenico Mariperto, hearing him say
so, marvelled greatly, and was very sorry, that all they in the chamber, which
were a great number, as (at such chances commonly be) did hear those words:
and because they were spoken so openly, he was forced to say unto him: Aloisio
I am very sorry that thou have committed such folly, but for so much as
sorrow now will not serve to remedy the trespass, I must needs she we myself
both faithful to my country, and also careful of mine honor, without respect
of persons. Wherefore thou shall remain here in such safe custody as I shall
apoint, and when thou art better amended thou must according (...) desert be
referred to yt jail. Leaving him then there under sure keeping, he went to the
counsel of the Dieci, (which magistrates in that city be of (...) authority)
and finding the lords in counsel, he opened the whole matter unto them. The
presidents of the Counsel which had heard a great number of complaints of
many thefts done in the night within the City, took order that one of the
captains that were appointed to the diligent watch and keeping of Aloisio,
remaining in the priests house, should cause him to be examined, and with
torments forced to tell the truth, for that they did verily believe that he
had committed many robberies besides, or at lest wise was priuieand accessarie
to the same, and knew where the thieves were become. Afterward the said
Counsel did sit upon the matter of Girolamo Bembo and Anselmo Barbadico,
found at midnight naked in each others chamber, and committed to prison as is
before remembered. And because they (...) many matters besides of greater
importance, to entreat upon, amongs which the wars between them and
Philippo Maria Vesconte, duke of Milane, the aforsaid causes were deferred till
an other time, notwithstanding in the mean while they were examined. The Duke
himself that time being in counsel, spoke most severely against his nephew.
Nevertheless he did hardly believe that his nephew being very rich, and
indewed with great honesty, would abase him self to a vice so vile and
abominable as theft is, whereupon he began to consider of many things, and in
the end talked with his nephewe secretly alone, and by that means learned the
troth of the whole matter. In like manner Anselmo and Girolamo were examined by
commissioners appointed by the state, what one of them did in an others
chamber, at that hour of the night, who confessed that many times they had
seen Aloisio Foscari, to pass up and down before their houses at times
inconvenient, and that night by chance one of them not knowing of another,
espied Aloisio, thinking yt he lingered about their houses, to abuse one of
their wives, for which cause they went out, and so soon as they (...) taken
him, they killed him. Which confession they openly declared accordingly, as
whereupon before they were agreed. Afterward with further circumstance being
examined upon the Article of being one in another (...), it appeared yt their
first tale was utterly untrue. Of al which contradictions the Duke was
advertised, and was driven into extreme admiration, for that the truth of
those disorders could not be understood and known. Whereupon the Dieci, and
the assistants were again assembled in counsel according to the manner, at
what time after all things thoroughly were debated and ended, the Duke being a
very grave man, of excellent wit, advanced to the Dukedom by the consent of
the whole state, as every of the^ were about to rise up, said unto them: My
Lords there rests one thing yet to be moved, which peradventure hitherto
has not been thought upon. There are before us two complaints, the effect
whereof in my judgment is not thoroughly conceived in the opinions of diverse.
Anselmo Barbadico and Girolamo Bembo, between whom there has been ever
continual hatred, left unto them as a man may say even by fathers enheritance,
both of the^ in either of their chambers, were apprehended in a manner naked by
our Sergeants, and without torments, or for fear to be racked upon the only
interrogatories of our ministers, they have voluntarily confessed that before
their houses they killed Aloisio our Nephew. And albeit that our said Nephew
yet lives, and was not stricken by them or any other as should apeare, yet they
(...) themselves guilty of the murder. What shall be said the^ to the matter,
does it not seem doubtful? Our Nephew again has declared, that in going
about to rob the house of Mistress Gismonda Mora, whom he meant to have
slain, he fell down to the ground from the top of a window, wherefore by
reason so many robberies have been discovered within the City, it may be
presumed that he was the (...) and malefactor, who ought to be put to the
torments, that the truth may be known, and being found guilty, to feel the
severe punishment that he has deserved. Moreover when he was found lying upon
the ground, he had neither ladder nor weapon, whereupon may be thought that the
fact was otherwise done, than hitherto is confessed. And because amongs moral
virtues, tempera^ce is the chiefest and worthy of greatest commendation, and
that justice not righteously exercised, is injustice and wrong, it is meet and
convenient for us in these strange accidents, rather to use tempera^ce than the
rigor of justice. And that it may appear that I do not speak these words
without good ground, mark what I shall say unto you. These two most mortal
enemies do confess that which is impossible to be true, for that our Nephew
(as is before declared) is a live, and his wound was not made by sword, as
he himself has confessed. Now who can tell or say the contrary, but that
shame for being taken in their several Chambers, and the dishonesty of both
their wives, has caused them to despise life, and to desire death? We shall
find if the matter be diligently inquired and searched, that it will fall out
otherwise than is already supposed by common opinion. For the contrariety of
examinations, vnlikelihoode of circumstances, and the impossibility of the
cause, renders the matter doubtful. Wherefore it is very needful diligently to
examine these attempts, and thereof to use more advised consideration. On the
other side, our Nephew accuses himself to be a (...), and which is more, that
he meant to kill mistress Mora when he brake into her house. Under this grass
my Lords as I suppose, some other Serpent lies hidden, that is not yet thought
of. The Gentleman ye know before this time was never defamed of such outrage,
ne suspected of the least offe^se that may be objected. Besides that, all ye
do know, (thanks therefore be given to almighty God) that he is a man of
great richesse and possessions, and has no need to rob. For what necessity
should drive him to rob a widow, that has of his own liberally to bestow
upon the succor of widows? Were there none else of substance in the City for
him to give attempt, but to a widow a comfortless creature, contented with
quiet life to live amongs her family within the bounds of her own house? What
if her richesse, Jewels and plate be great, has not Aloisio of his own to
redouble the same? But truly this Robbery was done after some other manner
than he has confesfessed. To us then my Lords it appertains, if it so stand
with your pleasures, to make further inquiry of the same, promising unto you
upon our Faith, that we shall employ our whole diligence in the true
examination of this matter, and hope to bring the same to such good end, as
none shall have cause to blame us, the final sentence whereof shall be
reserved to your judgment. This grave request and wise talk of the Duke
pleased greatly the Lords of the Council, who referred not only the
examination, but also the final sentence unto him.

Whereupon the wise Prince being fully informed of yt chance happened to his
Nephewe, attended only to make search, if he could understand the occasion why
Bembo and Barbadico so folishly had accused themselves of that which they never
did. And so after much counsel and sundry devises examined and made, his
nephew then was well recovered, and able to go abroad, being set at liberty.
After sundry examinations I say, he also had learned the trothe of the case
touching the other two prisoners which he communicated to the Lords of the
aforesaid council called Dieci. Then he caused with great discretion,
proclamation to be made throughout Venice, that Anselmo and Girolamo should be
beheaded between the two Pillars, and Aloisio hanged, whereby he thought to know
what suit the women would make, either with or against their husbands, and what
evidence mistress Gisinonda would give against Aloisio. The brute hereof
dispersed through Venice, diverse talk thereupon was raised, and no
communication of any thing else in open streats and private houses, but of the
putting to death of those men And because all three were of honorable houses,
their kinsme^ and friends made suit by all possible means for their pardon.
But their confessions published, yt rumor was made worse, (as it daily
chau^ceth in like cases) than the matter was in deed, and the same was noised
how Foscari had confessed so many theftes done by him at diverse times, as none
of his friends or kin durst speak for him. Mistress Gismonda which bitterly
lamented ye mischaunce of her lover, after she understood the confession he
had made, and evidently knew that because he would not blemish her honor, he
had rather willingly forgo his own, and therwithall his life, felt her self so
inflamed with fervent love toward him, as she was ready presently to surre^der
her ghost. Wherefore (...) sent him word yt he should comfort himself, because
she was determined to manifest the very troth of the matter, and hoped upon
her declaration of true evidence, sentence should be revoked, for testimony
whereof, she had his loving letters yet to (...), written to her with his own
hands, and would bring forth in the judgment place, the corded ladder, which
she had kept still in her chamber, Aloisio hearing these loving news, and of
the evidence which his Lady would give for his defense, was the gladdest man
of the world, and caused infinite thanks to be rendered unto her, with promise
that if he might be rid and discharged out of prison, he would take her for
his loving spouse and wife. Whereof the Gentlewoman conceived singular
contentation, loving her dear friend with more entier affection than her own
soul. Mistress Lucia and mistress Isotta, hearing the dispercled voice of
the death of their husbands, and understanding the case of mistress Gismonda
by an other woman, laid their heads together likewise to devise means for
saving their husbands lives: and entering into their barge or Gondola, went to
seek mistress Gismonda, and when they had debated upon the truth of these
chances, concluded with one assente to provide for the sauegarde and delivery
of their husbands, wherein they showed them self both wise and honest. For what
state is more honorable and of greater comfort than the married life, if in
deed they that have yoaked themselves therein be conformable to those delights,
and co^tentation which the same conduces? Wealth and riches makes the true
united couple to rejoice in the (...) of Fortune, granted by the sender of the
same, either of them providing for disposing thereof, against the decrepite
time of old age, and for the bestowing of the same upon the fruit accriued of
their bodies. Poverty in any wise does not offend them, both of them glad to
labor and travail like one body, to sustain their pore and needy life, either
of them comfortably does minister comfort in the cruel time of adversity,
reudring humble thanks to God for his sharp rod and punishment enflicted upon
the^ for their manifold sins committed against his majesty, travailing by
night and day by sweating brows to get brown bread, and drink full thin to
cease the cries and pitiful crauings of their tender babes, wrapped in cradle
and instant on their mother to fill their hungry mouths. Adverse fortune
makes not one to forsake the other. The loving (...) cease not by painful
suit to trot and go by night and day in heat and calde to relieve the misery of
her husband. He likewise spares not his pain to get and gain the living of
them both. He abroad and at home according to his called state, she at home to
save the lucre of that labor, and to do such necessary travail incident to the
married kind. He careful for to get, she heedefull for to save. He by (...)
and Art, she by diligence and household toil. O the happy state of married
folk: O surpassing delites of marriage bed: which makes these. (...). pore
gentlewomen, that by honorable policy saved the honor of themselves and
honestly of their husbands, to make humble suit for their preservation, who
were like to be berieued of their greatest comforts.

But come we again to declare the last act of this Tragedy. These married
women, after this chance befell, upon their husbands imprisonment, began to be
abhorred of their friends and parents, for that they were suspected to be
dishonest, by reason whereof dolefully lamenting their misfortune, not
withstanding, their own conscience void of fault, did bid the^ to be of good
cheer and comfort. And when the day of execution came they did their friends
and parents to understand that their conceived opinion was untrue, and prayed
them to forbear their disdain and malice, till the truth should be thoroughly
manifested, assuring the^ that in ye end their own innocence and the
guiltless crime of their husbands should openly be revealed to the world. In
the mean time they made request unto their friends, that one of the Lords
called Auogadori might be admitted to understand their case, the rest to be
referred to themselves, wherein they had no need either of Proctor or
Advocate. This request seemed very strange to their friends, deeming their
case to be shameful and abominable. Nevertheless diligently they accomplished
their request, and understanding that the Council of the Dieci had committed
the matter wholly to the Duke, they inade a supplication unto him in yt name of
yt. iij. Gentlewomen, wherein they craved nothing else but their matter might be
herd. The Duke (...) his advise like to take effect, assigned a day when yt
same should be heard, commanding them at yt time before him and the Lords of
the Council and all the college of the state to appear. The day being come,
all yt Lords assembled, desirous to see to what issue this matter would grow.
On the morning the three Gentlewomen honestly accompanied with other Dames, went
to the palace, and going along the street of San Marco, diverse people (...) to
utter many railing words against the^. Some cried out (as we see by unstable
order the vulgar people in like cases use to do) and doing a certain courtesy
by way of disdain and mockery: Behold yt honest women, yt without sending
their husbands out of Venice, have placed the^ in ye castle of Cornetto, and
yet the arrant whores be not ashamed to show them selves abroad, as though
they had done a thing that were honest and praise worthy. Other shot forth
their boltes, and with their proverbs proceeding from their malicious mouths,
thwited the poor women at their pleasure. Other also seeing mistress Gismonda
in their company, thought that she went to declame against master Aloisio
Foscari, and none of them all happened on the troth. Arrived at the palace,
ascending the marble stairs or steps of the same, they were brought into the
great hall, where the Duke appointed the matter to be heard. Thither repaired
the friends and those of nerest kin to the three Gentlewomen; and before the
matter did begin, the duke caused also the three prisoners to be brought
thither. Thither also came many other Gentlemen, with great desire to see the
end of those events. Silence being made, the duke turning his face to ye women,
said unto them: Ye Gentlewomen have made request by supplication to grant you
public audience according to justice, for that you do allege that law and
order does so require, and that every well ordered common wealth (...) deumeth no
subject without due answer by order of law. Behold therefore, that we
desirous to do justice, be ready in place to hear what ye can say. The two
husbands were very angry and wrathful against their wives, and the more their
stomachs did (...) with choler and disdain to see their impudent and
shameless wives with (...) audacitie to appear before the majesty of a
counsel so honorable and dreadful, as though they had been the most honest and
(...) women of the world. The. (...). honest wives perceived the anger and
displesure of their husbands, and for all that were not afraid ne yet
dismayde, but smiling to the^ selves and somewhat moving their heads in decent
wise, seemed unto them as though they had mocked them. Anselmo more angry and
impacient than Girolamo, brake out into such fury, as had it not ben for the
majesty of the place, and the company of people to have stayed him, would
have killed them: and seeing he was not able to hurt them, he began to utter the
vilest words, that he possibly could devise against them. Mistress Isotta
hearing her husband so spitefully to spit forth his poison in the presence of
that honorable assembly, conceived courage, and craving license of the Duke
to speak, with merry countenance and good vttrance began thus to say her mind:

Most excellent Prince, and ye right honorable lords, perceiving how my dear
husband uncomely and very dishonestly does use himself against me in this
noble company, I do think master Girolamo Bembo to be affected with like
rage and mind against this gentlewoman mistress Lucie his wife, although more
te^perate in words, he do not express the same. Against whom if no reply be
made, it may seem that he has spoken the truth, and that we by silence
should seem to condemn our selves to be those most wicked women whom he
alleges us to be. Wherefore by your gracious pardon and license (most
honorable) in the behalf of mistress Lucie and my self, for our defense I
purpose to declare the effect of my mind although my purpose be clean altered
from that I had thought to say, being now justly provoked by the unkind
behavior of him, whom I do love better than my self, which had he been
silent and not so rashly run to the overthrow of me and my good name, I would
have conceiled and only touched that, which should have concerned the
purgation and sauegard of them both, which was the only intent and meaning of
us, by making our, humble supplication to your majesty's. Nevertheless, so so
far as my feeble force shall stretch, I will assay to do both the one and the
other, although it be not appropriate to our kind in public place to declame,
or yet to open such bold attempts, but that necessity of matter and
opportunity of time and place, does bolden us to enter into these terms,
whereof we crave a thousand pardons for our unkindly dealings, and render
double thanks to your honors, for admitting us to speak. Be it known therefore
unto you, yt our husbands against duty of love, laws of marriage, and
against all reason, do make their heavy complaints, which by and by I will make
plain and evident. I am right well assured, that their extreme rage and bitter
hearts sorrow do proceed of. y. occasions: The one, of ye murder whereof they
have falsely accused the^ selves: ye other of iealosy, which grievously does
gnawe their hearts, thinking us to be vile and abominable women, because they
were surprised in each others chamber. Concerning the murder, if they have
soiled their hands therein, it appertains unto you my lords to render their
desert. But how can ye same be laid to our charge, for so much as they (if it
were done by the^) co^mited ye same without our knowledge, our help and counsel?
And truly I see no cause why any of us ought to be burdened with yt outrage,
and much less cause have they to lay the same to our charge. For meet it is
yt he that does any unlawful act, or is accessarie to the same, should suffer yt
due penalty and severe chastisement accordingly as the sacred laws do
prescribe, as an example for other to abstein from wicked facts. But hereof what
need I to dispute, wherein the blind may see to be none offense, because
(thanks be to God) Master Aloisio lives, which declares the fond confession
of our vngitle husbands, to be contrary to troth? And if so be our husbands in
deed had done such an abominable enterprise, reason and duty had moved us to
sorrow and lament them, because they be borne of noble blood, and be gentlemen
of this noble city, which like a pure virgin inuiolably does co^serue her laws
and customs. Great cause I say, had we to lament them, if like homicides and
murderers they had spotted their noble blood with such foul (...), thereby
deserving death, to leave us young women widows in woeful plight. Now it
behooves me to speak of the iealoufis they have conceived of us, for that
they were in each others chamber, which truly is the doubtful knot and scruple
that forces al their disdain and grief. This I know well is the nail that
pierces their heart: other cause of offense they have not: who like men not
well advised, without examination of us and our demeanor, be fallen into
despair, and like men desperate, (...) wrongfully accused themselves. But
because I may not consume words in vain, to stay you by my long discourse from
matters of greater importance, I humbly beseech you (right excellent prince) to
command them to tell what thing it is, which so bitterly does torment them.
Then the Duke caused one of the noble men assistant there, to demand of them
the question: who answered, yt the chiefest occasion was, because they knew
their wives to be harlots, who^ they supposed to be very honest: and for so much
as they knew them to be such, they conceived sorrow and grief, which with such
extremity did gripe the^ at yt heart, as not able to sustain yt great infamy,
ashamed to be seen of me^ were induced through desire of death to confess yt
they never did. Mistress Isotta hering the^ say so, began to speak again,
turning her self unto them: Were you offended then at a thing which ye thought
inco^uenie^t and not mete to be done? We then have greatest cause to complain.
Why then (...) husband went you to the chamber of mistress Lucie at that time
of the night? What had you to do there? what thing thought you to find there
more than was in your own house? And you master Girolamo, what constrained you
to forsake your wives bed to come to my husbands, where no man ever had, or at
this present has to do but him self? were not yt shetes of the one so white,
so fine, neat and sweet as the other? I am (most noble Prince) sorry to
declare my husbands folly, and ashamed that he should forsake my bed to go to
an other, that did account my self so well worthy to entertain him in mine
own, as the best wife in Venice, and now through his abuse, I abstain to
show my self amongs the beautiful and noble dames of this City. The like
misliking of her self is in mistress Lucie, who (as you see) may be numbered
amongs the fairest, Either of you ought to have been contented with your wives,
and not (as wickedly you have done) to forsake them, to seek for better bread
than is made of wheat, or for purer gold than whereof the Angel is made: O
worthy deed of yours, that have the face to leave your own wives, that be
comely fair and honest, to seek after strange carrion. O beastly order of men
that can not content their lust within the bounds of their own house, but
must go hunt after other women as beasts do after the next of their kind that
they chance upon. What vile affection possessed your hearts to lust after
others wife? You make complainte of us, but we with you have right good cause
to be offended, you ought to be grieved with your own disorder, and not with
others offense, and this your affliction patiently to bear, because you went
about to beguile one an others love, like them that be weary and glutted with
their own fare, seeking after other dainties more delicate if they were to be
found.

But praised be God and our provident discretion, if any hurt or shame has
chanced, the same does light on you. Moreover I know no cause why men should
have more liberty to do evil than we women have: albeit through the
weakness and cowardice of our sex, ye men will do what ye lift. But ye be
now no Lords, nor we servant, and husbands we do you call, because the holy
laws of Matrimony (which was the first Sacrament given by God to men after the
creation of the world) do require equal faith, and so well is the husband
bound to the wife as she unto him. Go to then and make your complaint: the
next Ass or beast ye meet, take her to be your wife. Why do ye not know that
the balance of Justice is equal, and wayeth down no more of one side than of
other? But let us now leave of to reason of this matter, and come to yt for
which we be come hither. Two things (most righteous Prince) have moved us to
come before your majesty, and all this honorable assembly, which had they not
been, we would have been ashamed to show our faces, and less presumed to speak
or once to open our lips in this Noble audience, which is a place only meet
for them yt be most expert and eloquent orators, and not for us, to whom the
needle and distaffe be more requisite. The first cause that forced us to come
forth of our own house, was to let you understand yt our husbands be no
murderers, as is supposed, neither of this Gentleman present master Aloisio, ne
yet of any man else: and thereof we have sufficient and worthy testimony. But
herein we need not to travail much, or to use many words: for neither
master Aloisio is slain, ne any other murdered, yt is known or manifest
hitherto. One thing rests, which is that Madonna Lucia and I do humbly
beseech your excellent Majesty, that your grace and the authority of the
right honorable Lords here present, (...) vouchsafe to reconcile us to our
husbands, that we may obtain pardon and favor at their hands, because (...)
have so manifestly made their acts to appear, and for that we be the offense,
and they the offenders, and yet by their own occasions, we have committed the
error (if it may be so termed.) And now to come to the conclusion, I do
remember (...) I was a child, that I have heard the Gentlewoman my mother say
(whose soul God pardon) many times unto me, and other my sisters, and to
mistress Lucia, that was brought up with us, being by her instructed in diverse
good and virtuous lessons, that all the honor a woman can do unto her husband,
whereby she beautifieth him and his whole race and family, consists in her
honest, chaste, and virtuous life, without which, she ought rather to die than
live. And that a Gentleman's wife when she has given her body to the use of an
other man, is the common mark for every man to point at in the streate where
she goth, her husband thereby incurring reproach and shame which no doubt is the
greatest iniuric and scorn that an honest Gentleman can receive, and the most
shameful reproach that can blemish his house. Which lesson we so well
remembering, desirous not to suffer the careless and unbridled appetites of
our (...) to (...) vnrained, and run at large to some dishonest end, by a
faithful and commendable policy, did provide for the mischief that might
ensue. I need not here rehearse the enimitie and debate that many years did
reign between our husbands fathers, because it is known and manifest unto
the whole City. We two therefore here present, the wives of those noble Gentle
men, brought up together from our Cradle, perceiving the malice between our
husbands, made a virtue of necessity, deemyng it better for us to lose our
sweet and anncient conversation, than to minister occasion of disquietnesse.
But the nerenesse of our houses would not that natural hatred should defrande
and take away (...) ingrafted amity. Wherefore many times when our husbands
were gone forth, we met together, and talked in our gardens, between which
there is but a thin hedge beset with primme and roses, which commodity in
their abse^ce we did discretely use. And as sometimes for pleasure we walked
with our husbands there, ye (she turning unto them) did cast your eyes upon
each others wife, and were straighte way in love, or else perchance you fained
your selves to be, which espied by us, many times between our selves did common
of the same, and red your amorous letters and song sent unto us. For which
dissoyaltie and treson toward us your wives, we sought no dishonor to your
persons, we were content to suffer you to be abused with your fond love, we
blabbed it not abroad to our gossips, as many leude and fantastical women be
wont to do, thereby to raise slander to our husbands, and to stir up ill
report upon them, whose infirmities it becomes us to conceile and hide. We
devised means by some other way to let you understand your fault, and did
cast upon you many times right loving looks. Which although it were against
our own desire, yet the cause and full conclusion of the same, was to practice,
if it were possible, to make you friends. But considering that this love and
allurementes of either parts, could not tend to other end, as we coniectured,
but to increse displeasure, and to put the swords into your hands, we therefore
consulted between our selves, and uniformly in one mind did agree for (...)
(...) and satisfaction of all parts, at such nights as ye fained to go into
diverse places about earnest affairs as ye alleged, Mistress Lucie with the
help of Cassandra my maid, through the Gardeine came into my chamber, and I by
means of Jane her maid by like way repaired unto hirs. And yt poor me^
guided by our maids were brought unto your chambers where ye lay with your own
wives, and so by tilthe of others land in strange soil (as ye believed) ye lost
no labor. And because your embraceme^ts then, were like to those achieved by
amorous Gentlemen, using us with more earnest desire than you were wo^t to do,
both we were begotten with child: which ought to be very gladsome and grateful
unto you, if ye were so feign to have children as ye showed your selves to be.
If then none other offense does grieve you, if remorse of conscience for other
cause does not offend you, if none other sorrow does displease you: Give over
your grief. Remit your displeasure. Be glad and joyful. Thank us for our
policy, and pleasant disport yt we made you. If hitherto ye have been enemies,
he^ceforth be friends, put of that ancient malice so long continued, mitigate
your hateful mood, and live ye from henceforthe like friendly Gentlemen,
yield up your rancor into the lap of your Country, yt she may put him in exile
for ever, who like a pitiful and loving mother would gladly see all her
children of one accord and mind. Which if ye do, ye shall do singular
pleasure to your friends, ye shall do great disco^fort to your foes, ye shall do
singular good to the common wealth, ye shall do greatest benefit to your selves,
ye shall make us humble wives, ye shall increase your posterity, ye shall be
praised of all men, (...) finally shall depart the best contented men yt ever
the world brought forth. And now because ye shall not think that we have piked
out this tale at our fingers ends, thereby to seek your sauegard and our fame
and praise, behold the letters which you sent us, behold your own hands
subscribed to the same, behold your seals assigned thereunto, which shall
render true testimony of that which unfeignedly we have affirmed. Then both
delivered their letters, which viewed and seen, were well known to be their own
husbands hands, and the same so well approved her tale, as their husbands were
the gladdest men of the world, and the Duke and seignorie maruelously satisfied
and contented. In so much as the whole asse^bly with one voice, cried out for
their husbands deliverance. And so with the consent of the Duke and the whole
seignorie they were clearly discharged. The parents, cosins and friends of the
husbands and wives were wonderfully amazed to here this long history, and
greatly praised the manner of their delivery, accompting the women to be very
wise, and mistress Isotta to be an eloquent gentlewoman, for that she had so
well defended the cause of their husbands and of themselves. Anselmo and
Girolamo openly in the presence of all the people embraced and kissed their
wives with great (...). And then the husbands shaked one an other by the
hands; between whom began a brotherly accord, and from that time forth lived
in perfect amity and friendship, exchaunging the wanton love that either of
the^ bare to others wife into brotherly friendship, to the great co^tentation
of the whole City. When the multitude assembled to hear this matter thoroughly
was satisfied, the Duke with cheereful countenance loking toward Gismonda,
said thus unto her: And you fair Gentlewoman, what have you to say? Be bold
to utter your mind, and we will gladly hear you. Mistress Gismonda bashful
to speak, began wonderfully to blush, into whose chekes entered an orient rud,
intermixed with an Alablaster white, which made her countenance more (...)
tha^ it was wont to be. After she had stood still a while (...) her eyes
declined toward the ground, in comely wise lifting the^ up again with shamfast
audacitie she began to say: If I most noble prince, in open audience should
attempt to speak of love, whereof I never had experience, or knew what thing it
was, I should be doubtful what to say thereof, and peradventure durst not open
mouth. But hering my father (of worthy memory) many times to tell yt your
majesty in ye time of your youth disdained not to open your heart to receive ye
amorous flames of love, and being assured yt there is none but that does love
little or much, I do not doubt but for the words which I shall speak, to obtain
both pity and pardon. To come then to ye matter: God I thank him of his
goodness, has not permitted me to be one of yt sort of women, yt like
hipocrites do mumble their Pater nosters to saints, appering outwardly to be
devout and holy and in fruit do bring forth devils, and all kinds of vices,
specially ingratitude, which is a vice that does suck and dry up the
fou^tain of godly piety. Life is dear to me (as naturally it is to all) next
which I esteem mine honor, that peradventure is to be preferred before life,
because without honor life is of no reputation. And where man and woman do live
in shame notorious to the world, ye same may be termed a living death rather
tha^ a life. But ye love yt I bear to mine only beloved master Aloisio here
present, I do esteem above al yt jewels and treasures of the world, whose
personage I do regard more tha^ mine own life. The reason yt moves me there to
is very great, for before yt I loved him, or ever me^t to fire my mind yt way,
he derely regarded me, continually devising which way he might win and obtain
my love, sparing no travel by night and day to seek ye same. For which tender
affection should I show my self unkind and froward? God forbid. And to be plain
with your honors, he is more dear and acceptable unto me, than yt balls of
mine own eyes, being the derest things that appertain to yt furniture of the
body of man, without which no earthly thing can be gladsom and joyful to ye
sense and feeling. Last of all, his amorous and affectionate demonstration of
his love toward me, by declaring him self to be careful of mine honor, rather
more willing to bestow his own, than to suffer the same to be touched with the
left suspicion of dishonestie, I can not choose, but so faithfully embrace, as
I am ready to guage my life for his sake, rather than his finger should ache for
yt offense. And where has there ben ever found such liberality in any lover?
What is he that has been ever so prodigal, to employ his life, the most
special pledge in this world, rather than he would suffer his beloved to
incur dishonor? Many histories have I red, and Chronicles of our time, and
yet I have found few or none comparable unto this Gentleman, the like of whom
be so rare and seldom as white crows or swannes of color black. O singular
liberality, never heard of before. O fact that can never be sufficiently
praised. O true love most unfeigned. Master Aloisio rather tha^ he would have my
fame any one jot to be impaired, or suffer any shadow of suspicion to blemish
the same, frankly has confessed himself to be a thief, regarding me and mine
honor more than himself and life. And albeit that he might a thousand ways
have saved himself without the imprisonment and adversity which he has
sustained: nevertheless after he had said, being then past remembrance through
the fall, that he fell down from my window, and perceived how much that
confession would prejudice and hurt my good name, and spotte the known honesty
of the same, of his good will chose to die rather than to speak any words that
might breed ill opinion of me, or the least thing of the world yt might
ingendre infamy and slander. And therefore not able to call back the words he
had spoken of the fall, nor by any means could color ye same, he thought to
save yt good name of another by his own hurt. If he then thus redily and
liberally has protruded his life to manifest danger for my benefit and
sauegard, preferring min honor above the care of himself, shall not I abandon
all that I have, yea and therwithall hazard mine honor for his salvation? But
what? Shall I disdain bountifully to employ my self and all the endeavor of my
friends for his delivery? No no (my Lords) if I had a thousand lives, and so
many honors at my commandment, I would give them al for his relief and
comfort, yea if it were possible for me to recover a fresh. x. C. M. lives, I
would so frankly bestow them all, as ever I desired to live, that I might enjoy
mine own Aloisio. But I am sorry, and ever shall be sorry, for that it is not
lawful for me to do more for him, tha^ yt which my small power and possibility
is able. For if he should die, truly my life could not endure: if he were
deprived of life, what pleasure should I have to live in this world after him?
whereby (most honorable and righteous judge,) I believe before the honest, not to
lose any one jot of mine honor, because I being (as you may see) and young
woman and a widow desirous to mary again, it is lawful for me to love and to
be beloved for none other intent (whereof God is the only judge) but to attain
a husband according to my degree. But if I should lose my reputation and honor,
why should not I adventure the same for him, that has not spared his own for
my sake? Now to come to the effect of the matter, I do say with all duetifull
reverence, that it is an accusation altogether false and untrue, that ever
master Aloisio came to my house as a Thief against my will. For what need he
to be a thief, or what would he do with my goods, that is a lord and owner
of. xx. times so much as I have? Alas good Gentleman, I dare depose and guage
my life, that he never thought, much less did any robbery or thing
unlawful, wherewith justly he may be charged. But he repaired to my house with
my consent, as a loving and affectionate lover, the circumstance whereof, if it
be duly marked, must aduouch the same to be of truth infallible. For if I
had not given him license to come, how was it possible for him to convey his
ladder so high, that was made but of ropes, and to fasten the same to the iaume
of the window, if none within did help him. Again, how could the window of
the chamber be open at that time of the night, which is still kept shut, if it
had not been by my consent. But I with the help of my maid threw down to
him a little rope, whereunto he tied his ladder and drew the same up, and making
it so fast, as it could not undo, and then made a sign for master Aloisio to
come up. But as both our ill fortune would have it, before I could catch any
hold of him, to mine inestimable grief and hearts sorrow he fell down to the
ground. Wherefore (my lords) I beseech your honors to revoke the confession
wherein he has made him self to be a thief. And you master Aloisio declare
the troth as it was, since I am not ashamed in this honorable assembly to tell
the same. Behold the letters (my lords) which so many times he wrote unto me,
wherein he made suit to come to my speech, and continually in the same does
call me wife. Behold the ladder, which till now, did still remain in my
chamber. Behold my maid, which in all mine affairs, is as it were mine own
hand and helper. Master Aloisio being here upon demanded of the Lords of the
articles, which she in her tale had recited, confessed them all to be true: who
at the same instant was discharged. The Duke greatly commended them both, her
for her stout audacitie, in defense of an innocent Gentleman, and him for his
honor and modesty, seeking to preserve the fame and good report of the
Gentlewoman. Which done, the Counsel disassembled and brake up. And the
friends of both the parties accompanied them home to the house of mistress
Gismonda, where to the great rejoice and pleasure of al men, they were
solemnly married in sumptuous and honorable wise, and master Aloisio with his
wife lived in great prosperity long time after. Mistress Lucia and mistress
Isotta, at the expired time were delivered of two goodly sons, in whom the
fathers took great joy and delight. Who with their wives after that time lived
very quietly and well, one loving an other like natural brethren, many times
sporting among them selves discretely at the deceipts of their wives. The
wisdom of the Duke also was wonderfully extolled and commended of all men, the
fame whereof was increased and bruted throughout the region of Italy, And not
without cause. For by his prudence and advise, the dominion of the state and
Common wealth was amplified and dilated. And yet in the end being old and
impotent, they unkindly deposed him from his Dukedom.

The Lord of Virle
The Lord of VIRLE, by the commandment of a a fair young widow called ZILIA,
and for his promise made, the better to attain her love, was contented to
remain dumb the space of three years, and by what means he was revenged,
and obtained his suit.

The. xxvij. Nouel.
THey that have passed the most part of their youth in humain folies, and have
rather followed the vanities of fools and insensate lovers, in matters of
love, and that the contemplation of heavenly things, or else of those that here
on earth may give some entry for man to attain glory and honor of his name,
they I say, shall serve me for witnesses, to confirm the opinion of long time
rooted in the fancies of men: which is, that the beauty and comely favor of a
woman, is the very true and natural Adamant that can be found, since the same
stone (for a certain attractiue power and agreeable quality therein enclosed)
does not better draw the iron, than ye woman does, by a certain hidden force,
which resting under ye allureme^t of her eye, draws unto it yt hearts and
affections of men, which has made many beleene, that the same only essence
was sent to us below, to serve both for men's torment and joy together. But yet
there is an other thing of greater wonder it is not to hear tell that Paris for
sooke Troy, to go visit Helena in Greece, that Hercules had given over his
mace, to handle the (...) at the commandment of a woman, or that Solomon was
sotted in his wisdom to dalie with those that made him a volu^tarie slave. But
that a woman of whom a man had received no favor and courtesy at all, had
forgotten her own duty to her servant, if it seem not strange, I can not
tell what to call wonderful or marvelous: if defense of speech for love, is
not deemed such, whereby man is different from brute beasts: (for reason is
altogether refused by lovers, and notwithstanding our fathers have seen the
example of that virtue no long time past in the person of a Gentleman, very
wise and well trained up in other things. A case so strange as declaring the
singular force of nature in that matter, wherein the seems to have given ye
preferme^nt above all things in earth. Examples hereof, is the effemination of
Hercules, the deprivation of Samsons strength, the loss of sense, and the
idolatry of the famous and wise king Solomon, and the simplicity of a
warelesse and uncircumspect Gentleman, of whom ye shall read the History.

Thurin (as is well known to them that have traveled Piedmont) is the
ornament and bulwark of all the country, so well for the natural site of the
place, as for the artificial and industrious work of man's hand, which has
instaured and furnished with great magnificence, that which nature had
indifferently enriched, for the rudeness and little knowledge of the time past.
Now besides this stately and strong city, there stands a little town named
Montcall, a place no less strong, and of good defense, than well planted in a
fair and rich soil. In this town there dwelt a Gentlewoman a widow called
Zilia, beautiful amongs the most excellent fair Gentlewomen of the country,
which country (besides the other happy and heavenly influences) seems to be
specially favored, for having the most fairest and courteous Gentlewome^, above
any other within the compass of Europa. Notwithstanding this fair Zilia,
degenerating from the nature of her climate, was so haggarde and cruel, as it
might have been thought. she had been rather nourished and brought up amidde
the most desert mountains of Sauoy, than in the pleasant and rich champayn
country, watered and moistened with Eridanus, the father of rivers, at this day
called the Pau, the largeness whereof does make men to marvel, and the
fertility allureth every man to be desirous to inhabit upon the same. This
fair rebellious widow, albeit that she was not above. xxiiij. or. xxv. years
of age, yet protested never more to be subject to man, by marriage, or
otherwise, thinking her self well able to live in single life: A mind truly
very holy and commendable, if the pricks of yt flesh do obey the first motions
and adhortations of the spirit, but where youth, pleasure, and multitude of
suitors do address their endeavor against that chastity (lightly enterprised)
the Apostles counsel ought to be followed, who wills young widows to marie
in Christ, to avoid the temptations of the flesh, and to flee offensive
slander and dishonor before men. Now mistress Zilia (her husband being dead)
only bent her self to enrich her house, and to amplify the possession of a
little infant which she had by her late departed husband. After whose death she
became so covetous, as having removed, and almost cut off quite the wonted
port she used in her husbands days, employed her maids in household affairs,
thinking nothing to be well done yt passed not through her own hands. A thing
truly more praise worthy, than to see a sort of effeminate, fine, and dainty
fingred dames, which think their honor diminished if they hold but their nose
over their household matters, where their hand and diligence were more
requisite, for so much as the mistress of the house is not placed the chief
to hear only the reasons of them that labor, but thereunto to put her hands,
for her present eye seems to give a certain perfection to the work which
the servants do by her commandment. Which caused the historians in times
past, to describe unto the posterity a gentlewoman called Lucretia, not
babbling amongs young folish girls, or running to feasts and Maigames, or
Masking in the night, without any regard of the honor and dignity of her race
and house, but in her Chamber sowing, spinning, and carding, amids the troop
of her maiden servants: wherein our mistress Zilia passed the most part of her
time, spending no minute of the day, without some honest exercise, which she
did for that she liked not to be seen at feasts and bankets, or to be gadding
up and down the streats, wandering to gardens or places of pleasure, although
to such places youth sometimes may have honest repair to refreshe their
wearied bodies with some virtuous recreation, and thereby to rejoice the
heaviness of the mind. But this Ge^tlewoman was so severe in following the
rigorous and constrained manners of our ancients, that impossible it was, to
see her abroad, except it were when she went to Mattens or other divine
service. This Gentlewoman seemed to have studied the divinity of the
Egiptians, which paint Venus holding a key before her mouth, and setting her
foot upon a Tortus, signifying unto us thereby, yt duty of a chaste woman,
whose tongue ought to be locked, that she speak not but in time and place, and
her feet not straying or wa^dering, but to keep her self within the limits of
her own house, except it be to serve God, and sometimes to render our bounden
duty to them which have brought us into light. Moreover Zilia was so religious
(I will not say superstitious) and rigorous to observe customs, as she made it
very squeimish and strange to kiss Gentlemen that met her, a civility which
of long time has been observed, and yet remains in the most part of the
world, that Gentlewomen do welcome strangers and guestes into their houses
with an honest and chaste kiss. Notwithding the institution and profession of
this widow had wiped away and deferred this point of her youth: whither it
were for that she esteemed her self so fair, as all men were unworthy to
touch the utter parts of so rare and precious a vessel, or that her great
and inimitable chastity made her so strange, to refuse that which her duty
and honor would have permitted her to grant. There chanced about this time
that a gentleman of the Country called Sir Philiberto of Virle, esteemed to be
one of the most valiant Gentlemen in those parts, repaired upon an holy day to
Montcall, (whose house was not very far off the Town) and being at divine
service, in place of occupying his sense and mind in heavenly things, and
attending the holy words of a Preacher, which that day declared the word of
God unto the people, he gave himself to contemplate the excellent beauty of
Zilia, who had put off for a while her mourning veil, that she might the
better behold the good father that preached, and receive a little air,
because the day was extreme hot. The Gentleman at the first blushe, when he
saw that sweet temptation before his eyes, thought him self rapt above the
third heaven, and not able to withdraw his look, he fed himself with the
venom which by little and little, so seized upon the soundest parts of his
mind, as afterward being lively rooted in heart, the Gentleman was in
danger still to remain there for a guage, without any hope of ease or
comfort, as more amply this following discourse, shall give you to understand.
Thus all the morning he beheld the Gentlewoman, who made no more account of
them, that with great admiration did behold her, than they themselves did of
their life, by committing the same to the hands of a woman so cruel. This
Gentleman being come home to his lodging, enquired what fair widow that was,
of what calling, and of what behauior, but he heard tell of more truly, than
he would of good will have known or desired to have been in her, whom he did
presently choose to be the only mistress of his most secret thoughts. Now
understanding well the stubburne nature and uncivil manner of that widow, he
could not tell what part to take, nor to what Saint to vow his devotion, to
make suit unto her he thought it time lost, to be her servant, it was not in
his power, having already inguaged his liberty into the hands of her, which
once holdyng captive the hearts of men, will not infraunchise them so soon as
thought and will desire. Wherefore bayting himself with hope, and tickled
with love, he determined what soever chanced, to love her, and to assay if by
long service he could lenifie that hard heart, and make tender that unpliant
will, to have pity upon the pain which she saw him to endure, and to
recompense his laborsome travels, which he thought were virtuously employed for
gayning of her good grace. And upon this settled deliberation, he retired
again to Virle (so was his house named) where disposing his things in order,
he returned again to Montcall to make his long resiance there, to put in
readiness his furniture, and to welde his artillery with such industry, as
in the end he might make a reasonable breach to force and take the place: For
surprisyng whereof, he hazarded great dangers, the rather, that he him self
might first be taken. And where his assaults and policies could not prevail,
he minded to content him self with the pleasure and passetyme that he might
receive in the contemplation of a thing so fair, and the ordinary sight of an
image so excellent. The memory of whom rather increased his pain than yielded
comfort, did rather minister corrosiue poison, than give remedy of ease, a
cause more of cruel and sudden death, than of prolonged life. Philiberto then
being become a citizen of Mo^tcall, used to frequent the Church more than he
was wont to do, or his devotion served him, and that because he was not able
elsewhere to enjoy the presence of his Saint, but in places and temples of
devotion: which no doubt was a very holy and worthy disposition, but yet
not meet or requisite to observe such holy places for those intentes, which
ought not to be profaned in things so fond and foolish, and acts so
contrary to the institution and mind of those, which in times paste were the
first founders and erectours of temples. Signior Philiberto then moved with
that religious superstition, made no conscience at all to speak unto her
within the Church. And true it is, when she went out of the same, he (moved
with a certain familiar courtesy, natural to each Gentleman of good bryngyng
up) many times conducted her home to her own house, not able for all that
(what so (...) he said) to win the thing that was able to engender any little
contentation, which grieved him very much: For the cruel woman fained as
though (...) understood nothing of that he said, and turnyng the wayne against
the oxen, by contrary talk she began to tell him a tale of a tubbe, of matters
of her householde, whereunto he gave so good heed, as she did to the hearing of
his complaints. Thus these two, of diverse affections, and moved with contrary
thoughts, spoke (...) to an other, without apt answer to eithers talk. Whereby
ye Gentleman conceived an assured argument of his ruin, which void of al hope
and means, he saw to be inevitable, and therefore practiced with (...) dames
of the City, that had familiar resort unto her house, and used frequent
conversation with (...) rebellious lady Zilia. To one of them then he
determined to communicate his secrets, and to do her to understand in deed the
only cause that made him to (...) at Montcall, and the grief which he
sustained, for that he was not able to discover his torment to her, that had
given him the wound. This Gentleman therefore, repaired to one of his
neighbors, a woman of good courage, which at other (...) had experimented what
meats they feed on, which (...) at Venus table, and what bitterness is
intermingled, amid those drinks that Cupido quaffeth unto his guestes. (...)
whom (having before coniured her to keep secret that which he would declare) he
disclosed the secrets of his mind, expressing his love without naming of his
lady before he herd the answer of his neighbor, who understanding almost to
what purpose the affections of the pacient were directed, said unto him: Sir,
needful it is not to use long orations, the love that I bear you for the
honest qualities which hitherto I have known to be in you, shall make me to
keep silent, that whereof as yet I do not know the matter, and the assurance
you have, not to be abused by me, constrains me to warrant you, that I will
not spare to do you all the pleasure and honest service I can. Ah mistress
(answered sir Philiberto) so long as I live, I will not fail to acknowledge
the liberality of your (...), by offering your self pacientely to hear, and
secretly to keep the words I speak, accorduigly as they deserve: and that
(which is more than I require) you do assure me that I shall find such one
of you, as will not spare to give your aid. Alas, I resemble the good and wise
Captain, who to take a (...) does not only aid himself with the
forwardenesse and valiance of his soldiers, but to spare them, and to avoid
slaughter for making of way, planteth his cannon, and battereth the wall of the
fort, which he would assail, to the intent that both the soldier and the
ordinance may perform and suffice the perfection of the platte, which he
has framed and devised within his politic head. I have already encouraged my
soldiers, and have lost the better part truly in the skirmish which has
delivered unto me my sweet cruel enemy. Now I am driven to make ready the
fire, which rests in the kindled match of your co^ceipts, to batter yt fort
hitherto (...), for any assault which I can make. I understand not (said she
smiling) these Labyrinthes of your complaints, except you speak more plain. I
never haunted the wars, (...) knew (...) thing it is to handle weapons,
improper and not seemly for mine estate and kind. The war (quod he) whereof
I speak, is so natural and common, as I doubt not, but you have somtymes
(...), with what (...) and camisados men use to take their enemies, how they
plant their (...), (...) what means both the assaylant and (...) ought to
use. So far as I see (said she) there (...) nothing for us, but the assurance
of the field, since we be ready to enter in combat: and do think that the fort
shall not be hard to win, by reason of the walls, dikes, rampars, bulwarks,
platformes, counterforts, curtines, vamewres and engines which you have
prepared, besides a number of false brayes and flanks, placed in good order,
and the whole defended from the thundryng cannons and bombardes, which do
amaze the wandering enemy in the field. But I pray you leaving these warlike
tumults, to speak more boldly without these extrauagantes and digressions, for
I take pity to see you thus troubled, and ready to excede the bounds of your
modesty and wonted wisdom. Do not marvel at all mistress (quod he) since
according to new occurrents and alterations, both the purpose, talk, and
counsel ordinarily do change. I am become the servant of one which makes me
altogether like unto those that (...) mad, and bound in chains, not able to
speak or say any thing, but what the spirits which be in them, do force them
to utter. For I neither will, think, or (...) any thing, but that which the
enchaunter Love does command and suffer to express, who, so rigorously does
(...) my heart, that in place where boldness is most requisite, he depriueth
me of force, and leaves me without any countenance. And being alone, God (...)
how frankly I do wander in the place, where mine enemy may command, and
with what (...) I do invade her province. Alas, is it not pity then to see
these diversities in one self matter, and upon one very thing? Truly I would
endure willyngly all these travails, if I (...) in the end my service might be
accepted, and hoped that my (...) should find relief: but living in this (...),
I must needs norish the (...) and the solace of the unhappy, which are wishes
and vain hope, trusting that some God, will (...) me a faithful friend that
will assaye to rid me from the hell wherinto I am thrown, or else to shorte^
this miserable life, which is a (...) times more painful than death. In saying
so, he began to sigh so strangely as a man would have thought that two smithes
(...) working at the (...), had given two blows at his stomach, so vehement was
the enclosed wind within his heart, that made him to fetch forth those
terrible (...), the eyes not forgetting to yield forth a river of tears, which
gushing forth at the center of his heart, mounted into his brains, at length
to issue forth, through the spout proper to the channel of such a fountain.
Which the gentlewoman seeing, moved with compassion, could not contain to keep
him company in (...), and therewithal said unto him. Although mine estate and
reputation, which to this day I have kept unspotted, defend the use of my good
will in things yt may (...) mine honor, yet sir by seeing the extremity which
you suffer, to be (...), I will somewhat (...) my conscience, and assay to succor
you with so good heart, as (...) you trust me with the secrets of your thought.
There rests only for me to know, the thing that you will have me to do, and
toward what woman your devotions be inclined: for sure I am to give her such
(...) of that which I have seen and known of your good will and service toward
the mistress of your heart, that (...) shall be altogether out of taste, and
void of appetite, (...) she do not accept that affectionate offered will, the
like whereof shall never be proffered again. And truly such a woman may judge
her self right happy to have a Gentleman, so (...), (...) and faithful, for
(...) and lover, which honoring and serving her beauty (...) good (...), is
the (...) and ornament of the (...) of his Lady. (...) the earth (...) (...)
forth in these days like (...), men being grown to (...) disloyalty, as in
the end it will defraude the virtue of Fidelity from them, and wholly plant
the same, in the soil of women's hearts: and they not able to depart the
force and (...) thereof, will (...) upon them conditions that be cruel, to
punish the (...) (...) of (...) (...), who disguised with the visard of fained
friendship, and painted with colored amity, languishing in sighs and
sorrows, (...) to deceive them that prodigally employ (...) (...) into the
hands of those cruel, inconstante (...) foolish suitors. Ah Mistress answered
the Gentleman: how may I be able to recompense that only (...) which you (...)
promise me now? But be sure that you see (...) a Soldier and Gentleman which
shall no less be prodigal of his life to do you (...), (...) you be liberal
of your reputation to ease his pains. Now since it pleases you to show such
favor to (...) me your help and support in that which paineth me, I require
no more at your hands, but to bear a Letter which I shall write to Mistress
Zilia, with whom I (...) (...) (...) in love, as if I do receive no solace of
my (...), I know not how I shall avoid the cutting of my threede, which the
spinning sisters (...) twisted to prolong my life, that henceforth can receive
no succor, if (...) your means I (...) not atchieue the thing that holds me
in such bondage. The Gentlewoman was (...) sorrowful, when she understood that
(...) (...) had (...) his Love upon such one, as would not (...) to that
request, and much less would (...) any rest unto his miseries, and therefore
(...) her self to move that (...) fantasy out of his (...). But he was
already resolved in his misehappe, which perceiving in the end she said: To
the (...) Sir that you do not think that I do mean to excuse the (...) of
my promise, make your letters, and of my Faith I will deliver them. And albeit
I know (...) well what be the honors and glory of that Pilgrim, yet I will
render to you again the true answer of her (...) which she shall use to me,
whereby you may consider the gain you are like to make by pursuing of a woman
(although fair) of so small deserte. The Gentleman failed not to give her
(...) thanks, praying her to (...) until (...) had written his letters:
whereunto she most willingly obeyed. He then gone into his Chamber, (...) to
(...) a hundred hundred matters to write unto his Lady, and after he had fixed
them in mind, (...) incke and paper writing as follows.

The Letters of Seignior Philiberto of Virle, to Mistress Zilia of Montcall.
THe passion (...) which I endure (Madame) through (...) love of you, is such,
as (...) that I am assured of the little love you bear me, in (...) of the
incredible servitude which mine (...) and desire is (...) to employe, I have no
will to (...) my force, ne yet to rid my self from (...) (...) (...) (...)
will to (...) (...) beauty, although even from the beginning I felt the (...)
of the mortal (...) which now (...) (...) (...). Alas I (...) not know (...)
what (...) I am borne, nor what fate does (...) my years, (...) I do (...)
that heaven and love, and her whom I (...) do conform themselves with one
assent to (...) mine overthrow, who think my self of (...) born and sustained
in my first young age, to be the (...) man and (...) servant of you my (...)
dear, (...) whom alone, I yield my heart (...) as it is, and the joy of (...)
thoughts (...) in my (...), by the contemplation and remembrance of your
excellent and perfect grace, whereof if I be not favored, I (...) for death,
from which even presently I (...): (...) (...) fear of that which she can do,
or of the ugly (...) which I conceive to be in her, but rather to confirm my
life, this body, for instrument to exercise the (...) (...) for doing of your
commandments, where I shall prove that unworthy cruelty, both of your gentle
(...), and of the body fraught full of that, which dame Nature can depart of
her abundant graces. (...) sure madame that you shall shortly see the end of
him, which attends yet to bear so much as in him (...) lie, the vehement
love into an other world, which makes me to pray you to have pity on him, who
(attending the rest and final sentence of his death or life) does humbly kiss
your white and delicate hands, (...) god to give to you like (...) as his is,
who (...) to be,

Wholly yours, or not to be at all. Philiberto of Virle.


The letter written, closed and sealed, (...) (...) to (...) neighbor, who
promised him again to (...) him (...) at night. Thus this (...) went her way,
leaving this poor languishing Gentleman hoping against his hope, and faining
by and by some joy and pleasure, wherein he (...) himself with great contented
mind. Then suddenly he called again unto remembrance, the cruelty and (...)
of Zilia, which showed before his eyes so many kinds of death, as times he
thought upon the same, thinking that he saw the choler wherewith his little
courteous mistress furiously did intertaine the messanger, who found Zilia
coming forth of a gardein adjoining to her house, and having saluted her, and
received like courteous salutation, she would have framed her talk, for honest
excuse in that (...) charge and message: for her also unto whom she was sent,
and for some ease to the pore getleman which aproched nearer death than life.
But Zilia brake of her talk saying: I marvel much gentle neighbor to see you
here at this time of the day, knowing your honest custom is to let pass no
minute of the time, except it be employed in some virtuous exercise. Mistress
answered the messanger, I thank you for the good opinion you have of me, and
do pray you to (...) the same. For I do assure you that nothing vain and of
little effect has made me slack my business at this time, which me think I
do not (...), when I enforce my self to take pity and mercy upon the afflicted
sort: and the cause thereof I would disclose, if I feared not to offend you, and
break the love which of long time between us two has been frequented. I know
not (said Zilia) whereunto your words do te^d, although my heart does throbbe,
and mind does move to make me think your purposed talk to be of none other
effect, than to say a (...) which may redou^d to the prejudice of mine (...).
Wherefore I pray you, do not open any thing yt (...) be contrary, be it never
so little to the duty of Dames of our degree. Mistress said the neighbor,
I suppose that the little likelihoode which is in you with the thing for the
help whereof I come to speak, has made you feel the passion, contrary to
the grief of him that indures so much for your sake. Unto whom not thinking
thereof I gave my faith in pledge to bear this Letter. In saying so, she drew
the same out of her bosom, and presenting them to cruel (...), she said: I
beseech you to think that I am not ignorant of the (...) wherewith the Lord
of (...) is affected, who wrote these letters. I promised him the duty of a
messanger toward you: and so constrained by promise I could do no less,
than to deliver you that which he does send, with service such as shall (...)
for ever, or if it shall please you to accept him for such a one as he
desires. For my part I pray you to read the contents, and accordingly to
give me answer: for my faith is no further bound, but faithfully to report to
him the thing whereupon you shall be resolved. Zilia which was not wont to
receive very often such embassades, at the first was in mind to break the
letters, and to return the messanger to her shame. But in the end taking
heart, and changing her affection, she red the letters not without showing
some very great alteration outwardely, which declared the meaning of her
thought that diversely did strive within her mind: for suddenly the changed
her color twice or thrice, now waring pale like the increasing (...),
Eclipsed by the Sun, when the feels a certain darkening of her borrowed
light, then the Uermilion and colored tainte came into her face again, with
no less hew than the blomed Rose newly budded forth, which increased half so
much again, the excellency of that wherewith Nature (...) endued her. And
(...) (...) paused a while. Notwithstanding, after that she had read, and
read again her lovers letter, not able to dissemble her foolish anger which
vered her heart, she said unto the mistress messanger: I would not have
thought that you, being such as each man knows, would (by abusing your
duty,) have been the ambassador of a thing so uncomely for your estate, and
the house whereof you come, and toward me which never was such one (ne yet
pretend to be,) to whom suit should be made for doing of such follies. And
trust to it that it is the love I bear you, which shall make me dissemble that
I think, and hold my peace, reserving in silence, that which (had it come
from an other than you) I would have published to the great dishonor of her
which had made so little account of my chastity. Let it suffice therefore in
time to come for you to think and believe, that I am chaste and honest: and to
advertise the Lord of (...) to proceed no further in his suit: for rather will
I die, than agree to the least point of that which he desires of me. And that
he may know the same, be well assured that he shall take his leave of that
private talk which sometimes I used with him to my great dishonor, as far as
I can see. Get you home therefore, and if you love your honor so much, as you
see me curious of my chastity, I beseech you use no further talk of him,
whom I hate so much, as his (...) is excessive, by loving her which cares not
for those amorous toys and sained passions, whereunto such loving fools do
suffer them selves to be carried headlong. The messanger ashamed, to hear her
self thus pinched to the quick, answered her very quietly without moving of
her patience: I pray to God (mistress) that he may remedy the different
disease almost incurable in either of you twain, the same being so vehement,
as altered into a (...), makes you in this wise, incapable of reason.
Finishing these words she took her leave of Zilia, and arrived to the lovers
house, she found him lying upon his bed, rather dead than alive: who seeing
his neighbor returned back again, with face so sad, not tarying for the
answer which she was about to make, he began to say: Ah unfortunate Gentleman,
thou payest well the usury of thy pleasures past, when thou did live at
liberty, free from those trauails which now do put thee to death, with out
suffering thee to die. Oh happy, and more than right happy had I been, if
inconstant Fortune had not devised this treason, wherein I am surprised and
caught, and yet no raunsom can redeem me from prison, but the most miserable
death that ever poor lover suffered. Ah mistress, I know well that Zilia
estemeth not my letters, ne yet regards my love, I confess that I have done
you wrong by thus abusing your honest amity, for the solace of my pain. Ah
fickle love, what fool is he which does commit himself to the rage and fury
of the waves of thy foming and tempestuous seas? Alas I am entered in, with
great gladsom cheer, through the glistering show before mine eyes of the faint
sun beams, whereunto so soon as I made sail, the same denied me light to
thrust me forth into a thousand winds, tempests, and raging storms of rain.
By means whereof I see no mean at all to hope for end of my mishaps: and much
less the shipwreck which suddenly may rid me from this danger more
intolerable, than if I were overwhelmed within the bottomless depth of the
maine Ocean. Ah deceiuer, and wily soldier, why have thou made me enterprise
the voyage far of from thy solitudes and wilderness, to give me over in the
midst of my necessity? Is this thy manner toward them, which franckly
follow thee by trace, and pleasantly subdue themselves to thy traitorous
folies? At lest wise if I saw some hope of health I would endure without
complaint thereof: yea, and it were a more dangerous tempest. But O good God,
what is he of whom I speak? Of whom do I attend for solace and relief? of
him truly which is borne for the overthrow of men? Of whom hope I for health?
Of the most noysom poison that ever was myngled with the most subtle druggs
that ever were. Whom shall I take to be my defender? He which is in ambush
traitrously to catch me, that he may martyr me worsse than (...) has done
before. Ah cruel wenche, that thou should measure so evil the good will of
him that never purposed to trespass the least of thy commandments. Ah, that
thy beauty should find a subject so stubborn in thee, to torment them that
love and praise thee. O maigre and unkind recompense, to expel good servants
that: be affectionate to a service so just and good. Ah Basiliske, colored
over with pleasure and sweetness, how has thy sight dispersed his poison
throughout mine heart? At least wise if I had some drugge to repel thy
force, I should live at ease, and that without this suit and trouble. But I
feel and prove that this sentence is more than true:

No physike herbs the grief of love can cure,
Ne yet no drugge that pain can well assure.
Alas, the sear clothe will not serve, to tense the wound the time shall be
but lost, to cut the same is but increase of pain, to salve the same bredeth
matter to cause mine overthrow. To be short, any dressing can not avail,
except the hand of her alone which gave the wound. I would to God the saw the
bottom of my heart, and viewed the closet of any mind, yt she might judge my
firm says and know the wrong she does me by her rigor and froward will. But O
unhappy man, I feel that she is so resolved in obstinate mind, as her rest
seems only to depend upon my pain, her ease upon my grief, and her joy upon
my sadness. And saying so, began strangely to weep, and sighing between,
lamented, in so much as, yt mistress messanger not able to abide the grief and
painful travail wherein she saw the pore gentleman wrapped, went home to her
house: not withstanding she told afterward the whole success of his love to a
Gentleman, the friend of Philiberto. Now this Gentleman was a companion in
arms to the lord of Virle; and a very familiar friend of his, for which cause
he went about by all means to put away those foolish and frantike conceits out
of his fancy, but he profited as much by his endeavor, as the passionate
gained by his heuinesse: who determining to die, yielded so much to care and
grief, as he fell into a grievous sickness, which both hindered him from sleep,
and also of his appetite to eat and drink, giving himself to muse upon his
folies and fansied dreams, without hearing or admitting any man to speak unto
him. And if he did hear them, his words tended to the complainte of the
cruelty of one, whom he named not, and sounded of desire he had to end his
life upon that co^playnt. The physicians round about were sought for, who could
give no judgment of that disease (neither for all the signs they saw, or any
inspection of the urine, or touching of the pulse) but said that it was a
melancholy humor distilling from the brain, which caused the alteration of
his sense: howbeit their art and knowledge were void of skill to euacuate the
gross blood that was congeled of (...) melancholy. And therefore dispairing of
his health, with hands full of money they gave him over. Which his friend and
companion perceiving, marvelous sorry for the affliction of his friend, ceased
not to practice all that (...) could by letters, gifts, promises and complaints
to procure Zilia to visit the pacient. For he was assured that the only
presence of her was able to recover his friend. But the cruel woman excused
her self through her widdowhed, that it should be unseemly for one of her
degree (of intent) to visit a Gentleman, whose parentage and aliance she knew
not. The soliciter of the Lord of Virle his health, seeing how little his
prayers auailed with his implacable fury, knew no longer to what (...) he
might vow himself for counsel, in the end resolved to solicit her which
had done the first message, that she might devise some means to bring them
to speak together. And fyndyng her for his purpose, thus he said unto her:
Mistress, I marvel much that you make so little account of the pore lord of
Virle who lies in his bed attending for death. Alas, if ever pity had
place in woman's heart, I beseech you to give your aid to help him, the mean
whereof in whom it lies, is not ignorant unto you. God is my witness (quod
she) what travail I could take, to help him: but in things impossible, it is
not in man to determine, or rest assured in judgment. I will go unto him and
comfort him so well as I can, that peradventure my promises may (...) some
part of his pain: and afterward we will at leisure better consider upon that
which we shall promise. Herevppon they went together to see the pacient, that
began to look up more (...) than he was wonted: who seeing the Gentlewoman,
said unto her: Ah mystresse, I would to God I had never proved your
fidelity, to feel the passing cruel heart of her, that rather does esteem
her honor, to practyse regour and tyranny upon me, than with gentleness to
maintain the life of a poor feeble knight. Sir (said she) I can not tell
what you mean thus to torment your self: for I trust to cure you between this
and to morrow, and will do mine endeavor to cause you speak with her, upon whom
wrongfully perchance you do complain, and who dares not to come unto you,
lest some occasion be given of suspicion to (...) speakers, which will make the
report more slanderous, when they know the cause of your disease. Ah (said the
pacient) how joyful and pleasant is your talk? I see well that you desire my
health, and for that purpose, would have me drink of those liquors, which
superficially do appear to be sweet, afterward to make my life a hundred
times more fainte and feeble than now it is. Be you there said she? And I
swear unto you by my faith not to fail to keep my promise, to cause you
speak alone with mistress Zilia. Alas mystresse said the lover, I ask no more
at your hands, that I may hear with mine own ears the last sentence (...)
or defiance. Well put your trust in me, said she, and take you no thought but
for your health. For I am assured ere it be long, to cause her to come unto
you, and then you shall see whether I am diligent in those matters I took in
hand, and to what effect mine attemptes do prove. Me think already (quod he)
that my sickness is not able to stay me from going (...) her that is the cause
of my debilitie, when it shall (...) her to command me, where soever it be,
since her only remembrance will be of no less force in me, than (...)
clerenesse of the sun beams is to euaporate the thickness of the morning
mistes. Even so is she (if such be her cheer to me) the (...) wherein my day
shall take increase, or the night which eclipseth and obscureth the
bra^dishing brightness of my first sunbeames. With that the Gentlewoman took
her leave of him, (who without let of his companion (immediately rose up) and
she went home attending opportunity to speak to Zilia, whom two or three days
after she met at Church, and they two being alone together in a Chapel,
said unto her with fained tears, forced from her eyes, and sending forth a
cloud of sighs: Madame, I nothing doubt at al, but yt last letters which I
brought you, made you conceive some ill opinion of me, which I do guess by the
frownyng face that ever since you have borne me. But when you shall know the
hurt which it has done, I think you will not be so hard, and void of pity,
but with patience to hearken that which I will say, and moved to pity the
state of a pore Gentleman, who by your means is in the pangs of death. Zilia,
which til then never regarded the pain and sickness of the pacient, began to
sorrow, with such passion, not to grant him further favor than he had already
received, but to find some means to ease him of his grief, and then to give
him over for ever. And therefore she said unto her neighbor: Mistress I thought
that all these suits had been forgotten, until the other day, a Gentleman
prayed me to go see the Lord of Virle, who told me as you do now, that he was
in great danger. But seeing that he wareth worsse and worsse, I will be ruled
by you, being well assured of your honesty and virtue, and that you will not
advise me to that which shall be hurtful to mine honor. And when you shall do
what you can, you shall win so much as nothing, and yet shall ease him
nothing at all, which wrongfully plaineth of my cruelty. For I do not purpose
to do any private fact with him, but that which shall be mete for an honest
Gentlewoman, and such as a faithful tutor of her chastity, may grant to an
honest and virtuous gentleman. His desire is none other (said the gentle woman)
for he entreats but your presence, to let you wit by word, yt he is ready to
do the thing which you shall command him. Alas, said (...), I know not how I
shall be able to do the same: for it is impossible to go to him without
suspicion, which the common people will lightly conceive of such light and
familiar behavior. And rather would I die than adventure mine honor, hitherto
conserved with great severity and diligence. And since you say, yt he is in
extremes of death, for your sake I will not stick to go unto him, yt hereafter he
may have no cause to complain of my rudeness. I thank you (said the messanger
for the good will you bear me, and for the help you promise unto the poor
passionate gentleman, whom these news will bring on foot again, and will do
you reverence for that good turn. Since it is so (said Zilia) to morrow at
noone let him come unto my house, where in a low chamber, he shall have leisure
to say to me his mind. But I purpose by Gods help, to suffer him no further
than that which I have granted. As it shall please you (said her neighbor)
for I crave no more of you but that only favor, which as a messanger of good
news, I go to show him, recommending my self in the mean time to your
command. And then she went unto the pacient, whom she found walking up and
down the chamber, indifferently lusty of his person, and of color metely
fresh for the time he left his (...).

Now when sir Philiberto saw the messanger, he said unto her: And how now
mystresse, what news? Is Zilia so stubborn as (...) was wont to be? (...)
may see her (said she) if to morrow at noone you have the heart and dare go
unto her house. Is it possible (said he imbracynge her) that you have
procured for me that good turn, to deliver me from the (...), wherein I have
so long time been (...)? (...) trusty and assured friend, all the days of my
life I will remember that pleasure and benefit, and by acknowledgyng of the
same, shall be ready to render like, when you please to command, or else let
me be counted the most unkind and discourteous Gentleman that ever made
profession of love: I will go by Gods help to see mystresse Zilia, with
intent to endure all trouble that Fortune shall send unto me, protesting to
vere my self no more, although I see my (...) hap otherwise to end than my
desert required and that good luck has cause to work against me. But yet
against Fortune to contend, is to war against my self, whereof the victory can
be but (...). Thus he passed all the day, which seemed to last a thousand years
to him, that thought to receive some good intertainme^t of his lady, in whose
bonds he was catched before he thought that womans malice could so far
excede, or display her venomous sting. And truly that man is void of sense,
which suffers him self so fondly to be charmed, (...) the peril of the abused
ought to serve him for example. They be to the masculine kind a great
confusion, and unawares for want of due forsight, the same (...) suffer it self
to be bound and taken captive by ye very thing which has no being to work
effect, but by his own freewil. But this inchantme^t which rises of women's
beauty, being to men a pleasant displeasure, I think to be decked with that
drawing virtue and allurement, to punish and torment the faults of men, for
they once fed and baited with a fading favor and poisoned sweetness, forget
their own perfection, and nousled in their foolish fancies, seeking felicity
and sovereign gift, in the matter wherein does lie the sum of their
vnhappes. In like manner the virtuous and shamfast dames, have not their eyes of
mind so blindfolde, but that they see whereunto those frank services, (...)
(...) faithes and vices colored and stuffed with, exterior virtue do tend:
and doubt not but those lovers do imitate the Scorpion, whose venom lies in
his tail, the end of such love, being the ruin of good renoume, and the
decay of former virtues. For which cause the heavens, the friend of their
sex, have given them a providence, which those gentle, vnfauoured lovers term
to be rigor, that by those means they may prove the desert of a suter, both
for their great contentation and praise, and for the rest of them that do them
service. This just right and modeste providence, that cruel Gentlewoman used
not to the good and faithful lover, the Lord of Virle, who was so humble a
servant of his unkind mistress, as his goodness redounded to his great (...)
and folly, as manifestly may appear by that which follows.

Sir Philiberto then thinkyng to have gained much by having made promise,
liberally to speak to (...) Lady, went unto her at the appointed time, so well
a contented man truly of that grace, as all the unkindness past was quite
forgot. Now being come to the lodging of mistress Zilia, he found her in the
devised place with one of her maids waiting upon her. When she saw him after
a little cold entertainment, she began to say unto him with fained joy, that
never moved her within, these words: Now sir, I see that your late (...) was
not so strange as I was given to under stand, for the good state wherein I see
you presently to be, which from henceforth shall make me believe, that the
passions of men endure so long as the cause of their affections continue within
their fancies, much like unto looking glasses, which albeit they make the
equality or (...) of things represented to apere, yet when the thing seen
does pass and vanish away, the forms also do void out of remembrance, like
the wind which lightly whorleth too and fro through the plain of some deep
valey. Ah madame answered he, how easy a matter it is for the (...) person to
counterfeit both joy and dissimulatio^ in one very thing, which not only may
forget yt conceit that moves his affections, but the object must (...) remain
in him, as painted and (...) in his mind. Which truly as you say is a loking
glass, not such one for all that, as the counterfaited appearance of
represented forms has like vigor in it, yt the first and true (...) and
shapes can so soon vanish without leaving the trace of most perfect impression
of such forms wtin the mind of him, which lives upon their only remembrance.
In this mirror then (which by reason of ye hidden force I may well say to be
ardent and burning) have I looked so well as I can, thereby to form ye
sustentation of my good (...). But ye imagined shape not able to support such
perfection, has made the rest of the body to fail (weakened through ye minds
passions) in such wise as if yt hope to recover this better part half lost, had
not cured both, ye whole decay of the one had followed, by thinking to give some
acco^plishme^t in the other. And if you see me Madame, attain to some good
state, impute not ye same I beseech you, but to the good will and favor which
I receive by seeing you in a private place, wherein I conceive greater joy than
ever I did, to say unto you the thing which you would not believe, by words at
other times proceeding from my mouth, ne yet by aduertiseme^t signified in my
(...) letters. Notwithstanding I think yt my Martyrdom is known to be such as
every man may perceive yt the sum of my desire is only to serve and obey you,
for so much as I can receive no greater comfort, tha^ to be commanded to make
repair to you, to let you know that I am hole (although (...) over by (...))
when you vouchsafed to employ (...) in your service, and think my self raised
up again (...) one (...) thousand deaths at once, when it shall please you
to have pity upon the grief and passion, which I (...). Alas what causes my
(...) to see yt (...) beauty of yours to make the proof of a cruelty so
great? (...) you determined Madame thus to (...) the (...) gentleman that is
ready to sacrifice himself in your (...), when you shall depart to him some
favor of your (...)? Do you think that my passions be (...) or (...)? Alack,
alack, the tears which I have shed, the loss of (...) to eat and drink,
the weary passed nights, the long contrived sleepelesse time, the restless
turmoile of my self, may well assure that my (...) heart is of better merit
than you esteem. Then seeing her to fire her eyes upon the ground, and
thinking that he had already won her, he reinforced his fair talk, and
sighing at (...) between, not sparing the (...) which trickled (...) alongs
his face, he prosecuted his talk, saying: Ah fair amongs the fairest, would
you blot that divine beauty with a cruelty so furious, as to cause the death
of him which loves you better tha^ him self? Ah mine eyes, which hitherto
have been (...) with two lively springs to express the hidden griefs within
my heart, if your unhappy be such, that the only dame of your contemplatio^s,
and cause of your tears, do cause the humor to increase, which hitherto in
such wise has emptied my brain, that there is no more in me to moisten your
drouthe, I am content to endure the same, until my heart shall feel the
last pangue, (...) the^e of nourishment, and me of mine (...). The
Gentlewoman, whether she was weary of that (...), or rather doubted that in the
end her chastitis should receive some assault through the dismesured passion
which she saw to endure, said unto him with rigorous words: You have talked and
written enough, you have (...) well solicited her, which is thoroughly resolved
by former mind, to keep her honor in yt worthy reputacion of degree, wherein
she maintains the same amongs the best. I have hitherto suffered you to abuse
my patience, and have used that familiarity which they deserve not that go
about (...) to assail the chastity of those women that patiently give them
(...), for the opinion they have conceived of some shadowing virtue of such
foolish suitors. I now do see yt all your words do tend to beguile me, and to
deprive me of that you cannot give me: which shall be a warning for me
henceforth, more wisely to look about my business and more warely to take heed of the charms of such as you be, to the end that I by bending mine open
(...), (...) not both surprised and overcome with your enchauntments. I pray
you then for conclusion, and the last sentence of my will, that I hear no more
these words, neither from you, nor yet from the Ambassador that comes from
you. For I neither will, ne yet pretend to (...) to you any other favor than
that which I have enlarged for your comfort: but rather do protest, that so
long as you abide in this Country, that I will neither go forth in streate,
nor suffer any Gentleman to have access into this place except he be my near
kinsman. Thus for your importune suit. I will (...) my self, for (...) unto you
in those requests which duty and womanhode ought not to have (...). And if you
do proceed in your folly, I will seek redress according to your desert which
(...) now I have deferred, thinking yt time would have put out the (...) heat
of your folly and wanton youth.

The unfortunate Lord of Virle, hearing this (...) sentence, remained long time
without speech, so astonned as if he had been fallen from the clouds. In the end
for all his despair he said to Zilia (...) countenance indifferent merry: Since
it is so madame, that you take from me all hope to be your perpetual servant,
and that without other comfort or contentation I must (...) depart your
presence, never (perchance) hereafter to speak unto you again, yet be not so
squeimish of your beauty, and cruel toward your languishing lover, as to
deny him a kiss for a pledge of his last farewell. I demand nothing here in
secret, but that (...) you may perform openly. It is all that alone which I
crave at your hands in recompe^se of all the trauails, pains, and afflictions
suffered for your sake. The malicious dame full of rancor and spiteful rage
said unto him: I shall see by and by sir, if that love which you (...) to bear
me, be so vehement as you seem to make. Ah Madame (said the unadvised lover)
commau^d only, and you shall see with what devotion I will perform your will,
were it that it should cost me the price of my proper life. You shall have
(quod she) the kiss which you require of me if you will make promise, and
swear by the says of a Gentleman, to do the thing which I shall command,
without fraud, couin, or other delay. Madame (said the over wilful lover) I
take God to witness that of the thing which you shall command I will not
leave one jot (...), but shall be executed to the uttermost of your request
and will. She hearing him swear with so good affection, said unto him smiling:
Now then upon your oath which I believe, and assured of your virtue and Noble
nature, I will also perform and keep my promise: And saying so, she embraced
him and kissed him very lovingly. The pore gentleman not knowing how (...) he
had brought that dissauorable favor, and bitter sweetness, held her a while
between his arms, doubling kiss upon kiss, with such pleasure, as his soul
thought to fly up to the heavens with that impoisoned baulme which he sucked
in the sweet and sugared breath of his cruel mistress: who undoing her self
out of her lovers arms, said unto him: Since that I have made the first
disclosure both of the promise and the effect thereof, it behooves that you
perform that which rests, for the full accomplishment of the same. Come on
hardily (says he) and God knows how spedily you shall be obeyed. I will then
(quod she) and command you upon your promised faith, yt from this present
time, until yt space of three years be expired, you speak to no living person
for any thing that shall happen unto you, nor yet express by tongue, by sound
of word, or speech, the thing you want or desire, otherwise if you shall do,
I will never trust living man for your sake, but will publishe your same to be
villainous, and your person perjured, and a promise breaker. I leave for you to
think whether this unhappy lover were amazed or not, to hear such a strange
request and commandment so unjust, and therwithall the difficulty in the
performance. Notwithstanding he was so stout of heart, and so religious an
obseruer of his (...), that at that very time he began to do the part which she
had commanded, playing (...), and using other signs, that he would do his
duty, according to her demand. Thus after his right humble reverence unto
her, he went home, where fayning that he had lost his speech by means of a
Catarre or reume which distilled from his brain, he determined to forsake his
country until the time of his penance was expired. Wherefore setting stay in
his affairs, and prouidyng for his train, he made him ready to depart.
Notwithstanding, he wrote a Letter unto Zilia, before he took his journey,
which was toward the country of France, that in old time has beue the
solace and refuge of the miserable, as well for the pleasantness and
temperature of the air, the great wealth and the abundaunce of all things,
as for the courtesy, gentleness, and familiarity of the people: which may
compare with any other Nation upon the earth.

Now the Letter of Philiberto, fell into the hands of Lady Zilia, by means
of his Page instructed for that purpose: who advertised her of the departure of
his master, and of the despair wherein he was. Whereof she was somewhat
sorye, and offended: but yet puttyng on her aunciente severity, took the
Letters, and breakyng the seal, found that which follows.

THE very evil that causes mine anoy
The matter is that bredes to me my joy,
Which does my woeful heart full sore displease,
And yet my hap and hard ill luck does ease.
I hope one day when I am frank and free,
To make her do the thing that pleases me,
Whereby gain I shall, some pleasant gladness,
To supply mine undeserved sadness,
The like whereof no mortal Dame can give
To loving man that here on earth does live.
This great good turn which I on her pretend,
Of my conceits the full desired end,
Proceeds from thee (O cruel mystres mine)
Whose froward heart has made me to resign
The full effect of all my liberty
(To please and ease thy fond fickle fancy)
My use of speech, in silence to remain:
To every wight a double hellish pain.
Whose faith had thou not wickedly abusde
No stresse of pain for thee had been refusde,
Who was to thee a trusty servant sure,
And for thy sake all dangers would endure.
For which thou have defaced thy good name,
And there unto procurde eternal shame.
I That roaring tempest huge which thou have made me felt,
The raging storms whereof, well nere my heart has swelt
By painful pangs: whose waltering waves by troubled skies
And thousand blastes of wind that in those seas do rise
Do promise shipwreck sure of that thy sailing Bark
When after weather clear does rise some tempest dark.
For either I or thou which art of Tygres kind,
In that great raging gulf some danger sure shall find,
Of that thy nature rude the dest'nies enemies be,
And thy great overthrow full well they do foresee.
The heavens unto my estate no doubt great friendship shoe
And do seek ways to end, and finish all my woe.
This penance which I bear by yelding to thy hest
Great store of joys shall heap, and bring my mind to rest.
And when I am at ease amids my pleasant happes,
Then shall I see thee fall, and suarlde in Fortunes trapes.
Then shall I see thee banne and curse the wicked time
Wherein thou made me gulpe such draught of poisoned wine.
By which thy mortal cup, I am the offered wight,
A vowed sacrifice, to that thy cruel spite.
Wherefore my hoping heart, does hope to see the day,
That thou for silence now, to me shall be the pray.
I O blessed God most just, whose worthy laud and praise
With uttered speech in Skies aloft I dare not once to raise,
And may not well pronounce and speak what suffrance I sustain,
Ne yet what death I do endure, whiles I in life remain.
Take vengeance on that traitresse rude, afflict her corpse with woe,
Thy holy arm redress her fault, that she no more do so.
My reason has not so far strayed, but I may hope and trust
To see her for her wickedness, be whipped with plague most just:
In the mean while, great hauinesse my sense and soul does bite,
And shaking fever vex my corpse for grief of her despite.
My mind now set at liberty, from thee (O cruel dame)
Does give defiance to thy wrath, and to thy cursed name,
Proclamyng mortal war on thee, until my tongue untied
Shall joy to speak to Zilia fast weeping by my side.
The heue^s forbid, that causeless wrong abroad should make his vau^t,
Or that an undeserved death, forget full tomb should haunt:
But that in written book and verse their names should ever live,
And eke their wicked deeds should die, and virtues still reuine.
So shall the pride and glory both, of her be punished right,
By length of years, and tract of time. And I by virtues might
Full recompense thereby shall have, and stand still in good fame,
And she like caitife wretch shall live, to her long lasting shame.
Whose fond regard of beauties grace, contemned has the force
Of my true love full fixed in her: her heart void of remorse,
Esteemed it self right foolishely, and me abused still,
Usurping my good honest faith and credit at her will.
Whose loyal faith does rest in soul, and therein still shall bide,
Until in filthy stinking grave, the earth my corpse shall hide.
Then shall that soul fraught with that faith, to heue^s make his (...).
And rest among the heavenly rout, bedeckt with sacred air. (pair,
And thou for thy great cruelty, as God above does know,
With rufull voice shall weep and wail for thy great overthrow,
And when thou would fain purge thy self for that thy wretched
No kindness shall to thee be done, extreme shall be thy mede (deed
And where my tongue does want his will, thy mischief to display
My hand and pen supplies the place, and shall do so always.
For so thou have constrainde the same by force of thy behest:
In silence still my tongue to keep, t'accomplishe thy request.
Adieu, farewell my tormenter, thy friend that is full mute,
Does bid thee farewell once again, and so he ends his suit.
He that lives only, to be revenged of thy cruelty, Philiberto of Virle.


Zilia like a disdainful woman made but a jest at the letters and complaints
of the infortunat lover, saying that she was very well content with his
service. And that when he should perform the time of his probatiou, she should
see if he were worthy to be admitted into the fellowship of them which had made
sufficient proof of the order and rule of love. In the mean time Philiberto
rode by great iourneys (as we have said before) toward the goodly and pleasant
Country of France. wherein Charles the seventh that time did reign, who
miraculously (but give the French man leave to flatter and speak well of his
own Country, according to the flattering and vaunting nature of that Nation)
chased ye English men out of his lands and ancient Patrimony in the year of
our Lord. 1451. This king had his camp then warfaring in Gascoine, whose luck
was so fortunate as he expeld his enemies, and left no place for the^ to
fortify in the said Country, which encouraged the king to follow that good
occasion, and by prosecuting his victorious fortune, to profligat out of
Normandy, and to dispatch himself of that enemy, into whose hands and
servitude the Country of Guiene was rightly delivered and victoriously won
and gotten by the Englishmen. The king then being in his Camp in Normandy,
the Piedmont Gentleman the Lord of Virle aforesaid, repaired thereunto to serve
him in his person, where he was well known of some Captains which had seen
him at other times, and in place where worthy Gentlemen are wont to frequent,
and in the Duke of Sauoyes court, which the Frenchmen did very much (...),
because the Earl of Piedmont that then was Duke of Sauoy had married Iolanta
the second daughter of Charles the seventh. These Gentlemen of France were
very much sorry for the misfortune of the Lord of Virle, and knowing him to be
one of the brauest and lustiest men of arms that was in his time within the
Country of Piedmont, presented him before the King, commending unto his grace
the virtue, gentleness, and valianee of the man of war: Who after he had
done his (...) according to his duty, which he knew full well to do, declared
unto him by signs that he was come for none other intent, but in those wars
to serve his majesty: whom the king heard and tha^kfully received, assuring
himself and promising very much of the (...) Gitlema^ for respect of his
personage which was comely and well proportioned, and therefore represented some
force and great dexterity: and that which made the king the better to fantasy
yt gentleman, was ye report of so many worthy me^ which extolled even to yt
heane^s ye prowess of yt Piedmont knight. Whereof he gave assured testimony in
yt assault which yt king made to deliver (...) the chief City and defense of
all (...) in ye year of our Lord. 1451. where Philiberto behaved himself so
(...) as he was yt first yt mounted upon yt walls, and by his dexterity and
invincible force, made way to the soldiers in the breche, whereby a little while
after they entered and sacked ye enemies, driving the^ out of yt City, and
wherein not long before, yt is to say. 1430. yt Duke of Somerset caused loan yt
Pucelle to be burnt. The King advertised of yt service of the du^be Gentleman,
would reco^pense him according to his desert, and because he knew him to be of
a good house, he made him a Gentleman of his chamber, and gave him a good
pension, promising him moreover to continue his liberality, when he should see
him prosecute in time to come, yt towardness of service which he had so happily
begone. The du^be Gentleman thanking the king very humbly, both for yt present
princely reward, and for promise in time to come, lifted up his hand to heaven,
as taking God to witness of the faith, which inviolable he promised to keep
unto his Prince: which he did so earnestly, as hardely he had promised, as well
appeared in a skirmish between yt French, and their ancient enemies the English
men, on whose side was ye valiant and hardy Captain the Lord Talbot, who has
eternized his memory in ye victories obtained upon yt people, which sometimes
made Europa and Asia to tremble, and appalled ye monstrous and warlike Country
of Africa. In this conflict the Piedmont knight joined with the lord Talbot,
against who^ he had so happy success, as upon yt shock and (...), he overthrew
both man and horse, which caused ye disco^fiture of yt English me^: who after
they had horssed again their captain, (...) amain, leaving the (...) bespred with
dead bodies and bludshed of their co^panio^s. This victory recovered such (...)
and boldness to yt French, as from yt time forth the English me^ began with
their places and forts to lose also their hearts to defend themselves. The king
excedingly well contented with the prowess and valia^ce of the dumb gentleman,
gave him for service past the charge of v. C. men of arms, and endued him with
some possessions, attending better fortune to make him understand how much ye
virtue of valiance ought to be rewarded and cherished by Princes that be aided
in their necessity with the diligence of such a virtuous and Noble Gentleman.
In like manner when a Prince has something good in himself, he can do no less
but cherish yt which (...) himself by Princely conditions, since yt virtue in
what so ever place it takes root, can not choose but produce good fruit, yt
use whereof far surmounts them all which aproche yt place, where these first
seeds were thrown. Certain days after, the king desirous to reioyee his
Knights and Captains that were in his train, and desirous to extinguish quite
the woeful time which so (...) space held France in fearful silence, caused
(...) triumph of Turney to be proclaimed within the City of Roane, wherein the
Lord of Virle was deemed and esteemed one of the best, which further did
increase in him the good will of ye king, in such wise as he determined to
procure his health, and to make him have his speech again. For he was very
sorry that a gentleman so valiant was not able to express his mind, which if
it might be had, in council would serve the state of common wealth, so well as
the force and valor of his body had til then served for defense and recovery of
his places. And for that purpose he made Proclamation by sound of Trumpet
throughout the Countries as well within his own kingdom, as the regions
adjoining upon the same, yt who so ever could heal that dumb Gentleman, should
have ten thousand Frankes for recompense. A man might have then seen
thousands of Physicians assembled in field, not to skirmish with the English
me^, but to combat for reward in recovery of the Pacients speech, and begone
to make such war against those ten thousand Franks, as the King was afraid
that the cure of that disease could take no effect: and for that cause ordained
furthermore, that who so ever would take in hand to heal the dumb, and would
not keep promise within a certain prefixed time, should pay the said sum, or
for default thereof should pledge his head in gage. A man might then have seen
those Physic masters, as well beyond yt Mountains, as in France it self,
retire home again, bleeding at the nose, cursing with great impiety their
Patrones, Galen, Hypocrates and Auicen, and blamed with more than reprochful
words, the Art wherewith they fished for honor and richesse. This brute was
spread so far, and babbling Fame had already by mouth of Trumpe published ye
same throughout the most part of the Provinces, Towns, and Cities near and
far off to France, in such wise as a man would have thought that the two young
men (which once in the time of the Macedonian wars brought tidings to
Vatinius that the King of (...) was taken by the Consul Paulus Emilius) had
been vagant and wa^dering abroad to carry news of the Kings edicte for the
healing of the Lord of Virle. Which caused that not only the brute of the
Proclamation, but also the credit and reputation wherein the said Lord was with
the French King, came even to Montcall, and passed from mouth to mouth, til at
length Zilia the principal cause thereof understood the news, which reioysed
her very much, seeing ye firm amity of the dumb Lord, and the sincere faith
of him in a promise unworthy to be kept, for so much as, where (...) and fear
bear swinge in hearts of men, religion of promise, specially the place of the
given faith, gives over his force and reuolteth, and is no more bound but to
that which by good will he would observe. Now thought she, thought? nay rather
she assured her self, that the Gentleman for all his written letter was so
surprised with her love, and kindled with her fire in so ample wise, as when he
was at (...): and therefore determined to go to Paris, not for desire she had
to see her pacient and penetenciarie, but rather for couetise of the ten
thousand Fra^ks, whereof already she thought her self assured, making good
account that the dumb Gentleman seeing himself discharged by her of his
promise, for gratifying of her, would make no stay to speak, to the intent she
might bear away both the (...) and money which all others had (...) till that
time. Thus you see that she whom honest amity and long service could little
induce to compassion and desire to give some ease unto her most earnest lover,
yielded her self to covetous gain and gredinesse for to increase her richesse.
O curssed hunger of Money, how long will thou thus blind the reason and
sprites of men? Ah perilous gulf how many have thou overwhelmed within thy
botto^lesse throat, whose glory, had it not been for thee, had surpassed ye
clouds, and been equal with the brightness of the Sun, where now they be
obscured with the thickness of thy fogges and palpable darkness. Alas the
fruits which thou bring forth for all thine outward appearance, conduce no
felicity to them that be thy possessors, for the dropsey that is hidden in
their mind, which makes them so much the more thirsty, as they drink often in
that thirsty Fountain, is cause of their alteration: and most miserable is
that insaciable desire the Covetous have to glut their appetite, which can
receive no contentation. This only (...) sometimes procured the death of the
great and rich Roman Crassus, who through Gods punishment fell into the hands
(...) the Persians, for violating and sacking the Temple of God that was in
Jerusalem. Sextimuleus burning with Covetousness and gredinesse of money, did
once cut of the head of his patron and defender Caius (...) the Tribune of the
people, incited by the Tyrant, which tormenteth the hearts of the couctous. I
will not speak of a good number of other examples in people of all kinds, and
diverse nations, to come again to Zilia. Who forgetting her virtue, the first
ornament and shining quality of her honest behauior, feared not the weariness
and travail of way, to commit her self to the danger of loss of (...), and to
yield to the mercy of one, unto whom she had done so great injury, as her
conscience (if she had not lost her right sense) ought to have made her
think that he was not without desire to revenge yt wrong (...) done unto him,
and specially being in place where she was not known, and he greatly honored
and esteemed, for whose love that Proclamation and search of Physic was made
and ordained. Ziha then having put in order her affairs at home, departed from
Montcall, and passing the Mountes, arrived at Paris, at such time as greatest
despair was had of the dumb Knights recovery. When she was arrived there,
within few days after she inquired for them that had the charge to entertain
such as came, and would take upon them the cure of the said pacient. For (said
she) if there be any man in the world, through whom the Knight may get his
health, I hope in God that I am she which shall have the praise. Hereof the
Commissaries deputed hereunto, were advertised, who caused the fair Physician
to come before them, and asked her if it were she, that would take upon her to
cure this dumb Gentleman. To whom she answered, my masters it has pleased
God to reveal unto me a certain secret very proper and meet for the cure of
his malady, wherewithal if the pacient will, I hope to make him speak so
well, as he did these two years past and more. I suppose said one of the
Commissaries, that you be not ignorant of the (...) of the Kings Proclamation.
I know full (quod she) the effect thereof, and therefore do say unto you, that I
will loose my life if I do not accomplish that which I do promise, upon
condition that I may have license to tarry with him alone, because it is of no
less importance than his health. It is no marvel said the Commissary,
considering your beauty, which is sufficient to frame a new tongue in the most
(...) person, yt is under the heavens. And therefore do your endeavor, assuring
you, that you shall do a great pleasure unto the King, and besides the praise
which you shall acquire, get the good will of the dumb gentleman which is the
most excellent man of the world, and therefore shall be so well recompensed, as
you shall have good cause to be routented with the Kings liberality. But (to
the intent you be not deceived) the meaning of the Proclamation is, that
within. xv. days after you begin ye cure, you must make him hole, or else to
satisfy the pains ordained in the same. Whereunto she submitted her self,
blinded by Avarice and presumption, thinking that she had like power over the
Lord of Virle, as when she gave him that sharp and cruel penance. These
conditions promised, the Commissaries went to advertise the Knight, how a
Gentlewoman of Piedmont was of purpose come into France to help him: whereof
he was maruellously astonned. Now he would never have thought that Zilia had
borne him so great good will, as by abasing the pride of her courage, would have
come so far to ease ye grief of him, whom by such great torments she had so
wonderfully persecuted. He thought again that it was the Gentlewoman his
neighbor which sometimes had done her endeavor to help him, and had provoked
Zilia to absolve him of his faith, and acquit him of his promise. Musing upon
the diversity of these things, and not knowing whereupon to settle his
judgment, the deputies commanded that the woman Physician should be brought to
speak with the patient. Which was done: and brought in place, the Commissaries
presently with drew themselves. The Lord of Virle seeing his enemy come before
him, whom sometimes he loved very (...), judged by and by the cause wherefore
she came, that only avarice and gredy desire of gain (...) rather procured
her to pass the mountains trauail, than due and honest amity, wherewith she
was double bound through his perseverance and humble service, whereby he was
estraunged of himself, as he fared like a shadow and image of a dead man.
Wherefore calling to mind the rigor of his Lady, her inciuilitie and fond
commandment, so long time to forbid his speech, the love which once he bare
her, with a vehement desire to obey her, suddenly was so cooled and qualified,
that love was turned into hatred, and will to serve her, into an appetite of
revenge: whereupon he determined to use that present fortune, and to play his
part with her, upon whom he had so foolishly doted, and to pay her with that
mo^ney wherewith she made hint feel the fruits of unspeakable cruelty, to
give example to fond and presumptuous dames, how they did abuse Gentlemen of
such degree whereof the Knight was, and that by having regard to the merit of
such personages, they be not so prodigal of themselves, as to set their
honor in sale for vile reward and filthy mucke: which was so constantly
conserved and defended by this Gentlewoman, against the assaults of the good
grace, beauty, calour, and gentleness, of that virtuous and honest suter. And
notwithstanding, in these days we see some to resist the amity of those that
love, for an opinion of a certain virtue, which they think to be hidden
within the corpse of excellent beauty, who afterward do set them selves to
sale to him yt gives most, and offreth greatest reward. Such do not deserve to
be placed in rank of chaste Gentlewomen, of whom they have no smack at all, but
amongs the throng of strumpets kind, that have some spark and outward show of
love: for she which loves money (...) hunteth after gain, will make no bones,
by treasons trap to betray that unhappy man, which shall yield himself to
her: her love tending to insensible things, and such in deed, as make the
wysest sort to falsify their faith, and sell the right and equity of their
Judgment. The Lord of Virle, seeing Zilia then in his company, and almost
at his commandment, feigned as though he knew her not, by reason of his small
regard and less intertainment showed unto her at her first coming: Which
greatly made the poor Gentlewoman to muse. Nevertheless she making a virtue of
necessity, and seeing her self to be in that place, from whence (...) could
not depart, without the loss of her honor and life, purposed to prove
Fortune, and to commit her self unto his mercy, for all the mobiltie which
the ancient attribute unto Fortune. Wherefore shutting fast the door, she
went unto the Knight, to whom she spoke these words: And what is the matter
(sir knight) that now you make so little account of your own Zilia, who in
times past you said, had greater power and authority over you? What is the
cause that moves you hereunto? Have you so soon forgotten her? Behold me
better, and you shall see her before you, that is able to acquit you of your
promise, and therefore prays you to pardon her committed faults done in
times past by abusing so cruelly the honest and (...) love which you bare her.
I am she, which through folly and temeritie did stop your mouth, and tied up
your tongue. Give me leave I beseech you, to open the same again, and to break
the line, which lets the liberty of your speech. She seeing that the dumb
Gentleman would make no answer at all, but Mumme, and showed by signs, that
he was not able to undo his tongue, weepyng began to kiss him, embrace him,
and make much of him, in such wise, as he which once studied to make eloquent
orations before his Lady, to induce her to pity, forgot then those
ceremonies, and spared his talk, to show himself to be such one as she
had made at her commandment, mused and devised altogether upon the execution
of that, which sometime he had so paynefully pursued, both by words and
continual service, and could profit nothing. Thus waked again by her,
which once had mortified his mind, assayed to renew in her that, which long
time before, seemed to be a sleep. She more for fear of loss of life, or
the price of the reward, than for any true or earnest love, suffered him to
receive that of her, which the long suter desires to obtain of his mistress.
They lived in this joy and pleasure the space of. xv. days ordained for the
assigned term of her cure, wherein the poor Gentlewoman was not able to
convert her offended friend, to speak, although she humbly prayed him to show
so much favor, as at least she might go free, from either loss: tellyng him
how little regard she had to her honor, to come so far to do him
pleasure, and to discharge him of his promise. Much other gay and lowlye talk
she had to move the Knight to take no regard of that she said, for he
determined to bring her in such fear, as he had been heaped full of
heaviness, which came to pass at the expired time. For the co^missaries
seeing that their pacient spoke not at all, summoned the gentlewoma^ to pay the
penalty pronounced in the edict, or else to lose her life. Alas, how bitter
seemed this drink to this poor Gentlewoman, who not able to dissemble the
grief that pressed her on every side, began to say: Ah I wretched and Caitife
woman, by thinkyng to deceive an other, have sharpened the sword to finishe
mine own life. (...) it not enough for me to use such cruelty toward this
mine enemy, which most cruelly in double wise takes revenge, but must I come
to be thus tangled in his snares, and in the hands of him, who inioying the
spoils of mine honor, will with my life, deprive me of my fame, by making me
a common fable, to all posterity in time to come? O what hap had I that I was
not rather devoured by some furious and cruel beast, when I passed the
mountains, or else that I brake not my neck, down some steep and headlong hill,
of those high and hideous mountains, rather than to be set here in stage, a
pageant to the whole city to gaze upon, for enterprising a thing so fondely,
done of purpose by him, whom I have offended. Ah Signior Philiberto, what
(...) rewardest thou for pleasures received, and favors felt in her, whom thou
did love so much, as to make her die such shameful and dreadful death. But O
God, I know that it is for worthy guerdon of my foolish and wicked life. Ah
disloyalty and fickle trust, is it possible that thou be harbored in the
heart of him, which had the brute to be the most loyal and courteous
Gentleman of his country? Alas, I see well now that I must die through mine
only simplicity, and that I must sacrifice mine honor to the rigor of him,
which with two advantages, takes over cruel revenge of the little wrong,
wherewith my chastity touched him before. As she thus had finished her
complaint, one came for her to carry her to prison, whether willingly she went
for that she was already resolved in desire, to live no longer in that misery.
The gentleman contented with that pain, and not able for to dissemble the
grief, which he conceived for the passion which he saw his well-beloved to
endure, the enjoying of whom renewed the heat of the flames forepast, repaired
to the king, unto whom to the great pleasure of the standers by, and exceeding
rejoice of his majesty (to hear him speak) he told the whole history of
the love between him and cruel Zilia, the cause of the loss of his spech, and
the sum of his revenge. By the faith of a Gentleman (said the King) but here
is so strange an history as ever I heard: and verily your faith and loyalty
is no less to be praised and commended than the crueltic and covetousness of
the woman woorthye of reproach and blame, which truly deserves some grievous and
notable justice, if so be she were not able to render some apparent cause for
the couerture and hidyng of her folly. Alas sir (said the Gentleman) pleases
your majesty to deliver her (although she be worthy of punishment) and
discharge the rest that be in prison for not recovery of my speech, since my
only help did rest, either at her commandment which had bound me to that
wrong, or else in the expired time, for which I had pledged my faith. To which
request, the King very willingly agreed, greatly praisyng the wisdom,
courtesy, and above all the fidelity of the lord of Virle, who causing his
penitenciarie to be set at liberty, kept her company certain days, as
well to feast and banquet her, in those lands and possessions which the kings
majesty had liberally bestowed upon him, as to saciate his appetite with the
fruits whereof he had sauoured the taste when he was voluntarily dumb. Zilia
found that favor so pleasant, that in a manner she counted her imprisonment
happy, and her travel rest, by reason that distress made her then feel more
lively the force and pleasure of liberty, which she had not found to be so
pleasant, had she not received the experience and pain thereof. Mark here how
fortune (...) with them which trusting in their force, despise (in respect of
that which they do them selves) the little porcio^ that they judged to be in
others. If the vainglorie and arrogant presumption of a chastity impregnable
had not deceived this Gentlewoman, if the sacred hunger of gold had not
blinded her, it could not (...) been known, wherein her incontinencie
consisted, not in the minion delights and alluring toys of a passionate
lover, but in yt covetous desire of filling her purse, and hypocritical glory
of praise among men. And notwithstanding, ye see the gain which she made, to
(...) her turn nothing at all, but to the perpetual reproach of her name, and
raised a slander, such as ill speakers and enemies of womenkind, do burden
that sex withal. But the fault of one which by her own presumption deceived
her self, ought not to obscure the glory of so many virtuous, fair and
honest dames, who by their chastity, liberality and courtesy, be able to
deface the blot of folly, covetousness, and cruelty of this gentlewoman here,
and of all other that do resemble her. Who taking leave of her lover, went home
again to Piedmont, not without an ordinary grief of heart, which served
her for a spur to her conscience, and continually forced her to think, that
the force of man is less tha^ nothing, where god works not by his grace,
which failyng in us, our works can savor but of the (...) and corruption of
our nature, wherein it tumbleth and tosseth like the Sow that waloweth in the
puddle full of filth and dirte. And because ye shall not think in general
terms of woman's chastity and discretion, that I am not able to vouche some
particular example of later years, I mean to tell you of one, that is not only
to be praised for her chastity in the absence of her husband, but also of her
courage and policy in chastizing (...) vaunting natures of two Hungarian lords
that made their braggs they would win her to their wills, and not only her,
but also al other, what soever they were of womankinde.

A Lady of Boeme
Two Barons of (...) assuring them selves to obtain their suit made to a fair
Lady of (...), (...) of her a strange and marvelous repulse, to their great
shame and infamy, curssyng the time that ever they adventured an enterprise so
foolish.

The. xxviij. Nouel.
P Enelope, the woeful wife of absent Ulysses, in her tedious lo^ging for the
home return of that her adueturous knight, assailed with careful heart
amidde the troop of amorous suitors, and within the bowels of her royal palace,
deserved no greter fame for her valiant encountries and stout defense of the
invincible and Adamante forte of her chastity, than this Boeme Lady (...) by
resisting two mighty barons, that canoned the walls and well mured rampart of
her pudicitie. For being threatened in his Princes court, whether all the well
trained crew of each science and profession, did make repair, being menaced
by Venus band, which not only summoned her forte, and gave her a camisado by
thick AP Arms, but also forced the place by fierce assault, she like a
courageous and politic captain, gave those brave and lusty soldiers, a
foul repulse, (...) in end taking them captines, urged them for their
victuals to fall to woman's toil, more shameful than shameless Sardanapalus
amidde his amorous troop.

I need not aggrauate by length of preamble, the fame of this, Boeme Lady, nor
yet (...) recou^t the triumph her victory: vain it were also by glorious
hymns to chaunt the wisdom of her beleuyng Make, who not careless of her
life, employed his care to serve his Prince, and by service at chieued the
cause that drove him to a soldiers state. But yet for trustlesse faith in the
prime conference of his future port, he consulted with Pollaco, for a
compounded drugge, to ease his suspect mind, which medicine so eased his
malady, as it not only preserved him from the infected humor, but also made
him happy for ever. Such fall the euentes of valiant minds, though many times
mother iealosie yt (...) wytch steppeth in her foot to anoy the well disposed
heart. For had he joined to his valiaunce credit of his loving wife, without
the blind advise of such as profess that black and lying science, double
glory he had gained: once for endeavoring by service to seek honor: the
second, for absolute trust in her, that never meant to beguile him, as by her
first answer to his first motion appears. But what is to be objected
against the Barons? Let them answer for their fault, in this discourse
ensuing: which so lessoneth all noble minds, as warely they ought to beware
how they adventure upon the honor of Ladies, who be not altogether of one
self and yeldyng trampe, but well (...) and steeled in the shamefast shop of
loyalty, which armure defends them against the fond skirmishes and
vnconsidred conflicts of Venus wanton band. The majesty's also of ye King and
Queen, are to be advanced above the stars for their wise dissuasion of those
noble men from their hot and hedlesse enterprise and then their justice for due
execution of their forfait, the particularitie of which discourse in this wise
does begin.

Mathie Coruine sometime king of Hungaric, about the year of our Lord.
1458. was a valiant man of war, and of goodly personage. He was the first
that was famous, or feared of the Turks, of any prince that governed that
kingdom. And amongs other his (...) so well in arms and letters, as in
liberality and courtesy he excelled all that reigned in his time. He had to
wife Queen Beatrice of Arragon, the daughter of old (...), king of Naples,
and sister to the mother of Alphonsus, Duke of Ferrara, who in learning, good
conditions, and al other virtues generally dispersed in her, was a surpassing
Princess, and she wed hirself not only a courteous and liberal Gentlewoman to
king Mathie her husband, but to al other, that for virtue seemed worthy of
honor and reward: in such wise as to the court of these two noble princes,
repaired the most notable men of al nations that were given to any kind of good
exercise, and every of them according to their desert and degree were welcomed
and entertained. It chanced in this time, that a knight of (...), the vassal
of King Mathie, for that he was likewise king of that country, borne of a
noble house, very valiant and well exercised in arms, fell in love with a
passing fair Gentlewoman of like nobility, and reputed to be the (...) of all
the country, and had a brother that was but a poor Gentleman, not luckie to
the goods of fortune. This Boemian knight was also not very rich, having only
a castle, with certain revenues (...), which were (...) able to yield unto him
any great maintenance of living. Falling in love then with this fair
Gentlewoman, he demanded her in marriage of her brother, and with her had but a
very little dowry. And this knight not well forseeing his poor estate, brought
his wife home to his house, and there, at more leisure considering yt same,
began to feel his lack and penury, and how hardly and scant his revenues were
able to maintein his port. He was a very honest and gentle person, and one that
delited not by any means to burden and fine his tenants, co^tenting himself
with ye revenue which his auncesters left him, the same amounting to no great
yearly rent. When this gentleman perceived yt he stood in need of
extraordinary relief, after many and diverse considerations with himself, he
purposed to follow the court, and to serve king Mathie his souerain lord and
master, there by his diligence and experience, to seek means for ability to
sustain his wife and him self. But so great and fervent was yt love that he
bare unto his lady, as he thought it impossible for him to live one hour (...)
her, and yet judged it not best to have her with him to ye court, for avoiding
of further charges (...) to courting ladies, whose delight (...) pleasure rests
in the toys and tricks of ye same, yt cannot he well avoided in poor ge^tleme^,
without their names in the Mercers or Drapers Iornals, a heavy thing for them
to consider if for their disport they like to walk yt streets. The daily
thinking thereupon, brought yt poor Gentleman to great sorrow and heaviness.
The lady that was young, wise and discrete, marking ye manner of her husband,
feared yt he had some (...) of her. Wherefore upon a day she thus said unto him:
Dear husband, willingly would I wish and desire a good turn at your hand, if I
wist I should not displease you. Demand what you will (said the knight) if I
can I will gladly perform it, because I do esteem your satisfaction, as I do
mine own life. Then the Lady very sobrely prayde him, that he would open unto
her the cause of that discontenment, which he showed outwardly to have, for
that his mind and behavior seemed to be contrary to ordinary custom, and
contrived day and night in fighes, auoidyng the company of them that were wont
specially to delight him. The Knight hearing his ladies request, paused a
while, and then said unto her: My well-beloved wife, for so much as you desire to
understand my thought and mind, and whereof it comes that I am so sad and
pensife, I will tell you: All the heaviness wherewith you see me to be
affected, does tend to this end. Feign would I devise that you and I, may in
honor live together, according to our calling. For in respect of our
parentage, our liuelode is very poor, the occasion whereof were our parents,
who morgaged their lands, and consumed a great part of their goods that our
auncesters left them. I daily thinkyng hereupon, and conceiving in my head
diverse imaginations, can devise no means but one, yt in my (...) seems best,
which is, yt I go to the Court of our souerain lord Mathie, who at this present
is inferring wars upon ye Turk, at whose hands I do not mistrust to receive
good (...), being a most liberal prince, and one that estemeth al such as be
valiant and active. And I for my part will so govern my self (by Gods grace)
that by deserte I will procure such living and (...), as hereafter we may live
in our old days a quiet life to our great stay and comfort: For although
Fortune hitherto has not favored that state of pare^tage, whereof we be, I
doubt not with noble courage to win that in despite of Fortunes teeth, which
obstinately hitherto she has denied. And the more assured am I of this
determination, because at other times, I have served under the Lord Vaiuoda in
Transsyluania, against the Turk, where many times I have been required to serve
also in the Court, by that honorable Gentleman, the Count of Cilia. But when
I did consider the beloved company of you (dear wife) the sweetest companion
that ever wight did (...), I thought it impossible for me to forbear your
presence, which if I should do, I were worthy to sustain that dishonor, which
a great number of careless Gentlemen do, who followyng their private gain
and will, abandon their young and fair wives, neglecting the fire which Nature
has instilled to the delicate bodies of such tender creatures. Fearing
therwithall, that so soon as I should depart, the lusty young Barons and
Gentlemen of the country would pursue the gain of that love, the price
whereof I do esteem above the crown of the greatest emperor in all the
world, and would not forgo for all the riches and precious Jewels in the
fertile soilt of Arabie, who no doubt would (...) together in greater heaps
than ever did the wowers of Penelope, within the famous graunge of Ithaca,
the house of wandering Ulysses. Which pursuit if they did attain, I
should for ever hereafter be ashamed to show my face before those that be of
valor and regard. And this is the whole effect of the scruple ((...) wife)
that hinders me, to seek for our better estate and fortune. When he had
spoken those words, (...) held his peace. The Gentlewoman which was wise and
stout, perceiving the great love that her husband bare her, when he had stayed
himself from talk, with good and merry countenance answered him in this wise:
Sir Vlrico (which was the name of the Gentleman) I in like manner as you have
done, have devised and thought upon the Nobility and birth of our ancestors,
from whose state and port (and that without our fault and crime) we be far
wide and divided. Notwithstanding I determined to set a good face upon the
matter, and to make so much of our painted sheath as I could. In deed I
confess my self to be a woman, and you men do say that women's hearts be faint
I feeble: but to be plain with you, the contrary is in me, my heart is so
stout and ambitious, as paraduenture not meet and consona^t to power and
ability, although we women will find no lack if our hearts have pith and
strength enough to bear it out. And feign would I support the state wherein my
mother maintained me. Now be it for mine own part (to God I yield the thanks) I
can so moderate and stay my little great heart, that contented and satisfied I
can be, with that which your ability can bear, and pleasure command. But to
come to the point, I say that debating with my self of our state as you full
wisely do, I do verily think that you being a young Gentleman, lusty and
valiant, no better remedy or devise can be found, than for you to aspire and
seek the Kings favor and service. And it must needs rise and redounde to your
gain and preferment, for that I hear you say the Kings majesty does
already know you. Wherefore I do suppose that his grace (a skillful
Gentleman to way and esteem the virtue and valor of each man) cannot choose
but (...) and recompense the well doer to his singular co^tentation and comfort.
Of this mine opinion I durst not before this time utter word or sign for fear
of your displeasure. But now since your self has opened ye way and means, I
have presumed to discover ye same, do what shall seem best unto your good
pleasure. And I for my part, although yt I am a woman (accordingly as I said
eue^ now) tha thy nature am desirous of honor, and to show my self abroad more
rich and sumptuous than other, yet in respect of our fortune, I shall be
contented so long as I live to continue with you in this our Castle, where by
the grace of God I will not fail to serve, love, and obey you, and to keep
your house in that moderate sort, as the revenues shall be able to maintain
the same. And no doubt but that poor living we have orderly used, shall be
sufficient to find us two, and. v. or. (...). servants with a couple of
horse, and so to live a quiet and merry life. If God do send us any children,
til they come to lawful age, we will with our poor living bring them up so
well as we can, and then to prefer them to some Noble men's services, with
whom by Gods grace they may acquire honor and living, to keep them in their
aged days. And I do trust that we two shall use such mutual love, and
rejoice, that so long as our life does last in wealth and woe, our contented
minds shall rest satisfied. But I waying the stoutnesse of your mind, do know
that you esteem more an ounce of honor, than all the gold that is in the
world. For as your birth is Noble, so is your heart and stomach. And therefore
many times seeing your great heaviness, and manifold muses and studies, I
have wondered with my self whereof they should proceed, and amongs other my
conceits, I thought that either my behauior and order of dealing, or my
personage did not like you: or else that your wonted gentle mind and
disposition had been altered and transformed into some other Nature: many times
also I was content to think that the cause of your disquiet mind, did rise
upon the disuse of arms wherein you were wont daily to accustom your self
amongs the troops of the honorable, a company in deed most worthy of your
presence. (...) many times these and such like cogitations, I have sought
means by such loving allurements as I could devise, to ease and mitigate your
troubled mind, and to withdraw the great impiety and care where with I saw
you to be affected. Because I do esteem you above all the world, deeming your
only grief to be my double pain, your aching finger, a (...) feuerfit, and
the least woe you can sustain most bitter death to me, that loves you more
dearly than my self. And for that I do perceive you are determined to serve
our Noble King, the sorrow which without doubt will assail me by reason of
your absence, I will sweeten and lenifie with contentation, to see your
commendable desire appeased and quiet. And the pleasant memory of your valiant
factes shall beguile my penfife thoughts, hoping our next meeting shall be more
joyful tha^ this our disjunction and departure heavy. And where you doubt of yt
confluence and repair of the dishonest which shall attempt the winning and
subduing of mine heart and unspotted body hitherto inuiolably kept from yt
touch of any person, cast from you yt fear, expel from your mind that fond
conceit: for death shall sooner close these mortal eyes, than my chastity
shall be defiled. For pledge whereof. I have none other thing to give, but my
true and simple faith, which if you dare trust, it shall hereafter appear so
firm and inviolable, as no spark of suspicion shall enter your careful
mind, which I may well term to be careful, because some care before hand
does rise of my behauior in your absence. The trial whereof shall yield sure
evidence and testimony, by passing my careful life which I may with better
cause so term, in your absence that God knows will be right (...) and
careful unto me, who ioyeth in nothing else but in your welfare. Nevertheless
all means and ways shall be agreeable unto my mind for your assurance, and
shall breed in me a wonderful contentation, which lusts after nothing but
your satisfaction. And if you list to close me up in one of the Castle towers
till your return, right glad I am there to continue an Ankresse life: so that
the same may ease your desired mind.

The Knight with great delight gave ear to the answer of his wife, and when she
had ended her talk, he began to say unto her: My well-beloved, I do like well
and greatly commend the stoutnesse of your heart, it pleases me greatly to
see ye same agreeable unto mine. You have lightened the same from inestimable
woe, by understanding your conceived purpose and determination to guard and
preserve your honor, praying you therein to persevere still remembering that when
a woman has lost her honor, she has forgone the chiefest jewel she has in
this life, and deserves no longer to be called woman. And touching my talk
proposed unto you, although it be of great importance, yet I mean not to
depart so soon. But if it do come to effect I assure thee wife, I will leave
thee Lady and mistress of all that I have. In the mean time I will consider
better of my business, and consult with my friends and kinsmen, and the^
determine what is best to be done. Till which time let us live and spend our
time so merely as we can. To be short, there was nothing that so much molested
the Knight, as the doubt he had of his wife, for that she was a very fine and
fair young Gentlewoman: And therefore he still devised and imagined what
assurance be might find of her behauior in his absence. And resting in this
imagination, not long after it came to pass that the Knight being in company
of diverse Gentlemen, and talking of sundry matters, a tale was told what
chanced to a gentleman of the Country which had obtained the favor and good
will of a woman, by means of an old man called Pollacco, which had the name
to be a famous enchaunter and Physician, dwelling at Cutiano a City of Boeme,
where plenty of silver Mines and other metals is. The knight whose Castle was
not far from Cutiano, had occasion to repair unto that City, and according
to his desire found out Pollacco, which was a very old man, and talking with
him of diverse things, perceived him to be of great skill. In end he entreated
him, that for so much as he had done pleasure to many for (...) of their love,
he would also instruct him, how he might be assured that his wife did keep her
self honest all the time of his absence, and that by certain signs he might
have sure knowledge whether she brake her faith, by sending his honesly into
Cornwall. Such vain trust this Knight reposed in the lying Science of Sorcery,
which although to many other is found deceitful, yet to him served for sure
evidence of his wives sidelitie. This Pollacco which was a very cunning
enchaunter as you have hard, said unto him: Sir you demand a very strange
matter, such as where with never hitherto I have been acquainted, ne yet
searched the depthe of those hidden secrets, a thing not commonly sued for, ne
yet practiced by me. For who is able to make assurance of a woman's chastity,
or tell by signs except he were at the deed doing, that she has done amiss?
Or who can gain by proctors wryt, to summon or sue a sprituall Court,
peremptorily to affirm by never so good evidence or testimony, yt a woman has
hazarded her honesty, except he swear Rem to be in Re, which the greatest
(...) that ever Padua bred, never saw by process duly tried? Shall I then
warrant you the honesty of such (...) cattle prone and ready to lust, easy to
be vanquished by the suites of earnest pursuers? But blame worthy surely I am,
thus generally to speak: for some I know, although not many, for whose pore
honesties I dare adventure mine own. And yet that number how small so ever it
be, is worthy all due reverence and honor. Notwithstanding. (because you
seem to be an honest Gentleman) of that knowledge which I have, I will not be
greatly (...). A certain secret experiment in deed I have, wherewith
perchance I may satisfy your demand. And this is it. I can by mine Art in
small time, by certain compositions, frame a woman's Image, which you
continually in a little box may carry about you, and so often as you list
behold the same. If the wife do not break her marriage faith, you shall still
see the same so fair and well colored as it was at the first making, and seem
as though it newly came from the painters shop, but if perchance she mean to
abuse her honesty, the same will wax pale, and in deed committing that filthy
fact, suddenly the color will be black, as arrayed with cole or other (...),
the smell whereof will not be very plesa^t: but at al times when she is attempted
or pursued, the color will be so yealow as gold. This marvelous secret devise
greatly pleased the Knight, verily believing the same to be true, specially much
moved and assured by ye fame bruted abroad of his science, whereof ye Citizens
of (...) told very strange and incredible things. When the price was paid of
this precious jewel, he received ye Image, and joyfully returned home to his
castle, where tarying certain days, he determined to repair to yt Court of the
glorious king Mathie, making his wife privy to his intent. Afterward when he
had disposed his household matters in order, he committed yt government thereof
to his wife, and having prepared all necessaries for his voyage, to the great
sorrow and grief of his beloved, he departed and arrived at Alba Regale, where
that time the King lay with Queen Beatrix his wife: of whom he was joyfully
received and entertained. He had not long continued in the Court, but he had
obtained and won the favor and good will of all men. The King (which knew him
full well) very honorably placed him in his court, and by him accomplished
diverse and many weighty affairs, which very wisely and trustely he brought to
pass according to the kings mind and pleasure. Afterward he was made Colonel
of a certain number of footmen sent by ye king against the Turks to defend a
hold which the enemies of God began to assail under ye conduct of Mustapha
Basca, which conduct he so well directed, and therein stoutly behaved himself, as
he chased al ye Infidels out of those coasts, winning thereby yt name of a most
valiant soldier and prudent captain. Whereby he meruellously gained ye favor
and grace of the king, who (over and besides his daily intertainement) gave
unto him a Castle, and the Revenue in fee farm for ever. Such rewards deserve
all valiant men, which for the honor of their Prince and country do willingly
employ their service, worthy no dout of great regard and cherishing, upon their
home return, because they hate idleness to win glory, devising rather to
spend hole days in field, than hours in Court, which this worthy Knight
deserved, who not able to sustain his pore estate, by politik wisdom and
prowess of arms endeavored to serve his Lord and country, wherein surely he
made a very good choice. Then he devoutly served and praised God, for that he
put into his mind such a Noble enterprise, trusting daily to atchieue greater
fame and glory: but the greater was his joy and contentation, because the image
of his wife enclosed within a box, which still he carried about him in his
pursie, continued fresh of color without any alteration. It was noysed in
the Court, that this valiant Knight Vlrico, had in Boeme the fairest and
goodliest Lady to his wife that lived either in Boeme or Hungary. It chanced
as a certain company of young Gentlemen in the Court were together, (amongs
whom was this Knighte) that a (...) Earon said unto him: How is it possible
sir (...), being a year and a half since you departed out of Boeme, that you
have no mind to return to see your wife, who as the common fame reports, is
one of the goodliest women of all the Country: truly it seems to me, that
you care not for her, which were great pity if her beautic be correspondent to
her fame. Sir (quod Vlrico) what her beauty is I refer unto the world, but
how so ever you esteem me to care of her, you shall understand that I do
love her, and will do so during my life. And the cause why I have not visited
her of long time, is no little proof of the great assurance I have of her
virtue and honest life. The argument of her virtue I prove, for that she is
contented that I should serve my Lord and king, and sufficient it is for me to
give her intelligence of my state and welfare, which many times by letters at
opportunity I fail not to do: the proof of my Faith is evident by reason of
my bounden duty to our sovereign Lord of whom I have received so great and
ample benefits, and the warfare which I use in his graces service in the
frontiers of his Realm against the enemies of Christ, whereunto I bear more
good will than I do to wedlock love, preferring duty to Prince before
marriage, albeit my wives faith and consta^cy is such, as freely I may spend my
life without care of her deuoir, being assured that besides her beauty she is
wise, virtuous and honest, and loves me above all worldly things, tendering me
so dearly as she does the balls of her own eyes. You have stoutly said
(answered the Barone) in defense of your wives chastity, whereof she can make
unto her self no great warrantise, because a woman sometimes will be in mind
not to be moved at the requests and gifts offered by ye greatest Prince of the
world, who afterward within a day upon the only sight and view of some lusty
young man, at one simple word uttered with a few tears and shorter suit, yeldeth
to his request. And what is she then yt can conceive such assurance in her
self? What is he that knows the secrets of hearts which be impenetrable?
Surely none as I suppose, except God him self. A woman of her own nature is
moveable and plyant, and is the most ambitious creature of the world. And (by
God) no woman do I know but that she lusts and desires to be beloved,
required, sued vn^to, honored and cherished? And oftentimes it comes to pass
yt the most crafty dames which think with fained looks to feed their diverse
lovers, be the first that thrust their heads into the amorous nets, and like
little birds in hard (...) of weather be caught in lovers (...) wigges.
Whereby sir Vlrico I do not see that your wife (above all other women compacte
of flesh and bone) has such privilege from God, but that she may be soon
entised and corrupted. Well sir (said the (...) Knight) I am persuaded of that
which I have spoken, and verily do believe the effect of my belief most true.
Every man knows his own affairs, and the fool knows better what he has,
than his neighbors do, be they never so wise. Believe you what you think good,
for I mean not to digress from that which I conceive. And suffer me (I pray
you) to believe what I list, since belief cannot hurt me, nor yet your discredit
can hinder my belief, being free for each man in semblable chances to think
and believe what his mind lusts and likes. There were many other Lords and
Gentlemen of the court (...) at that talk, and as we commonly see (at such
like metings) (...) man utters his mind: whereupon many and sundry opinions
were produced touching that question. And because diverse me^ be of diverse
natures, and many presume upon the pregnancie of their wise heads, there rose
some stur about yt talk, each man obstinate in his alleged reason, more
froward (...) than reason did require: the communication grew so hot, and talk
brake forth so loud, as the same was reported to the (...). The good Lady sorry
to hear tell of such strife within her Court, abhorring naturally all
controversy and contention, sent for the parties, and required them from point
to point to make recital of the beginning and circumsta^ce of their reasons and
arguments. And when she understood the effect of al their talk, she said, that
every man at his own pleasure might believe what he list, affirming it to be
presumptuous and extreme folly, to judge all women to be of one disposition,
in like sort as it were a great error to say that al men be of one quality and
condition: the contrary by daily experience manifestly appearing. For both in
me and women, there is so great difference and variety of natures, as there be
heads and wits. And how it is commonly seen that two brothers and sisters,
born at one birth, be yet of contrary natures and (...), of manners and
conditions so diverse, as the thing which shall please the one, is altogether
displesant to ye other. Whereupon the (...) concluded, yt the (...) Knight had
good reason to continue that good and honest credit of his wife, as having
proved her fidelity of long time, wherein she showed her self to be very wise
and discrete. Now because (as many times we see) the natures and appetites of
diverse men to be insaciable, and one man to be sometimes more foolish hardy
than another, even so (to say the (...),) were those two Hungarian Barons, who
seeming wise in their own conceits, one of them said to the (...) in this
manner: Madame your grace does well maintain the sere of womankinde, because you
be a woman. For by nature it is given to that kind, stoutly to stand in (...)
of themselves, because their imbecillitie and weakness otherwise would bewray
them: and although good reasons might be alleged to open the causes of their
(...), and why they be not able to attain the hault excellency of man, yet
for this time I do not mean to be tedious unto your grace, least the little
heart of woman would rise and display that conceit which is wrapped within that
little molde. But to return to this chaste Lady, through whom our talk
began, if we might crave license of your majesty, and safe (...) of this
Gentleman to know her dwelling place, and have (...) to speak to her, we doubt
not but to break with our battering talk, the Adamant walls of her (...)
that is so famous, and carry away that spoil which (...) we shall (...). I know
not answered the (...) Knight, what ye can or will (...), but sure I am, that
hitherto I am not (...). Many things were spoken there, and sundry opinions of
(...) parts alleged. In end the two Hungarian. (...) persuaded them selves,
and made their vaunts that they were able to clime the skies, and both would
attempt and also bring to passeny enterprise were it never so great, affirming
their former offer by oath, and would gage all the lands and goods they had,
that within the space of. v. months they would either of them obtain the
Gentlewomans good will to do what they list so that the Knight were (...),
neither to return home, ne yet to advertise her of yt their determination. The
Queen and all the standers by laughed heartily at this their offer, mocking
and jesting at their foolish and youthly conceits. Which the Barons
perceiving, said: You think Madame that we speak triflingly, and be not able
to accomplish this our proposed enterprise, but Madame, may it please you to
give us leave, we mean by earnest attempt to give proof thereof. And as they
were thus in reasoning and debating the matter, the king (hearing tell of this
large offer made by the Barons) came into the place where the Queen was, at
such time as she was about to dissuade them from their fra^tike devise. Before
who^ he being entered the chamber, the two Barons fell down upon their knees,
and humbly besought his grace, that the compacte made between sir Vlrico and
them might proceed, disclosing unto him in few words the effect of all their
talk, which frankly was granted by ye king. But the Barons added a Prouiso,
that when they had won their wager, the Knight by no means should hurt his
wife, and from that time forth should give over his false opinion, that women
were not naturally given to the suits and requests of amorous persons. The
Boeme Knighte, who was assured of his wives great honesty and loyal faith,
believed so true as the Gospel, the proportion and quality of the image, who
in all the time that he was far off, never perceived the same to be either pale
or black, but at that time lookyng upon the image, he perceived a certaie
yealow color to rise, as he thought his wife was by some love pursued, but yet
suddenly it returned again to his natural hew, which boldned him to say
these words to the Hungarian barons: Ye be a couple of pleasant and unbelieving
Gentlemen, and have conceived so (...) opinion, as ever men of your calling
did: but since you proceed in your obstinate folly, and will needs guage all the
lands and goods you have, that you be able to vanquishe my wives honest and
chaste heart, I am contented, for the singular credit which I repose in her,
to join with you, and will pledge the poorelyuing I have for proof of mine
opinion, and shall accomplish all other your requests made here, before the
majesty's of the King and Queen. And therefore (...) it (...) your highness,
since this fond devise can not be beaten (...) of their heads, to give license
unto those noble men, the lords Vdislao, and Alberto, (so were they called) to
put in proof the merry conceit of their disposed minds (whereof they do so
greatly brag) and I (...) your good grace and favor, am content to agree to
their demaundes: and we answered the Hungarians do once again affirm the
same which we have spoken. The King wylling to have them give over that
strife, was entreated to the contrary by the Barons: whereupon the King
perceiving their follies, caused a decree of the bargain to be put in writing,
either parties interchaungeably subscribing the same. Which done, they took
their leaves. Afterward, the two Hungarians began to put their enterprise
in order, and agreed between themselves, Alberto to be the first that should
adventure upon the Lady. And that within (...) weeks after, upon his return,
the Lord Vladislao should proceed. These things concluded, (...) all
furnitures for their several journeys disposed, the Lord Alberto departed in
good order, with two (...) directly trauailyng to yt castle of the Boeme
knight, where being arrived, he lyghted at an Inn of the town adjoining to
the castle, and demanding of the host, the conditions of the Lady, he
understood that she was a very fair woman, and that her honesty and love
toward her husband far excelled her (...). Which words nothing (...) the
amorous (...), but when he had pulled of his boots, and richely (...)
himself, he repaired to the Castle, and (...) at the Gates, gave the Lady to
understand that he was come to see her. She which was a courteous
Gentlewoman, caused him to be brought in, and (...) gave him honorable
intertainement. The (...) greatly mused upon the beauty and goodlinesse of the
Lady, singularly commendyng her honest order and behavior. And being set
down, the young Gentleman said unto her: Madame, moved with the (...) of your
surpassing beauty, which now I see to be more excellent than Fame with her
swiftest wyngs is able to carry, I am come from the Court to view and see if
that were true, or whether lying brutes had (...) their vulgar talk in vain:
but fyndyng the same (...) more fine and pure than erst I did expect, I crave
license of your Ladyshyp, to conceive none (...) of this my (...) and rude
attempt: and herewithall he began to join many trifling and vain words,
which daliyng suitors by heat of lusty blood be wont to shote forth, to
declare the^ selves not to be spechlesse or tongtied. Which the Lady well
espying, speedily imagined into what port his (...) bark would arrive: (...)
in the end when she saw his ship at road, began to enter in pretty loving
talk, by little and little to encourage his fond attempt. The Baron thinkyng he
had caught the Eele by the tail, not well practiced in Cicero his school,
ceased not (...) to contriue the (...), by making her believe, that he was
far in love. The Lady weary (God wot) of his fond (...) and amorous
reasons, and yet not to seem scornful. made him good countenance, in such
wise as the Hungarian two or three days did nothing else but proceed in
vain pursuit: She perceiving him to be but a (...) of the first coat,
devised to recompense his Follies with such enterteynemente, as during all his
life, he should keep the same in good remembrance. Wherefore not long
after, faynyng as though his great wisdom, uttered by cloquente talk,
had (...) her, she said thus unto him: My (...), the reasons you produce,
and your pleasant gesture in my house, have so inchaunted me, that impossible
it is, but I must (...) agree unto your will: for where I never thought
during life, to stayne the purity of marriage bed, and determined continually
to preserve my self inuiolablye for my husband, (...) Noble grace and
courteous behauioure, have (I say) so bewitched me, that ready I am to be at
your commandment, humbly (...) your honor to beware, that knowledge hereof
may not come unto mine husbands ears, who is so (...) and cruel, and loves
me so dearly, as no doubt he will without further trial either him self kill
me, or otherwise procure my (...): and to the intent none of my house may
suspect our doings, I shall desire you to morrow in the morning about nine of the
clock, which is the (...) time of your repair hither, to come unto my castle,
wherein when you be entered, speedily to mount up to the chamber of the highest
(...), over the door whereof, ye shall find the arms of my husband, entailed
in marble: and when you be entered in, to shut the (...) fast after you, and in
the mean time I will wait and and provide, that none shall molest and trouble
us, and then shall bestow our selves for accomplishement of that which your
love desires. Now in very deed this chamber was a very strong prison ordained
in ancient time by the progenitors of that territory, to imprison and punish
the bassals and tenants of the same, for offenses and crimes committed. The
Baron hearing this liberal offer of the Lady, thinking that he had obtained
the sum of all his joy, so glad as if he had conquere^d a whole kingdom,
the best contented man alive, thankyng the Lady for her courteous answer,
departed, and returned to his Inn. (...) knows upon how merry a pin the
heart of this young Baron was set, and after he had liberally banketted his
host and hostess, pleasantly disposing him self to mirth and recreation, he
went to bed, where joy so lightened his merry head, as no sleep at all could
close his eyes: such be the savage pangs of those that aspire to like
delights, as the best reclaimer of the wildest hawk could never take more
pain or devise (...) shifts to man the same for the better atchieuing of her
pray, than did this brave Baron sustain for bryngyng his enterprise to
effect. The next day early in the morning he rose, dressyng himself with the
swetest parfumes, and putting on his finest suit of (...), at the appointed
hour he went to the castle, and so secretly as he could, according to the
Ladies instruction, he conveyed himself up into the chamber (...) he found
open, and when he was entered, he shut the same. The manner of the door was
such, as none within could open it without a (...), and besides the strong
lock, it had both bar and (...) on the outside, with such fastening, as the
devil him self being locked within, could not break forth. The Lady which
waited hard by for his (...), so soon as she perceived that the door was
shut, stepte unto the same, and both double locked the door, and also
without she barred and fast bolte the same, carrying the (...) away with her.
This chamber was in the highest tower of the house (as is before said) wherein
was placed a bed with good furniture, the wyndow whereof was so high, that
none could look out without a ladder. The other parts thereof were in good and
convenient order, apt and mete for an honest prison. When the Lord Alberto was
within, he satte down, waiting (as the Jews do for Messiah) when the Lady
according to her appointement should come. And as he was in this expectation,
building castles in the air, and devising a thousand Chimeras in his brain,
behold he heard one to open a little wicket that was in the door of that
chamber, which was so straight and little, as scarcely able to receive a loaf
of bread, or cruse of wine, used to be sent to the prisoners. He thinkyng that
it had been the Lady, rose (...), and heard the noise of a little girl, who
loking in at the hole, thus said unto him: My Lord Alberto, the Lady Barbara
my mistress (for that was her name) has sent me thus to say unto you: That
for so much as you be come into this place, by countenance of Love, to
dispoyle her of her honor, she has imprisoned you like a thief, according to
your deserte, and purposes to make you suffer penance according to the measure
of your offense. Wherefore so long as you shall remain in this place, she
minds to force you to gain your bread and drink with the art of spinning, as
pore women do for sustentation of their living, meaning thereby to cool the
heat of your lusty youth, and to make you taste the sour sause mete for them
to assay, that go about to rob Ladies of their honor: she bad me likewise to
tell you, that the more yarne you spin, the greater shall be the abundance and
delicacie of your fare: the greater pain you take to gain your food, the
more liberal she will be in distributing of the same: otherwise (she says)
that you shall fast with bread and water. Which determinate sentence she has
decreed, not to be infringed and broken for any kind of suit or entreaty that
you be able to make. When the maiden had spoken these words, she shut the
portall door, and returneo to her Lady. The Baron which thought that he had been comen to a marriage, did eat nothing all the morning before, because he
thought to be enterteined with better and daintier store of viandes, who now
at those news fared like one out of his wits, and stood still so amazed,
as though his legs would have failed him, and in one moment his (...) (...)
to vanish, and his force and breath forsook him, and fell down upon the chamber
(...), in such wise as he that had beheld him, would have thought him rather
dead than living. In this state he was a great time, and after wards somewhat
coming to him self, he could not tell whether he dreamed, or else that the
words were true, which the maiden had said unto him: In the end seeing, and
being verily assured, that he was in a prison so sure as bird in Cage, through
(...) and rage was like to die, or else to lose his wits, faryng with him
self of long time like a mad man, and not knowing what to do, passed the
rest of the day in walkyng up and down the chamber, rauing, stamying, staring,
cursing, and using words of greatest villainy, lamenting and bewailyng the time
and day, that so like a beast and (...) man, he gave the attempt to dispoile
the honesty of an other man's wife. Then came to his (...) the loss of al his
lands and goods, which by the (...), authority were put in comprimise, then
the shame, the scorn, and rebuke whyehe he should receive at other men's
hands, beyond measure vexed him: and reporte^ bruted in the Court (for that
it was impossible but the whole world should know it) so grieved him, as his
(...) seemed to be strained with two sharp and bityng nails, the pains
whereof, forced him to lose his wits and under standing. In the mids of
which pangs furiously vauting up and down the chamber, he espied by chance in
a corner, a (...) furnished with good (...) of flare, and a spindle hangyng
therevppon: and (...) with choler and rage, he was about to spoil and break
the same in pieces: but remembering what a hard weapon Necessity is, he
stayed his wysdom, and albeit he had rather to have contrived his leisure in
noble and Gentlemanlyke passetyme, yet rather than he would be idle, he
thought to reserve that Instrument to avoid the tedious lack of honest and
familiar company. When supper time was come, the maiden returned again, who
opening the Portall door, saluted the Baron, and said: My Lord, my mistress
has sent me to visit your good Lordshyp, and to receive at your good
hands the effect of your labor, who hops that you have spoonne some
substanciall web of threede for earning of your supper, which being done,
shall be readily brought unto you. The Baron full of rage, fury, and felonious
mood, if before he were fallen into choler, now by protestation of these
words, he seemed to transgress the bounds of reason, and began to rail at
the poor wench, scolding and chiding her like a strumpet of the stews, faring
as though he would have beaten her, or done her some (...) there mischief: but
his mood was stayed from doing any hurt: The poor (...) (...) by her (...),
in laughing wise said unto him: Why (my lord) do you chafe and rage against
me? Me thinks you do me wrong to use such reprochful words, which am but a
servant, and bound to the commandment of my mistress: Why sir, do you not
know that a (...) or messanger suffers no pain or blame? The greatest King or
Emperor of the world, receiving (...) from a meaner Prince, never uses his
ambassador with scolding words, ne yet by villainy or rebuke abuses his
person. Is it wisdom then (...) you, being a present prisoner, at the mercy of
your kepers, in this (...) sort to revile me with (...) talk? But (...),
leave of your rages, and quiet your self for this present time, for my
mistress maruelleth much why you durst come (for all your noble state) to give
(...) to violate her good name, which message she required me to tell you,
oue^r and bisides a desire she has to know, whether by the science of
Spinning, you have gained your food: for you seem to kick against the wind,
and beat water in a mortar, if you think from hence to go before you have
earned a recompense of the meat which shall be given you. Wherefore it is your lot
patiently to suffer the (...) of your fondattempt, which I pray you gently to
sustain, and think no scorn thereof hardely: for desperate men and hard
adventurers must needs suffer the dangers thereunto belonging. This is the
determinate sentence of my mistress mind, who fourdeth you no better fare
than bread and water, if you can not show some pretty spindle full of yarne
for sign of your good will at this present pinche of your distress. The
maiden seeing that he was not disposed to show some part of willing mind to
gain his living by that (...) science, shut the portal door, and went her way.
The unhappy Baron (arrived thither in very ill time) that night had neither
bread nor broth, and therefore he fared according to theprouerbe: He that goth
to bed supperlesse, lies in his bed restless. For during the whole night, no
sleep couldfasten his eyes. Now as this baron was closed in prison fast, so
the La die took order, that secretly with great cher ehis servants should be
interteined, and his horse with sweet hay and good prouender well maintained,
all his furnitures, sumpture horse and cariages conveyed within the Castle,
where wanted nothing for the state of such a personage but only liberty,
making the host of the Inn believe (where the Lord harbored before) that he
was returned into Hungary.

But now turn we to the Boeme Knight, who knowing that one of the two
Hungarian Competitors, were departed the Court, and ridden into Boeme, did still
behold the quality of the inchaunted image, wherein by the space of three or
four days, in which time, the baron made his greatest suit to his Lady, he
marked a certain alteration of color in the same: but afterward returned to
his native form: and seeing no greter transformation, he was well assured, that
the Hungarian Baron was repulsed, and employed his labor in vain. Whereof the
Boeme Knight was excedingly pleased and contented, because he was well assured,
that his wife had kept her self right pure and honest. Notwithstanding his
mind was not well settled, ne yet his heart at rest, doubtyng that the Lord
Vladislao, which as yet was not departed the Court, would obtain the thing,
and acquit the fault, which his companion had committed. The imprisoned Baron
which all this time had neither (...) nor dronken, nor in the night could
sleep, in the morning, after he had considered his mysaduenture, and well
perceived no remedy for him to go forth, except he obeyed the Ladies hest,
made of necessity a virtue, and applied himself to learn to Spynne by force,
which freedom and honor could never have made him to do. Whereupon he
took the distaffe, and began to spynne. And albeit that he never spoonne in
all his life before, yet (...) by Necessity, so well as he could, he drew out
his threede, now small and then great, and many times of the meanest sort,
but very often broad, ill favored, ill closed, and worsse twisted, all cut of
form and fashion, that sundry times very heartyly he laughed to him self,
to see his cunning, but would have made a cunnyng woman spinner brust into ten
thousand laughters, if she had (...) there. Thus all the morning he spent
in spynnyng, and when dinner came, his accustomed messanger, the maiden,
repaired unto him again, and openyng the wyndowe demanded of the Baron how
his work went forewarde, and whether he were disposed to manifest the (...)
of his coming into Boeme? He well beaten in the School of shame, uttered
unto the maid the whole compacte and bargayne made between him and his
companion, and the Boeme Knight her master, and afterward showed unto her his
spindle full of threde. The young Wench smylyng at his work, said: By Saint
Marie this is well done, you are worthy of victual for your hire: for now I
right well perceive that Hunger forces the Woulfe out of her den. I conne
you thancke, that like a Lord you can so puissantly gain your living.
Wherefore proceedyng in that which you have begone, I doubt not but shortly
you will prove such a woorkeman, as my mistress shall not need to put out
her (...) to spinne (to her great charge and cost) for making of her smockes,
but that the same may well be done within her own house, yea although the
same do serve but for Kitchen clothes, for dresser boordes, or cleanyng of
her vessel before they (...) served forth. And as your good deserts do
merit thanckes for this your art, now well begoonne, even so your new
told tale of coming hither, requires no less, for that you have disclosed
the truth. When she had said these words, she reached him some store of
meats for his dynner, and badde him well to fare. When she was returned unto
her Lady, she showed unto her the Spindle full of threede, and told her
therwithall the whole story of the compact between the Knight Vlrico, and the
two Hungarian Barons. Whereof the Lady sore astoonned, for the snares laid to
(...) her, was notwithstanding well (...), for that she had so well for seen
the same: but most of all reioysed, that her husband had so good opinion of
her honest life. And before she would advertise him of these euentes, she
purposed to attend the coming of the Lord Vladislao, to whom she meant to do
like penance for his careless bargain and dishonest opinion, accordingly as
he deserved, maruelling very much that both the Barons, were so rash and
presumptuous, daungerously (not knowing what kind of woman she was) to put
their lands and goods in hazard. But considering the nature of diverse
brainsicke me^, which pass not how carelessly they adventure their gained
goods, and inherited lands, so they may (...) the pray, after which they
vainly hunt, for the prejudice and hurt of other, she made no account of these
attempt, s since honest matrones force not upon the suits, or vain consumed
time of light brained cockscombs, that care not what fond cost or ill
employed hours they waste to anoy the good renoume and honest brutes of women.

But not to discourse from point to point the particulers of this intended
journey, this poor deceived Baron in short time proved a very good Spinner, by
exercise whereof, he felt such solace, as not only the same was a comfortable
sport for his captive time, but also for want of better recreation, it seemed
so joyful, as if he had been pluming and (...) his Hawk, or doing other
sportes belongyng to the honorable state of a Lord. Which his well arrived
labor, the maiden recompensed with abundance of good and delicate meats. And
although the Lady was many times required to visit the Baron, yet she would
never to that request consent. In which time the Knight Vlrico ceased not
continually to view and reuewe the state of his image, which appeared still to
be of one well colored sort. And although this use of his was diverse times
marked and seen of many, yet being earnestly demanded the cause thereof, he
would never disclose the same. Many conjectures thereof (...) made, but none
could attain the truth. And who would have thought that a Knight so wise
and prudent had worn within his pursse any enchanted thing? And albeit the
King and Queen had intelligence of this frequent practice of the Knight, yet
they thought not mete for any private and secret mystery, to demand the
cause. One Month and a half was passed now, that the Lord Alberto was
departed the Court, and become a castle knight and cunning spinster: which made
the Lord Vladislao to muse, for that the promise made between them was broken,
and heard neither by letter or messanger what success he had received. After
diverse thoughts imagined in his mind, he conceived that his companion had
happily enjoyed the end of his desired joy, and had gathered the wished fruits
of the Lady, and drowned in yt maine sea of his own pleasures, was overwhelmed
in the bottom of oblivion: wherefore he determined to set forward on his
journey to give onset of his desired fortune: who without long delay for
execution of his purpose, prepared all necessaries for that voyage, and mounted
on horseback with two of his men, he iourneyed toward Boeme, and within few
days after arrived at the Castle of the fair and most honest Lady. And when
he was entered the Inn where the Lord Alberto was first lodged, he diligently
enquired of him, and hard tell that he was returned into Hungary many days
before, whereof much maruelling, could not tell what to say or think. In yt end
purposing to put in proof the cause wherefore he was departed out of Hungary,
after diligent inquiry of the manners of the Lady, he understood the general
voice, that she was without comparion the most honest, wise, gentle and comely
Lady within the whole Country of Boeme. Incontinently the Lady was
advertised of ye arrival of this Baron, and knowing the cause of his coming,
she determined to pay him also with that money which she had already coined for
the other. The next day the Baron went unto the Castle, and knocking at the
gate, sent in word how that he was come from the Court of King Mathie, to
visit and salute the Lady of that Castle: and as she did entertain the first
Baron in courteous (...), and with loving countenance, even so she did the
second, who thought thereby that he had attained by that pleasant
entertainment, the game after which he hunted. And discoursing upon diverse
matters, the Lady showed her self a pleasant and familiar Gentlewoman, which
made the Baron to think that in short time he should win the price for which he
came. Notwithstanding, at the first brunt he would not by any means descend to
any particularitie of his purpose, but his words ran general, which were, that
hearing tell of the fame of her beauty, good grace and come, linesse, by having
occasion to repair into Boeme to do certain his affairs, he thought it
labor well spent to ride some portion of his journey, though it were besides
the way, to digress to do reverence unto her, whom fame advanced above the
skies: and thus passing his first visitation, he returned again to his
lodging. The Lady when the Baron was gone from her Castle, was rapte into a
rage, greatly offended that those two Hungarian Lords so presumptuously had
bended them selves like common Thieves to wander and roue the Countries, not
only to rob and spoil her of her honor, but also to bring her in
displeasure of her husband, and thereby into the danger and peril of death.
By reason of which rage (not without cause conceived) she caused an other
Chamber to be made ready, next wall to the other Baron that was become such a
Notable spinster. And upon the next return of the Lord Vladislao, she received
him with no less good entertainment than before, and when night came, caused
him to be lodged in her own house in the Chamber prepared as before, where he
slept not very soundly all that night, through the continual remembraunee of
his Ladies beauty. Next morning he perceived himself to be locked fast in a
Prison. And when he had made him ready, thinking to descend to bid the Lady
good morrow, seeking means to unlock the door, and perceiving that he could
not, he stood still in a dumpe. And as he was thus standing, maruelling the
cause of his shutting in so fast, the Maiden repaired to the hole of the door,
giving his honor an (...) salutation, which was, that her Mistress commanded
her to give him to understand, that if he had any lust or appetite to his
breakefast, or minded from thence for the to ease his hunger or contain life,
that he should give him self to learn to reele yarne. And for that purpose
she willed him to look in such a corner of the Chamber, and he should find
certain spindles of threede, and an instrument to wind his yarne upon.
Wherefore (quod she) apply your self thereunto, and lose no time. He that had
that time beholden the Baron in the face, would have thought that he had
seen rather a Marble stone, than the figure of a man. But converting his cold
conceived mood, into mad anger, he fell into ten times more displeasure
with himself, than is before described by the other Baron. But seeing that his
mad behauioure and beastly usage was bestowed in vain, the next day he began
to reele. The Lady afterward when she had intelligence of the good and
gainefull spinning of the Lord Alberto, and the well disposed and towardly
reeling of the Lord Vladislao, greatly rejoiced for making of such two
Notable woorkemen, whose woorkemanship exceeded the labors of them that had
been apprentyzes to the occupation seven years together. Such be the apt
and ready wits of the Souldioures of love: Where in I would wish all Cupides
dearlings to be nousled and applied in their youthly time: the^ no doubt their
passions would appease, and rages assuage, and would give over their over bold
attemptes, for which they have no thank of the chaste and honest. And to this
goodly sight the Lady brought the servants of these Noble men, willing them
to mark and behold the diligence of their masters, and to imitate the
industry of their goodly exercise, who never attained meat before by labor
they had gained the same. Which done, she made the^ take their horse and
furnitures of their Lords, and to depart: otherwise if by violence they
resisted, she would cause their choler to be calmed with such like service as
they saw done before their eyes. The servant seeing no remedy, but must
needs depart, took their leave. Afterward she sent one of her servants in
post to the Court, to advertise her husband of all that which chanced. The
Boeme Knight receiving this good news declared the same unto the King and
Queen, and recited the whole story of the two Hungarian Barons, accordingly as
the tenor of his wives letters did purporte. The Princes stood still in great
admiration, and highly commended the wisdom of the Lady, (...) her for a very
sage and politic woman. Afterward the Knight Vlrico humbly besought the King
for execution of his decree and performance of the bargain. Whereupon the King
assembled his counsel, and required every of them to say their mind. Upon the
deliberation whereof, the Lord Chauncelor of the kingdom, with two
Counselors, were sent to the Castle of the Boeme Knight, to enquire and learn
the process and doings of the two Lords, who diligently accomplished the Kings
commandment. And having examined the Lady and her maiden with other of the
house, and the Barons also, whom a little before the arriual of these
Commisioners, the Lady had caused to be put together, yt by spinning and
reeling they might comfort one an other. When the Lord Chau^celor had framed
and digested in order the whole discourse of this history, returned to the
court where the King and Queen with the Pieres and Noble men of his kingdom
caused the acts of the same to be diuulged and bruted abroad, and after much
talk and discourse of the performance of this co^pact, pro and co^tra, the
Queen taking the Ladies part, and favoring the Knight, the King gave sentence
yt sir Vlrico should wholly possess the lands and goods of the two Barons to
him, and to his heirs for ever, and that the Barons should be banished out of
the kingdoms of Hungary and Boeme, never to return upon pain of death. This
sentence was put in execution, and the unfortunate Barons exiled, which
specially to those that were of their consanguinitie and blood, seemed too
severe and rigorous. Nevertheless the covenant being most plain and evident
to most men, ye same seemed to be pronounced with great Justice and equity,
for example in time to come, to lesson rash wits how they judge and deem so
indifferently of wome^s behauiors amo^gs whom no doubt there be both good and
bad, as there be of men. Afterward the. y. Princes sent for ye Lady to yt
Court, who there was courteously entertained, and for this her wise and
politic fact had in great admiration. The Queen then appointed her to be one
of her women of honor, and esteemed her very dearly. The knight also daily grew
to great promotion, well beloved and favored of the King, who with his Lady
long time lived in great joy and felicity, not forgetting the cunning man
Pollacco, that made him the image and likeness of his wife: whose friendship
and labor he rewarded with money, and other benefits very liberally.

Dom Diego and Gineura
DOM DIEGO a Gentleman of Spain (...) in love with fair GINEVRA, and she with
him: their love by means of one that envied DOM DIEGO his happy choice, was
by default of light credit on her part interrupted. He constant of mind, fell
into despair, and abandoning all his (...) and living, repaired to the Pyrene
Mountains, where he led a savage life for certain mo^ths, and afterward
known by one of his friends, was (by marvelous circumstaunce) reconciled to
his (...) (...), and married.

The. xxix. Nouel.
Men's mischaunces occurring on the bruntes of diverse Tragical fortunes,
albeit upon their first taste of bitterness, they savor of a certain kind of
loathsome relish, yet under the Kind of that vnsauerouse sap, does lurk a
sweeter honey, than sweetness it self, for the fruit that the posterity may
gather and learn by others hurtes, how they may (...) and shun the like.
But because all things have their seasons, and every thing is not convenient
for all times and places, I purpose now to show a Notable example of a vain
and superstitious Lover, that abandoned his living and friends, to become a
Savage desert man. Which History resembles in a manner a Tragical comedy,
comprehending the very same matter and argument, wherewith the greatest part of
the (...) sortearme them selves to cover and defend their follies. It is red
and seen too often by common custom, and therefore (...) here to display what
rage does govern, and headlong hale fond and licentious youth conducted by
the pangue of love, if the same be not moderated by reason, and cooled with
sacred lessons even from the Cradle to more mature and riper age. For the
Tyranny of love amongs all the deadly foes that (...) and (...) our minds,
glories of his force, vaunting himself able to change the proper nature of
things, be they never so sound and perfect: who to make them like his lusts,
(...) himself into a substance qualified diversely, the better to entrap such as
be given to his vanities. But having avouched so many examples before, I am
content for this present to tell the discourse of two persons, chanced not long
since in Catheloigne. Of a Gentleman that for his constancy declared two
extremities in him self of love and folly. And of a Gentlewoman so fickle and
inconstant, as love and they which waited on him, be disordered, for the
trustlesse ground whereupon such foundation of service is laid, which ye shall
easily conceive by well viewing the difference of these twain: (...) I mean
to (...) to the listes, by the blast of this (...) trumpe. And thus the same
begins.

Not long after yt the victorious and Noble prince, young (...), the son of
Alphonsus King of Aragon was dead, Jews the twelfth, that time being French
King, upon the Marches of Catheloigne, between Barcelona and the Mountains,
there was a good Lady then a widow, which had been the wife of an excellent and
Noble knight of the Country, by whom she had left one only daughter, which
was so carefully brought (...) by the mother, as nothing was to dear or heard
to be brought to pass for her desire, thinking that a creature so Noble and
perfect, could not be trained up too delicately. Now bisides her incomparable
furniture of beauty, this young Gentlewoman was adorned with hair so fair,
curle, and yealow, as the new fined gold was not matchable to the shining
locks of this tender infant, who therefore commonly was called Gineura la
Blonde. Half a days journey from the house of this widow, lay the lands of an
other Lady a widow also, that was very rich, and so well allied as any in all
the land. This Lady had a son, whom she caused to be trained up so well in
Arms and good letters, as in other honest exercises proper and meet for a
Gentleman and great Lord, for which respect she had sent him to Barcelona the
chief City of all the Country of (...). Senior Dom Diego, (for so was ye
son of that widow called) (...) so well in all things, that when he was.
(...). years of age, there was no Gentleman of his degree, that did excel
him, ne yet was able to approach unto his perfections and comme^dable behauior.
A thing that did so well content yt good Lady his mother, as she could not tell
what countenance to keep to cover her joy. A vice very commen to fond and
folish mothers, who flater them selves with a shadowed hope of the future
goodness of their children, which many times does more hurt to that wanton and
wilful age, than profit or advancement. The persuasion also of such
towardness, full often does blind yt sprites of youth, as yt faults which follow
the same be far more vile tha^ before they were: whereby the first Table (made
in his first colors) of yt imagined virtue, ca^ take no force or perfection,
and so by incurring sundry mishaps, the parent and child commonly eskape not
without equal blame. To come again therefore to our discourse: it chanced in
yt time that (the Catholic king deceased) Philippe of Austrich which succeeded
him as heir passing through France, came into Spain to be invested and take
possession of al his seigniories and kingdoms: which known to the Citizens of
Barcelona, they determined to receive him with such pomp, magnificence and
honor, as duly appertains to the greatness and majesty of so great a
Prince, as is the son of the Roman Emperor. And amongs other things they
prepared a triumph at the Tilt, where none was suffered to enter the listes,
but young Ge^tlemen, such as never yet had followed arms. Amongs whom Dom Diego
as yt Noblest person was chosen chief of one part. The Archduke then come to
Barcelona after the received honors and Ceremonies, accustomed for such
entertainment, to gratify his subjects, and to see the bravery of the young
Spanish Nobility in arms, would place himself upon the skaffolde to judge the
courses and valiance of the runners. In that magnifique and Princely conflict,
all men's eyes were bent upon Dom Diego, who course by course made his
adversaries to feel the force of his arms, his manhood and dexterity on
horseback, and caused them to muse upon his toward (...) in time to come,
whose noble gests then acquired the victory of the camp on his side. Which
moved King Philip to say, that in all his life he never saw triu^ph better
handled, and yt the same seemed rather a battle of strong and hardy men, than
an exercise of young Gentlemen never wo^ted to support the deeds of arms and
travail of warfare. For which cause calling Dom Diego before him he said. God
grant (yo^g Gentleman) yt your end agree with your goodly beginnings and
hardy shock of (...) done this day. In memory whereof I will this night yt ye do
your watch, for I mean to morrow (by Gods assistance) to dub you knight. The
young gentleman blushing for shame, upon his knees kissed the Princes hands,
thanking him most humbly of ye honor and favor which it pleased his majesty to
do him, vowing and promising to do so well in time to come, as no man should be
deceived of their conceived opinion, nor ye king frustrate of his service,
which was one of his most obedient vassals and subjects. So the next day he
was made Knight, and received the collar of ye order at the hands of King
Phillip, who after ye departure of his prince which took his journey into
Castille, retired to his own (...) and house, more to see his mother, who^e
long time before he had not seen, than for desire of pleasure yt be in
fields, which notwithstanding he exercised so well as in end (...) perceived
(...) in towns and cities, to be an impriso^ment (...) respect of that he felt
in Country. As ye Poets whilom fained love to shote his arrows amid yt (...),
forests, fertile fields, sea coasts, shores of great rivers and fountain
brinkes, and also upon the tops of huge and high Mountains at the pursuit of
the sundry sorted Nymphs and (...) dimigods, deeming the same to be a mean of
liberty to follow loves tract without suspicion, void of company and loathsome
cries of Cities, where (...), envy, false report, and ill opinion of all
things, have pitched their camp and raised their tents. (...) contrariwise
fra^kly and without dissimulation in the fields, the friend discovering his
passion to his Mistress, they enjoy the pleasure of hunting, the natural
music of birds, and sometimes in pleasant herbers (...) with the murmur of some
running brooks, they communicate their thoughts, beautify the accord and
unity of lovers, and make the place famous for yt first witness of their
amorous acquaintance. In like manner thrice and four times blessed (...) they
there, who leaning the unquiet toil that ordinarily does chance to them that
abide in Cities, do render (...) y of their studies to the Muses whereunto they
be most minded. (...) Dom Diego at his own house loved and cherished of his
mother, reverenced and obeyed of his subjects after he had employed some time
at his study, had none other ordinary pleasure but in rousing the Dear,
hunting the wild Bore, run the Hare, sometimes to fly at the Heron or fearful
Partrich alongs the fields, Forrestes, pondes and stepe Mountains. It came to
pass one day, as he Hunted the wild Mountain Goat, which he had dislodged
upon the Hill top, he espied an old Heart that his dogs had found, who so
joyful as was possible of that good luck, followed the course of that swift
and fearful beast. But (such was his Fortune) the dogs lost the foot of
that pray, and he his men: for being horssed of purpose, upon a fair Iennet,
could not be followed, and in end loosing the sight of the Dear, was so far
severed from company, as he was utterly ignorant which way to take. And that
which grieved him most was his horse out of breath skarse able to ride a false
galloppe. For which cause he put his horn to his mouth, and blewe so loud
as he could. But his men were so far off, as they could not hear him. The
young Gentleman being in this distress, could not tell what to do, but to
return back, wherein he was more deceived than before, for thinking to take
the way home to his Castle, wandered still further off from the same. And
trotting thus a long time, he spied a Castle situated upon a little Hill,
whereby he knew himself far from his own house. Nevertheless hearing a
certain noise of hunters, thinking they had been his people, resorted to the
same, who in deed were the servant of the mother of Gineura with the golden
locks, which in company of their mistress had hunted the Hare, Dom Diego, when
he drue nere to the cry of the Hounds, saw right well that he was deceived.
At what time night approached, and the shadows darkening the earth, by reason
of the suns departure, began to clothe the heavens with a brown and mistie
mantell. When the mother of Gineura saw the Knight which rode a soft pace, for
that his horse was tired, and could travail no longer, and knowing by his
outward apperaunce that he was some great Lord, and ridden out of his way, sent
one of her me^ to know what he was, who returned again with such answer as she
desired. The Lady joyful to entertain a Gentleman so excellent and famous,
one of her next neighbors, went forward to bid him welcome, which she did with
so great courtesy as the Knight said unto her: Madame I think that fortune
has done me this (...), by setting me out of the way, to prove your courtesy
and gentle entertainment, and to receive this joy by visiting your house,
whereof I trust in time to come to be so perfect a (...), as my predecessors
heretofore have been. Sir said the Lady, if happiness may be attributed to
them, yt most do gain, I think my self better favored than you, for that it
is my chance to lodge and entertain him, that is the worthiest person and
best beloved in all Catheloigne. The Gentleman blushing at that praise, said
nothing else, but that affection forced men so to speak of his virtues,
notwithstanding such as he was, he vowed from thence for the his service to her
and all her household. Gineura desirous not to be (...) in courtesy, said yt he
should not so do, except she were partaker of some part of that, which the
Knight so liberally had offered to the whole family of her mother. The Gentleman
which till that time took no heed to the divine beauty of the Gentlewoman,
beholding her at his pleasure, was so (...), as he could not tell what to
answer, his eyes were so fixed upon her, spending his looks in (...) of that
fresh hew, stained with a red Uermilion, upon the Alabaster and fair color of
her clear and beautiful face. And for the imbelishing of that natural
perfection, the attire upon her head was so couenable and proper, as it seemed
the same day she had looked for the coming of him, that afterward endured so
much for her sake. For her head was adorned with a Garlande of Flowers,
interlaced with her golden and enameled hair, which gorgeously covered some
part of her shoulders, (...) and hanging down, sometime over her passing fair
forhead, somewhiles upon her ruddie chekes, as the sweet and pleasant windy
breath did move them to and fro: ye should have seen her wavering and crisped
tresses disposed with so good grace and comeliness, as a man would have
thought that Love, and the three Graces could not tell elsewhere, to harbor
themselves, but in that rich and delectable place of pleasure, in gorgeous wise
laced and (...). Upon her ears did hang two sumptuous and rich oriental
perles, which to the artificial order of her hair added a certain splendent
brightness. And he yt had beholden the shining and large forhead of that
Nymph, which galantly was beset with a diamonde of inestimable price and value,
chased with a tresse of gold, made in form of (...) stars, would have
thought that he had seen a rank of the twinckelyng Planettes, fixed in the
(...) in the hottest time of Summer, when that fair season discovers the
order of his glitteryng clouds. In like manner the sparkling eyes of the fair
Gentlewoman, adorned with that goodly vaulte with two arches, equally by even
spaces distinct and divided, dyed with the (...) Indian tree, did so well
set forth their brightness, as the eyes of them that stayed their looks at
noone days directly upon the Sun, could no more be dazeled and offended,
than those were, that did contemplate those two flaming stars, which were in
force able thoroughly to pierce even the bottom of the inward parts. The nose
well formed, justly placed in the amiable valey of the visage, by equal
conformity distinguished the two cheeks, stained with a pure carnation,
resemblyng two little Apples that were arrived to the due time of their maturitie
and (...). And then her Coralline mouth, through which breathing, issued out
a breath more soot and sauorous than Ambre, Musk, or other aromatical parfume,
that ever the (...) soil of (...) brought forth. She sometime vnclosing the
door of her lips, discovered two rank of perles, so finely blanched, as the
purest Orient would blushe, if it were compared with the beauty of (...)
incomparable whiteness. But he that will take upon him to speak of al her
inspeakable beauty, may make his vaunte that (...) has seen all the
greatest perfections that ever dame Nature wrought. Now to come a little lower,
on this fresh Diana appeared a neck, that surmounted the blaunche color of
milk, were it never so excellent white, and her stomach somewhat mounting by
the two pomels and firm teates of her breasts, separated in equal distaunce,
was covered with a veil, so lose and (...), as those two little pretty
mountains might easily be seen, to move and remove, according to the affection
that rose in the center of that modest and sober pucelles mind: who over and
besides all this, has such a pleasant countenance and ioyefull cheer, as
her beauty more than wonderful, rendered her not so worthy to be served and
loved, as her natural goodness and disposed courtesy appearyng in her face,
and her excellent entertainment and comely grace to all indifferently. This was
not to imitate the manner of the most part of our fair Ladies and (...), who
(moved with what opinion I know not) be so disdaynfull, as almost their name
causes coffeehouse, and breeds in them great imperfection, who by
thinking to appear more brave and fine, by too much squeymishe dealyng, do
offuscate and darken with Folly their exterior beauty, blotting and defacing
that which beauty makes amiable and worthy of honor. I leave you now to
consider whether Dom Diego had occasion to forgo his speech, and to be berest
of (...), being lively assailed with one so well armed as Gineura was with her
graces and honesty: who no less abashed with the port, countenance, sweet
talk, and stately behauior of the knight, which she vewed to be in him by
stealing lokes, felt a motion (not wo^ted or accustomed) in her tender heart, ye
made her to change color, and by like occasion spechlesse: an ordinary custom
in the^ yt be surprised with ye malady of love to lose yt use of spech where
the same is most necessary to give the intier charge in the heart, which not
able to support and bear the burden of so many passions, departs some
portion to the eyes, as to the faithful messangers of the minds secret
conceits, which tormented beyond measure, and burning with affection, causes
sometimes the humor to gushe out in that part that discovered the first
assault, and bredde the cause of that fever, which frighted the hearts of those
two young persons, not knowing well what the same might be. When they were come
to the Castle, and dismounted from their horse, many welcomes and gratulations
were made to the knight, which yielded more wood to the fire, and lively touched
the young Gentleman, who was so outraged with love, as almost he had no mind of
himself, and rapt by little and little, was so intoxicated with amorous passion,
as all other thoughts were loathsome, and joy displeasant in respect of the
favorable martyrdom which he suffered by thinking of his fair and gentle
Gineura. Thus the knight which in the morning disposed him self to pursue the
heart, was in heart so attached, as at evening he was become a servant, yea and
such a slave, as yt voluntary servitude wholly dispossessed him from his former
freedom. These be the fruits also of folly, inuegling the eyes of men, that
launch themselves with eyes shut into the gulf of despair, which in end does
cause the ruin and overthrow of him, that yeldeth thereunto. Love proceeds
never but of opinion: so likewise the ill order of those that be afflicted with
that passion, rises not elsewhere, but by the fond persuasion which they
conceive, to be blamed, despised and deceived of the thing beloved: where if
they measured that passion according to his valor, they would make no more
account of that which does torment them, than they do of their health, honor
and life, who for their service and labor delude them, and recompense an other
with that which the foolish lover shall employ, that does haste despair to him,
and end more than desperate, by seeing an other come to enjoy that, for which
he has beat the bushes. During the time that supper was preparing, the Lady
sent her men to seek the huntesmen of Dom Diego, to give them knowledge where
he was become, and thereof to certify his mother, who when she heard tell that
he lay there, was very glad, being a right good friend and very familiar
neighbor with the Lady, the hostess of her (...). The Gentleman supping after
he had tasted the fervent heat that broiled in his mind, could eat little
meat, rather satisfied with the feeding diete of his amorous eyes, which
without any manner of jealousy, distributed their nourishment to the heart, and
(...) very soberly, privily throwing his secret pricks, with lovely and
wanton look, to the heart of the fair Lady, which for her part spared not to
render usury of rollyng looks, whereof he was so sparing, as almost he durst
not lift up his eyes for dazelyng of the same. After supper, the Knight bidding
the mother and daughter good night, went to bed, where in steed of sleep,
he fell to sighing and imagening a thousand diverse (...) (...) like number of
follies, such as they do whose brains be fraught with love. Alas (said he)
what means it, that always I have lived in so great liberty, and now do
feel my self attached with such bondage as I can not express, whose effects
nevertheless be fastened in me? Have I hunted to be taken? Came I from my house
in liberty, to be shut up in prison, and do not know whether I shall be
received, or being received, have interteinement, according to my desert? Ah
Gineura, I would to God, that thy beauty did prick me no worsse, than the
tree whereof thou take thy name, is sharp in touching, and bitter to them
that (...) the same. Truly I esteem my coming hither happy (for all the
passion that I endure) since the purchase of a grief so luckie does qualify
the joy, that made me to wander thus over (...). (...) fair amongs the fairest,
truly the fearful beast which with the bloody hareboundes was torn in pieces,
is not more martired, than my heart divided in opinions upon thine affection.
And what do I know if thou love an other more worthy to be fa uored of thee
tha^ thy poor Dom Diego. But it is impossible yt any can approach ye sincerity
ye I feel in my heart, determining rather to endure death, tha^ to serve other
but fair and golden Gineura: therefore my loyalty receiving no comparison
cannot be matched in man sufficient (for respect of ye same) to be called
servant of thine (...). Now come what shall, by means of this, I am assured yt
so long as Dom Diego lives, his heart shall receive none other impression or
desire, but yt which inciteth him to love, serve, and honor ye fairest
creature at this day within the compass of Spain. (...) herevpo^, sweating,
laboring and traveling upon ye framing of his love, he found nothing more
expedient tha^ to tell her his passion, and let her understand ye good will yt he
had to do her service, and to pray her to accept him for such, as from that
time forth would perpetrate nothing but under yt title of her good name. On ye
other side Gineura could not close her eyes, and knew not yt cause almost yt so
(...) her of sleep, wherefore now tossing on ye one side, and the^ turning to
ye other inhir rich and goodly bed, fa^tasied no fewer devises tha^ passionated
Dom Diego did. In ye end she concluded, yt if yt knight showed her any evident
sign, or opened by word of mouth of love and service, she would not refuse to do
the like to him. Thus passed ye night in thoughts sighs and wishes between
these. (...). apprentises of the thing, whereof they yt be lerners, shall sone
attain ye experience, and they yt follow the occupation thoroughly, in short time
be their (...) masters. The next day yt knight would depart so soon as he was
up: but ye good widow, embracing yt personage and good order of ye knight in
her heart, more tha^ any other that she had seen of long time, entreated (...)
so earnestly to tarry as he which loved better to obey her request tha^ to
depart, although fained ye contrary, in yt end appeared to be vanquished upon ye
great importunity of the lady. All that morning yt mother and the daughter
passed the time with Dom Diego in great talk of common matters. But he was then
more astoonned and inamored than the night before, in such wise as many times
he (...) so unaptly to their demau^ds, as it was easily perceived that his
mind was much disquieted with some thing, yt only did possess ye force and
veheme^ce of yt same: not withstanding ye lady imputed yt to ye (...) of yt
gentleman, and to his simplicity, which had not greatly freque^ted yt company
of Ladies. When diner time was come, they were served with such great fare and
sundry delicates, accordingly as with her heart she wished to intertain ye young
lord, to ye intent from that time forth, he might more willingly make repair
to her house. After diner he re^dred thanks to his hostess for his good cheer
and intertainment that he had received, assuring her, yt all ye days of his
life he would employ himself to recompense her courtesy, and withal duty and
endeavor to acknowledge that favor. And having taken his leave of the mother, he
went to ye damsel, to her I say, that had so sore wounded his heart, who
already was so depely graue^ in his mind, as ye mark remained there for ever,
taking leave of her, kissed her hands, and thinking verily to express yt
whereupon he imagined al ye night, his tongue and wits were so tied and rapt, as
the ge^tlewoman perfectly perceived this alteration, whereat she was no whit
disco^tented and therefore all blushyng, said unto him: I pray to God sir, to
ease and comfort your grief, as you leave us desirous and glad, long to enjoy
your company. Truly Gentlewoman (answered the Knight,) I think my self more
than happy, to hear that wysh proceed from such a one as you be, and
specially for the desire which you say you have of my presence, which shall be
ever ready to do that which it shall please you to (...). The Gentlewoman
bashful for that offer, thanked him very heartily, praying him with sweet and
smiling countenance, not to forget the way to come to visit them, being well
assured, that her mother would be very glad thereof. And for mine own part
(quod she) I shall think my self happy to be partaker of the pleasure and
great amity that is between our two houses. After great reverence and leave
taken between them, Dom Diego returned home, where he told his mother of the
good interteynement made him, and of the great honesty of the Lady his
hostess: wherefore Madame (quod he to his mother) I am desirous (if it be your
pleasure) to let them know how much their bountiful hospitality has tied me
to them, and what desire I have to recompense the same. I am therefore willing
to bid them hither, and to make the^ so good cheer, as with all their heart
they made me when I was with them. The Lady which was the assured friend of
the mother of Gineura, liked well the advice of her son, and told him that
they should be welcome, for the aunciente amity of long time between them,
who was wont many times to visit one an other. Dom Diego upon his mothers
words, sent to entreat the Lady and fair Gineura, that it would please them
to do him the honor to come unto his house: To which request she so
willingly yielded, as he was desirous to bid them. At the appointed day Dom
Diego sought al means possible honorably to intertaine them: In meats whereof
there was no want, in instruments of all sorts, Mummeries, Morescoes, and a
thousand other passetimes, whereby he declared his good bryngyng up, the
gentleness of his spirit, and the desire that he had appear such one as he
was, before her, which had already the full possession of his liberty. And
because he would not fail to accomplish the perfection of his intent, he
invited all the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen that were his neighbors. I will not
here describe the least part of the provision for that feast, nor the
diversity of meats, or the delicate kinds of wines. It shall suffice me to
tell that after dinner they daunced, where the knight took his mistress by the
hand, so glad to see her self so advanced, as he was content to be so near
her, that was the sweet torment and unspeakable passion of his mind, which he
began to discover unto her in this wise: Mistress Gineura, I have been always
of this mind, that Music has a certain secret hidden virtue (which well can
not be expressed) to revive the thoughts and cogitations of man, be they never
so mornful and pensive, forcing them to utter some outward rejoice: I speak it
by my self, for that I live in extreme anguish and pain, that all the joy of
the world seems unto me displeasaunt, care, and disquietnesse: and
nevertheless my passion, agreeing with the plaintiff voice of the instrument,
does rejoice and conceive comfort, as well to perceive insensible things
(...) to my desires, as also to see my self so near unto her, that has the
salve to ease my pain, to discharge my disease, and to deprive my mind from
all griefs. In like maner-reason it is, that she her self do remedy my
disease, of whom I received the prick, and which is the first foundation of
all mine evil. I can not tell (said the Gentlewoman) what disease it is you
speak of, for I should be very unkind to give him occasion of grief, that
does make us this great cheer. Ah Lady mine (said the Knight) fetching a
sighe from the bottom of his heart, the intertainement that I receive by the
continual contemplation of (...) beauties, and the unspeakable (...) (...)
those two beams, which twynckle in your (...), be they that happily do
vere me, and make me drink this cup of bitterness, wherein not wythstanding
I find such sweetness as all the heavenly drink called Ambrosia, feigned by
the Poets, is but gall in respect of that which I taste in mind, feelyng my
devotion so bente to do you service, as only Death shall untie the knotte
wherewith voluntarilye I knytte my self to be your servant for ever, and if
it so please you, your faithful and loyal friend and husband. The young
Damoselle not woonted for to hear such Songs, did change her color at
least three or four times, and nevertheless (...) a little anger of that
which did content her most: and yet not so sharp, but that the Gentleman
perceived well enough, that she was touched at the quycke, and also that he
was accepted into her good grace and favor. And therefore he continued still
his talk, all that time after dynner, and the maiden said unto him: Sir, I
will now confess that grief may cover alteration of affections proceedyng
from Love. For although I had determined to dissemble that which I think,
yet there is a thing in my mind (which I may not name) that governs me so
strongly, and draws me far from my propre devises and conceiptes, in such
wise as I am constrained to do that which this second inspiration does lead
me unto, and does force my mind to receive an Impression, that what will be
the end thereof, as yet I know not. Not withstandyng, reposyng me in your
virtue and honesty, and acknowledgyng your merit, I think my self happy to
have such (...) for friend, that is so fair and comely a Knight, and for
such I do accept you until you have obtained of my Lady my mother, the
second point, which accomplisheth that which is most desired of them, that
for virtues sake do love. For but only for that, you shall be none otherwise
favored of me, than hitherto you have been. Till now have I attended for this
right happy day of joy and bliss (said the (...)) in token whereof, I do
kiss your white and delicate hands, and for acknowledgyng the favor that
presently I do receive, whereby I may make my vaunt to (...) the servant of
her, that is the fairest, most courteous, and honest Gentlewoman on this side
the Mountains. As he had ended those words, they came to cover for
supper, where they were served so honorably, as if they had been in the
Court of the Monarch of Spain. After supper, they went to walk abroad
alongs the (...) side, besette with wyllowe trees, where both the beauty of
the time, the runnyng (...), the charm of the natural music of birds, and
the pleasant murmr of the tremblyng leaves, at the whistelyng of the sweet
Western wind, moved them again to renew their passetyme after dynner. For
some did give them selves to talk, and to devise of (...) matter: some
framed nosegayes, garlandes, and other pretty poesyes for their friends: Other
some did leap, run, and throw the bar. In the end a great lord, neighbor
to Dom Diego, whose name was Dom Roderico, knowing by his friends countenance to
what saint he was vowed, and perceiving for whose love (...) feast was
celebrate, took by (...) hand a gentlewoman that sat next to fair Gineura,
and (...) her to dance after a song, whereunto she being pleasant and wise,
made no great refusal. Dom Diego failed not to join with his mystresse, after
whom followed the rest of that noble train, every of them as they thought
best. Now the Gentlewoman, that began to dance, song this song so apt for
the purpose, as if she had entered the heart of the enemy and mystresse of
Dom Diego, or of purpose had made the same in the name of her, whom the
matter touched above the rest.

Who may better sing and dance amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage thrall?
The young and tender feblenesse
Of mine unskillful age,
Whereof also the tenderness
Does feeble heart assuage:
Whom beauties force has made to frame
Unto a lovers hest.
So soon as first the kindled flame
Of loving toys increst.
Who may better sing and dance, amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage thrall?
I have assayed out to put
The fire thus begoonne,
And have attempted of to cut
The threede which love has spoonne:
And new alliance feign would flee
Of him whom I love best,
But that the Gods have willed me
To yield to his request.
Who may better sing and dance amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage (...)
So amiable is his grace,
Not like among us all:
So passing fair is his face,
Whose hue does stain us all:
And as the shining sunny day
Does every man delight,
So he alone does bear the sway,
Amongs each loving wight.
Who may (...) sing and dance amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage thrall?
Why should not then, the fairest dame,
Apply her gentle mind,
And honor give unto his name,
With humble heart and kind?
Since he is full of courtesy,
Indewd with noble grace,
And breast replete with honesty,
Well known in every place.
Who may better sing and dance amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage thrall?
If I should love, and serve him than,
May it be counted vice?
If I retain that worthy man,
Shall I be demde unwise?
I will be gentle to him sure,
And render him mine aid:
And love that wight with heart full pure,
That never love assaide.
Who may better sing and dance amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage thrall?
Thus the most sacred unity,
That does our hearts combine:
Is void of wicked flattery,
The same for to (...).
No hardened rigor is our guide,
Nor folly does us lead:
No Fortune can us twain divide,
Until we both be dead.
Who may better sing and dance amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage (...)?
And thus assured certainly,
That this our love shall dure,
And with good luck hope verily,
The same to put in ure.
The sown seeds of amity,
Begone betwixt us twain,
Shall in most perfect unity,
For evermore remain.
Who may better sing and dance amongs us Ladies all,
Than she that does her lovers heart possess in bondage thrall!
This song delited the minds of many in yt company, and principally Dom Diego
and Gineura, who felt themselves tickled without laughing: notwithstanding, the
maiden reioysed to hear her self so greatly praised in so noble a company, and
specially in yt presence of her friend who had no less pleasure by hearing the
praises of his beloved, than if he had been made Lord of all Aragon. She for
all her dissembled countenance used openly, could not hide the alteration of
her mind, without sending forth a sudden change of color, yt increased yt
fair and goodly taint of her face. Dom Diego seeing yt mutation, was so joyful
as was possible, for thereby he knew and judged himself assured of the good
grace of his mistress and therefore wringing her finely by the hands, said unto
her very soberly (...). What greater pleasure my loving wench can there happen
unto your servant, than to see the accomplishme^t of this Prophetical (...)? I
assure you yt in all my life I never heard music, yt delited me so much as
this, and thereby do understand yt good will of the Gentlewoman, which so
courteously has discovered yours toward me, and the faithful service where of
you shall see me from hence forth so liberal, as neither goods nor life shall
be spared for your sake. Gineu^ra who loved him with all her heart, thanked him
very humbly, and prayed him to believe that the song was not un truly soong, and
yt without any fail, she had thereby manifested all the secrets of her mind. The
dance ended, they sat them down round about a clear fountain, which by
silent discourse, issued from an high and moisty rock, enuiro^ned with an
infinite number of Mapletrees, Poplers and Ashes. To which place a page brought
a lute to Dom Diego, whereupon he could play very well, and made it more
pleasa^tly to sound for that he accorded his fayning voice to the instrument,
singing this song that follows.

That I should love and serve also, good reason does require,
What though I suffer loathsome grief, my life in woe to wrappe?
The same be thonely instruments, of my good luck and hap,
The food and pray for hungry corpse, of rest th'assured hire.
By thought whereof (O heavy man) gush forth of tears great store
And by and by reioyst again, my driery tears do cease:
Which guerdon shall mine honor sure, in that triumpha^t peace,
The sum whereof I offer now, were it of price much more.
Which I do make withal my heart, unto that blessed wight,
My proper Goddess here on earth, and only mistress dear:
My goods and life, my brething ghost within this carcass here,
I vow unto that majesty, that heavenly star most bright.
Now since my willing vow is made, I humbly pray her grace,
To end th'accord between us pight, no longer time to tracte:
Which if it be by sured band, so happily brought to pass,
I must my self thrice happy count, for that most heavenly fact.
This song made the company to muse, who commided the trim invention of the
Knight, and above al Gineura praised him more than before, and could not so
well refrain her lokes from him, and he with country change rendering like
again, but that the two widows their mothers conceived great heed thereof,
rejoicing greatly to see the same, desirous in time to couple them together.
For at that present they deferred the same, in consideration they were both
very young. Notwithstanding it had been better that the same conjunction had
been made, before fortune had turned the wheel of her unstableness. And
truly delay and prolongation of time sometimes brings such and so great
missehaps, that one hundred times men curse their fortune, and little advise
in foresight of their unfortunate chances that commonly do come to pass. As
it chanced to these widows, one of them thinking to loose her son by the
vain behauior of the others daughter, who without yt help of God, or care
unto his will, disparaged her honor, and prepared a poison so dangerous for
her mothers age, that the food thereof prepared the way to the good Ladies
grave. Now whiles this love in this manner increased, and that desire of these
two Lovers, flamed forth ordinarily in fire and flames more violent, Dom Diego
all changed and transformed into a new man, received no delight, but in the
sight of his Gineura. And she thought that there could be no greater felicity,
or more to be wished for, than to have a friend so perfect, and so well
accomplished with all things requisite for the ornament and full furniture of a
Gentleman. This was the occasion that the young Knight let no week to pass
without visiting his mistress twice or thrice at the least, and she did unto
him the greatest courtesy and best entertainment, that virtue could suffer a
maiden to do, who is the diligent treasurer and careful tutor of her honor.
And this she did by consent of her mother. In like manne, rhonestie does not
permit yt chaste maidens should use long talk, or immoderate speech, with the
first that be suitors unto them: and much less seemly it is for them to be
over squeimishe nice, with that man which seeks (by way of marriage) to win
power and title of the body, which in very deed, is or ought to be the moitie
of their soul. Such was yt desires of these two Lovers, which notwithstanding
was impeeched by means, as hereafter you shall hear. For during the rebounding
joy of these fair couple of loyal lovers, it chanced that the daughter of a
noble man of the Country, named Ferrando de la Serre, which was fair, comely,
wise, and of very good behauior, by keeping daily company with Gineura, fell
extreemely in love with Dom Diego, and assayed by all means to do him to
understand what the puissance was of her love, which willingly she meant to
bestow upon him, if it would please him to honor her so much, as to love her with
like (...). But the Knight which was no more his own man, (...) rather
possessed of another, had lost with his liberty his wits, and mind to mark
the affection of this Gentlewoman of whom he made no account. The Maiden
nevertheless ceased not to love him, and to (...) al possible ways to make
him her own. And knowing how much Dom Diego loved Hawking, she bought a (...)
the best in all the Country, and sent the same to Dom Diego, who with all his
heart received the same, and effectuously gave her thanks for that desired
gift, praying the messanger to recommend him to the good grace of his
Mistress, and to assure her self of his faithful service, and that for her
sake he would keep the hauk so tenderly as ye balls of his eyes. This Hauk was
the cause of the ill fortune that afterward chanced to this pore lover. For
going many times to see Gineura with the Hawk on his fist, and bearing with
him the tokens of the goodness of his Hawk, it escaped his mouth to say,
that the same was one of the things that in all the world he loved best. Truly
this word was taken at the first bound contrary to his meaning, wherewith the
matter so fell out, as afterward by despair he was like to lose his life.
Certain days after, as in the absence of the Knight, talk rose of his virtue
and honest conditions, one prainsing his prowess and valiaunce, another his
great beauty and curtesy, another passing further, extolling the sincere (...)
and consta^cy which appeared in him touching matters of love, one envious
person named Gracian spoke his mind the^ in this wise: I will not deny but that
Dom Diego is one of the most excellent, honest and brauest Knights of
Catheloigne, but in matters of Love he seems to me so waltering and
inconstant, as in every place where he comes, by and by he falls in love,
and makes as though he were sick, and would die for the same. Gineura
maruelliing at those words, said unto him: I pray you my friend to use better
talk of the Lord Dom Diego. For I do think the love which the Knight does
bear to a Gentlewoman of this Country, is so firm and assured, that none
other can remove the same out of the siege of his mind: Lo how you be deceived
gentlewoman (quod Gracian,) for under color of (...) service, he and such as
he is do abuse the simplicity of young Gentlewomen. And to prove my saying
true, I am assured that he is extremely enamored with the daughter of Dom
Ferrando de la Serre, of whom he received an Hawk, yt he loves above all
other things. Gineura remembering the words which certain days before Dom
Diego spoke touching his Hawk, began to suspect and believe that which master
Gracian alleged, and not able to support the choler, which cold iealosie bred
in her stomach, went into her Chamber full of so great grief and heaviness, as
she was many times like to kill her self. In the end, hoping to be revenged of
the wrong which she believed to receive of Dom Diego, determined to endure her
fortune patiently. In ye mean time she conceived in her mind a despite and
hatred so great and extreme against the pore. Gentleman that thought little
hereof, as the former love was nothing in respect of the revenge by death,
which she then desired upon him. Who the next day after his wonted manner came
to see her, having (to his great damage) the Hawk on his fiste, which was the
cause of all that iealosse. Now as the Knight was in talk with the mother,
seeing that his beloved came not at all (according to her custom) to salute
him and bid him welcome, inquired how she did. One that loved him more than the
rest, said unto him: Sir, so soon as she knew of your coming, immediately
she withdrew her self into her Chamber. He that was wise and well trained up,
dissembled what he thought, imagining that it was for some little fantasy,
whereunto women willingly be subject. And therefore when he thought time to
depart, he took leave of the widow, and as he was going down the stairs
of the great Chamber, he met one of the maids of Gineura, whom he prayed to
commend him to her mistress.

Gineura during all this time took no rest, devising how she might cut of
clean her love entertained in Dom Diego, after she knew that he carried the
Hawke on his fist: which was the only cause that did put her into that frenzy.
And therefore thinking her self both despised and mocked of her Knight, and
that he had done it in despite of her, she entered into so great rage and
choler, as she was like to fall mad. She being then in this trouble of mind,
behold her Gentlewoman came unto her, and did the Knights message. Who hearing
the simple name of her supposed enemy, began to sigh so strangely, as a man
would have thought her soul presently would have departed her body. Afterward
when she had vanquished her raging fit which stayed her speech, she began very
tenderly to weep, saying: Ah traitor and unfaithful lover, is this the
recompense of the honest and firm amity which I have borne thee, so wickedly
to deceive me under the color of so faint and detestable a friendship? Ah
rash and arrant These, is it I upon whom thou ought to vende thy wicked
trumperies? Doste thou think that I am no better worth, but that thou
prodigally should wast mine honor to bear yt spoils thereof to her, that is
in nothing comparable unto me? Wherein have I deserved this discurtesie, if not
by loving thee more than thy beauty and fained love deserve? Did thou dare
to adventure upon me, having thy conscience wounded with such an abominable
and deadly treason? Durst thou to offer thy mouth to kiss my hand, by the
mouth of another, to whom thou had before dedicated thy lying lips in
thine own proper person? I praise God that it pleased him to let me see before
any other worse chance has happened, the poison by thee prepared for the
ruin of my life and honor. Ha fool, hope not to take me in thy trap, nor yet
to deceive me through thy sugared and deceitful words. For I swear by the
almighty God, that so long as I shall live, I will account thee none other, but
as ye most cruel and mortal enemy that I have in this world.

Then to accomplish the rest of her careful mind, she wrote a letter to give
her farewell to her old friend Dom Diego. And for that purpose instructed her
Page with this lesson, that when the Knight should come, he should be ready
before her lodging and say unto him in the behalf of her, that before he
passed any further, he should read the letter, and not to fail to do the
contents. The Page which was malicious, and ill affectioned to Dom Diego,
knowing the appointed day of his coming, waited for him a quarter of a mile
from the Castle, where he had not long tarried, but behold the innocent lover
came, against whom the Page went, bearing about him more hurtful and noisome
weapons, than all the Thieves and robbers had in all the Country of
Catheloigne. In this manner presenting his mistress letters, he said unto
him: My Lord, Madame Gineura my mistress has sent me unto you, and because
she knows how fearful you be to displease her, prays you not fail to
read this letter before you pass any further, and there withal accomplish
the effect of the same. The Knight abashed with that sudden message, answered
the Page: God forbid my friend (quod be) that I should disobey her by any
means, unto whom I have given a full authority and puissance over mine
affections. So receiving the letters, he kissed them three or four times, and
opening them, found that he hoped not for, and red that which he thought not
off. The co^tents whereof were these.

The Letters of fair Gineura, to the Knight Dom Diego.
THere shall pass no day of my life, from making complaints of thee disloyal
and perjured Lover, who being more esteemed and better beloved than (...)
did deserve, have made so small account of me, whereof I will be revenged
upon my self, for that I have thus lightly believed thy words so full of
craft and guile. I am in (...) that thou from hence for the shall fly, to
buzze and beat the bushes, where (...) suspectest to catch the pray: for
here thou art like to be deceived. Go varlet, (go I say,) to (...) her which
holds thee in her nets and snares, and whose Presents (although of small
value) have (...) thee more than the Honest, virtuous, and (...) Love, that
virtue her self began to knitte between us. And since a carrion Kite has made
thee (...) further off, than the wind of the air was able to bear thee, God
defend that Gineura should go about to hinder thy follies, and much less
to-suffer her self to be beguiled through thine excuses. (...) rather God
defend (except thou desire to see me die) that thou should ever be in
place where I am, assuring (...) of this my mind, never to be changed so long
as my soul shall rest within my body: which giving breath unto my panting
breast, shall never be other, but a mortal enemy to Dom Diego: and such one
as even to the Death will not fail to prosecute the (...) of the most
traitorous and unfaithful Knighte, that ever was girte with girdle, or armed
with sword. (...) behold the last favor that thou can, or ought to hope
of me, who lives not but only to martyr and (...) thee, and never shall be
other but

The greatest enemy that ever thou have, or shall have, Gineura the fair.


The miserable lover had no sooner red the contents of the letter, but lifting
up his (...) to the (...), he said: Alas, my God thou know well if ever I
have (...), that I ought to be banished from the place, where my contentation
is chiefly fixed, and from whence my heart shall never depart, chance what
missehappe and fortune so ever. Then tourning himself toward the Page, he
said: Sir Page my friend, say unto my Lady, most humbly commending me unto
her, that for this present I will not see her, but heareafter she shall hear
some news from me. The Page well lessoned for the purpose, made him answer,
saying: Sir she has willed me to say thus much by mouth, that ye cannot do
her greater pleasure, than never to come in place where she is: for so much as
the Daughter of Dom Ferrando de la Serre has so (...) you in her nets, that
loath she is your faithful heart should hang in balance, and expect the
uncertain love of two Ladies at once.

Dom Diego hearing the truth of his missehap, and the occasion of the same,
made light of the matter for that time, till at length the choler of his
mistress should begin to cool, that thereby she might know upon how brittle
ground she had planted a suspicion of her most faithful and loving
servant, and so retiring toward his house, altogether vexed and ill
contented, he went into his Chamber, where with his dagger he paunched the
gorge of the pore Bird, the cause of his Ladies (...), saying: Ha vile
carraine Kite, I swear by the blood of him, that thou shall never be the cause
again, to make her fret for such a trifling thing as thou art: I believe that
what so ever fury is hidden within the body of this curssed Kite, to engender
a Plague, the same now is seized on me, but I hope to do my mistress to
understand what Sacrifice I have made of the thing which was sent me, ready to
do the like upon mine own flesh, where it shall please her to command. So
taking ink and paper, he made answer to Gineura as follows.

The letters of Dom Diego to Gineura the fair.
BUt who would ever have thought (my Lady dear) that a light opinion could so
soon have divided and disparkled your good judgment, to condemn your Knight
before you had heard what he was able to say, for himself? truly I thought no
more to offend you, than the man which you never knew, although you have been
deceived by colored words, uttered by those that be envious of my hap, and
enemies of your joy, who have filled your mind full of false report. I swear
unto you (by God, my good Lady) that never thing entered into my fantasy more,
than a desire to serve you alone, and to avoid the acquaintance of all other,
to preserve for you a pure and entire heart. Whereof long agone I made you an
offer. In witness whereof I humbly (...) you to believe, that so soon as you
see this Bird (the cause of your anger and occasion of my mishap) torn and
pluckte in pieces, that my heart feels no less alteration or torment: for so
long as I shall understand your displeasure to endure against me, assure your
self my life shall abide in no less pain than my joy was great, when I
frankly possessed your presence. Be it sufficient (madame) for you to know,
that I never thought to offend you. Be contented I beseech you, with this
sacrifice which I send you, if not, that I do the (...) upon mine own body,
which without your good will and grace can not longer live. For my life
depending upon that only benefit, you ought not to be astoonned if the same
(...) his nourishmente does perish, as frustrate of that food, propre and
apt for his appetite: and by like means my said life shall revive, if it may
please you to spread your beams over mine obscure and base personage, and to
receive this (...) for a fault not committed. And so waiting a gentle answer
from your great (...), I humbly kiss your white (...) delicate hands with all
humility, praying God sweet lady, to let you se how much I suffer without
desert, and what puissaunce you have over him that (...) all your

Faithful and ever servant most obedient Dom Diego.


The letter closed and sealed, he delivered to one of his faithful and secret
servants, to bear (with the dead Hawk) unto Gineura, chargyng him
diligentely to take heed to her countenance, and above all, that faithfully
he should bear away that which she did say unto him for answer. His man
failed not to speed himself with diligence: and being come before Gineura, he
presented that which his master had sent her. She full of wrath and indignation,
would not once (...) to read the letter, and much less to accept the present
which was a witness of the contrary of that she did (...), and tournyng unto
the Messanger, she said: My friend, thou may go get thee back again,
with the self same charge which thou have brought, and say unto thy master,
that I have nothing to do with his Letters, his excuses, or any other things
that comes from his hands, as one having good expeperience of his sleightes
and deceipts. Tell him also, that I praise God, in good time I have taken heed
to the little faith and trust that is in him for a countergarde in time to
come, lightly never to be deceived. The seruyng man would feign have framed
an Oration to purge his master, but the fierce Gentlewoman brake of his talk,
saying unto him, that she was well resolved upon her intent, which was, that
Dom Diego should never recover place in her mind, and that she hated him as
much at that time as ever she loved him before. Upon which answer the
Messanger returned, so sorrowful for the misfortune of his master (knowing him
to be very innocent) as he knew full well into what despair his master would
(...), when he understood those pitiful and heavy news: not with standing
needs he must know them, and therefore when he was come before Dom Diego, he
recited unto him from point to point his embassage, and delivered him again
his letters. Whereof the unfortunate Gentleman was so sore assooned, as he was
like to have fallen down dead at that instant. Alas (said he) what ill luck
is this, that when I thought to enjoy the benefit of my attempt, Fortune
has revolted to bring me to the extremity of the most desperate man that
ever lived? Is it possible that my good service should be the cause of my
approached overthrow? Alas, what may true and faithful lovers henceforthe
hope for, if not the loss of their time, when after long deuoire and duty,
an Envious fool shall come to deprive them of their joy and gladness, and
they feeling the bitterness of their abandoned farewell, one that loves less
shall bear away the (...) (...) of such hope, and shall possess without
deserte the glory due to a good and faithful (...). Ah fair Gineura, that
thou see not the grief which I do (...), and the affection wherewith I
serve thee, and how much I would suffer to gain and recover thy good grace
and favor. Ha vain hope, which until now haste filled me, with myrthe and
gladness, altogether spente and powdered in the gaulle of operation of thy
bitter sauoure, and the taste of thy corrupted lycour: better it had been for
me at the beginning to have refused thee, than afterward received,
cherished, and sincerely beloved, to be banished for so light occasion, as I am
full sore ashamed to conceive the same within remembrance: but Fortune shall
not have her will over me: for so long as I shall live, I will continue the
servant of Gineura, and my life I will preserve, to let her understand the
force of Love: By continuance whereof, I will not stick to set my self on
fire with the lively flames of my passion, and then withdraw the (...) of my
joy, by the rigor and frowardness that shall proceed from her. When he had
finished his talk, he began to sigh and lament so straungely, as his man was
about to go to call the lady the mother of the Knighte his master: In whom
did appear such signs, as if Death had (...) at hand, or else that he
had been attached with the Spirit of phrenesie. But when he saw him about
to come again to himself, he said thus unto him: How now sir, will you cast
your self away for the foolish toy of an indiscreet girl, ill manered and
taught, and who perchance does all this, to prove how constant you would be?
No no sir, you must turn over an other leaf, and since you be determined to
love her, you must persevere in your pursuit. For at length it is impossible,
but that this diamont hardness, must needs be mollified, if she be not a
devil incarnate, more furious than the wildest beasts, which haunte the
deserts of Lybia. Dom Diego was comforted with that admonition, and purposed
to persist in his affection, and therefore sent many messages, gifts, letters,
and excuses to his angered mistress Gineura: But she made yet (...) account of
them than of the first, chargyng the messangers not to trouble them selves
about those (...), for she had rather die than to see him, or to receive any
thing from him, whom she hated above all things of the world. When news
hereof came to the knight, he was altogether impacient, and seeing the small
profit which he did gain by pursuing his foolish opinion, and not able to
bestow his love elsewhere, he determined to die: and yet unwilling to imbrue
his hands with his own blood, he purposed to wander as a varabunde into some
deserte, to perform the course of his unhappy and sorrowful days, hoping by
that means to quench the heat of (...) amorous rage, either by length of
time, or by (...), the last refuge of the miserable. For which purpose then,
he caused to be made two pilgrims weeds, ye one for himself, and the other
for his man, and prepared all their necessaries for his voyage. Then writing a
Letter to his Gineura, he called one of his men, to whom he said: I am going
about certain of mine affairs, whereof I will have no man to know, and
therefore when I am gone, thou shall tell my Lady mother what I say to thee,
and that within twenty days (God wyllyng) I mean to return. Moreover I
require thee, that four days after my departure, and not before, to bear
these letters to mistress Gineura, and if so be she refuse to receive them,
fail not to deliver them unto her mother: take heed therefore if thou love
me, to do all that which I have given thee in charge. Afterward he called his
servant unto him, which had done the first message unto Gineura, which was a
wise and gentle fellow, in whom the Knight reposed great affiance, to him he
declared al his enterprise, and the end whereunto his fierce determination did
extend. The good servant which loved his master, hearing his intent so
unreasonable, said unto him: Is it not enough for you sir to yield your self a
pray to the most fierce and cruel woman that lives, but thus to augment her
glory, by seeing her self so victorious over you? Are you ignorant what the
malice of women is, and how much they triumph in tormentyng the poor
blinded souls that become their servants, and what praise they attribute unto
(...), if by some misfortune they drive them to despair? Was it without cause
that the Sage in times paste did so greatly hate that sex and kind, as the
common ruin and overthrow of men? What moved the Greek Poet to sing these
verses, against all sorts of women?

A common woe though silly woman be to man,
Yet double joy again she does unto him bring:
The wedding night is one, as wedded folk tell can,
The other when the knell for her poor soul does ring.
If not for that he knew the happiness of man consisted more in avoiding the
acquaintance of that fury, than by embracing and cherishyng of the same, since
her nature is altogether like unto Aesops serpent, which being delivered from
peril and danger of death by the shephierd, for recompense thereof, (...) his
whole house with his venomous (...) and rammish breath. O how happy is he that
can master his own affections, and (...) a free man from that passion, can
rejoice in liberty, (...) from the sweet evil which (as I well (...)) is
the cause of your despair. But sir, your wisdom ought to vanquish those
light conceiptes, by setting so light of that your rebellious Gentle woman as
she is unworthy to be favored by so great a Lord as you be, who deserves a
better personage than hirs is, and a frendlier entertainemen than a farewell so
foolishly (...). Dom Diego, although that he took pleasure to hear those
discourses of his faithful servant, yet he showed so sour a countenance
unto him, as the other with this little word held his peace. Since then it is
so sir, that you be resolved in your missehappe, it may please you to accept me
to wait upon you, whither you are determined to go: for I mean not to live at
(...) ease, and suffer my master, in pain and in grief. I will be partaker of
that which Fortune shall prepare, until the heavens do mitigate their rage
upon you, and your predestinate mishappe. Dom Diego, who (...) no better
company, embraced him very lovingly, thanking him for the good will that he
bare him, and said: This present night about midnight, we will take our
(...), even that way whether our lotte and also Fortune shall guide us,
attending either the end of my passion, or the whole overthrow of my self.
Their intent they did put in proof: For at midnight yt Moon being clear when
all things were at rest, and the crickets chirping through the creauises of the
earth, they took their way unseen of any. And so soon as Aurora began to
garnish her mantle with the colors of red and white, and the morning star of
the Goddess of stealing love, appeared, Dom Diego began to sigh, saying: Ah ye
fresh and dewy mornings, that my hap is far from the contentation of others,
who after they have rested upon the cogitation of their ease and joy, do awake
by the pleasant chirpyng of the birds, to perform by effect that which the
shadow and fantasy of their mind, did present by dreaming in the night,
where I am constrained to separate by great distance exceeding vehement
continuation of my torments, to follow wild beasts, wandering from thence
where the greatest number of men do quietly sleep and take their rest. Ah
Venus, whose star now co^duceth me, and whose beams long ago did glowe
and kyndle my loving heart, how (...) it that I am not entreated according to
the desert of my constant mind and mening most sincere? Alas, I look not to
expect any thing certain from thee, since thou have thy course amongs the
wa^dring stars. Must the influence of one star yt rules over me, deface
that which yt (...) would to be accomplished, and that my cruel mistress,
deluding my languors and griefs triumphs over mina infirmity, and
ouerwhelmeth me with care and sorrow, that I live pining away, amongs the savage
beasts in yt wilderness? for somuche as (...) yt grace of my lady, all company
shall be so tedious and lothsom unto me, yt the (...) thought of a true (...) with
her, yt has the (...) of me, shall serve for yt comfort and true remedy of all
my troubles. Whiles he had with these pa^gs forgotten himself, he saw yt the
day began to wax clear, the Sun already spreading his golden beanies upon the
earth, and therefore began hastily to set forthwards, using byways, and far from
common used trades, so nere as he could, yt he might not by any means be
known. Thus they rode forth even until noone: but seeing their (...) to be
weary and faint, they lyghted at a village, sarre from the high way: where
they refreshed themselfes, and baited their horse until it was late. In this
sort by the space of three days they trauersed the (...), until they (...) to
the foot of a mountain, not frequented almost but by wild and savage
beasts. The country round about was very fair, pleasant, and fit for the
solitariness of the knight: for if shadow pleased him, he might be delighted
with the couerte of an infinite number of fruitful trees, where with only
nature had furnished those hideous and savage deserts. Next to the high and
well timbred forests, there were groves and bushes for exercise of hunting. A
man could desire no kind of veneson, but it was to be had in that wilderness:
there might be seen also a certain sharp and rude situation of craggy and
(...) rocks, which notwithstanding yielded some pleasure to yt eyes, to see them
tapissed with a pale moasure green, which disposed into a frizeled guise,
made the place pleasant and the rock soft, according to the fashion of (...).
There was also a very fair and wide cave, which liked him well, compassed round
about with fur (...), Cedre trees, pine apples, Cipres, and trees distillyng
a certain rosen or gum, toward the bottom whereof, in the way down to the
valley, a man might have (...) a passing company of Ewe trees, Poplers of al
sorts; and Maple trees; the leaves whereof felt into a lake or ponde, which
came by certain small gutters into a fresh and very clear fountain right
against that (...). The knight seeing the auncientie and (...) of the place,
deliberated by and by to plant there the siege of his abode, for performing of
his penance and life. And therefore said unto his servant: My friend, I am
(...) that this place shall be yt monastery, to make yt (...) profession of
our religion, and where we will accomplish the voyage of our (...). Thou (...)
both the beauty and solitariness, which do rather commau^d us here to rest,
than any other place nere at band. The servant yielded to the pleasure of his
master, and so lighting from their horse, they dissurnished the^ of their
saddles and bridles, giving to them the liberty of the fields, of whom
afterward they never heard more news. The saddles they placed within the
cave, and leaving their ordinary apparel, they clothed themselves in Pilgrims
weeds, fortifying the mouth of the cave, yt wild beasts should not hurt the^
when they were a sleep. There the servant began to play the (...), and to
make. y. (...) beds of moss, whose spindle and wheel were of wood, so well
poollished and trimmed, as if he had been a carpenter well expert in yt
occupation. They (...) of nothing else but of yt fruits of those wild trees,
sometimes of the fruits of herbs, until they had devised to make a crosbow of
wood, wherewith they killed now and then a Hare, a Cony, Kid, and many times
some stronger beast remained with the^ for gage: whose blood they pressed out
between. (...). pieces of wood, and roasted them against the Sun, serving the
same in, as if it had been a right good dishe for the first course of their
sobre and vndelicate table, whereat the pure water of the fountain, next unto
their holow and deep house, served in (...) of the good wines and delicious
drinks that abounded in yt house of Dom Diego. Who living in yt pore estate,
ceased night nor day to complain of his hard fortune and curssed plight,
going many times through the deserts all alone, yt better to muse and study
thereupon, or (peradventure) desirous that some hungry Bear should descend from
the Mountain, to finish his life and painful griefs. But the good servant
knowing his masters sorrow and mishap, would never go out of his sight, but
rather exhorted him to return home to his goods and possessions, and to
forget that order of life, unworthy for such a personage as he was, and
uncomely for him that ought to be endued with good reason and judgment. But
the desperate Gentleman wilful in his former deliberation, would not hear him
sprake of such (...). (...) yt if it escaped the servant to be earnest and
sharp against ye rudeness and sottish cruelty of Gineura, it was a (...) to
see Dom Diego mount in choler against him, saying: Art you so hardy to speak
ill of the gentlewoman, which is the most virtuous and honest personage under
ye coape of heaven? Thou may tha^k the love I bear thee, otherwise I would
make thee feel how much the slander touches me at the heart yt thou vttrest
against her, which has right to punish me thus for mine (...), and yt it is I
that commit the wrong in co^plaining of her severity. Now sir said the servant,
I do in deed perceive what manner of thing the contagion of love is. For they
which once do feel the corruption of that air, think nothing good or sauory,
but the filthy smell of yt (...) meat. Wherefore I humbly beseech you a little to
set apart, and remove from mind, that (...) and presumptuous dame Gineura, and
by forgetting her beauty, to measure her desert and your grief, you shall know
then (being guided by reasons lore) yt you are the simplest and weakest man in
the world, to torment your self in this wise, and that she is the fondest
girl, wholly straught of wits, so to abuse a Noble man yt meriteth ye good
grace and sweet embraeeme^t of one more fair, wise and modest, than she (...)
her self to be to you. The Knight hearing this, thought to aba^don patience,
and therefore said unto him: I swear unto thee by God, yt if ever thou have any
such talk again, either I will die, or thou shall depart out of my company,
for I cannot abide by any means to suffer one to despise her whom I do love and
honor, and shall so (...) during life. The servant loath to offend his master,
held his peace, heavy for all that in heart, to remember how the pore Gentleman
was resolved to finish there, (in the desert unknown to his friends) all the
remna^t of his life. And who as well for the evil order, and not (...)
nouriture, as for assiduall plaints and we(...), was become so pale and lean,
as he better resembled a dry chippe, than a man having feeling or life. His
eyes were soonke into his head, his beard (...), his hair staring, his skin full
of filth, altogether more like a wild and savage creature (such one as is
depainted in brutall form) than fair Dom Diego, so much commended and
esteemed through out the kingdom of Spain. Now leave we this amorous Hermit
to passionate and plain his misfortune, to see to what end the Letters came
that he wrote to his cruel Mistress. The day (...) for delivery of his
Letters, his servant did his charge, and being come to the house of Gineura,
found her in the Hall with her mother, where kissing his masters letters, he
presented them with very great reverence to the Gentlewoman. Who so soon as
she knew that they came from Dom Diego, all changed into raging color and
foolish choler, threw them incontinently upon the ground, saying: Suffices it
not thy master, that already twice I have done him to understand, that I have
nothing to do with his letters nor Ambassades, and yet goes he about by such
assaults to increase my displeasure and agony, by the only remembrance of
his folly? The mother seeing that uncivil order, although she understood the
cause, and knew that there was some discord between the two Lovers, yet
thought it to be but light, since the Comike Poet does say:

The lovers often falling out,
And pretty wrangling rage:
Of pleasant love it is no dout,
The sure renewing gage.
She went unto her Daughter, saying: What great rage is this? Let me see that
letter that I may read it: For I have no fear yt Dom Diego can deceive me with
the sweetness of his honey words. And truly daughter you need not fear to
touch them, for if there were any poison in them, it proceaded from your
beauty that has bitten and stong the Knight, whereof if he assay to make you
a partaker, I see no cause why he ought to be thus rigorously rejected,
deserving by his honesty a better entertainment at your hands. In the mean
time one of the Serving men took up the letters, and gave them to the Lady,
who reading them, found written as follows.

The letters of Dom Diego to Mistress Gineura.
MY dearest and most wellbeloued Lady, since that mine innocence can find no
resting place within your tender corpse, what honest excuse or true reason so
ever I do allege, and since your heart declares it self to be implacable, and
not pleased with him yt never offended you, except it were for overmuch love,
which for guerdon of yt rare and incomparable amity, I perceive my self to be
hated deadly of you and in such wise contemned, as the only record of my name,
causes in you an insupportable grief and displeasure unspeakable. To avoid I
say your indignation, and by my mishap to render unto you some (...) and
contentment, I have meant to dislodge my self so far from this Country, as
neither you nor any other, shall ever hear by fame or true report, the place of
my abode, nor the grave wherein my bones shall rest. And although it be an (...)
hearts sorrow and torment, which by way of pen can not be declared, to be thus
misprised of you, whom alone I do love and shall, so long as mine afflicted
soul shall hang upon the feeble and brittle threede of life: yet for all that,
this grief falling upon me, is not so (...), as the punishment is grievous, by
imagining the passion of your mind, when it is (...) with (...) and wrath
against me, who lives not, but to wander upon the thoughts of your
perfections. And for so much as I do feel for the debilitie that is in me, that
I am not able any longer to bear the sour shockes of my bitter torments and
martyrdom that I presently do suffer, yet before my life do fail, and death
do sease upon my senses, I have written unto you this present letter for a
testimonial of your rigor, which is the mark that justifies my
vngyltinesse. And although I do complain of mine unhappy fortune, yet I mean
not to accuse you, only contented that each man do know, that firm affection
and eternal thraldom do deserve other recompense than a farewell so cruel.
And I am well assured, that when I am dead, you will pity our torment, knowing
then, although to late, that my loyalty was so sincere, as the report of those
was false, that made you believe, that I was very far in love with the
daughter of Dom Ferrande de la Serre. Alas, shall a noble Gentleman that has
been well trained up, be fordidden to receive the gifts that come from a
virtuous Gentlewoman? Ought you to be so incapable and void of humanity, that
the sacrifice which I have made of the poor bird, the cause of your
disdain, my repentance, my lawful excuses, are not able to let you see the
contrary of you persuation? Ah, ah, I see that the dark and obscure veil of
unjust disdain and (...) anger, has so blindfold your eyes, and (...) your
mind, as you can not judge the truth of my cause and the unrighteousness of
your quarrel. I will render unto you none other certificat of mine innocence,
but my languishing heart, which you clepe between your hands, feling such rude
intertainment there, of whom he looked for rejoice of his travels. But for
so much then as you do hate me, what rests for me to do, but to pro cure
destruction to my self? And since your pleasure consists in mine overthrow,
reason wills that I obey you, and by death to sacrifice my life in like manner
as by life you were the only mistress of my heart. (...) only thing chereth up
my heart, and makes my death more miserable, which is, that in dying so
innocent as I am, you shall remain faulty, the only cause of my ruin. My
life will depart like a puff, and soul shall vanish like a sweet so^mers
blast: whereby you shall be ever deemed for a cruel woman and bloody murderer
of your devout and faithful servants. I pray to God mine own sweet Lady, to
give you such contentation, joy, pleasure, and gladness, as you do cause
through your rigor, disco^tentation, grief and displeasure to the poor lan
guishing creature, and who for evermore shall be

Your most obedient and affected servant Dom Diego.


The good Lady having read the Letter, was so astoonned, as her words for a
long space stayed within her mouth, her heart panted, and spirit was full of
confusion, her mind was filled with sorrow, to consider the anguishes of the
poor vagabund and foster hermit. In the end before the household dissembling
her passion which moved her sense, she took her daughter aside, who^ very
sharply she rebuked, for that she was the cause of the loss of so notable and
perfect a Knight as Dom Diego was. Then she read the Letter unto her, and as
all her cloquence was not able to move that cruel damsel, more venomous than a
serpent against the knight who (as she thought) had not endured the one half
of that which his inconstancy and lightness and well deserved, whose
obstinate mind the mother perceiving, said unto her: I pray to God (dear
daughter) that for your (...), you be not blinded in your beauty, and for the
refusal of so great a benefit as is the allia^ce of Dom Diego, you be not
abused with such a one as shall dim the light of your renoume and glory,
which hitherto you have gained amongs the sobrest and modest maidens. Having
said so, the wise and sage widow, went toward the servant of Dom Diego, of who^
she demanded what (...) his master departed, which she knowing, and not igno
rant of the occasion, was more wroth than before: notwithsta^nding she
dissembled what she thought, and sending back his servant, she required him to
do her hearty commendations to the lady his mistress, which he did. The good
lady was joyful thereof, for not knowing yt co^tents of her sons letters, she
looked yt he had sent word unto his lady of the just hour of his return. But
when she saw that in. xx. days, nor yet within a month he came not, she could
not tell what to think, so dolorous was she for the absence of her son. The
time passing without hering any news from him she began to torment her self,
and be so pensive, as if she had heard certain news of his death. Alas (quod
she) and wherefore have the heue^s given me the possession of such an exquisite
fruit, to deprive me thereof before I do partake the goodness and
sweetness thereof, and enjoy the grifts proceeding from so goodly a stock. Ah
God, I fear that my immoderate love is the occasion of the loss of my (...),
and the whole ruin of the mother, with the demolition and wast of all our
goods. And I would that it had pleased God (my son) that hunters game had
never ben so dear, for thinkyng to catch the pray thou thy self was taken,
and thou wandering for thy better disport, missing the right way, so strangely
did (...), that hard it is to reduce thee into the right track again. At
least wise if I knew the place, whereunto thou art repaired to find again thy
loss, I would travail thither to bear (...) company, rather than to line
here void of a husband, betrayed by them whom I best trusted, and (...) from
the presence of thee my son, the staff and only comfort of mine old age,
and the certain hope of al our house and family. Now if the mother vered her
self, the son was eased with no great rejoice, being now a free citizen with
the beasts and fowls of the forestes, dens and caves, leaving not the
profunditie of the wooddes, the craggednesse of the rocks, or beauty of the
valey, without some sign or token of his grief. Sometime with a puncheon well
sharpened, serving him in steed of a penknife, he graued the success of his
love upon on hard stone. Other times the soft bark of some tender and new
grown spraye served him in place of paper or parchement. For there he carved
in (...) proprely combined with a knotte (not easily to be known) the name of
his Lady, interlaced so proprely with his own, that the finest (...) might be
deceived, to disciphre the right interpretation. Upon a day then, as he passed
his time (according to his custom) to muse upon his myssehaps, and to frame
his success of love in the air, he ingraued these verses on a stone by a
fountain side, adjoining to his savage and rusticall house.

If any forest Pan, does haunt here in this place,
Or Wandering Nymphe, has heard my woeful plaint:
The one may well behold, and view what drop of grace,
I have deseru'de, and eke what griefs my heart does taint,
The other lend to me some broke or shoure of rain,
To moist mine heart and eyes, the gutters of my brain.
Somewhat further of many times at the rising of the Sun, he mounted the
top of an high and green Mountain to solace himself upon the fresh and
green grass where four pillars were erected, (either naturally done by dame
Nature her self, or wrought by the industry of man,) which bore a stone in
form four square, well hewed, made and trimmed in manner of an Altar, upon
which Altar he dedicated these verses to the posterity.

Upon this holy squared stone, which Altar men do call,
To some one of the Gods above, that consecrated is,
This doleful verse I consecrate, in token of my thrall,
And deadly griefs that do my silly heart oppress.
And vex with endless pains, which never quiet is.
This woeful verse (I say) as surest gage of my distress,
I grave on Altar stone for ever to remain,
To show the heart of truest wight, that ever lived in pain.
And upon the brims of yt table, he carved these words:

This Mason work erected here, shall not so long abide,
As shall the common name of two, that now uncoupled be,
Who after froward fortune past, knit each in one degree,
Shall render for right earnest love, reward on either side.
And before his lodging in that wild and stony (...) upon the bark of a
goodly and lofty Beeche tree, feeling in himself an unaccustomed lustiness,
thus he wrote:

The increasing beauty of thy shape, extending far thy name,
By like increase I hope to see, so stretched forth my fame.
His man seeing him to begin to be merrily disposed, one day said unto him: And
wherefore sir serves yt lute, which I brought amongs our males, if you do not
assay thereby to recreate your self, and sing thereupon yt praises of her whom
you love so well: yea and if I may so say, by worshipping her, you do commit
Idolatry in your mind. Is it not your pleasure that I fetch the same unto you,
that by imitation of Orpheus, you may move the trees, rocks, and wild beasts
to bewail your misfortune, and witness the penance that you do for her sake,
without cause of so heinous punishment: I see well ((...) the Knight) yt thou
would I should be merry, but mirth is so far from me, as I am estraunged from
her yt holds me in this misery. Notwithstanding I will perform thy request,
and will awake that instrument in this desert place, wherewith sometime I
witnessed yt greatest part of my passions. Then the Knight receiving the Lute,
sounded thereupon this song ensuing.

The waves and troubled (...), that moves the seas aloft,
Which runs and roares against the rocks, and threatens dangers often,
Resembles lo the fits of love,
That daily do my fancy move.
My heart it is the ship, that drives on salt sea (...),
And reason sails with senseless wit, and never looks home,
For love is guide, and leads the dance,
That brings good hap, or bredes mischaunce.
The furious flames of love, that never cease sure,
Are loc the busy sails and oars, that would my rest procure,
And as in Skies, great winds do blo,
My swift desires runs, fleting so.
As sweet Zephyrus breath, in spring time fedes the flowers,
My mistress voice would joy my wits, by her most heavenly powers,
And would exchau^ge my state I say,
As Summer changes Winters day.
She is the Artique star, the gracious Goddess to,
She has the might to make and mar, to help or else vnde,
Both death and life, she has at call,
My war, my peace, my ruin and all.
She makes me live in woe, and guids my sighs and lokes,
She holds my fredome by a lace, as fish is held with hokes,
Thus by despair, in this concaite,
I swallow up both hoke and bait.
And in the deserts lo I live, among the savage kind,
And spend my time in woeful sighs, raisde up by care of mind,
All hopeless to, in pains I pine,
And joys for ever do resine.
I dread but Charons boat, if she no mercy give,
In darkness then my soul shall dwell, in Plutos reign to live,
But I believe, she has no care,
On him that caught is in her snare.
If she release my woe, a thousand thanks therefore,
I shall her give, and make the world to honor her the more,
The Gods in Skies will praise the same,
And (...) bear of her good name.
O happy is that life, that after torment (...),
And earthly sorrows on this mould, for better life shall (...),
And live amongs the Gods on high,
Where love and lovers never die.
O life that here I lead, I freely give thee now,
Unto the fair where ere she rests, and look thou show her (...)
I linger forth my years and days,
To win of her a crown of praise.
And thou my pleasant lute, cease not my songs to sound,
And show the torments of my mind, that I through love (...) found,
And always tell my Mistress still,
Her worthy virtues rules my will.
The Foster Lover.
The Foster lover singing this song, sighing (...) times between, the trickling
tears ran down his face: who thereby was so disfigured, as searse could they
have known him, which had all the days of their life frequented his company.
Such was the state of this miserable young gentleman, who dronk with his own
wine, balanced himself down to despair rather than (...) the hope of that which
he durst not look for. Howbeit like as the mischiefs of men be not always
durable, and that all things have their proper season, eue^ so fortune
repenting her evil entreaty, which wrongfully she had caused this pore
penetenciarie of Gineura to endure, prepared a means to readuaunce him aloft
upon her wheel, even when he thought least of it. And certes, herein appeared
the mercy of God, who causes things difficult and almost impossible to be so
easy, as those that ordinarily be brought to pass. How may it hereby be
perceived, that they which were plu^ged in the bottom (...) defiance, deeming
their life utterly forlorn, be sone exalted even to the top of all glory and
felicity? Has not our age seen that man which was by authority of his
enemy judged to die, ready to be carried forth to the scaffold miraculously
delivered from that danger, and (wherein the works of God are to be marvelled)
yt same man to be called to the dignity of a prince, and preferred above all
the rest of the people. Now Dom Diego attending his fieldish Philosophy in the
solitary valeis of the rich Mountain Pyrene, was helped with help unlooked
for, as you shall hear.

You have hard how he had a neighbor and singular fre^d, (...) Noble gentleman
named Dom Roderico. This ge^tleman amongs al his faithful companions, did most
lament the hard fortune of Dom Diego. It came to pass. (...), months after yt
the pore wild penitent person was gone on his pilgrimage, yt Dom (...) took his
journey into Gascoine for diverse his vrge^t affairs, which after he had
dispatched, were it yt he was gone out of his way, or that God (as it is most
likely) did drive him thither, he approached toward yt coast of the Pyrene
mountains, where yt time his good friend Dom Diego did inhabit, who daily grew
so weak and feeble, as if God had not sent him sudden succor, he had gained yt
he most desired, which was death yt should have been the end of his trauails and
afflictions. The train of Dom Roderico being the^ a bow shot off from the
savage caben of Dom Diego, they espied the tracts of men's feet newly (...),
and began to marvel what he should be yt dwelled there, considering ye solitude
and (...) of the place, and also that ye same was far of (...) or house. And as
they devised hereupon, they saw a man going into a Cave, which was Dom Diego,
coming from making his complaints upon the rock (...) (...) before. From which
having (...) his face toward that part of the world where he thought ye
lodging was of that saint, whereunto he addressed his deuotio^s, Dom Diego
hearing the noise of the horse, was retired because he would not be seen. The
knight which rode that way, seeing that, and knowing how far he was out of the
way, commanded one of his men to gallop toward the Rock, to learn what
people they were yt dwelled (...), and to demand how they might coast to the
high way yt led to Barcelone. The servant approaching near the cave, perceived
the same so well empaled and fortified (...) beastres skins before, fearing
also yt they were thieves and robbers yt dwelled there, durst not approach, and
less enquire the way, and therefore returned toward his master to whom he told
what he saw. The Knight of another manner of metal and hardiness than yt
rascal and coward servant, like a stout, courageous and valiant man, (...) to
the cave, and demanding who was within, he saw a man come forth so
disfigured, horrible to look upon, pale with staring hair upright, that
pitiful it was to behold him, which was the servant of the foster hermit. Of
him Roderico demanded what he was, and which was yt way to Barcelone. (...)
answered yt disguised person: I know not how to answer your demand, and much
less I know the country where we now presently be. But sir said he sighing,
true it is yt we be two pore co^panio^s whom fortune has sent hither, by what
il adventure I know not, to do penance for our trespasses and offenses.
Roderico hearing him say so, began to call to his remembrance his friend Dom
Diego, although he never besore yt time suspected the place of his above. He
lighted then from his horse, desirous to see the singularities of yt (...),
and the magnificence of yt cauish lodging, where be entered and saw him whom he
sought for, and yet for all that did not know him: he co^moned with him a long
time of the pleasure of yt solitary life in respect of them that lived
entangled with the co^bresome follies of this world. For So Much quod he as yt
sprite distracted and withdrawn from worldly troubles is eleuable to the
conte^plation of heavenly things, and sooner attends to the knowledge and
reverence of his God, than those yt be conuersa^t amongs me^, and to conclude,
the complaints, yt delites, ambitions, covetousness, vanities and
superfluities yt abou^d in ye co^fused maze of worldly troup, do cause a
misknowledge of our selves, a forgetfulness of our creator, and many times a
negligence of piety and pureness of religion.

Whiles ye unknown Hermit and the Knight Roderico talked of these things, the
servant of To. visiting all the corners of the deep and stony cel of those
penite^ts, by fortune espied two saddles, one of the^ richly wrought and armed
with plates of steel, yt had been meet for some goodly Ienet. And upon the
plate well wrought, graven and enameled, the gold for all the rust cankring
the plate, did yet appear. For which purpose one of the^ said to yt servant of
Dom Diego. Good father hitherto I see neither Mule nor horse, for whom these
saddles ca^ serve, I pray (...) to sell them unto us, for they will do us more
pleasure, than presently they do you. Masters (quod the Hermit,) if they like
you, they be at your commandment. In the mean time Roderico having ended his
talk with the other Hermit, without knowing of any thing that he desired, said
unto his me^. Now sirs to horse, and leave we these pore people to rest in
peace, and let us go seek for the right way which we so well as they have
lost. Sir (quod one of his me^,) there be. y. saddles, and one of them is so
exceeding fair, so well garnished and wrought as ever you saw. The knight feling
in himself an unaccustomed motion, caused the^ to be brought before him, and as
he viewed and marked the rich harness and trappings of the same, he stays to
look upon the hinder part minonly wrought, and in the mids of the engrauing he
red this devise in the Spanish tongue.

Que brantare la fe, es causa muy fea. That is to say. To violate or break
faith, is a thing detestable. That only inscription made him to pause a little
more. For it was the Poesy yt Dom Diego bore ordinarily about his arms, which
moved him to think yt without doubt one of those Pilgrims was the very same
man to whom yt saddle did appertain. And therefore he bent himself very
attentively afterward to behold first the one, and then the other of those
desert Citizens. But they were so altered, as he was not able to know the^
again. Dom Diego seeing his friend so near him, and the desire yt he had to
know him, chafed very much in (...) mind and the more his rage began to ware,
when he saw Roderico approach near unto him more advisedly to look upon him,
for he had not his own affections so much at commandment, but his blood
moved his entrails, and mounting into the evident place, caused outwardly the
alteration which he endured, to appear. Roderico seeing him to change color,
was assured of that which before he durst not suspect: and that which made him
yt (...) believe yt he was not deceived, was a little tuft of hair, so yelow as
gold, which Dom Diego had upon his neck, whereof Don't Roderico taking heed,
gave over al suspicion, and was well assured of yt he doubted. And therefore
displaying himself we his arms opened upon the (...) of his friend, and
embracing him very lovingly, bedewing his face with tears, said unto him: Alas
my Lord (...) Diego, what evil luck from heaven has departed you (...) yt good
company of the^ which die for sorrow, to see themselves be reued of yt beuty,
light and orname^t of their fellowship: What be they that have given you
occasion thus to eclipse the brightness of your name, when it ought most
clearly to shine, both for your present pleasure, and for the honor of your
age? Is it from me sir, that you ought thus to hide your self? Do you think
how I am so blind, that I know not right well, you to be that Dom Diego, that
is so renoumed for virtue and prowess? I would not have tarried here so long,
but to bear away a power to rejoice two persons, you being the one, by
withdrawing you from this heavy and unseemly wilderness, and my self the
other, by enjoying your company, and by bearing news to your friends, who
since your departure, do bewail and lament the same. Dom Diego seeing that he
was not able to conceyle the truth of that which was evidently seen, and
feeling the loving imbracements of his best friend, began to feel a certain
tenderness of heart like unto that which the mother conceiueth, when she has
recovered her son that was long absent, or the chaste wife, the presence of
her dear husband, when she clepeth him between her arms, and frankely
culleth and cherishes him at her pleasure. For which cause not able to refrain
any longer for joy and sorrow together, weping and sighing began to embrace him
with so good and hearty affection, as with good will the other had sought for
his knowledge And being come again to him self, he said to his faithful and
most loving friend: Oh God, how uneasy and difficult be thy judgments to
comprehend? I had thought to live here miserably, unknown to all the world, and
behold, I am here discovered, when I thought lest of it: I am (...) deed (quod
he to Roderico) that wretched and vnfortuante Dom Diego, even that your very
great and loving friend, who werie of his life, afflicted with his unhap, and
tormented by fortune, is retired into these deserts, to accomplish the
overplus of the rest of his ill luck. Now since that I have satisfied you
herein, I beseech you that being content with my sight, ye will get you hence and
leave me here to perform that little remna^t which I have to live, without
telling to any person that I am alive, or yet to manifest (...) place of my
abode. What is that you say sir (said Roderico) are you so far straught out
of your right wits, to have a mind to continue this brutal life, to deprive al
your friends from the joy which they receive by inioying your company? Think I
pray you, that God has caused us to be borne noble men, and having power and
authority not to live in corners, and buried amid the slave rye of the popular
fort, or remain idle within great palaces or privy places, but rather to
illustrat and give light with the example of our virtue to them which apply
themselves to our manner of good behauior, and do live as depending upon our
(...) and commau^dements: I appele to your faith, what good shall succeed to
your subjects, who have both heard and also known the benefit bestowed upon
them by god, for that he gave them a lord so modest and virtuous, and before
they have experimented the goodness and virtue, be deprived of him, that is
adorned and garnished with such perfections? What comfort, contentation and
(...) shall my lady your mother receive, seeing the loss of you to be so
sudden, after your good and delicate bringing up, instructed with such great
diligence to be utterly bereued of yt fruit of that educatio^? It is you sir,
yt may command obedience to parents, succor yt afflicted, and do justice to
the^ that crave it: Alas, they be your poor subjects yt make complaints, even
of you, for denying the^ your due presence. It is you of who^ my good madame
does complain, as of him yt has broken and violated his faith, for not
coming at yt promised day. Now as he was about to to continue his oration, Dom
Diego unwilling to hear him, brake his talk saying: Ah sir, and my great
friend: It is an easy matter for you to judge of mine affairs, and to blame
mine absence, not knowing peradventure ye occasion ye same. But I esteem you a
man of so good judgment, and so great a fre^d of things honest, and of the same
(...), as by understanding my hard luck when you be advertised of yt cause of
my withdrawing into this solitarieplace, you will right ly confess, and plainly
see that the wisest and most constant have committed more vain folies than
these done by me, forced with like spirit yt now moves and torme^teth my
mind. Having said, he took aside Roderico, where he did tell unto him the whole
discourse both of his love and also of the rigor of his Lady, not without
weeping, in such abundance and with such frequent sighs and (...), as
interrupted his spech, that Roderico was constrained to keep him company, by
remembering yt obstinacy of her yt was the mistress of his heart, and thinking
yt alredie he had seen the effect of like missehap to fall upon his own head,
or nere unto yt like, or greater distress tha^ that which he saw his dear and
perfect friend to endure. Notwithstanding he assayed to remove him from that
desperate mind and opinion of continuance in yt desert. But the froward
penitent swore unto him, that so long as he lived (without place recovered in
the good graces of his Gineura, he would not return home to his house, but
rather change his being, to seek more savage abode, and less freque^ted tha^
yt was. For (said he) to what purpose shall my return serve, where continuing
mine affection, I shall feel like cruelty yt I did in time past, which will be
more painful and (...) for me to suffer than voluntary exile and banishement,
or bring me to that end wherein presently I am. Content your self, I beseech
you, and suffer me to be but one unhappy, and do not persuade me to prove a
second affliction, woorsse than the (...) (...).

Roderico hearing his reasons so lively and well applied, would not reply,
only content that he would make him promise to (...) there two months, and
in that time should attempt to (...) him self. And for (...) own part, he
swore unto him, that he would be a means to reconcile Gineura, and bring them
to talk together. Moreover, he gave him assurance by oath, that he should not
be discovered by him, nor by any in his company. Wherewith the Knight somewhat
recomforted, thanked him very affectuously. And so leuing with him a field
bed, two servants, and money for his (...), Roderico took his leave, telling
him that shortly he would visit him again, to his so great contentation, as
ever he was left and forsaken with grief and sorrow, himself making great moan
for the unseemly state, and miserable plighte of Dom Diego. And God knows
whether by the way, he (...) the (...) of pitilesse Gineura, blaspheming a
million of times the whole sex of womankind, peradventure not without just
cause. For there lies hidden (I know not what) in the breasts of women, which
at times like the wane and increase of the Moon, does change and alter a
(...) can not tell on what foot to stand to conceive the (...) of the same:
which fickle fragillitie of theirs (I dare not say mobilitie) is such, as the
subtillest (...) of them al, best skilled in Turners Art, can not (I say not
deface) so much as hide or color that natural imperfection.

Roderico arrived at his house, frequented many times the lodging of Gineura,
to epsy her fashions, and to see if any other had conquered that place, that
was so well assailed and besieged by Dom Diego. And this wise and sage knight
used the matter so well, that he fell in acquaintance with one of the
Gentlewomans pages, in whom she had so great trust, as she conceyled from him
very few of her greatest secrets, not well observing the precept of the wise
man, who counsels us not to tell the secrets of the mind to those, whose
judgment is but weak, and (...) tongue very frank of speech. The knight (...)
familiar with this page, dandled him so with fair words, as by little and
little he wrong the worms out of his nose, and understood that when Gineura
began once to take pepper in snuff, agoinst Dom Diego, she fell in love with a
Gentleman of Biskaye, very poor, but beautiful, young, and lusty, which was
the steward of the house: and the page added further, that he was not then
there, but would return within three days, as he had sent word to his
mistress, and that two other Gentlemen would accompany him to carry away
Gineura into Biskaye, for that was their last conclusion: and I hope (quod he)
that she will take me with her, because I am made privy to their whole intent.
Roderico hering the treason of this flight and departure of the unfaithful
daughter, was at the first brunt astoonned, but desirous that the page should
not mark his alteration, said unto him: In very deed mete it is, that the
Gentlewoman should make her own choice of husband, since her mother so little
cares to pronide one for her. And albeit that the Gentleman be not so rich
and noble, as her estate deserves, her affection in that behalf ought to
(...), and the honesty of his person: for the rest Gineura has (thanks be to
God) wherewith to intertaine the state of them both. These words he spoke,
far from the thought of his heart. For being by himself, thus he said: O
blessed God, how blind is that love, which is unruled, and out of order: and
what despair to recline to them, which (void of reason) (...) feed so
foolishly of vain thoughts and fond desires, that two commodities, presented
unto them, by what ill luck I know not, they forsake the best, and make
choice of the worst. Ah Gineura, the fairest Lady in all this country, and
the most unfaithful woman of our time, where be thine eyes and judgment?
whither is thy mind strayed and wandered, to acquit thy self from a great
lord, fair, rich, noble, and virtuous, to be given to one that is poor, whose
parents be unknown, his prowess obscure, and birth of no aparant reputation.
Behold, what makes me believe, that (...) (so well as Fortune) is not only
blind, but also dazeleth the syghte of them that he imbraceth and captiuateth
under his power and bondage. But I make (...) vow (false woman) that it shall
never come to pass, and that this master Biskaye shall never enjoy the
spoils which justly be due unto the trauaple and faithful service of the
valiant and virtuous (...) Dom Diego. It shall be he, or else I will dye for
it, which shall have the recompense of his troubles, and shall feel the caulme
of that tempest, which presently holds him at anchor, amydde the most
dangerous rocks that ever were.

By this means Roderico knew the way how to keep promise with his friend,
which lived in expectation of the same. The two days paste, whereof the Page
had spoken, the beloved of Gineura, sailed not to come, and with him two
Gallauntes of Biskaye, valiant Gentlemen, and well exercised in arms. That
night Roderico went to see the old wydowe Lady, the mother of the maiden,
and syndyng opportunity to speak to the Page, he said unto him: I see my
friend, accordingly as you told me, that you (...) upon departing, the
Steward of the house being now returned. I pray thee tell me, if thou have
need of me, or of any thing that I am able do for thee, assuryng thee, that
thou shalt obtain and have what so ever thou requirest. And therewithal I
have thought good to tell thee, and give thee warnyng (for thine own sake
specially) that thou keep all things close and secret, that no (...) or (...)
do follow, to blotte and deface the fame and praise of thy Mistress. And for
my self I had rather dye, than once to open my mouth, to discover the least
intent of this enterprise. But tell me, I pray thee, when do you depart? Sir
(quod the page) As my mystresse says, to morrow about ten or eleven of the
clock in the euenyng, when the Lady her mother shall be in the sound of her
first sleep. The knight hearing that, and desirous of no better time, took
his leave of the Page, and went home, where he caused to be sent for ten
or twelve Gentlemen, his neighbors and tenauntes, whom he made privy of his
secrets, and partakers of that he went about, to deliver out of captivity
and miscrie, the chiefest of all his friends. The night of those two lovers
departure, being come, Dom Roderico, which knew the way where they should
pass, be stowed him self and his company in Ambushe, in a little grove,
almost three miles off the lodgyng of this fugitive Gentlewoman: where they
had not long tarried but they heard the trampling of horse, and a certain
whispring noise of people rydyng before them. Now the night was somewhat
clear, which was the cause, that the Knight amongs the throng, knew the
Gentlewoman, besides whom rode the miserable wretch that had (...) her
away. Whom so soon as Roderico perceived, full of despite, moved with extreme
passion, welding his lance into his rest, brake in the nerest way upon the
infortunat lover, with (...) vehemency, as neither coat of maile or placard
was able to save his life, or warraunt him to keep company with that troop
which banded under loves Enseigne, was miserably slain, by the guide of a
blind, naked, and thieuish little boy. And when he saw he had done that he
came for, he said to the rest of the company: My friends, this man was
careless to make invasion upon other men's ground. These poor Biskayes
surprised upon the sudden, and seeing the ambushment to multiply, put spurs
to their horse to the best advantage they could for expedition, leaving their
(...) or gaping for breath, and gyuing a sign that he was dead. Whiles the
other were making them selves ready to run away, two of Roderico his men,
covered with skarfes, armed, and unknown, came to sease upon sorrowful
Gineura, who beholding her friend dead, began to weep and cry so straungely,
as it was marvel that her breath failed not. Ah traitorous theenes (said she)
and bloody murderers, why do ye not address your selves to execute cruelty
upon the rest, (...) you have done to death him, that is of greater value than
you all? (...) my dear friend, what crooked and grievous fortune have I, to see
thee groueling dead on the ground, and I abiding in life, to be the pray of
murderous thieves, and thou so cowardly bereued of life? Roderico with his face
covered, drew nere unto her, and said: I beseech you gentlewoman, to forget
these strange fashions of complaint, since by them ye be not able to revive the
dead, ne yet make your end of griefs. The maide^ knowing the voice of him
that had bereued her freinde, began to cry out more fiercely than before. For
which cause one of the Gentlemen a companion of Roderico, having a black
counterfeit bearde with two lunets, in manner of spectacles, very large and
great, that covered the most part of his face, approached nere the basheful
maiden, and with big voice and terrible talk, holdyng his dagger upon her
white and delicate breast, said unto her: I swear by the Almighty God, if I
hear thee speak one word more, I will sacrifice thee unto the ghost of that
varlet, for whom thou make thy moan, who deserved to end his days upon a
gallowe tree, rather than by the hands of a gentleman. Hold thy peace therefore
thou foolish girl, for greater honor and more ample benefit is meant to
thee, than thou (...) deserved. Ingratitude only has so overwhelmed thy good
nature, that thou art not able to judge who be thy friends. The Gentlewoman
fearing death, which as she thought was present, held her peace, down alongs
whose eyes a river of tears did run, and the passion of whose heart,
appeared by (...) sighs, and never ceassing sobbes, which in end so
qualified her cheer, that the exterior sadness was wholly enclosed in the
mind and thought of the afflicted Gentlewoman. Then Roderico caused the body
of the dead to be buried in a little Country chapel, not far out of their
way. Thus they travailed two days before Gineura knew any of them, that had
taken her away from her lover: even so they permitted none to speak unto her,
nor to any of her company, which was none else but a waytyng maid, and the
page that had discovered all the secrets to Dom Roderico.

A notable example surely for stolen and secret marriages, whereby the honor
of the contraded parts, is most commonly blemyshed, the commandment of God
violated, who enioyneth obedience to our parents in all rightful causes, who
(...) for any light (...), they have power to take from us the (...) which
otherwise natural law would give us, (...) ought they of duty to do,
where rebellious (...) abusing their goodness, do consume without fear of
(...) bertie, the thing which is in the hand and will (...) their fathers. In
like manner diverse indiscreet (...) foolyshe mothers are to be accused, which
suffer their daughters of tender and chyldishe age, to be (...) red of their
servants, not remembryng (...) (...) the flesh is, how prone and ready men be
to do evil, and how the seducing spirit waiting still upon us, is procliue
and prone to surprise and catch us within his snares, to the intent he may
rejoice in the ruin of souls washed and redeemed with the blood of the son of
God. This troop drawyng nere to the cave of Dom Diego, Roderico sent one of
his men to (...) him of their coming, who in the absence of his friend, (...)
and (...) with hope, shortly to see the only Lady of his heart, accompanied
with a merry (...) joyful train, so soon as he had somewhat (...) his wild
manner of life, he also by little and little (...) a good part of his lusty and
fresh color, and almost had recovered that beauty, which he had when
he first became a Citizen of those deserts. Now having understood the
message sent unto him by Roderico, God knows if with that (...) tydyngs he
felt a motion of blood, such as made all his members to leap and dance,
which rendered his mind astoonned, for the only memory of the thing, that
poysed his mind up and down, not able to stand with equal balaunce, which
rather he ought to have made rejoice than complain, being assured to see her,
of whom he demanded only grace and pardon, but for recovery thereof, he
durst not repose any certain Judgment. In the end hoystyng up his head like
one risen from a long and sonnd sleep, he said: Praise be to God, who yet
before I dye, has done me that pleasure, to suffer me to have a sight of her,
that by causing my martyrdom, continues this disordered life, which shall
procure in like sort mine utter ruin and decay: Upon the approach where of, I
shall go more joyful, charged with incomparable love, to visit the ghostes
beneath dead, in the presence of that cruel sweet, and who tormenting me with
ticklish tentation, has made me taste honey sugared with (...) gall, more
dangerouse than the suck of poison, and under the vermilion rudde of a new
sprouted rose (...) blown forth, has hidden secret thorns, the pricks
whereof has me so lively touched, as my wound can not well be cured, with any
baulme that may be thereunto applied, without enjoying of that mine own
happy missehap, or without that remedy, which almost I feel the same only
resting in death, that so long and oftenymes I have desired, as the true
remedy of my pains and grief. In the mean while Dom Roderico, which till
that time was not known unto Gineura, drew near unto her by the way as he
rode, and talked with her in this sort: I doubt not (Gentlewoman) but that
you think your self not well contented to see me in this place, in such
company, and for occasion so unseemly for my degree and state: and moreover
knowing what injury I seem to do unto you, that ever was, and am so
affectionate and friendly to yt whole stock of your race and lineage, and am not
ignorant that upon yt first bru^t you may judge my cause unjust to carry you
away from the hands of your friend, to bring you into these (...), wild, and
solitary places. But if ye considered the force of that true amity, which by
virtue shows the common bonds of hearts and minds of men, and shall measure
to what end this act is done, without to much staying (...) the light
apprehension of choler, for a beginning somewhat troublesome, I am assured then
(that if you be not wholly deprived of reason) I shall not be altogether
blamed, nor you quite of fault. And bycanse (...) draw near unto the place,
whether (by the help of God) I mean to conduct you, I beseech you to
consider, that the true servant which by all service and duty studieth to
execute the comaundementes of him that has (...) over him, does not deserve
to be beaten or driven away from the house of his master, but to be favored
and cherished, and ought to receive equal recompense for his service. I speak
not this for my self, my devotion being (...) elsewhere, and not to you,
saving for that honest affection which I ought to bear to all virtuous and
chaste persons. The (...) whereof I will not deny unto you in time and place,
where I shall use such (...) toward you, as is mete for a maiden of your age
and state. For the gretnesse of noble men and puisant, does most appear and
show forthit self, when they use mildness and gentleness unto those, to who^
by reason of their authority they might do (...) tie and malice. Now to yt end
yt I do not make you doutful long. Al yt which I have done and yet do mean to
do, is for none other purpose, but to ease the grievous pains of yt most
faithful lover that lives at this day under yt circle of the Moon. It is for
the good Knight Dom Diego, yt loves you so derely and still worshippeth your
noble fame who because he will not! show him self disobedic^t, lives miserably
among brute beasts, amid ye craggy rocks and mountains and in the deep
solitudes of comfortless dales and valleis. It is to him I say that I do
bring you, protesting unto you by oath (Gentlewoman) that yt misery wherein I
saw him, little more than. vj. wekes past, touches me so near the heart, as
if the Sacrifice of my life sufficed alone, (and without letting you to feel
this painful voyage) for the solace of his (...) I would spare it no more,
than I do mine own endeavor and honor, besides the hazarding of yt loss of
your good grace and favor. And albeit I well perceive, that I do grieve you,
by causing you to enter this painful journey, yet I beseech you that yt whole
displeasure of this (...) may be imputed unto my charge, and that it would
please you lovingly to deal with him, who for your sake uses such cruel
misdemeanor against himself. Gineura as a woman half in despair for the
death of her friend, behaved her self like a mad woman void of wit and sense,
and the simple remembrance of Dom Diego his name so astonned her, (which name
she hated far more than the pa^gs of death) that she staide a long time, her
mouth not able to shape one word to speak. In the end vanquished with
impacience, burning with choler, and trembling for sorrow, looked upon Dom
Roderico with an eye no less furious, than a Tigresse caught within the net,
and sees before her face her young Fawnes murdered, wringing her hands, and
beating her delicate breast, she used these or such like words: Ah bloody
traitor and no more Knight, is it of thee that I ought to look for so
detestable a villainy and treason? (...) dare thou be so hardy to entreat
me for an o there that have in mine own presence killed him, whose death I will
pursue upon thee, so long as I shall have life within this body? Is it to thee
false thief and murderer, that I ought to render account of that which I
meant to do? who has appointed thee to be arbitrator, or who gave thee
commission to capitulate the articles of my marriage? Is it by force then, that
thou would I should love that unfaithful Knight, for whom thou have committed
and done this act, that so long as thou live shall blot and blemish thy
renoume, and shall be so well fixed in my mind, and the wounds shall cleave so
near my heart, until at my pleasure I be revenged of this wrong? No, no, I
assure thee that any force done unto me, shall never make me otherwise disposed,
tha^ a mortal enemy both to thee which art a Thief and rauisher of an other
man's wife, and also to thy desperate friend Dom Diego, which is the cause of
this my loss: And now not satisfied with the former wrong done unto me, thou
go about to deceive me under the color of good and pure amity. But since
wicked Fortune has made me thy prisoner, do with me what thou will, and yet
before I suffer and endure that that traitor Dom Diego do enjoy my virginity,
I will offer up my life to the shadows and ghosts of my faithful friend and
husband, whom thou have so traitorously murdered. And therefore (if honestly I
may or ought entreat mine enemy,) I pray thee yt by doing thy duty, thou
suffer us in peace, and give license to me, this Page, and my two pore maidens,
to depart whether we list. God (...) (quod Roderico) that I should do a
trespass so shameful, as to deprive my dearest friend of his joy and
contentation, and by falsifiing my faith be an occasion of his death, and of
your loss, by leaving you without company, wa^dring amids this wilderness.
And he continued thus his former discourse and talk, to reclaim this cruel
Damsel to have pity upon her pore penitent, but he gained as much by his
talk, as if he had gone about to number the sands alongs the sea coasts of
the maine Ocean. Thus devising from one talk to an other, they arrived near
the Cave, which was the stately house of Dom Diego: where Gineura lighted, and
saw the pore amorous Knight, humbly falling down at her feet, all forworne,
pale, and disfigured, weeping with warm tears, he said unto her: Alas my
dear Lady, the alone and only mistress of my heart, do you not think that
my penance is long inoughe for the sin which ignorauntly I have committed,
if ever I have done any fault at all? Behold I beseech you (good Lady dear)
what joy I have conceived in your absence, what pleasures have nursed mine
hope, and what consolation has entertained my life: which truly had it not
been for the continual remembrance of your divine beauty, I had of long time
abreuiated to shorten the pains which do renew in me so many times the pangs
of death: as oftentimes I think upon the unkindness showed unto me by making
so little account of my fealty: which can, nor shall receive the same in good
part, were it so perfect as any assurance were able to make it. Gineura
swelling with sorrow, and full of feminine rage, blushing with fury, her eyes
sparckling forth her cholerike conceiptes, vouchsafed not so much as to give
him one word for answer, and because she would not look upon him, she turned
her face on the other side. The pore and afflicted lover, seeing the great
cruelty of his felonious mistress still kneeling upon his knees, redoubling
his arms, fetching his sighs with a voice, that seemed to be drawn by force
from the bottom of his heart, said unto her: Since the sincerity of (...)
faith, and my long service (...) Gineura, cannot persuade you that I have been
a most obedient, faithful, and very loyal servant toward you, as (...) any
man that has served Lady or (...), and that without your favor and grace it
is (...) possible for me any longer to live, yet I do very humbly beseech
you, for that all other comfort is denied me, if there be any ge^tlenesse and
courtesy in you, that I may receive this only grace at your hands for the last
that ever I hope to crave: which is, that you being thus grievously offended
with me, would do justice to that unfortunate man, which upon his knees does
instantly crave the same. Grant (cruel mistress) this my request, do
vengeance at your pleasure upon him, which willingly yeldeth him self to death
with the effusion of his pore innocent blood to satisfy you, and verily far
more expedient it is for him thus to die, by appeasing your will, than to rest
on live to your coffeehouse or anoyance. Alas, shall I be so unfortunate,
that both life and death should be denied me by one person of the world, whom I
hope to content and please by any sort or means what so ever resting in mine
humble obedience? Alas Gentlewoman rid me from this torment, and dispatch your
self from the grief which you have to see this unhappy Knight, who would say
and esteem himself to be happy (his life being loathsome unto you) if he may
content you, by death done by your own hands, since other favor he cannot
expect or hope for. The maiden hardened in her opinion, stood still immovable,
much like unto a rock in the midst of the sea, (...) with a tempest of
billows and fomie (...), in such wise as one word could not be procured from
her mouth. Which unlucky Dom Diego perceiving, attached with the fear of
present death, and failing his natural force fell down to the ground, and
fainting said: Ah, what a recompense do I receive for this so faithful Love?
Roderico beholding that hideous (...), whilst the others went about to (...)
Dom Diego, repaired to Gineura, and full of heaviness mingled with (...),
said unto her: By God (false (...) woman) if so be that I do change my mind,
I will make thee feel the smarte, no less than thou show thy self
dishonorable to them that do thee honor: Art thou so careless of so great
a Lord as this is, that humbles himself so low to such a strumpet as thou
art? who without regard either to his renoume, or the honor of his house, is
content to be abandoned from his noble state, to become a fugitive and
stranger? What cruelty is this for thee to misprise the greatest humility
that man can imagine? What greater amends (...) thou wish to have although the
(...) which thou presupposest had been true? Now (if thou be wise) change this
opinion, except thou would have me do into so many pieces, thy cruel
(...) and unfaithful heart, as once this poor knight did in parts the
unhappy hawk, which through thy folly did breed unto him this distress,
and to thy self the name of the most cruel and disloyal woman that ever
lived. But what greater benefit can happen unto thee, than to see this
Gentleman utterly to forget the fault, to conceive no sinister suspicion of thy
running away, craving thine acquaintance, and is contented to sacrifice him
self unto thine anger to appease and mitigate thy rage? Now to speak no more
hereof, but to proceed in that which I began to say, I offer unto thee then
both death and love, choose whether thou list. For I swear again by him
that sees and hears al things, that if thou play the fool, thou shall feel
and prove me to be the cruellest enemy that ever thou had: and such a one as
shall not fear to imbrue (...) hands with the blood of her that is the
death of the chiefest of all my friends. Gineura hearing that resolute
answer, (...) her self to be nothing afraid, nor declared any token of
fear, but rather (...) to have encouraged Roderico, in brave and mannish sort,
far diverse from the simplicity of a young and tender maide^, as a man would
say, such a one as had never felt the assault es and troubles of adverse
fortune. Wherefore frouncing her brows, and grinning her teeth with closed
(...), and (...) very bold, she made him answer: Ah thou knight, which once
gave assault to commit a villainy and treason, think thou now without
remorse of conseience to continue thy mischief? I speak it to thee villain,
which (...) shed the blood of an honester man tha^ thou art, fear not now
to make me a companion of his death. Which thing spare not hardily to (...),
to the intent that I living, may not be such a one as thou falsely iudgest me to
be: for never man hitherto (...), and never shall, that he has had the
spoil of my virginity: from the fruit whereof, like an arrant thief, thou
have deprived my loyal spouse. Now do what thou list: for I am far better
content to suffer death, be it as cruel as thou art mischeuous, and borne for
the (...) and vexation of honest maide^s: not withstanding I humbly beseech
almighty God, to give (...) so much pleasure, contentation and joy in thy
love, (...) thou have done to me, by hastening the death of my dear husband. O
God, if thou be a just God, such a one, as from whom we thy poor creatures
do believe, all (...) to proceed, thou I say, which art the rampire and refuge
of all justice, pour down thy vengeance and plague upon these pestiferous
thieues and murderers, which have prepared a worldely plague upon me thine
innocent damsel. Ah wicked Roderico, think not that death can be so fearful
unto me, but that with good heart, I am able to accept the same, trusting
verily that one day it shall be the cause of thy ruin, and overthrow of him,
for whom thou take all these pains. Dom Roderico maruellously rapte in sense,
imagined the woman to be fully bent against him, who then had puissaunce (as he
thought,) over her own heart: and thynkyng, that he saw her moved with like
rage against him, as she was against Dom Diego, stood still so perplered and
void of right mind, that he was constrained to sit down, so feeble he
felt him self for the only remembrance of her evil demeanor. And whilst this
was a doing, the handemayde of Gineura, and her Page, enforced to persuade
their mystresse to have compassion upon the knight that had suffered so much
for her sake, and that she would consent to the honest requests and good
counsel of Roderico. But she which was stubbornly bente in her foolish
persuasions, said unto them: What fools? are you so much be witched, either
with yt fained tears of this disloyal knight, which colorably thus does
torment himself, or else ar ye incha^ted with the venomous honey and tira^nical
bravery of the thief which murdered my husband and your master? Ah unhappy
caytife maiden, is it my chance to endure the (...) of such Fortune, when I
thought to live at my best case, and thus cruelly to tomble into the hands
of him, whom I hate so much as he fayneth love unto me? And morcouer my
unlucky fate is not herewith content, but redoubleth my sorrow, even by those
that be of my frayn, who ought rather to encourage me to die, than consent to
so vureasonable requests. Ah love, love, how evil be they recompensed which
faithfully do homage unto thee? and why should not I forget al (...), never
hereafter to have mind on man to prove beginning of a pleasure, which tasted
and (...) brings more displeasure than ever joy engendered (...). Alas, I
never knew what was the fruit of that which so straungely did attache me, and
thou O (...) and thieuishe Love, haste ordained a banquet (...) with such bitter
dishes, as forced I am perforce to taste of their egre sweetes: Auaunt sweet
folly, auant, I do henceforth for ever let thee (...), to embrace the death,
wherein I hope to find my greatest rest, for in thee I find naught else but
heaps of straynyng (...). Avoid from me all my myssehap, (...) from me ye
furious ghostes and (...) most unkind, whose gaudes and toys dame love has
wrought to keep occupied my loving mind, and suffer me to take end in thee,
that I may live in an other life without thee, being now charged with cup of
grief, which I shall (...) in venomous drink soaked in the soppes of (...).
Sharpen thou thy self, (O death unkind) prepare thy darte, to strike the
corpse of her, that she may void the quarrels shot against her by her
adversary. Ah pore heart strip thy self from hope, and qualify thy desires.
Cease henceforth to wish thy life, seeing and feeling the appointed fight of
love and life, combattyng within my mind, elsewhere to seek my peace in an
other world, with him to joy, which for my sake was sacrificed to the treason
of varlets hands, who for the persite (...) of his desires, naught else did
seek but to soil his (...) (...) with the purest blood of my loyal friend.
And I this abundance of tears do sheade to saciate his felonous mood, which
shall be the just shortenyng of my doleful days. When she had thus
complained, she began horribly to torment her self, and in furious guise, that
the cruellest of the company were moved with compassion, seeing her thus
strangely straught of wits: (...) they did not discontinue by duty to
solicit her to have regard to that which poor fayntyng Dom Diego did
endure. Who so sone as with fresh (...) water he was revived, (...) still the
heaviness of his Lady, and her incresed disdain and choler against him,
vanished in diverse soundings: which moved Roderico from study (...) wherein he
was to rise, whereunto yt rage of Gineura had cast him down, because forgetting
all imaginary affection of his Lady, and proposing his duty before his eyes,
which each Gentleman owes to gentle damsels and women kind, still beholding
with honorable respect the grief of the martyred wilderness Knight, sighyng
yet by reason of former thought, he said unto Gincura. Alas, is it possible,
that in the heart of so young and delicate a maiden, there may be harbored so
strange fury and unreasonable rage? O God, the effect of the cruelty
resting in this woman, paintyng it self in the imaginatiue force of my mind,
has made me fear the like missehappe to come to the cruel state of this
disauenturous gentleman: Notwithstanding (O thou cruel beast) think not that
this thy fury shall stay me from doing thee to death, to ryd thee from folly
and disdain, and this unfortunate lover from despair and trouble, verily
believing, that in time it shall be known what profit the world shall gain by
purging the same of such an infected plague as is an unkind and arrogant
heart: and it shall feel what utility ryseth by thine, overthrow. And I do
hope besides that, in time to come, men shall praise this deed of mins, who for
preserving the honor of one house, have chosen rather to do to death two
offenders, than to leave one of them alive, to obscure the glory and
brightness of the other. And therefore (said he) tourning his face to those of
his train) Cut the throat of this (...) and froward beast, and do the like to
them that be come with her, show no more favor unto them all, than that
curssed strumpet does mercy to the life of that miserable Gentleman, who dies
there for love of her.

The maiden hearing the cruel sentence of her death, cried out so loud as she
could, thinking reskue would have come, but the pore wenche was deceived: for
the desert knew none other, but those that were abiding in that troop. The
Page and the woman servant exclamed upon Roderico for mercy, but he made as
though he heard them not, and rather made sign to his men to do what he
commanded. When Gineura saw that their death was purposed in deed,
confirmed in opinion rather to die, tha^ to obey, she said unto the
executioners: My friends, I beseech you let not these innocents abide the
penance of that which they never committed. And you Dom Roderico, be (...) on
me, by whom the fault, (if a woman's faith to her husband may be termed a
fault) is done. And let these (...) depart, yt be God knows, innocent of any
crime. And thou my friend, which live amongs the shadows of faithful lovers,
if you have any feeling, as in deed thou prouest being in another world,
behold yt pureness of mine heart and sidelitie of my love: who to keep the
same inviolable, do offer my self voluntarily to the death, which this cruel
tyrant prepares for me. And you hangman the executioner of my joys, and
murderer of the immortal pleasures of my love (said she to Roderico) glut thy
gluttonous desire of blood, make drunk thy mind with murder, and (...) of thy
little triu^phe, which for all thy threats or persuasible words, thou (...) not
get from the heart of a simple maiden, ne carry away the victory for all ye
battred breach made into the ra^pare of her honor. When she had so said, a
man would have thought that the memory of death had cooled her heat, but yt
same served her as an assured solace of her pains. Dom Diego come to himself
seeing the discourse of that tragedy, being now addressed to the last (...)
and end of yt life and stage of fair and golden locked Gincura, making a
virtue of necessity, recovered a little courage to save, (if it were possible)
the life of her, that had put his own in hazard miserably to end. Having
stayed them that held the maide^, he repaired to Dom Roderico, to whom he spoke
in this wise: I see well my good Lord and great friend, that the good will you
bear me, causes you to use this honest order for my behalf, whereof I doubt if
I should live a whole hundred years, I shall not be able to satisfy the least
of the bonds wherein I am bound, the same surpassing all mine ability and
power. Yet for all that (dear friend) since you (...) the fault of this
missehap to arise of my predestinate ill luck, and that man cannot avoid
things once ordained, I beseech you do me yet this good pleasure (for all the
benefits yt ever I have received) to send back again this gentlewoman with her
train, to the place from whence you took her, with like assurau^ce and (...),
as if she were your sister. For I am pleased with your endeavor, and contented
with my misfortune, assuring you sir besides, yt the trouble which she endures,
does far more grieve my heart than al yt pain which for her sake I suffer. That
her sorrow then may decrease, and mine may renew again, yt she may line in
peace, and I in war for her cruel beauty sake, I will wait upon Clotho, the
spinner of the threden life of man until she break the twisted lace that
holds the fatal course of my doleful years. And you Gentlewoma^ live in
rest, as your pore supplia^t, wretched Dom Diego shall be citizen of these wild
places, and vaunt you (...) that you were yt best beloved maiden yt ever lived.
Marvelous truly be the forces of Love, when they discover their perfection:
for by their means things otherwise impossible be reduced to such facility,
as a man would judge that they had never been so hard to obtain, and so
painful to pursue. As appeared by this damsel, in whom the wrath of
fortune, the pinche of iealosie, the intolerable rage of her friends loss,
(...) engendered a contempt of Dom Diego, an extreme desire to be revenged on
Dom Roderico, and a (...) of longer life. And now putting of the (...) of
blind appetite, for the esclarishyng of her understanding eyes, and breaking
the Adamant rock planted in the mids of her breast, she beheld in open (...)
the steadfastness, patience and perseueration of her great friend. For that
supplication of the Knight had greater force in Gineura, than all his former
services. And full well (...) showed the same, when throwing her self upon yt
neck of the desperate Gentleman, and embracing him very lovingly she said unto
him: Ah sir, that your felicity is the beginning of my great joy of mind,
which (...) now of sweetness in the very same, in whom I imagined to be the
welspring of bitterness. The diminution of one grief is, and shall be the
increase of (...) bond, such as for ever I will call my self the most humble
slave of your worship, lowly beseeching you nevertheless to pardon my follies,
wherewith full fondely I have abused your patience. Consider a while sir, I
beseech you, the nature and secrecy of love. For those that be blinded in that
passion, think them selves to be perfect seers, and yet be the first that
commit most (...) faults. I do not deny any committed wrong and trespass,
and do not refuse therefore the honest and gentle correction that you shall
appointe me, for expiation of mine offense. Ah my noble Lady (answered ye
knight) all rapt with pleasure, and half way out of his wits for joy, I humbly
beseech you inflicte upon my pore wretched body no further pangs of death by
remembering the glory of my thought since the recital brings with it a taste of
the trauails which you have suffered for my joy and contentation. It is therefore
(quod she) that I think my self happy: for by that means I have known the
perfect qualities that be in you, and have proved two extremities of virtue.
One consists in your constancy and loyalty whereby you may vaunt your self
above him yt sacrificed his life upon the bloody body of his Lady, who for
dying so, finished his trauails. Where you have chosen a life worse than death,
no less painful a hundred times a day, than very death it self. The other
consists in the clemency wherewith you calm and appease the rage of your
greatest adversaries. As my self which before hated you to death, vanquished by
your courtesy do confess that I am double bound unto you, both for my life and
honor: and hearty thanks do I render to the Lord Roderico for yt violence he
did unto me, by which means I was induced to acknowledge my wrong, and the
right which you had to complain of my folish resistance. All is well, said
Roderico, since without peril of honor we may return home to our houses: I
intend therefore (said he) to send word before to my Ladies your mothers of
your return, for I know how so well to cover and excuse this our enterprise and
secret iorneis, as by Gods assistance no blame or displeasure shall ensue
thereof. And like as (said he smiling) I have builded the fortress which shot
into your camp, and made you fly, even so I hope (Gentlewoman) that I shall
be the occasion of your victory, when you combat in close ca^pe, with your
sweet cruel enemy. Thus they passed the journey in pleasant talk, recompe^sing
the. (...). lovers with all honest and virtuous intertainme^t for their (...)
and troubles past. In the mean while they sent one (...) their servants to the
two widow ladies, which were (...) great care for their children, to advertise
them yt Gineura was gone to visit Dom Diego, then being in one of the castles
of Roderico, where they were determined if it were their good pleasure, to
consu^mate their marriage, having given faith and affiance one to the other. The
mother of Gineura, could not here tell of more pleasant news: for she had
understood of the folish flight and escape of her daughter, with yt steward
of her house, whereof she was very sorrowful, and for grief was like to die, but
assured and reco^forted with those news, she (...) not to mete the mother of
Dom Diego, at ye appointed place whither the y. lovers were arrived two days
before. There the marriage of that fair couple (so long desired) was (...) with
such magnificence as was requisite for the state of those two noble houses.
Thus the torment (...), made the joy to savor of some other taste than they do
feel, which without pain in yt exercise of loves pursuit, attain the top of
their desires: And truly their pleasure was altogether like to him that
nourished in superfluous delicacie of meats can not aptely so well judge of
pleasure, as he which sometimes lacks that abundance. And verily Love without
bitterness, is almost a cause without effects: for he that shall take away
griefs and troubled fancies from lovers, depriueth them of the praise of their
steadfastness, and makes baine the glory of their perseverance: for he is
unworthy to bear away the price and garlande of triumph in the conflict, that
behaueth himself like a coward, and does not observe the laws of arms and
manlike duties in the combat. This history then is a mirror for loyal
lovers, and chaste suitors, and makes them detest the unshamefastness of
those, which upon the first view do follow with might and maine, the
Gentlewoman or Lady that gives them good face or countenance whereof any
gentle heart or mind, noursed in the scholehouse of virtuous education, will
not be squeymish to those that shall by chaste salutation or other incountrie,
do their courteous reverence. This history also yeldeth contempt of them,
which in their affection forget them selves, abasting the generositie of their
courages, to be reputed of fools, the true champions of Love, whose like they
be that desire such regard. For the perfection of true Love consists not in
passions, in sorrows, griefs, martirdomes, or cares, and much less arriueth
he to his desire, by sighs, exclamations, wepings, and childish playnts: for
so much as virtue ought to be the band of that indissoluble amity, which
makes the union of the two severed bodies of that woman man, which Plato
describes, and causes man to travel for his whole accomplishment in yt true
pursuit of chaste loueIn which labor truly fondly walked Dom Diego, thinkyng to
find the same by his despair amidde the sharp solitary deserts of those
Pyrene mountains. And truly the duty of his perfect friend, did more lively
disclose the same (what fault so ever he did) than all his countenances,
eloquent letters or amorous messages. In like manner a man does not know what a
treasure a true friend is, until he has proved his excellency, specially
where necessity makes him to taste ye swetnesse of such delicate meat. For a
friend being a second himself, agrees by a certain natural (...) and
atonement to the affections of him who^ he loves, both to participate his
joys and pleasures, and to sorrow his adversity, where Fortune shall use by
some misaduentures, to show her accustomed moblitie.

Salimbene and Angelica
A Gentleman of SISNA, called ANSELMO SALIMBENE, courteously and gently
delivers his (...) from death. The condemned party seeing the kind part of
SALIMBENE, renders into his hands his sister ANGELICA, with whom he was in
love, which gratitude and courtesy, SALIMBENE well marking, moved in
conscience, would not abuse her, but for recompense took her to his wife.

The. xxx. Nouel.
WE do not mean here to discover the sumptuositie and magnificence of Palaces,
stately and won derfull to the view of me^, ne yet to reduce to memory yt
marvelous effects of ma^s industry to build and lay foudations in the deepest
chanel of the maine sea, ne to describe their ingenious industry, in breking
the craggy mountains, and hardest rocks, to ease the crooked passages of
weary ways, for armies to march through inaccessible places. Only now do we
pretend to show the effects of love, which surmount all opinion of common
things, and appear so miraculous as the founding and erecting of the Collisaei,
Colossaei, Theaters, Amphitheatres, Pyramides, and other works wonderful to
the world, for that the hard endured path of hatred and displeasure long time
begoon, and obstinately pursued with strange cruelty, was converted into
love, by theffect of love and concord, such as I know none, but is so much
astoonned, as he may have good cause to wonder, considering the stately
foundations, upon which kings and great monarchs have employed the chiefest
revenues of their provinces. Now like as Ingratitude is a vice of greatest
blame and disco^mendation amongs men, even so gentleness and kindness ought
to bear yt title of a most co^me^dable virtue. And as ye Thebans were accused
of that crime, for their great captains Epaminondas and Pelopidas. The
Plateens (contrariwise) were praised for their solemn observation of the Greeks
benefits, which delivered them out of the Persians bondage. And the Sicyonians
bear away the price of eternal praise, for acknowledging the good turns
received of Aratus, that delivered them fra^ the cruelty of the tyrants. And
if Philippo Maria, duke of Milan, deserved eternal reproach for his ingratitude
to his wife Beatrix, for the secret killing of her, he being enriched with her
goods and treasures: a barbarous turk borne in Arabia, shall carry the praise
from him, who being vanquished in Arabia by Baldouine, king of Jerusalem, and
he and his wife taken prisoners, and his treasures fallen into the hands of
that good king, issued of the Loraine blood. Nevertheless seeing that the
Christian had delivered him, and restored again his wife, would not be
vanquished in magnificence and (...), and much less bear the name of an
unkind prince, but rather when Baldouine was overcome of yt infidels, and
being retired within a certain city, that Admiral of Arabie, came to him in
the night, and telling him the devise of his companions, conveyed him out of
the (...), and was his guide until he saw him free peril. I (...) alleged yt
premises, because ye history which I purpose to recite, aduoucheth two
examples not vulgar or common, the one of very great love, and the other of
such (...) ceptacio^ and knowledging thereof, as I thought it pity the same
should lurk from the acquaintance of (...) English men. And that they alone
should have the (...) thereof which understand the Italian tongue, supposing
that it shall bring some fruit and commodity to this our English soil, that
each wight may frame their life on those which in strange Countries far from
us, have lived virtuously without reproach that might soil or spot their name.

In Siena then (an ancient and very noble City of Toscane, which no long time
past was governed by her Magistrates, and lived in her own laws and liberties,
as the Lucquois, Pisans, and Florentines do) were two families very rich,
noble, and the chief of the City called the Salimbenes and Montanines, of the
race and stock whereof, excellent men in their common wealth have descended,
very good and expert soldiers for (...) of armies. Those two houses in the
beginning were so great friends, and frequented such love and (...), as it
seemed they had been but one house and (...), daily using each others company,
and banketting one another. But Italy in all times being as it were a store
house of troubles and a very mart of sedition, bands and parcialities,
specially of civil wars in every City, it could not be that Siena should
alone enjoy her liberty in peace, and accord of Citizens, and vaunt her self
to be free from knowledge of particular debate. For of wars she had good
experience against ye Florentines, who by long remembrance have done what they
could to make her subject unto them. Now the cause of that discord rose even
by them which kept the Citizens in unity and concord and was occasioned by
those. y. houses the noblest and most puissant of their common wealth. It is
not unknown to any man, that antiquity ordained it to be peculiar for
nobility, to train up the children of noble houses in hunting, as well to
bolden and nosel them in dangers, as to make them strong and accustomed in
trauail, and to force them shun the delicate life and great idleness which
accompany honorable houses, and those of gentle blood, for so much as by the
pursuit of beasts, sleights of war be observed: the hounds be the square
battle, the greihoundes be the flanquarts and wings to follow the enemy, the
horsman serves to give the chase when the game speedeth to covert, the horns
be the trumpets to sound the chase and retire, and for encouragement of the
dogs that run. To be short, it seems a very camp in battle, ordained for
the pleasure and passetyme of noble youth. Nevertheless, by huntyng diverse
missefortunes do arise, and sundry dangers have happened by the same.
Meleager lost his life for the (...) of the wild bore of Callydonia. Cephalus
lost his life for killyng his dear beloved Procris, and Acastus was accursed
for murderyng the Kings son of whom he was the Tutour. William Rufus, one
of our English Kings, the son of the Conqueroure, was slain with an arrowe
in the New forest by a French gentleman called Walter Tyrel, as he was
pursuing the heart. Other histories report diverse perils chanced in hunting,
but yet the same worthy to be cherished, frequented and used by good advise
and moderate passetyme. So the hunting of the wild Bore defiled the City of
Siena, with the blood of her own Citizens, when the Salimbenes and Montanines
upon a day in an assembled company, incountring upon a great and fierce
bore, took him by force of men and beasts, When they had done, as they were
banketting and (...) of the nimblenesse of their dogs, each man praising his
own, as having done best, there rose great (...) amongs them upon that matter,
and proceeded so far, as foudly they began to revile one another with words,
and from taunting terms to earnest blows, wherewith diverse in that skirmish
were hurt on both sides. In the end the Salimbenes had the worsse, and one of
the principal (...) in the place, which appalled the rest, not that they were
discoraged, but attending time and season of revenge. This hatred so strangly
kindled between both parts, that by little and little, after many combats and
overthrows of either side, the loss lighted upon the Montanines, who with
their wealth and richesse were almost brought to nothing, and thereby the rigor
and choler of the Salimbenes appeased, none being able to resist them, and in
space of time forgot al injuries. The Montanines also that remained at Siena,
lived in quiet, without challenge or quarrel of their (...) uersaries, howbeit
(...) talk and haunt of others company utterly surceased. And to say the
truth, there were almost none to quarrel withal, for the whole blood and name
of the Montanines rested in one alone, called Charles the son of Thomas
Montanine, a young ina^ so honest and wet brought up, as any then in Siena, who
had a sister, that for beauty, grace, curtesy and honesty, was comparable
with the best in all Thoscame. This pore young Gentleman had no great revenue,
for that the patrimony of his predecessors was wasted in charges for
entertainment of soldiers in the time of the hurly burly and debates
aforesaid. A good part also was confiseate to the chamber of Siena for
trespasses and forfaitures committed: with the remain he sustained his
family, and indisserently maintained his port soberly within his own house,
keeping his sister in vecent and moderate order. The maiden was called
Ange^lica, a name of troth, without offense to other, due to her. For in very
deed in her were harbored the virtue of curtesy and gentleness, and was so
well instructed and nobly brought up, as they which loved not the name or race
of her, could not forbear to commend her, and wish that their daughter were
her like. In such wise as one of her chiefest foes was so sharply beset with
her virtue and beauty, as he lost his quiet sleep, and lust to eat and
drink. His name was Anselmo Salimbene, who would willingly have made suit to
marry her, but the discord past, quite mortified his desire, so sone as he had
devised the plot within his brain and fancy. Notwithstanding it was
impossible that the love so lively graven and (...) in his mind, could easily
be defaced. For if once in a day he had not seen her, his heart did feel the
torments of tosting flames, and wished that the Hunting of the Bore, had never
decayed a family so excellent, to the intent he might have matched himself
with her, whom none other could displace out of his remembrance, which was
one of the richest Gentlemen, and of greatest power in Siena. Now for that he
ourst not discover his amorous grief to any person, was the chiefest cause that
martired most his heart, and for the ancient festred malice of those two
families, he despaired for ever, to gather either flower or fruit of that
affection, presupposing that Angelica would never fire her love on him, for
that his Parents were the cause of the defaite and overthrow of the Montanine
house. But what? There is nothing durable under the heavens. Both good and
evil (...) their revolution in the government of humane affairs. The amities
and hatreds of Kings and Princes, be they so hardened, as commonly in a moment
he is not (...) to be a hearty friend, that lately was a (...) foe, and spired
naught else but the ruin of his aduer farie? We see the variety of humane
chances, and then (...) judge at eye what great simplicity it is to stay and
settle certain and infallible iudgemit upon (...) unstayed doings. He that erst
governed a king, and made all things to tremble at his word, is suddenly
thrown down, and dies a shameful death. In like sort, another which looks
for his own undoing, sees himself advanced to his estate again, and
vengeance taken of his enemies. Calir Bassa governed whilom yt great Mahomet,
that wan the Empire of Constantinople, who attempted nothing without the advice
of that Bassa. But upon the sudden he saw himself rejected, and the next day
strangled by commandment of him, which so greatly honored him, and without
just cause did him to a death so cruel. Contrariwise Argon the T artarian,
entering arms against his uncle Tangodor Caui, when he was upon the point to
lose his life for his rebellion, and was conveyed into. Armenia to be executed
there, was rescued by certain T artarians the household servants of his dead
uncle, and afterward proclaimed king of T artarie about the year. 1285. The
example of the Empress Adaleda is of no less credit than the former, who
being fallen into the hands of Beranger the usurper of yt Empire, escaped his
fury and cruelty by flight, and in the end married to Otho the first, saw her
wrong revenged upon Beranger and al his race by her son Otho the second. I
aduouch these histories to prove ye mobility of fortune, and the change of
worldly chances, to the end you may see that the very same misery which
followed Charles Montanine, hoisted him aloft again, and when he looked for
least succor, he saw deliverance at hand. Now to prosecute our history, know
ye yt while Salimbenc by little and little pined for love of Angelica, whereof
she was ignorant and careless, and albeit she courteously rendered health to
him, when sometime in his amorous fit he beheld her at a window, yet for all yt
she never gessed the thoughts of her loving enemy. During these haps it
chanced yt a rich citizen of Siena, having a ferme adjoining to the lands of
Montanine, desirous to increase his patrimony, and annere the same unto his
own, and knowing yt the young gentleman wanted many things, moved him to sell
his inheritance, offering him for it in ready money, a M. Ducates, Charles which
of all the wealth and substance left him by his auncester, had no more
remaining but that country ferme, and a Palace in the City (so ye rich
Italians of each city, term their houses,) and with yt little lived honestly,
and maintained his sister so well as he could, refused flatly to dispossess
himself of yt portion, which renewed unto him yt happy memory of those yt had been the chief of all the common wealth. The covetous wretch seeing himself
frustrate of his pray, conceived such rancor against Montanine, as he purposed
by right or wrong to make him not only to for fait ye same, but also to lose
his life, following ye wicked desire of tirannous Iesabel, that made Naboth to
be stoned to death, to extorte and wrongfully get his vineyarde. About that
time for the quarrels and common discordes reigning throughout Italy, yt
nobility were not assured of safety in their countries, but rather the common
sort, and rascal number, were yt chief rulers and gouerners of the common
wealth, whereby ye greatest part of the nobility or those of best authority
being banished, the villainous band, and grosest kind of common people made a
law (like to the Athenians in ye time of Solon) that all persons of what degree
and co^ditio^ so ever they were, which practiced by himself or other means
the restablishing or reuocation of such as were banished out of their City,
should lose and forfaite the sum of M. Florens, and having not wherewith to pay
the condempnation, their head should remain for gage. A law no dout very just
and righteous, scenting rather of the barbarous cruelty of the Goths and
(...), tha^ of true christians, stopping the retire of innocents exiled for
particular quarrels of Citizens incited one against another, and rigorously
rewarding mercy and courtesy, with execution of cruelty incomparable.

This citizen then purposed to accuse Montanine for offending against the law,
because otherwise he could not purchase his intent, and the same was easy
enough for him to compass, by reason of his authority and estimation in the
City: for the enditement and plea was no sooner red and given, but a number of
post knights appeared to depose against ye pore gentleman, to bear witness
that he had trespassed the laws of the Country, and had sought means to
introduce the banished, with intent to kill the gouerners, and to place in
state those (...), that were the cause of the Italian troubles. The miserable
gentleman knew not what to do, ne how to defend himself. There were against him
the Moon and the. vy. stars, the state of the City the Proctor and Judge of
the court, the witnesses that gave evidence, and the law which condemned him.
He was sent to prison, sentence was pronounced against him with such
expedition, as he had no leisure to consider his affairs. There was no man,
for fear to incur the displeasures of the Magistrates, that durst open his
mouth to speak or make suit for his deliverance. Like as yt most part of
friends in these days resembling yt crow, that flies not but after carrion to
gorge his ravenous (...), and such friends do visit the house of the friend
but for profit, reuerencing him so long as he is in prosperity, according to
the Poets complaint.

Like as the purest gold in fiery flame is tried,
Even so is faith of friends in hard estate descried
If hard mischap does thee affray,
Each of thy friends do flee away,
And he which erst full friendly semde to thee,
A friend no more to thy pore state is he.
And simple wights ought not to be afraid, and think amiss if friends do flee
away, since Princes and great Lords incur such hap and fortune. The great
leader of the Roman armies, Pompeius, the honor of the people and senate of
Rome, what companion had he to flee with him? Which of his ancient friends
took pain to rescue and deliver him from his enemies hands which did pursue
him? A king of Egypt which had known and found this good Roman Prince a kind
and gentle friend, was he that killed him, and sent his head to his (...) and
insatiable gredie gutte Julius Caesar, falsifying his promised faith, and
forgetting his received pleasures. Amongs all the comfortes which this pore
Siena Gentleman found, although but a curssed traitor, was this unfaithful and
pestiferous Camaeleon, who came and offered him all the pleasure and kindness
he was able to do. But ye varlet attended convenient time to make him taste his
poison, and to let him see by (...), how dangerous a thing it is to be ill
neighbored, hoping after the condempnation of Montanine, he should at pleasure
purchase the Lordship, after which with so open mouth he gaped. Over whom he
had his will: for two or (...) days after the recital of the enditement, and
giving of the evidence, Charles was condemned, and his fine sessed at M.
Florins to be paid within. xv. days, until which (...) to remain in prison.
And for default of such payment to lose his head, because he had infringed the
laws, and broken the statutes of the Senate. This sentence was very difficult
for pore Montanine to digest, who saw all his goods like to be despoiled and
confiscate, co^plaining specially the fortune of fair Angelica his sister,
which all the time of the imprisonment of her dear brother, never went out of
ye house, ne ceased to weep and lament the hard fortune wherinto their family
was like to fall by yt new mischau^ce: Alas (said yt fair courteous damsel) will
ye heavens never be appeased but continually exte^d their wrath upon yt
deplored family, and shall our missehaps never cease? Had it not been more
tolerable for our consumed blood, yt the dissentio^s past, had been tried by
dent of sword, than to see yt present innocence of ye young gentleman my brother
in danger to be guiltlesly accused and put to death, through yt injustice of
those, which bear mortal malice to noble blood, and glory in deprivation of the
whole remembrance of the same? O dampnable state yt must hale the guiltless
to the gibet and irreuocable judgment of those judges remaining in a city,
which men call free, albeit a co^sused multitude has ye upper hand, and may so
be, yt nature has produced them to tread under foot noble wights for their
offenses. Ah dear brother, I see well what is ye cause, if thou had not that
little Lordship in the Country, and stately house in the city, no man would
have envied thine estate, or could have charged thee with any crime, which I would
to God, thou had not only enterprised, but also brought to pass, to the
intent thou might have been revenged of ye wrong, which these cankred carles
ordinarily do unto thy Noble blood. But what reason is it that merchants and
artificers, or the sons of villains should rule a common wealth? O happy
Countries where kings give laws, and Princes see by proved sight, those
persons which resemble them, and in their places bear ye sway. And O unhappy
we, yt be ye slaves of a waiwarde state, perverted by corruption. Why did our
predecessors mind to stablish any liberty at al, to thrust ye same into the
confused government of the commons of our country? We have still the Frenchmen
at our tail, or yt people of our highest bishop, or else those crafty
Florentines, we be the common pray of al those yt list to follow the haunt, and
that which is our extremest misery, we make our selves ye very (...) of them,
yt of right ought to be reputed yt (...) amongs us all. Ah dear brother, yt thy
wretched time is come, the only hope of our decayed family. Thou had never
been committed to ward, had not thy false assured foes been sure of witness
to condemn thee. Ah yt my life might ransom thine, and redeem again thine
estate and succor, thou should be sure yt forthwith Angelica would prepare
hirself to be ye pray of those hungry ravening wolves, which bleat and bellow
after thy lands and life. While this fair damsel of Siena in this sort did
torment her self, pore Montanine seeing yt he was brought to the last
extremity of his desired hope, as each man naturally does seek means to
prolong his life, knowing yt all other help failed for his deliverance, except
he sold his land, as well to satisfy ye fine, as to prevail in the rest of his
affairs, sent one of the gailers to yt worshipful usurer the cause of his
calamity, to offer him his land for yt price and sum of a M. Ducates. The
pernicious and (...) villain seeing yt Montanine was at his mercy, and stood in
the water up to the very throat, and knew no more what to do, as if already he
had triumphed of his life and land so greatly coueted, answered him in this
manner: My friend, thou shall say to Charles Montanine, that not long ago I
would willingly have given him a good sum of money for his ferme, but since
that time I have employed my money to some better profit: and albeit I was in
mind to buy it, I would be loath to give above. (...). (...). Florins, being
assured yt it can not be (...) (...), as my money is able to bring yearly gain
into my (...).

See how Avarice is the pickpurse of secret and (...) gain, and the very
whirlepoole of honesty and (...), coveting naught else but by unrighteous pray
(...) other men's goods, to accumulate and heap together. The abundance
whereof brings no greater good (...) unto the gluttonous owner, but rather the
mind (...) such is more miserable, and carries there withal more decrease of
quiet, than increase of filthy muck. The covetous man bears no love but to
his treasure, nor exercises charity but upon his coafers, who tha^ he would be
dispossessed thereof, had rather sell the life of his natural father. This
detestable villain having sometimes offered M. Ducates to Charles for his
enheritaunce, will now do so no more, aspiring the total ruin of ye Montanine
family. Charles advertised of his mind, and amazed for the Counsels decree,
well saw that all things contraried his hope and expectation, and that he must
needs die to satisfy the excessive and covetous lust of that Cormerant, whose
malice he knew to be so vehement, as none durst offer him money, by reason of
the unhappy desire of this never contented varlet: for which consideration
thoroughly resolved to die, rather than to leave his pore sister helpless, and
without relief, and rather than he would agree to the bargain tending to his
so great loss and disaduauntage, and to the tirannous dealing of the wicked
tormentor of his life, seeing also that all means to purge and auerre his
innocence, was taken from him, the (...) decree of the judges being alre ady
passed, he began to dispose himself to repentance and salvation of his soul,
making complaint of his missehapsin this manner.

TO what has not the heavens hateful bin,
Since for the ease of man they weaue such woe?
By diverse toiles they lap our corsses in
With cares and griefs, whereon our mischiefs groe:
The bloody hands and sword of mortal foe,
Do search mine evil, and would destroy me quite,
Through heinous hate, and hateful heaped spite.
Wherefore come not the fatal sisters three,
That draw the line of life and death by right?
Come (...) all, and make an end of me,
For from the world, my sprite would take his flight.
Why comes not now foul Gorgon full in sight,
And Typhons head, that deep in hell remains?
For to torment the silly souls in pains?
It better were for me to feel your force,
Than this missehap of murdring enuies rage,
By curssed means and fall upon my corse,
And work my (...) amid my flouring age:
For if I were dispatchde in this desire,
The fear were gone, of black infernal fire.
O Gods of seas, and cause of blustering wind,
Thou Aeolus and Neptune to I say,
Why did you let my Bark such fortune find
That safe to shore I came by any way?
Why brake ye not, against some rock or bay,
The kele, the stern, or else blew down the mast,
By whose large sails, through surging seas I past?
Had those things hapt, I had not seen this hour,
The house of dole, where woeful sprites complain,
Nor vserers on me had used such power,
Nor I had seen depainted in disdain,
The God of care, with whom dead Ghosts remain,
Who howles and skrekes in holow trees and holes,
Where Charon reigns, among condemned souls.
Ah, ah, since hap will work my wretched end,
And that my ruin by judgment is decreed:
Why does not hap such happy fortune send,
That I may lead with me the man in deed,
That staind his faith, and faild me at my need,
For gain of gold, as usurers do God knows,
Who cannot spare the dropping of their nose?
I should have slain the slave that served me so,
Oh God forbid, my hands were brued in blood.
Should I desire the harm of friend or foe?
Nay better were to wish mine en'my good:
For if my death I thoroughly understood,
I should make short the course I have to run,
Since rest is got, when worldly toil is done.
Alas, alas, my chiefest way is this,
Aguiltlesse death to susfer as I can,
So shall my soul be sure of heavens bliss,
And good renoume shall rest behind me than,
And body shall take end where it began,
And fame shall fly before me, ere I flit
Unto the Gods, where Jove in throne does sit.
O God convert, from vice to virtue now,
The heart of him that falseth faith with me,
And change his mind, and mend his manners throw,
That he his fault and foul offense may see,
For death shall make my fame immortal be:
And whiles the Sun which in the heavens does shine,
The shame is his, and honor shall be mine.
Alas I mourn not for my self alone,
Nor for the same of my forefuthers old,
Tys Angelike, that carseth me to moan,
Tys she that filles my breast with sansies cold,
Tys she more worth, than was the slice of gold,
That moves my mind, and bredes such passions strange,
As in my self I feel a wondrous chaknge.
Have pity Lord of her and me this day,
Since destny thus has sundred us in (...),
O suffer not (...) virtues to decay,
But let her take in friendship such delight,
That from her breast all vice be banished quite.
And let her like, as did her noble race
When I poor man (...) dead, and out of place.
Alas my hand would write these woeful lines,
That feeble sprite denies for want of might,
Wherefore my heart in breast consumes and pines,
With deep desires, that far is from man's sight,
But God he sees mine innocence and right,
And knows the cause of mine accuser still,
Who sekes my blood to have on me his will.
When Charles thus complained himself, and thoroughly was determined to die,
great pity it was to see how fair Angelica did rent her face, and tear her
golden locks, when she saw how impossible it was to save her obstinate brother
from the cruel sentence pronounced upon him, for whom she had employed all her
wits and fair speech, to persuade the nearest of her kin to make suit. Thus
rested she alone full of such heaviness and veration as they ca^ think which
see themselves deprived of things yt they esteem most dear. But of one thing I
ca^ well assure you, yt if ill fortune had permitted yt Charles should have been
put to death, the gentle damsel also had breathed forth the final gasp of
her sorrowful life, yelding therwithal the last end of the Montanine race and
family. What booteth it to hold process of long discourse? Behold the last
day is come deferred by the judges, whereupon he must either satisfy the fine,
or die the next day after like a rebel and traitor against the state, without
any of his kin making suit or mean for his deliverance: albeit they visited the
fair maiden, and comforted her in that her wretched state, instructing her
how she should govern her self patiently to suffer things remediless.
Angelica accompanied with her kin, and the maidens dwelling by that were her
companio^s, made the air to sound with outcries and waime^tings, and she her
self exclamed like a woman destraught of wits, whose plaints ye multitude
assisted with like eiulations and outcries, wailing the fortune of the young
gentleman, and sorrowful to see ye maiden in danger to fall into some
missehap. As these things were thus bewailed, it chanced about. ix. of the
clock at night, that Anselmo Salimbene, he whom we have said to be surprised
with the love of Angelica, returning out of the Country, where he had remained
for a certain time, and passing before the house of his Lady, according to
his custom, heard the voice of women and maidens which mourned for Montanine,
and therwithal stayed: the chiefest cause of his stay was, for that he saw go
forth out of the palace of his Angelica, diverse women making moan and
lamentation: wherefore he demanded of yt neighbors what noise that was, and
whether any in those quarters were dead or no. To whom they declared at length,
all that which ye have heard before. Salimbene hearing this story, went home to
his house, and being secretly entered into his chamber, began to discourse with
himself upon that accident, and (...) a thousand things in his head, in the
end thought that Charles should not so be cast away, were he justly or
innocently condemned, and for the only respect of his sister, that she might
not be left destitute of all the goods and inheritance. Thus discoursing
diverse things, at length he said: I were a very simple person now to rest in
dout, since Fortune is more curious of my felicity than I could wish, and
seeks the effect of my desires, when lest of all I thought upon them. For
behold, Montanine alone is left of al ye mortal enemies of our house, which to
morrow openly shall lose his head like a rebel and seditious person, upon whose
auncesters in him shall I be revenged, and the quarrel between our two
families, shall take end, having no more cause to fear renewing of discord,
by any that can descend from him. And who shall let me then from inioying her,
whom I do love, her (...) being dead, and his goods confiscate to the
segniorie and she without all maintenance and relief, except the aid of her
only beauty and courtesy? What maintenance shall she have, if not by the love
of some honest Gentleman, that for his pleasure may support her, and have pity
upon the loss of so excellent beauty? Ah Salimbene, what have thou said? Have
thou already forgotten that a Gentleman for that only cause is esteemed above
all other, whose glorious factes ought to shine before the brightness of
those that force themselves to follow virtue? Art not thou a Gentleman borne and
bredde in noble house, ssued from the loins of gentle and noble parents? Is it
ignorant unto thee, that it pertains unto a noble and gentle heart, to
revenge received injuries himself, without seeking aid of other, or else to
pardon them by using clemency and princely courtesy, burying all desire of
vengeance under the tomb of eternal oblivion? And what greater glory can
man acquire, than by vanquishing himself, and chastising his affections and
rage, to bind him which never thought to receive pleasure or benefit at his
hand? It is a thing which excedeth the common order of nature, and so it is
mete and requisite, that the most excellent do make the effects of their
excellency appear, and seek means for the immortality of their remembrance.
The great Dictator Caesar was more praised for pardoning his (...), and for
showing him self courteous and easy to be spoken to, than for subduing the
brave and valiant Galls and Britons, or vanquishing the mighty Pompee. Dom
Roderico Viuario, the Spaniard, although he might have been revenged upon Dom
Pietro, king of Aragon, for his infidelity, because he went about to hinder
his voyange against the Saracens at Grenado, yet would not punish or raunsom
him, but taking him prisoner in the wars, suffered him to go without any
tribute, or any exaction of him and his (...). The more I follow the example of
mighty personages in things that be good, the more notorious and wonderful
shall I make my self in their rare and noble deeds. And not willing to forget a
wrong done unto me, whereof may I co^plain of Montanine? what thing has he
ever done against me or mine? And albeit his predecessors were enemies to our
family, they have therefore borne the penance, more hard than the sin deserved.
And truly I should be afraid, that God would suffer me to (...) into some mishap,
if seeing one afflicted, I should rejoice in his affliction, and take by his
decay an argument of joy and pleasure. No no, Salimbene is not of mind, that
such fond imagination should bereue good will to make himself a friend, and to
gain by liberality and courtesy her, which for her only virtue deserves a
greater lord than I. Being asiured, that there is no man (except he were (...)
of al good nature and humanity) specially bering the love to Angelica, that I
do, but he would be sorry to see her in such heaviness and despair, and would
attempt to deliver her from such dolorous grief. For if I love her as I do in
deed, must not I likewise love all that which she earnest ly loves, as him that
is now in danger of death for a simple fine of a thousand Florens. That my
heart do make appear what the love is, which makes me tributarie and subject
to fair Angelica, and that each man may know, that furious love has vanquished
kings and great monarchs, it behooves not me to be abashed, if I which am a
man and subject tapassio^s, so well as other, do submit my self to the service
of her, who I am assured is so virtuous as eue^ very necessity cannot force
her to forget ye house, whereof she took her original. Uaunt thy self then (...)
Angclica to have forced a heart of it self impregnable, and given him a wound
which the stoutest lads, might sooner have deprived of life, than put him out
of ye way of his gentle kind: And (...) Montanine, think, that if thou will
thy self, thou wynnest to day so hearty a friend, as only death shall
separate the union of us twain, and of all our posterity. It is I, nay it is
I my self, that shall excel thee in duty, poynting the way for the wysest,
to get honor, and violently compel the moved minds of those that be our
adversaries, desiring rather vainly to forgo mine own life, than to give over
the virtuous conceits, which be already grifted in my mind. After this long
discourse seeing that the time required diligence, he took a thousand
Ducates, and went to the Treasurer of the fines, deputed by the state, whom he
fonnd in his office, and said unto him: I have brought you sir, the Thousand
Ducates, which Charles Montanine is bound to pay for his deliverance. Tell
them, and give him an acquittance that presently he may come forth. The
Treasorer would have given him the rest, that exceeded the sum of a Thousand
Florens: but Salimbene refused the same, and receiving a letter for his
discharge, he sent one of his servants therwithall to the chief Gailer, who
seeing that the sum of his condemnation was paid, immediately delivered
Montanine out of the prison where he was fast shut, and fettred with great
and weighty gives. Charles thinkyng that some Friar had been come to confess
him, and that they had showed him (...) mercy to do him to death in prison,
that abroad in open shame of the world he might not deface the noble house
whereof he came, was at the first sight astoonned, but having prepared himself
to die, praised God, and besought him to vouchsafe not to forget him in yt
sorrowful passage, wherein the stoutest and coragious many times be faint and
inconstant. He reco^mended his soul, he prayed forgiveness of his sins: and
above all, he humbly besought the goodness of God, that it would please him
to have pity upon his sister, and to deliver her from all infamy and
dishonor. When he was carried out of the Gayle, and brought before the chief
Gailer, suddenly his gives were discharged from his legs, and every of the
standers by looked merrily upon him, without speaking any word that might
asfray him. That Courtesy (...) for, made him attend some better thing, and
(...) him of that which before by any means he durst not think. And his
expectation was not deceived. For the Gailer said unto him: Be of good cheer
sir, for behold the letters of your discharge, wherefore you may go at liberty
whether you list. In saying so, he opened the pri son, and licensed Montanine
to depart, praying him not to take in ill part his entreaty and hard
imprisonment, for that he durst do none other, the State of the City having
so enjoined him. May not each wight now behold how that the events of love be
diverse from other passions of mind? How could Salimbene have so charitably
delivered Montanine, the hatred being so long time rooted between the two
houses, if some great occasion which has no name in Love, had not altered his
nature, and extinguished his affection? It is meritorious to succor them whom
we never saw before, since nature moves us to do well to them that be like our
selves. But faith surmounteth there, where the very natural inclination
feels it self constrained, and sees that to be broken, which obstinately
was purposed to be kept in mind. The graces, gentleness, beauty, mild
behauior and allurement of Angelica, had greater force over Salimbene, than the
humility of her brother, although he had kneeled a hundred times before him.
But what heart is so brute, but may be made tractable and mylde, by the
contemplation of a thing so rare, as the excellent beauty of that Siena
maiden, and would not humble it selse to acquire the good graces of so perfect
a damsel? I will never accuse man for being in love with a fair and virtuous
woman, nor esteem him a slave, which painefully serves a sobre maiden, whose
heart is fraught with honest affections, and mind with desire tending to good
end. Well worthy of blame is he to be demed which is in love with the outward
hew, and praises the tree only laden with flowers, without regard to the
fruict, which makes it worthy of co^menbation. The young maiden must needs
resemble the flower of the Spring time, until by her constancy, modesty, and
chastity, she has vanquished the concupiscence of the slesh, and brought
forth the hoped fruit of a virtue and chastity not common. Otherwise, (...)
shall be like the enrolled soldier, whose valiance his only mind does
witness, and the offer which he makes to him that does register his name in
yt muster books. But when the efsect of (...) is joined with his (...), and
proof belieth not his promise, then the (...) imbraceth him, and aduanceth
him, as a glass for his affairs from that time forth. The like of dames
having passed the assaults and resisted the attempts of their assaylants which
be honest, not by force being not required, but inclined by their own nature,
and the diligence of their chaste and invincible heart. But return we again
unto our purpose, Montanine, when he was delivered, forthwith went home to his
house, to comfort her, who^ he was more than sure to be in great distress and
heaviness for his sake, and which had so much need of comfort as he had, to
take his rest. He came to yt gate of his palace (where being known that it
was Montanine) his sister by any means could not be made to believe the same:
so impossible seem things unto us, which we most desire. They were all in
doubt like as we read that they were, when S. Peter escaped Herod's prison by
the Angels means.

When Angelica was assured that it was her brother, sobbes were laid aside,
sighs were cast away, and heuie weepings converted into tears of joy, she
went to embrace and kiss her brother, praising God for his deliverance, and
making account that he had been raised from death to life, considering his
stoutnesse of mind, rather bent to die than to forgo his land, for so small a
price. The dames that were kin unto him, and tarried there in company of the
maiden half in despair, lest by despair and fury she might fall into
outrage, thereby to put her life in peril, with all expedition advertised their
husbands of Montanines liberty, not looked for, who repaired thither, as well
to rejoice with him in his joy and good fortune, as to make their excuse, for
that they had not travailed to ryd him from that misery. Charles which cared
nothing at all for those mouth blessings, dissembled what he thought, thanking
them nevertheless for their visitation and good remembrance they had of him,
for visiting and co^forting his sister, which honor he esteemed no less than if
they had employed the same upon his own person. Their friends and kinsfolk
being departed, and assured yt none of them had paid his ransom, he was
wonderfully astoonned, and the greater was his grief for that he could not tell
what he was, which without request, had made so gentle a proof of his
liberality: if he knew nothing, far more ignorant was his sister, for so much
as she did think, that he had changed his mind, and that the horror of
death had made him sell his country inheritance, to him which made the first
offer to buie the same: but either of them deceived of their thought went to
bed. Montanine rested not all the night, having still before his eyes, the
unknown image of him that had delivered him. His bed served his turn to none
other purpose, but as a large field or some long alley within a woodde, for
walks to make discourse of his minds conceits, sometimes remembering one,
sometimes another, without hitting the blanke and namyng of him that was his
deliverer, unto whom he confessed him self to owe his service and duty so
long as he lived. And because he saw the day begin to appear, and that the
morning, the Uauntcurrour of the day, summoned Appollo to harness his horse
to begin his course in our Hemisphere, he rose and went to the Chamberlain
or treasurer, such as was deputed for receipt, of the Fines, sessed by the
State, whom he saluted, and receiving like salutation, he prayed him to show
him so much pleasure, as to tell him the parties name, that was so liberal to
satisfy his fine due in the (...) of the State. To whom the other answered:
None other has caused thy deliverance (O Montanine) but a certain person of
the world, whose name thou may easily guess, to whom I gave an acquittance
of thine imprisonment, but not of the just sum, because he gave me a
thousand Ducates for a thousand Florens, and would not receive the overplus
of the debt, which I am ready to deliver thee with thine acquittaunce. I have
not to doc with the money (said Charles) only I pray you to tell me the name of
him yt has done me this great courtesy, that hereafter I may acknowledge him
to be my friend. It is said the Chamberlain) Anselmo Salimbene, who is to be
commended and praised above all thy parents and kin, and came hither very
late to bring the money, the surplusage whereof, behold here it is. God forbid
(said Montanine) that I should take away that, which so happily was brought
hither to rid me out of pain: and so went away with his acquitta^ce, his mind
charged with a nu^bre of fancies for the fact done by Salimbene. Being at home
at his house, he was long time stayed in a deep consideration, desirous to
know the cause of that gentle part, proceeding from him whose whose parents
and auncesters were the capital enemies of his race. In the end like one
risyng from a sound sleep, he called to mind, that very many times he had
seen Anselmo with attentive eye and fired look to behold Angelica, and in
eying her very lovingly, he passed every day (before their gate) not showing
other countenance, but of good will, and with friendely gessure, rather than
enemies face, saluting Angelica at all times when he met her. Wherefore
Montanine was assured, that the only love of Salimbene toward his sister had
caused that deliverance, concluding that when the passion does proceed of
good love, seized in gentle heart and of noble enterprise, it is impossible but
it must bring forth the marvelous effects of virtues gallantise, of honesty
and courtesy, and that the spirit well borue, can not so much hide his gentle
nourture, but the fire must flame abroad, and that which seems difficult to
be brought to pass, is facility, and made possible by the conceits and
endeavors so well employed, and not common to a mind that is not severed from
villainy: wherefore in the end not to be surmounted in honesty, ne yet to
bear the mark of one, that unthankfully accepted good turns, he determined
to use a great prodigality upon him, that under the name of foe, had showed
himself a more faithful friend, than those that bare good face, and at need
were furthest off from afflic ted Montanine, who not knowing what present to
make to Salimbene, but of himself and his sister, purposed to (...) his mind
to Angelica, and then upon knowledge of her will to perform his intent. For
which cause understanding that his gracious enemy was gone into the country,
he thought well to consider of his determination, and to break with her in his
absence, the better to execute the same upon his next return to the city. No
called Angelica aside, and being both alone together, he used these or such
like words: You know dear sister, that the higher is the fall, the more
dangerous it is, and greater grief he feels that does fall from high than
he that tumbleth down from place more low and of lesser steepness. I speak
this, because I call to mind the condition, nobilite, and excellency of our
ancesters, the glory of our race, and riches of all our house, which
constrains me many times to sigh, and sheade a stream of tears, when I see
the sumptuous palaces that were the homes and resting places of our fathers,
and grand fathers, when I see on al parts of this City, the Arms, and
scutcheons painted and imbossed, bearing the mark of the antiquity of our
house, and when I behold the stately marble tombs and brazen monumentes, in
diverse our temples erected for perpetual memory of many knights and generals
of wars, that sorted forth the Montanine race: and chiefly I never enter this
great palace, the remnant of our inheritance and patrimony, but the
remembrance of our auncesters, so glaunceth over mine heart, as an hundred
hundred times, I (...) for death, to think that I am the post alone of the
misery and decay fallen upon the name and famous family of the Montanines,
which makes me think our life to be unhappy, being down fallen from such
felicity, to feel a misery most extreme. But one thing alone ought to
content us, that amid so great poverty, ill luck, ruin and abasement, none is
able to lay unto our charge any thing unworthy of the nobility and the house,
whereof we be descended, our life being conformable to the generositie of our
predecessors, whereby it chances, yt although our poor estate be generally
known, yet none can affirm, that we have forligned yt virtue of them, which
virtuously have lived in our race. If so be (...) have received pleasure or
benefit of any man, never disdained I with all duty to acknowledge a good
turn, still shunning ye vice of ingratitude, to soil the reputation, wherein
hitherto I have passed my life. Is there any blot which more spotteth the
renoume of man, than not confessing received benefits and pleasures performed
in our necessity? You know in what peril of death I was, these few days
past, through their false surmise which never (...) me, and home almost
miraculously I was redeemed out of the hangma^s hands, and the cruel sentence of
ye unrighteous magistrate, not one of our kyn offering themselves in deed or
word for my defense, which forces me to say, yt I have felt of my kin, which
I never thought, and have tasted, such commodity at his hands, of who^ I never
durst expect or hope for pleasure, relief, aid or any comfort. I atte^ded my
deliverance by suit of those, who^ I counted for kin and friends, but ye same
so soon vanished, as the necessity and peril were present. So pressed with
woe, and forsaken of friends, I was affrayde that our adversaries (to remove all
fear and suspicion in time to come) would have purchased my total ruin, and
procured the overthrow of the Montanines name, by my death, and approached end.
But good God, from the place whereof I feared the danger, the calm arose, which
has brought my bark to ye haue^ of health, and at his hands where I attended
ruin, I have tasted affia^ce and sustentation of mine honor and life. And
plainly to proceed, it is Anselmo Salimbene, the son of our ancient and capital
enimes, that has showed himself the very loyal and faithful friend of our
family, and has delivered your brother by paime^t to ye State, the sum not
of a thousand Flore^s, but of a thousand ducats to rau^som ye life of him, who
thought him to be his most cruel adversary. O Ge^tlema^s heart in deed, and
gentle mind, whose rare virtues do surpass all human understanding.
Friends united together in band of amity, amaze the world by yt effects not
vulgar in things which they do one for an other. But this surmounteth all, a
mortal enemy, not reconciled or required, without demand of assurance for yt
pleasure, which he does, pays the debts of his adversary: which fact
excedeth al consideration to them, that discover the factes of men. I can not
tell what name to attribute to the deed of Salimbene, and what I ought to call
that his courtesy, but this must I needs protest, that the example of his
honesty and gentleness is of such force, and so much has vanquished me, as
whether I shall die in pain, or live at case, never am I able to exceed his
liberality. Now my life being engaged for that which he has done to me, and
he having delivered the same from infamous death, it is in your hands (dear
sister) to do the devise imagined in my mind, to the intent that I may be
only bound to you for satisfiyng the liberality of Salimbene, by means
whereof, you which wept the death and wailed the lost liberty of your
brother, do see me free, and in safety, having none other care but to be
acquitted of him, to whom both you and I be derely bound. Angelica hearing her
brother speak those words, and knowing that Salimbene was he, that had
surpassed all their kin in amity and comfort of their family, answered her
brother, saying: I would never have thought (good brother) that your
deliuerannce had come to pass by him whose name even now you fold, and that
our enemies breaking all remembrance of ancient quarrels, had care of the
health and conservation of the Montanines. Wherefore if it were in my power I
would satisfy the courtesy and gentleness of Ansehno, but I know not which
way to begin ye same, I being a maid that knows not how to recompense a good
turn, but by acknowledging the same in heart: and to go to render thanks, it
is neither lawful or comely for me, and much less to offer him any thing, for
the little access I have to his house, and the small familiarity I have with
the Gentlewomen of his kin. Notwithstanding brother, consider you wherein my
power rests to aid and help you, and be assured (mine honor saved) I will
spare nothing for your contentation. Sister (said Montanine) I have of long
time debated with my self what is to be (...), and devised what might be the
occasion that moved this young Gentleman to use so great kindness toward me,
and having diligently pondred and wayed what I have seen and known, at length
I found yt it was the only force of love, which constrained his affection, and
altered the ancient hatred that he bare us, into new love, that by no means
can be quenched. It is the covert fire which love has kindled in his
intrailes, it is love which has raised the true effects of gentleness, and
has consumed the conceits of displeased mind. O the great force of that
amorous alteration, which upon the sudden exchange, seems impossible to
receive any more change or mutacion. The only beauty and good grace of you
sister, has induced our gracious enemy, the servant of your perfections, to
deliver the pore Gentleman forlorn of all good fortune. It is the honest life
and commendable behauioure of Angelica Montanine, which have incited Anselmo to
do an act so praise worthy, and a deed so kind, to procure the deliverance
of one, which looked not for a chance of so great consequence. Ah Gentle young
Gentleman, Ah Princely mind, and heart noble and magnanunous. Alas how shall
it be possible that ever I can approach the honest liberality wherewith thou
haste bound me for ever? My life is thine, mine honor depends of thee, my
goods be tied to thee. What rests then? if not that you (sister) void of
cruelty do use no unkindness to him that loves you and who for love of you
has prodigally offered his own goods to rid me from pain and dishonor? If so
be, my life and (...) have been acceptable unto thee, and the sight of me
discharged from prison was joyful unto thee, if thou gave thy willing consent
that I should sell my (...), grant presently that I may with a great, rare, and
precious present, requite the goodness, pleasure and courtesy that Salimbene
has done for your sake: And since I am not able with goods of fortune to
satisfy his bounty, it is your person which may supply yt default, to the
intent that you and I may be quitted of the (...), wherein we stand bound unto
him. It behooves that for the offer and reward of money which he has
employed, we make present of your beauty, not selling the price of your
chastity, but delivering the same in exchange of courtesy, being assured for
his gentleness and good nouriture sake, he will use you none otherwise, or
usurp any greater authority over you, than vertus permits in each gentle
and noble heart. I have none other mean of fatisfaction, ne larger raunsom to
render free my head from the tribute which Salimbene has given for my life and
liberty. Think (dear sister) what determinate answer you will make me, and
consider if my request be meet to be denied. It is in your choice and pleasure
to deny or consent to my demand. If so be that I be refused and lose the
means by your refuse to be acquitted of my defender, I had rather forsake my
City and Country, than to live here with ye name of ingratitude, for not
acknowledging so great a pleasure. But alas, with what eye shall I dare behold
the Nobility of Siena, if by great unkindness I pass under silence the
rarest friendship that ever was devised? What hearts sorrow shall I conceive to
be pointed at with the finger, like one that has forgotten in acknowledging by
effect, the received pleasure of my deliverance? No (sister) either you must
be the quiet of my mind, and the acquittaunce of us (...), or else must I die,
or wander like a vagabonde into strange Countries, and never put foot again
into Italy. At those words Angelica stood so astonned and confused, and so
besides her self, like as we see one distraught of sense that feels himself
attached with some amaze of the Palsy. In the end recovering her sprites, and
beblubbered all with tears, her stomach panting like the Bellows of a forge,
she answered her brother in this manner: I know not loving brother by reason
of my troubled mind how to answer your demand, which seems to be both
right and wrong, right (...) respect of the (...), not so, in consideration of
the request. But how I prove the same, and what reason I can allege and
discover for that proof, hearken me so patiently, as I have reason to
complain and dispute upon this chance more hard and difficult to avoid, than
by reply able to be defended, since that life and the hazarding thereof is
nothing, in regard of that which you will have (...) to present with too
exceeding prodigal liberality, and I would to God that life might satisfy
the same, then be sure it should so soon be employed, as the promise made
thereof. Alas good God, I thought that when I (...) my brother out of prison,
the near distress of death, whereunto unjustly he was thrown, I thought (I
say) and firmly did believe, that fortune the enemy of our joy, had vomited al
her poison, and being despoiled of her fury and crabbed nature had broken the
bloody and venomous arowes, wherewith so long time she has plaged our family,
and that by resting of her self: she had given some rest to the Montanine house
of al their troubles and misadue^tures. But I (O miserable wight) do see and
feel how far I am divided from my hope, and deceived of mine opinion, since yt
furious stepdame, appears before me with a face more fierce and thretning, then
ever she did, sharpening her self against my youth in other sort, than ever
against any of our race. If ever she persecuted our auncesters, if she brought
them to ruin and decay, she now does purpose wholly to subvert the same, and
throw us headlong into yt bottomless pit of all misery, exterminating for all
together, the remnaunt of our consumed house. Be it either by loss of thee
(good brother,) or the violent death of me which cannot hazard my chastity for
the price of mine unhappy life: Ah good God, into what anguishe is my mind
exponed, and how do I feel the force and violence of froward fortune? But
what speak I of fortune? How does hard luck ensue, that is predestined by
the heavens upon our race? Must I at so tender years, and of so feeble kind
make choice of a thing, which would put the wisest upon earth unto their
shifts? My heart does fail me, reason wants and judgment hangs in
ballaunce by continual agitations, to see how I am driven to the extremity of
two dangerous straits, and enuironned with fearful ieoperdies, forcibly
compelled either to be divided and separated from thee (my brother,) whom I
love above mine own life, and in whom next after God I have sixed and put my
hope and trust, having none other solace, comfort and help, but thee, or else
by keeping thee, am forced to give unto another, and know not how, yt precious
treasure which being once lost, cannot be recovered by any means, and for the
guard and conservation whereof, every woman of good judgment that loves
virtue, ought a thousand times to offer her self to death (if so many ways she
could) rather than to blot or soil that inestimable jewel of chastity,
wherewith our life is a true life: contrariwise she which fondly suffers her
self to be disseazed and spoiled of the same, and loses it without honest
title, albeit she be a live, yet is she buried in the most obscure cave of
death, having lost the honor which makes Maidens march with head upright.
But what goodness has a Lady, gentlewoman, maiden or wife, wherein she can
glory, her honor being in doubt, and reputation darkened with infamy? Whereto
served the imperial house of Augustus, in those Ladies that were entitled
with the Emperors daughters, when for their vilany, their were unworthy of the
title of chaste and virtuous? What profited Faustina the Imperial crown upon
her head, her chastity through her abominable life, being rapt and despoiled?
What wrong has been done to many simple women, for being buried in the tomb
of dark oblivion, which for their virtue and pudique life, merited eternal
praise? Ah Charles my brother dear, where have thou bestowed the eye of thy
fore seeing mind, that without foresight and care of the fame due to the
honest dames, and chaste damsels of our family, having lost the goods and
fathers inheritance, wilt have me in like sort sorgoe my chastity, which
hitherto I have kept with heedeful diligence. Will thou dear brother by the
price of my virginity, that Anselmo shall have greater victory over us, than he
has gotten by fight of sword upon the allied remnaunt of our house? Art thou
ignorant that the wounds and diseases of the mind, be more vehement than those
which afflicte the body? Ah I unhappy maiden and what ill luck is reserved for
me, what destiny has kept me till this day to be presented for Venus
Sacrifice, to satissie a young man's lust, which coueteth (peradventure) but
the spoil of my virginity? O happy the Roman maid, slain by the proper hands
of her woeful father Virginius, that she might not be soiled with infamy, by
the lecherous embracements of ravenous Appius, which desired her acquaintance.
Alas that my brother do not so, rather I would to God of his own accord he be
the (...) minister of my life, ready to be violated, if God by (...) grace take
not my cause in hand? Alas death, why (...) thou not throw against my heart
thy most pearcing darte, that I may go wait upon the shadows of my thrice
happy parents, who knowing this my grief, will not be void of passion to help me
wail my woeful state. O God why was not I choked and strangled, so sone as I
was taken forth the secret imbracements of my mothers womb, rather tha^ to
arrive into this mishap, that either must I lose the thing I deem most dear,
or die with the violence of my proper hands? Come death, come, and cut the
unhappy threede of my woeful life, stop the pace of tears with thy trenchant
darte that stream outragiously down my face, and close the brething wind of
sighs, which hinder thee from doing thine office upon my heart, by suffocation
of my life and it. When she had ended those words, her speech did fail, and
waxing pale and faint, (sitting upon bir stool) she fared as though that very
death had sitten in her place. Charles thinking that his sister had been dead,
(...) with sorrow, and desirous to live no longer after her, seeing he was the
cause of that sowning, fell down dead upon the ground, moving neither hand nor
foot, as though the soul had been departed from the body. At the noise which
Montanine made by reason of his fall, Angelica revived out of her sown, and
seeing her brother in so pitiful plight, and supposing he had been dead for
care of his request, for being berieued of her brother, was so moved, as a
little thing would have made her do, as (...) did, when she viewed Pyramus to be
slain. But conceiving hope, she threw her self upon her brother, cursing her
fortune, banning the stars of cruelty, and her lauash speech, and her self
for her little love to her brother, who made no refusal to die to save his land
for relief of her: where she denied to yield her self to him yt loved her with so
goodaffection. In the end she applied so many remedies unto her brother,
sometimes casting cold water upon his face, sometimes pinching and rubbing the
temples and pulses of his arms, and his mouth with vinegar, that she made him
to come again: and seeing that his eyes were open, beholding her intentiuely
with yt countenance of a man half in despair, she said unto him: For so much
brother as I see fortune to be so froward, that by no means thou can avoid
the cruel lot, which lau^cheth me into the bottom of mortal misery, and that
I must adventure to follow the endeavors of thy mind, and obey thy will, which
is more gentle and noble, than fraught with reason, I am content to satisfy the
same, and the love which hitherto thou have born me. Be of good cheer, and do
with me and my body what thou list, give and present the same to whom thou
please. Well be thou sure, that so soon as I shall be out of thy hands and
power, I will be called or esteemed thine no more, and thou shall have less
authority to stay me from doing the devises of my fantasy, swearing and
protesting by the almighty God, that never man shall touch Angelica, except it
be in marriage, and that if he assay to pass any further, I have a heart that
shall incorage my hands to sacrifice my life to the chastity of noble dames
which had rather die than live in (...) of dishonesty. I will die a body
without (...), and the mind void of consent, shall receive no shame or filth
that can soil or spot ye same. In saying so, she began again to weep in
such abundance, as the humor of her brain ran down by the issue of both
her eyes. Montanine albeit sorrowful beyond measure to see his gentle and chaste
sister in such vexation and heaviness, reioysed yet in his mind, that she had
agreed to his (...), which presaged the good luck that afterward chanced
unto him, for his liberal offer. Wherefore said he to Angelica, I was never in
my life so desirous to live, but yt I rather choose to die, than procure a
thing that should turn thee to displeasure and grief, or to hazard thine honor
and reputation in danger or peril of damage, which thou have ever known, and
should have still perceived by effect, or more properly to speak, touched
with thy finger, if that incomparable and rare courtesy and liberality of
Salimbene had not provoked me to require that, which honestly thou can not
give, nor I demand without wrong to thee, and prejudice to mine own
estimation and honor. But what? the sear I have to be deemed ingrate, has
(...) me forget thee, and the great honesty of Anselmo makes me hope, yea and
steadfastly believe, that thou shall receive none other displeasure, but to be
presented unto him, whom at other times we have thought to be our mortal
enemy. And I think it impossible that he will use any villainy to her, whom he
so fervently loves, for whose sake he fears not the hatred of his (...), and
disdained not to save him whom he hated, and on whom he might have been
revenged. And for so much sister, as the face commonly she weth the sign and
token of the hearts affections, I pray (...) by any means declare no sad
countenance in the presence of Salimbene, but rather cheer (...) thy face.
dry up the abundance of thy tears, that he by seeing thee joyful and merry,
may be moved to (...) his courtesy and use thee honestly, being satisfied with
thy liberality, and the offer which I will make of our service.

Here may be seen the (...) of two diverse things, duty combating with shame,
reason being in contention with himself. Angelica knew and confessed that her
brother did but his duty, and that she was bound by yt same very bond. On the
other side, her estate and virginal chastity, brake the endeavors of her duty,
and denied to do that which she esteemed right. Nevertheless she prepared her
self to follow both the one and the other: and by acquiling the duty to her
brother, she ordained the mean, to discharge him of that, which he was bound
to his benefactor, determining nevertheless rather to die, than shamefully to
suffer her self to be abused, or to make her lose the flower, which made her
glister amongs ye maidens of the city, and to deface her good fault by an act
so villainous. But that special rare virtue was more singular in her, than was
ye continency of Cyrus the Persian King, who fearing to be forced by the
allurements of the excellent beauty of chaste Panthea, would not suffer her to
be brought into his presence, for fear that he being surmounted with folish
lusts, should force her, that by other means could not be persuaded to break
the holy laws of marriage, and promised Faith to her husband. For Salimbene
having in his presence, and at his commandment her, whom above all things he
loved, would by no means abuse his power, but declared his Gentle nature to be
of other force and effect, than that of the before said king, by reading ye
success of this history you shall perceive.

After that Montanine and his sister had uttered many other words upon their
determination, and that ye fair maiden was appeased of her sorrow, attending
the issue of that which they went about to begin: Anselmo was come home out of
the Country, whereof Charles having intelligence, about the second hour of ye
night, be caused his sister to make her ready, and in company of one of their
servant that carried light before them, they came to the lodging of Salimbene,
whose servant seeing Montanine so accompanied to knock at the gate, if he did
marvel I leave for you to think, by reason of yt displeasure and hatred which
he knew to be between the two families, not knowing that which had already
passed for ye beginning of a final peace of so many controversies: for which
cause so astonned as he was, he went to tell his master that Montanine was at
the gate, desirous secretly to talk unto him. (...) knowing what company
Charles had with him, was not unwilling to go down, and (...) two torches to
be lighted, came to his gate to entertain them, and to welcome ye brother and
the sister, with so great courtesy and friendship as he was surprised with
love, seeing before his eyes ye sight of her, that burned his heart
incessa^tly, not discovering as yet the secrets of his thought, by making her
to understand the good will he bare her, and how much he was her servant. He
could not tell well whether he was incharmed, or his eyes daselled, or not well
wakened from (...) when he saw Angelica, so amazed was he with the
strangeness of the fact, and arrival of the maiden to his house. Charles
seeing him so confused, and knowing that the great affection he bare unto his
sister, made him so perplexed and besides himself, said unto him: Sir we would
gladly speak with you in one of your chambers, yt there might be none other
witness of our discourse, but we. (...). together. Salimbene which was (...)
with joy, was able to make none other answer, but, Go we whether you please.
So taking his Angelica by the hand, they went into yt hall, and from thence
into his chamber, which was furnished according to yt state and riches of a
Lord, he being one of the welthiest and chief of the city of Siena. When they
were set down, and all the (...) gone (...), Charles began to say to
Salimbene, these words: You may not think it strange (sir Salimbene) if
against the laws and customs of our common wealth, I presently do call you,
for knowing the band wherewith I am bound unto you, I must for ever confess and
count my self to be your slave and bo^dman, you having done a thing in my
behalf yt deserves ye name of Lord and master. But what ungrateful man is he
yt will forget so great a benefit, as that which I have received of you, holding
of you, life, goods, honor, and this mine own sister yt enjoys by your means
the presence of her brother and her rest of mind, not losing our noble
reputation by ye loss prepared for me through unrighteous judgment, you
having staid the ruin both of her and me, and the rest of our house and kin. I
am right glad sir, yt this my duty and service is bounden to so virtuous a
gentleman as you be, but exceeding sorry, yt fortune is so froward and contrary
unto me, that I am not able to accomplish my good will, and if ingratitude may
lodge in mind of a needy Gentleman, who has no help but of himself, and in
ye will of his chaste sister, and mind united in two persons only saved by
you, duty does require to present the rest, and to submit all that is left,
to be disposed at your good pleasure. And because that I am well assured, that
it is Angelica alone which has kindled ye fire of desire, and has caused you
to love that which your predecessors have deadly hated, yt same spark of
knowledge, which our misery could not quench with all his force, has made the
way, and showed the path whereby we, shall avoid the name of ingrate and
forgetful persons, and that same which has made you liberal toward me,
shall be bountifully bestowed upon you. It is Angelica sir which you see present
here, who to discharge my band, has willingly rendered to be your own,
submitting her self to your good will, for ever to be youres. And I which am
her brother, and have received that great good will of her, as in my power to
have her will, do present the same, and leave her in your hands, to use as you
would your own, praying you to accept the same, and to consider whose is the
gift, and from wheuce it comes, and how it ought to be regarded. When he had
said so, Montanine rose up, and without further talk, went home unto his
house. If Anselmo were abashed at the Montanines arrival, and (...) at the
Oration of Charles, his sudden departure was more to be marvelled at, and
therwithall to see the effect of a thing which he never hoped, nor thought
upon. He was exceeding glad and joyful to see himself in the company of her,
whom he desired above all things of the world, but sorry to see her heavy and
sorrowful for such chance. He supposed her being there, to proceed rather of
the young man's good and gentle nature, than of the maidens will and liking. For
which cause taking her by ye hand, and holding her between his arms, he used
these or such like words: Gentlewoma^, if ever I had felt and known with what
wing yt variety and lightness of worldly things do fly, and the gains of
inco^stant fortune, at this present I have seen one of yt most manifest profes
which seems to me so (...), as almost I dare not believe that, which I see
before mine eyes. I know well that it is for you, and for the service that I
bear you, yt I have broken the effect of yt hatred, which by inheritance I
have received against your house, and for yt devotion have delivered your
brother. But I see that fortune will not let me to have the upper hand, to be
the conqueror of her sudden pangs. But you your self shall see, and every man
shall know, yt my heart is none other tha^ noble, and my devises tend, but to
the exploit of all virtue and gentleness: wherefore I pray you (said he kissing
her lovingly) be not sad, and doubt not that your servant is any other now,
having you in his power, than he was when he durst not discover the arde^t love
that vexed him, and held him in feeble state, full of (...) and thought, you
also may be sure, that he has not had the better hand over me, ne yet for his
courtesy has obtained victory, nor you for obeying him. For since that you be
mine, and for such yielded and given to me, I will keep you, as her whom I love
and esteem above al things of the world, making you my companion, and the only
mistress of my goods, heart, and will. Think not that I am the friend of
Fortune, and practice pleasure alone without virtue. It is modesty which
commands me, and honesty is the guide of my conceits. Assure you then, and
repose your comfort on me: for none other tha^ Angelica Montanine, shall be the
wife of Anselmo Salimbene: and during my life, I will be the friend, the
defender and supporter of your house. At those good news, the drousie and
wandering spirit of the fair Siena maid awaked, who ending her tears, and
appeasing her sorrow, rose up, and made a very low reverence unto her courteous
friend, thanking him for his great and incomparable liberality, promising
all service, duty, and amity, that a Gentlewoman ought to bear unto him,
who^ God had reserved for her spouse and husband. After an infinite number of
honest imbracements and pleasant kisses given and received on both parts,
Anselmo called unto him one of his Auntes that dwelled within him, to whom he
delivered his new conquest to keep, and spedily without delay he sent for
the next of his kin and dearest friends: and being come, he entreated them to
keep him company, in a very urgent and weighty business he had to do,
wherein if they showed them selves diligent in his request, doubtful it is not,
but he addressed speed for accomplishme^t of his enterprise. Then causing his
Aunt and well-beloved Angelica to come forth, he carried them (not without their
great admiration) to the palace of Montanine, whither being arrived, he and
his company were well entertained of the said Montanine, the brother of fair
Angelica. When they were in the hall, Salimbene said to his brother in law that
should be: Senior Montanine, it is not long since, that you in company of my
fair Gentlewoman here, came home to speak with me, desirous to have no man
privy to the effect of your conference. But I am come to you with this troop
to disclose my mind before you al, and to manifest what I purpose to do, to the
intent the whole world may know your good and honest nature, and understand how
I can be requited on them, which endeavor to gratify me in any thing. Having
said so, and every man being set down, he turned his talk to the rest of the
company in this wise: I doubt not my (...) and noble dames, but that ye much
muse and marvel to see me in this house so late, and in your company, and am
sure, that a great desire moves your minds to know for what purpose, yt cause,
and why I have gathered this assembly in a time unlooked for, and in place
where none of our race and kynne of long time did enter, and less did mean
to make hither their repair. But when you do consider what virtue and
goodness rests in the hearts of those men, that shun and avoid the (...)
of mind, to follow the reasonable part, and which proprely is called
spiritual, you shall thereby perceive, that when gentle kind and noble heart,
by the great mistress (...) Nature, be grifted in the minds of men, they
cease not to make appear the effect of their doings, sometime producyng one
virtue, sometimes another, which cease not to cause the fruict of such
industry both to blow and bear: In such wise, as the more those virtuous
acts and commendable works, do appear abroad, the greater dyligence is
employed to search the matter wherein she (...) cause to appear the force of
virtue and excellency, conceiuyng singular delighte in that her good and holy
delyuerie, which brings forth a fruict worthy of such a stock. And that
force of mind and generositie of noble heart is so firm and sure in
operation, as although humane things be unstable and subject to change, yet
they can not be severed or disparcled. And albeit it be the butte and white,
whereat Fortune discharges all her darts and shaftes, threatening shooting and
assailing the same round, yet it continues stable and firm like a rock and
cliffe beaten with the violent fury of waves rising by wind or tempest.
Whereby it chances, that riches and dignity can no more advance the heart of a
slave and villain, than poverty make vile and abase the greatness of courage
in them that be procreated of other stuff than of common sort, which daily
keep the majesty of their original, and live after the instincte of good and
noble blood, wherewith their auncesters were made noble, and sucked that same
virtue out of the teates of Noursses breasts, who in the mids of
troublesome (...) of Fortune that do assail them, and depresse their
modesty, their face and countenance, and their factes full well declare their
condition, and do to understand, that under such a misery, a mind is
hid, which deserves greater guerdon than the eigre taste of calamity. In
that did glowe and shine the youth of the Persian and Median Monarch, being
nurssed amongs the stalles and stables of his grandfather, and the gentle kind
of the founder of stately Rome, suckeled in the shepecoates of Princes
shephierds. Thus much have I said, my good lords and dames, in consideration
of the noble courage and gentle mind of Charles Montanine, and of his sister,
who without prejudice to any other, I dare to say, is the paragon and mirror
of all chaste and courteous maidens, well trained up, amongs the whole troop of
those that live this day in Siena, who being brought to the end and last
point of their ruin, as every of you does know, and their race so sore decayed,
as there remains but the only name of Montanine: notwithstanding they never
lost the heart, desire, ne yet the effect of the courtesy, and natural
bounty, which ever does accompany the mind of those that be (...) in deed,
Which is the cause that I am constrained to accuse our auncesters, of to much
cruelty, and of the little respect which for a controversy occurred by chance,
have pursued them with such mortal revenge, as without ceassing, with all their
force, they have assayed to ruinate, abolishe, and for ever (...) that a right
noble and illustre race of the Montanines, amongs who^ if never any goodness
appeared to the world, but the honesty, gentleness, courtesy and virtuous
manners of these twain here present, the brother and sister, yet they ought to
be accounted amongs the rank of the noblest and chiefest of our City, to the
intent in time to come it may not be reported, that we have esteemed and
cherished riches and drossie mucke, more than virtue and modesty. But
imitating those excellent gouerners of Italy, which held the Roman Empire,
let us rather reverence the virtuous poor, than praise or prise the rich,
given to vice and wickedness. And for so much as I do see you all to be
desirous to know yt cause and argument, which makes me to use this talk, and
forces me to praise the (...) and goodness of the Montanines, pleases you
to stay a little with patience, and not think the time tedious, I mean to
declare the same. Plainly to confess unto you (for that it is no crime of
death, or heinous offense) the gifts of nature, the beauty and comeliness of
fair Angelica here present, have so captiuate my mind, and deprived my heart of
liberty, as night and day travailing how I might discover unto her my
martirdom, I did consume in such wise, as losing lust of sleep and meat, I
feared ere long to be either dead of sorrow, or (...) of my right wits, seeing
no means how I might avoid the same, because our two houses and families were
at continual debate: and albeit (...) were ceased, and quarelles forgotten,
yet there rested (as I thought) a certain desire both in the one and the
other of offense when time and occasion did serve. And yet mine affection for all that was not decreased, but rather more tormented, and my grief increased,
hopeless of help, which now is chanced to me as you shall hear. You do
know, and so do all men, how within these few days past, the Lord
Montanine here present, was accused before the Seniorie, for trespasses against
the statutes and Edicts of the same, and being prisoner, having not wherewith to
satisfy the condemnation, ye law affirmed that his life should recompense and
supply default of money. I not able to suffer the want of him, which is the
brother of the dearest thing I esteem in the world, and having not her in
possession, nor like without him to attain her, paid that sum, and
delivered him. He, by what means I know not, or how he coniectured the
benevolence of my deed, thinkyng that it proceeded of the honest (...) and
affection which I bare to gracious and amiable Angelica, well considering of my
curteste, has overcome me in prodigalitle he this night came unto me, with
his sister my mystresse, yeldyng her my slave and bondwoman, leaving her with
me, to do with her as I would with any thing I had. Behold my good Lords, and
ye noble Ladies and cousins, and consider how I may recompense this benefit,
and be able to satisfy a present so precious, and of such value and regard,
as both of them be, such, as a right puissant prince and lord, may be contented
with a duty so liberal and jewel in estimable of two offered things. The
assistants that were there, could not tell what to say, the discourse had so
much drawn their minds into diverse fantasies and contrary opinions, seeing
that the same required by deliberation to be considered, before lightly they
vttred their minds. But they knew not the intent of him, which had called them
thither, more to testify his fact, than to judge of the thing he went about,
or able to hinder and let the same. True it is, that the Ladies viewyng and
marking the amiable countenance of the (...) (...), would have judged for her,
if they feared not to be refused of him, whom the thing did touch most
near. Who without longer stay, opened to them all, what he was purposed to
do, saying: Since ye do spend time so long upon a matter already meant and
determined, I will ye to know, that having (...) of mine honor, and desirous to
satisfy the honesty of the brother and sister I mind to take Angelica to my
wife and lawful spouse, uniting that which so long time has been divided, and
making in two bodies, whilom not well accorded and agreed, one like and uniform
will, praying you each one, joyfully to joy with me, and your selves to rejoice
in that alliance, which seems rather a work from heaven, than a deed
concluded by the counsel and industry of men. So likewise all wedded feeres
in holy Wedlock (by reason of the effect and the Author of the same, even G
O D him self, which did ordain it first) be written in the infallible Book
of his own prescience, to the intent that nothing may decay, which is
sustained with the myghtie hand of that Almighty God, the God of wonders,
which verily he has displayed over thee (dear brother) by making thee to
fall into distress and danger of death, that mine Angelica, being the mean
of thy dyliueraunce, might also be cause of the atonement which I do hope
henceforth shall be, between so noble houses as ours be. This final decree
reveled in open audience, as it was, against their expectation, and the end
that the kynred of Anselmo looked for, so was the same no less strange and
bathful, as joyful and pleasant, feelyng a sudden joy, not accustomed in
their mind, for that union and alliance. And albeit that their riches was
unequal, and the Dowry of Angelica nothing near the great wealth of
Salimbene, yet all men did deem him happy, that he had chanced upon so
virtuous a maiden, the only modesty and integrity of whom, deserved to be
coupled with the most honorable. For when a man has respect only to the
beauty or riches of her, whom he means to take to wise, he most commonly
does incur the mischief, that the spirit of dissension intermeddleth
amydde their householde, whereby pleasure vanishing with age, makes the
riueled face (beset with a thousand wrinkeled furrows) to grow pale and dry.
The wife likewise when she sees her goods to surmou^t, the substance of her
wedded husband, she aduaunceth her heart, she swells to make himself a
conqueror by marriage, but she diminyshing no jot of her noble mind, he must
seek else where his price of victory. To her a desire to kill her self (if
things succeeded contrary to her mind) might have stopped the way to her great
glory, had she not regarded her virginity, more than her own life. The
second seems to go half constrained, and by manner of acquitall, and had his
affection been to render himself (...) to his foe, his patron and preserver,
it would have diminished his praise.

But since enough we have hereof discoursed, and ben large in treaty of
Tragicomicall matters, intermixed and suaged (in some part) with the
enteruiews of dolor, modesty, and indifferent good hap, and in some wholly
imparted the dreadful ends like to terrible beginnings, I mean for a
relief, and after such sour sweet bankettes, to interlarde a licorous
refection for sweeting the mouths of the delicate: And do purpose in this
Novel ensuing, to manifest a pleasant disporte between a Widow and a
Scholar, a passing practice of a crafty dame, not well schooled in the
discipline of Academicall rules, a surmountyng science to trade the nouices of
that form, by ware foresight, to incountre those that by laborsome travail
and nightly watch, have studied the rare knowledge of Mathematicalls, and other
hydden and secret Arts.

Wishing them so well to beware, as I am desirous to let them know by this
(...), the success of such attemptes.

Mistress Helena of Florence
A Widow called Mistress HELENA, with whom a Scholar was in love, (she
loving an other) (...) the same Scholar to stand a whole (...) night in the
Snow to wait for her, who afterward by a (...) and policy, caused her in
July, to stand upon a Tower stark (...), amongs Flies and Gnattes, and in the
(...).

The. xxxi. Nouel.
DIuerte we now a little from these sundry happes, to solace our selves with a
(...) devise, and pleasant circumstance of a Scholars love, and of the wily
guily (...) of an amorous Widow of Florence. A Scholar returned from Paris to
(...) his knowledge at home in his own Countreye, learneth a more cunnyng
lecture of Mystresse Helena, than he did of the subtillest Sorbone Doctor, or
other Mathematical from whenee he came. The Scholar as plainly he had
applied his book, and earnestly herkned his readings, so he simply meant to be
a faithful lover and devout requirant to this ioily dame, yt had vowed her
devotion and promised pilgrimage to an other saint. The scholar upon the first
view of the widows wandering looks, forgetting Ouides lessons of loves guiles,
pursued his conceit to the uttermost. The scholar never remembered how many
valiant, wise and learned men, wanton women had seduced and deceived. He had
forgot how Catullus was beguiled by Lesbia, Tibullus by Delia, Propertius by
Cynthia, Naso by Corinna, Demetrius by Lamia, Timotheus by Phryne, Philippe by
a Greek maiden, Alexander by Thais, Hannibal by Campania, Caesar by Cleopatra,
Pompeius by Flora, Pericles by Aspa ga, Psammiticus the king of Aegipt by
Rhodope, and diverse other very famous by women of that stamp. He had not ben
well trained in holy writ, or heard of Samsons Dalida, or of Salamons
concubines, but like a plain dealing man, believed what she promised, followed
what she bad him, waited whiles she mocked him, attended till she laughed him
to scorn. And yet for all these ioily pastimes invented by this widow, to
deceive the poor Scholar, the escaped not free from his Logike rules, nor safe
from his philosophy. He was forced to turn over Aristotle; to reuolue his
Porphyrie, and to gather his wits about him, to requite this loving peate,
that had so charitably dealt with him. He willingly serched over Ptolome,
perused Albumazar, made haste to Haly, yea and for a shift besturred him in
Erra Pater, for matching of two contrary elements. For cold in Christmasse
holy days, and frost at Twelftide, showed no more force in this poor learned
scholar, tha^ the Suns heat in the Feries of July; gnats, flies, and waspes, at
noone days in So^mer upon the naked tender corpse of this fair Widow. The
Scholar stood below in a Court, benoommed for cold, the widow preached a
lofte in the top of a Tower, and (...) would have had water to cool her
extreme heat. The scholar in his shirt bedecked with his demissaries. The
widow so naked as her graundmother Eve, without vesture to shroud her. The
widow by magike Art what so ever it cost, would feign have recovered her lost
lover. The Scholar well espying his aduau^tage when he was asked council, so
incharmed her with his Sillogismes, as he made her to mount a tower, to curse
the time that ever she knew him or her lover. So yt widow not well beaten in
causes of schole, was whipped with the rod, wherewith she scourged other. Alas
good woman, had she known that old malice had not been forgotten, she would
not have trusted, and less committed her self to the circle of his
enchauntments. If women wist what dealings are with men of great reading, they
would amongs one hundred other, not deal with one of the meanest of those that
be bookish. One Girolamo Ruscelli alearned Italian making pretty notes for yt
better elucidation of the Italian Decamerone of Boccaccio, judges Boccaccio
himself to be this scholar, whom by another name he terms to be Rinieri. But
whatsoever that Scholar was, he was truly too extreme in revenge, and therein
could use no mean. For he never left the pore feeble soul, for all her
courteous words and gentle supplication, until the skin of her flesh was
parched with ye scalding sun beams. And not contented with that, dealt his
almose also to her maid, by sending her to help her mistress, where also she
brake her leg. Yet Philenio was more pitiful over the three Nymphs and
fair Goddesses of Bologna, whose History you may read in the xlix. Novel of
my former Tome. He fared not so roughly with those, as Rinieri did with this,
that sought but to gain what she had lost. Well, how so ever it was, and what
differencie between either of them, this History ensuing, more amply shall
give to understand.

Not long since, there was in Florence, a young gentlewoman of worshipful
parentage, fair and comely of personage, of courage stout, and abounding in
goods of fortune (called Helena,) who being a Widow, determined not to mary
again, because she was in love with a young man that was not void of natures
goodly gifts, whom for her own toothe, above other she had specially chosen.
In whom (setting aside all other care) many times (by means of one of her
maids which she trusted best) she had great pleasure and delight. It chanced
about the same time that a young Gentleman of that City called Rinieri, having
a great time studied at Paris, returned to Florence, not to sell his Science
by retaile, as many do, but to know the reasons of things, and the causes of
the same, which is a marvelous good exercise for a Gentleman. And being there
honored and greatly esteemed of all men, as well for his courteous behauioure, as
also for his knowledge, he lived like a good Citizen. But as it is commonly
seen, they which have best understanding and knowledge in things, are soonest
tangled in Love: even so it happened to this Rinieri, who repairing one day for
his passetime to a feast, this Madame Helena clothed all in black, (after the
manner of widows) was there also, and seemed in his eyes so beautiful and well
favored, as any woman that ever he saw; and thought that he might be accounted
happy, to whom God did she we so much favor, as to suffer him to be cleped
between her arms: and beholding her diverse times, and knowing that the
greatest and dearest things can not be gotten without labor, he determined to
use all his endeavor and care in pleasing of her, that thereby he might
obtain her love, and so enjoy her. The young Gentlewoman not very bashful,
conceiving greater opinion of her self, than was needful, not casting her
eyes toward the ground, but rolling them artificially on every side, and by
and by perceiving much gazing to be upon her, espied Rinieri earnestly
beholding her, and said smiling to her self: I think that I have not this day
lost my time in coming hither, for if I be not deceived, I shall catch a
Pigeon by the nose. And beginning certain times steadfastly to look upon him,
she forced her self so much as she could, to seem effectuously to behold
him: and on the other part thinking, that the more pleasant and amorous she
showed her self to be, the more her beauty should be esteemed, chiefly of him
whom specially she was disposed to love. The wise Scholar giving over his
Philosophy, bent all his endeavor hereunto, and thinking to be her servant,
learned where she dwelt, and began to pass before her house under pretense of
some other occasion: whereat the Gentlewoman reioysed for the causes
beforesaide, faining an earnest desire to behold him. Wherefore the Scholar
having found a certain mean to be acquainted with her maid, discovered his
love: praying her to deal so with her mistress, as he might have her favor. The
maid promised him very willingly, and incontinently reported the same to her
mistress, who with the greatest scoffs in the world, gave ear thereunto and
said: See thou not from whence this goodfellow is come, to lose al his
knowledge and doctrine yt he has brought us from Paris. Now let us devise
therefore how he may be handled for going about to seek that, which he is not
like to obtain. Thou shall say unto him, when he speaks to thee again, yt I
love him better than he loves me, but that it behooves me to save mine
honor, and to keep my good name and estimation amongs other women. Which
thing, if he be so wise (as he seems) he ought to esteem and regard. Ah
poor Wench, she knows not well, what it is to mingle huswiuery with
learning, or to intermeddle distaues with books. Now the maid when she had
found the Scholar, told him as her mistress had commanded: whereof ye
Scholar was so glad, as he with greater endeavor proceeded in his enterprise,
and began to write letters to the Gentlewoman, which were not refused, although
he could receive no answers yt pleased him, but such as were done openly. And
in this sort the Gentle woman long time fed him with delays. In the end she
discovered all this new love unto her friend, who was attached with such an
aching disease in his head, as the same was fraught with the reume of ialosie:
wherefore she to she we her self to be suspected without cause (very careful
for the Scholar) sent her maid to tell him, that she had no convenient time to
do the thing that should please him, sithe^s he was first assured of her love,
but hoped the next Christmasse hollydayes to be at his commandment: wherefore
if he would vouchsafe to rome the night following the first holyday, into ye
court of her house, she would wait there for his coming. The Scholar the best
contented man in the world, failed not at the time appointed, to go to the
Gentlewomans house: where being placed by the maid in a base court, and shut
fast within the (...), he attended for her coming, who supping with her friend
that night, very pleasantly recited unto him all that she had determined then to
do, saying: Thou may see what love I do bear unto him, of whom thou have
foolishely conceived this jealousy. To which words her friend gave (...) with
great delectation, desiring to see the effect of that, whereof she gave him to
understand by words. New as it chanced the day before, the snow fell down
so thick from above, as it covered all yt earth, by which means (...)
Scholar within a very little space after his arriual, began to be very cold,
howbeit hoping to receive recompense, he suffered it patiently. The Gentlewoman
a little while after, said unto her friend: I pray thee let us go into my
chamber, where at a little window we may look out, and see what he does that
makes thee so jealous, and hearken what answer he will make to my maid, whom
of purpose I will send to speak unto him. When she had so said, they went to yt
window, where they seeing the Scholar (they not seen of him,) (...) the maid
speak these words: Rinieri, my mistress is the angriest woman in the world,
for that as yet she can not come unto thee. But the cause is, yt one of her
brethren is come to visit her this Evening, and has made a long discourse of
talk unto her, and afterward bad himself to supper, and as yet is not
departed, but I think he will not tarry long, and then immediately she will
come. In the mean time she prays thee to take a little pain. The scholar
believing this to be true, said unto her: Require your Mistress to take no
care for me till her leisure may serve: howbeit entreat her to make so much
have as she can. The maid returned and went to bed, and the dame of the house
said then unto her friend? Now sir, what say you to this: Do you think that if
I loved him as you mistrust, that I would suffer him to tarry beneath in the
cold to cool himself? And having said so, she went to bed with her friend,
who then was partly satisfied, and all the night they continued in great
pleasure and solace, laughing and mocking the miserable Scholar that walked up
and down the court to chafe himself, not knowing where to sit, or which way to
avoid the cold, and curssed the long tarying of his mistress brother, hoping
at every noise he heard, that she had come to open the door to let him in, but
his hope was in vain. Now she having sported her self almost till midnight,
said unto her friend: How think you (sir) by our Scholar, whether judge you is
greater, his wisdom, or the love that I bear (...) him? The cold that I make
him to suffer, will extinguish the heat of suspicion which ye conceived of my
words the other day. Ye say true (said her friend,) and I (...) assure you,
that like as you are my delight, my rest, my comfort and all my hope, even so I
am youres during life. For the confirmation of which renewed amity, they spared
no delites which the loving Goddess does use to serve and employ upon her
seruau^ts and suitors. And after they had talked a certain time, she said unto
him: For Gods sake (sir) let us rise a little, to see if ye glowing fire which
this my new lover bath daily written unto me, to burn in him, be quenched or
not. And rising out of their beds, they went to a little window, and loking
down into the court, they saw the Scholar daunsing upon the snow, whereunto
his (...) teeth were so good instruments, as he seemed the (...) dauncer that
ever trod a Cinquepace after such Music, being forced thereunto through the
great cold which be suffered. And then she said unto him: what say you to this
my friend, do you not see how cunning I am to make men dance without Laber or
Pipe? Yes in deed (said her lover) ye be an excellent musician. Then (quod
she) let us go down to the door, and I will speak unto him, but in any wise
speak you nothing, and we shall hear what reasons and (...) he will frame to
move me to compassion, and perchance shall have no little pastime to behold
him: whereupon they went down softly to the door, and there without open ing
the same, she with a soft voice out at a little bole, called the Scholar unto
her. Which he hearing, began to praise God and thank him a thousand times,
believing verily that he should then be let in, and approaching the door, said: I
am here mine (own sweet heart) open the door for Gods sake, for I am like to
dic for cold. Whom in mocking wise she answered: can you make me believe (M.
Scholar) that you are so tender, or that the cold is so great as you affirm,
for a little Snow that lies without? There be at Paris far greater snowes
than these be: but to tell you the trothe, you ca^ not come in yet, for my
brother (the devil take him) came yesternight to supper, and is not yet
departed, but by and by he will be gone, and then you shall obtain the effect of
your desire, assuring you, that with much ado I have stolen away from him, to
come hither for your comfort, praying you not to think it long. Madame said
the Scholar, I beseech you for Gods sake to open the door, that I may stand in
covert from ye snow, which within this hour has fallen in great abundance,
and does yet continue: and there I will attend your pleasure. Alas sweet
friend (said she) the door makes such a noise when it is opened, that it will
easily be heard of my brother, but I will pray him to depart, that I may
quickly return again to open the same. Go your way then (said the Scholar)
and I pray you cause a great fire to be made, that I may warm me when I come
in, for I can scarce feel my self for cold. Why, it is not possible (said
the woman) if it be true that you wholly burn in love for me, as by your
sundry letters written, it appears, but now I perceive that you mock me,
and therefore tarry there still on Gods name. Her friend which heard all this,
and took pleasure in those words, went again to bed with her, into whose eyes
no sleep yt night could enter for the pleasure and sport they had with the pore
Scholar. The unhappy wretched Scholar whose teeth clacked for cold, saring
like a Storke in cold nights, perceiving himself to be mocked, assayed to open
the door, or if he might go out by some other way: and seeing it (...),
stalking up and down like a Lion, curssed the nature of the time, the
wickedness of the woman, the length of the night, and the folly and
simplicity of himself: and conceiving great rage and despite against her,
turned suddenly the long and fervent love that he bare her, into despite and
cruel hatred, devising many and diverse means to be revenged, which he then
far more desired, tha^ he did in yt beginning to lie with his Widow. After
the prolixitie and length of the night, day approached, and the dawning thereof
began to appear: wherefore the maid instructed by her mistress, went down
into yt Court, and seeming to have pity upon ye Scholar, said unto him: The
Devil take him that ever he came hither this night, for he has both let us
of sleep, and has made you to be frosen for cold, but take it patiently for
this time, some other night must be appointed. For I know well yt never thing
could chance more displeasantly to my mistress than this. But the Scholar
full of disdain, like a wise man which knew well that threats and menacing
words, were weapons without hands to yt threatened, retained in his stomach that
which intemporate will, would have broken forth, and with so quiet words as he
could, not showing himself to be angry, said: In decde I have suffered yt worste
night that ever I did, but I know the same was not through your mistress
fault, because she having pity upon me, came down to ercuse her self and to
comfort me, and as you say, that which cannot be to night, may be done another
time, commend me then unto her, and fare well. And thus the pore Scholar stiff
for cold, so well as he could, returned home to his house, where for extreme
cold and lack of (...) being almost dead, be threw himself upon his bed, and
when he awaked, his arms and legs were benoommed. Wherefore he sent for
physicians and told them of the cold which he had taken, who incontinently
provided for his health: and yet for all their best and spedie remedies, they
could scarce recover his sinews, wherein they did what they could: and had it
not ben that he was young, and the Summer approaching, it had been to much for him
to have endured. But after he had recovered health, and grew to be lusty,
secret malice still resting in his breast, he thought upon revenge. And it
chanced in a little time after, that Fortune prepared a new accident to the
Scholar to satisfy his desire, because the young man which was beloved of the
Gentlewoman, not caryng my longer for her, fell in love with an other, and gave
over the solace and pleasure he was wont to do to mystresse Helena, for which
she consumed in weepings and (...). But her maid having pity upon her
sorrows, knowing no means to remove the melancholy which she conceived for the
loss of her friend, and seeing the Scholar daily pass by acording to his
common custom, conceived a foolish belief that her mistress fre^d might be
brought to love her again, and wholly recovered, by some charm or other
sleight of Necromancie, to be wrought and brought to pass by the Scholar.
Which devise the told unto her mistress, and she indiscreetly (and without the
due consideration, that if the Scholar had any knowledge in that science, he
would help himself) gave credit to the words of her maid, and by and by
said unto her, that she was able to bring it to pass, if he would take it in
hand, and therwithall promised assuredly, that for recompense he should use
her at his pleasure. The maid diligently told the Scholar hereof, who very
joyful for those news, said unto him self: O God, praised be thy name, for
now the time is come, that by thy help I shall requite the injuries done unto
me by this ungracious woman, and be recompensed of the great love that I bare
unto her: and said to the maid: Go tell thy mistress that for this matter she
need to take no care, for if her friend were in India, I could presentely
force him to come (...), and ask her forgiveness of ye thing he has committed
against her will. And the manner and way how to use her self in this behalf, I
will give her to understand when it shall please her to appoint me: and fail
not to tell her what I say, comforting her in my behalf. The maid carried yt
answer, and it was concluded, that they should talk more hereof at the church
of S. Lucie, whither being come, and resoning together alone, not remembering
that she had brought the Scholar almost to the point of death, she re ueled
unto him all the whole matter, and the thing which he desired, praying him
instantly to help her, to whom the Scholar said: True it is Lady, that amongs
other things which I learned at Paris, the Art of (...), (whereof I have very
great skill,) is one: but because it is much displeasant to God, I have made an
oath never to use it, either for my self, or for any other: howebeit the love
which I bear you, is of such force, as I can not deny you any request, yea
and if I should be damned amongs all the devils in hell, I am ready to
perform your pleasure. But I tell you before, that it is a harder matter to be
dove, than peradventure you believe, and specally when a woman shall provoke a
man to love, and a man the woman, because it can not be done but by the propre
person, whom it does touch, and therefore it is meet, what so ever is done,
in any wise not to be afraid, for that the coniuration must be made in the
night, and in a solitary place without company: Which thing I know not how
you shall be disposed to do. To whom the woman more amorous than wise,
answered: Love pricketh me in such wise, as there is nothing but I dare
attempt, to have him again, that causeless has forsaken me. But if it be
your pleasure, tell me wherein it behooves that I be so bold and hardy. The
Scholar (subtle enough) said: I must of necessity make an image of brass, in
the name of him that you desire to have, which being sent unto you, you must
when the Moon is at her full force, bath your self alone stark naked in a
running river at ye first hour of sleep. (...). times with the same image: and
afterward being still naked, you must go up into some tree or house uninhabited,
and turnyng your self toward the northside thereof with the image in your
hand, you shall say. (...). times certain words, that I will give you in
writing, which when you have done, two damsells shall come unto you, the
fairest that euor you saw, and they shall salute you, humbly demanding what
your pleasure is to command them: to whom you shall willingly declare in
good order what you desire: and take heed above all things, that you name not
one for an other: and when they be gone, you may descend down to the place
where you left your apparel, and array your self again, and afterward (...)
home unto your house, and assure your self, that before the midde of the next
night following, your friend shall come unto you weeping, and crying mercy and
forgiveness at your hands. And know ye, that from that time forth. he will
never forsake you for any other.

The Gentlewoman hearing those words, gave great credit (...): and thought
that already she held her friend between her arms, and very joyful said:
Doubt not but I will accomplish all that which you have told me: and I have
the meetest place in yt world to do it: for toward the valley of Arno, very
near the river side, I have a manor house, secretly to work (...) attempt
that I list: and now it is the month of (...), in which time bathing is most
pleasant. And also I remember that not far from the river, there is a little
Toure uninhabited, into which one can scarce get up, but by a certain ladder
made of chestnut tree, which is already there, whereupon the shephierds do
sometime ascend to the turrasse of the same Toure, to look for their cattle
when they be gone astray: and the place is very solitary and out of the way.
Into that Toure will I go up, and trust to do all that you have required me. The
Scholar which knew very well both the village whereof she spoke, and also the
Toure, right glad for that he was assured of his purpose, said: Madame, I was
never there, and do neither know the village, nor the Toure, but if it be as
you say, it is not possible to find any better place in the world: wherefore
when the time is come, I will send you the image, and the prayer. But I
heartily beseech you, when you have obtained your desire, and do perceive that
I have well served your turn, to have me in remembrance, and to keep your
promise: which the Gentlewoman assured him to do without fail, and taking her
leave of him, she retired home to her house. The Scholar joyful for that his
devise should in deed come to pass, caused an image to be made with certain
Characters, and wrote a tale of a tubbe instead of the prayer. And when he saw
time he sent them to the Gentlewoman, aduertising her that the night following,
she must do the thing he had appointed her. Then to proceed in his
enterprise, he and his man went secretly to one of his friends houses that
dwelte hard by the town. The woman on the other side, and her maid repaired
to her place: where when it was night, making as though she would go (...), she
sent her maid to bed: afterward about ten of the clock she went very softely
out of her lodgyng, and repaired near to the town upon the river of Arno, and
looking about her, not seeing or perceyuyng any man, she unclothed her self,
and hid her apparel under a bushe of thorns, and then bathed her self. vy.
times with the image, and afterward stark naked holding the same in her hand,
she went toward the Toure. The Scholar at the beginning of the night being
hidden with his servant (...) the willowes and other trees nere the Toure, saw
all the aforesaid things, and her also passing naked by him, (the whiteness of
whose body surpassed as he thought, the darkness of the night, so far as
black excedeth white) who afterward beheld her stomach, and the other
parts of her body, which seemed unto him to be very beautiful. And remembering
what would shortly come to pass, (...) had some pity upon her. And on the
other side, the temptation of the flesh suddenly assailed him, provoking him
to issue forth of the secret corner, to surprise her, and take his pleasure
upon her, and within a while after was vanquished both with the one and the
other. But calling to his remembrance what she was, and what great wrong he
had sustained, his malice began to kindle again, and did remove from him his
compassion, and lust, continuing still (...) in his determination, and so did
let her pass. The Widow so being upon the Toure, and turnyng her face
toward the North, began to say the (...) which the Scholar had given her.
Within a while after the Scholar entered in very softly, and took away the
ladder whereupon she got up, and stood still to hear what would say and do.
Who having. vy. times recited her prayer, attended the coming of the two
damsels: for whom she waited so long in vain, as she began to be extreemely
cold, and perceived the dawning of ye day appear. Wherefore taking great
displeasure that it came not to pass as the Scholar had told her, she said to
her self: I doubt much least this Scholar will reward me with such another
night, as wherein once I made him to wait: but if he have done it for that
occasion, he is not well revenged, for ye nights now want the third part of the
length of those then, besides, the cold that he endured, which was of greater
extremity. And that the day might not discover her, she would have gone down
out of the Toure, but she found the ladder to be taken away. Then as though the
world had molten under her feet, her heart began to fail, and fainting, fell
down upon the tarrasse of the Toure, and when her force began to come again,
she began pitifully to weep and complain. And knowing well that the Scholar
had done that deed, she grew to be angry with her self, for that she has
offended another, and too much trusted him whom she ought (by good reason) to
have accounted her (...). And after she had remained a great while in this
plight, then loking if there were any way for her to (...) down, and
perceiving none, she renewed her weeping, whose mind great care and sorrow did
pierce saying to her self: O unhappy wretch what will thy brethren say, thy
parents, thy neighbors, and generally al they of (...), when they shall
understand that thou have ben found here stark naked? Thy honesty which
hitherto has been never stained, shall now be attached with the blot of
shame, yea and if thou were able to find (for remedy hereof) any matter of
excuse (such as might be found) the wicked Scholar (who knows all thy doings)
will not suffer thee to lie: Ah miserable wretch, yt in one hours space, have
lost both thy friend and thine honor. What shall become of thee: who is able to
cover thy shame? When she had thus complained hirself, she was wrapped in such
sorrow, as she was like to cast her self headlong down from the Toure: but the
sun being already risen, she approached near one of the corners of the wall,
espying if she could see any boy keeping of Cattle, that she might send him for
her maid. And it chanced that the Scholar which had slept a while under a
bush, awaked, and one espied the other, to whom the Scoler said: Good morrow
Lady, be the damsels yet come? The woman seeing and hearing him, began again
bitterly to weep, and prayed him to come up to the Toure, that she might
speak with him. The Scholar was thereunto very agreeable, and she lying on her
belly upon the terrasse of the Toure, discovering nothing but her head over yt
side of the same, said unto him weeping: Rinieri, truly if ever I caused thee
to endure an il night, thou art now well revenged on me: for although it be the
month of (...), I thought (because I was naked) yt I should have frosen to
death this night for cold, besides my great and continual tears for the
offense which I have done thee, and of my folly for believing thee, yt marvel it
is mine eyes do remain (...) my head: and therefore I pray thee, not for the
love of me, whom thou ought not to love, but for thine own (...) which art a
gentleman, yt the shame and pain which I have sustained, may satisfy ye
offense and wrong I have committed against (...): and cause mine aparel to
(...) brought unto me, yt I may go town from hence, and take not yt from me,
which (...) you art not able to restore, which is, mine honor: for if I have
deprived thee of being with me yt night, I ca^ at all times when it shall
please thee, render many for yt (...). Let (...) suffice thee then with this,
and like an honest man content thy self by being a little reue^ged on me, in
making me to know what it is to hurt another. Do not, I pray thee, practice thy
power against a woman: for the Egle has no fame for conquering of the Dove.
Then for the love of God, and for thine honor sake, have pity and remorse upon
me. The Scholar with a cruel heart remembering the injury that he had received,
and seeing her so to weep and pray, conceived at one instant both pleasure and
grief in his mind: pleasure of the revenge which he above all things desired,
and grief moved his manhood to have compassion upon the miserable woman.
Notwithstanding, pity not able to overcome the fury of his desire, he
answered: Mistress Helena, if my prayers (which in (...) I could not moisten
(...) tears, ne yet sweeten them with sugared words, as you do yours now)
might have obtained that night wherein I thought I should have died for cold
in the Court full of snow, to have been conveyed by you into some covert place,
an easy matter it had been for me at this instant to hear your suit. But if
now more than in times past your honor do ware warm, and be so grievous for
you to stand stark naked, make your prayers to him, between whose arms it
grieved you not at all to be naked that night, wherein you heard me trot up and
down the court, my teeth chattering for cold, and marching upon the snow: and
at his hands seek relief, and pray him to bring your clothes. and fetch a
ladder that you may come down: force your self to set your honors care on
him, for whom both then, and now besides many other times, you have not
feared to put the same in peril: why do you not call for him to come and help
you? and to whom does your help better appertain than unto him? You are his
own, and what things will he not provide in this distress of yours? or else
what person will he seek to succor, if not to help and succor you? Call him
(foolish woman) and prove if the love which thou (...) him, and thy wit
together with his, be able to deliver thee from my folly, whereat (when both you
were togethers) you took your pleasure. And now thou have experience whether my
folly or the love which thou did bear unto him, is the greatest. And be
not now so liberal and courteous of that which I go not about to seek. (...)
thy good nights to thy (...) friend, if thou chance to escape from hence
alive: for from my self I clearly discharge you both. And truly I have had
to much of one: and sufficient it is for me to be mocked once. Moreover by thy
crafty talk uttered by subtle speech, and by (...) (...) praise, thou
think to force the getting of my good will, and thou call me Gentleman,
valiant man, thinking thereby to withdraw my valiant mind from punishing of
thy wretched body: but thy flateries shall not yet blear mine understanding
eyes, as once with thy unfaithful promises thou did beguile my ouerwening
wit. I now too well do know, and thereof (...) thee well assure, that all the
time I was a scholar in Paris, I never learned so much, as thou in one night
did me to understand. But put the case that I were a valiant man, yet thou
art none of them upon whom valiance ought to show his effects: for the end
of repentance in such cruel beasts as thou art, and the like revenge, ought to
be death alone: where amongs men thy pitiful plaintes which so lame^tably
thou speak, ought to suffice. But yet as I am no Eagle, and (...) no Dove,
but a most venomous serpent, I intend so well as I am able, so persecute thee
mine ancient enemy, with the greatest malice I can devise, which I can not so
proprely call revenge, as I may term it correction: for that the revenge of a
matter ought to surmount the offense, and yet I will bestow no revenge on thee:
for if I were disposed to apply my mind thereunto, for respect of thy
displeasure done to me, thy life should not suffice, nor one hundred more like
unto thine: which if I took away, I should but rid a vile, mischeuous and
wicked woman out of the world. And to say the (...), what other devil art thou
(to (...) pass a little beauty (...) thy face, which within few years will be
so riueled as the oldest cribbe of the world) but the most unhappy and wicked
woman, the dame of the devil himself: for thou tookest no care to kill and
destroy an honest man (as thou even now diddst term me) whose life, may in
time to come be more profitable to the world, than an hundred thousand such
as thine, so long as the world indureth. I will teach thee then by the pain
thou suffrest, what it is to mock such men as be of skill, and what manner of
thing it is to delude and scorn poor Scholars, giuyng thee warning hereby,
that thou never fall into such like folly, if thou escapest this. But if thou
have so great a will to come down as thou say thou haste, why do thou not
leap and throw down thy self, that by breaking of thy neck (if it so
please God) at one instant thou rid thy self of the pain, wherein thou
say thou art, and make me the best contented man of the world. For this
time I will say no more to thee, but that I have done enough for thee, by
making thee to mount so high. Learn then now so well how thou may get down,
as thou did know how to mock and deceive me. While the Scholar had preached
unto her these words, yt wretched woman wept continually, and the time still did
pass away, the sun rising more and more: but when she perceived that he held
his peace, she answered: O cruel man, if the (...) night was grievous unto
thee, and my fault appeared great, can not my youth and beauty, my tears and
humble prayers be able to mitigate thy wrath and to move thee to pity: do at
least that thou (...) be moved and thy cruel mind appeased for that only act,
let me once again be trusted of thee, and since I have manifested al my desire,
pardon me, for this time, thou haste sufficiently made me feel the penance of
my sinue. For, if I had not reposed my trust in thee, thou had not now
revenged thy self on me, which with ardent desire, thou (...) full well declare.
Give over then thine anger, and pardon me he^ceforth: for I am determinod if
thou will forgive me, and cause me to come down out of this place, to forsake
for ever yt unfaithful lover, and to receive thee for my only friend and lord.
Moreover where thou greatly blamest my beauty, esteming it to be short, and of
small account, such as it is, and the like of other women I know, not to be
regarded for other cause: but for pastime and pleasure of youthly me^, and
therefore not to be conte^ned: and thou thy self truly art not very old: and
albeit that cruelly I am entreated of thee, yet therefore I cannot believe that
thou would have me so miserably to die, as to cast my self down hedlong,
like one desperate, before thy eyes, who^ (except thou were a lier as thou art
now become) in time past I did well please and like. Have pity then upon me, for
Gods sake, for yt Sun begins to grow exceeding hot, and as the extreme and
bitter cold did hurt me the last night even so yt heat begins to molest me.
Whereunto the Scholar which kept her there for the nonce, and for his pleasure,
answered: Mistress you did not now commit your faith to me for love you bare
me, but to have yt again, which you had lost, wherefore yt deserves no good
turn, but greter pain: And fondly you think this to be ye only means, whereby
I am able to take desired revenge. For I have a thousand other ways, and a
thousand trapps have I laid to tangle thy feet, in making thee believe that I
did love thee, in such wise as thou should (...) have gone no where at any
time, if this had not chanced, but thou sholdest have fallen into one of them:
and surely thou could have chanced into neither of them, but would have
bred thee more annoyaunce and shame than this (which I chose not for thine
ease, but for my greater pleasure.) And where all these means had failed me,
the pen should not, wherewith I would have displayed thee in such colors, as
when it had come to thy knowledge, thou would have desired a thousand times
a day, that thou had never ben borne. For the forces of the pen be far more
vehement, than they can esteem that have not proved them by experience. I
swear unto thee by God, that I do reioise, and so will to the end, for this
revenge I take of thee, and so have I done from the beginning: but if I had
with pen painted thy manners to the world, thou should not have been so much
ashamed of other, as of thy self, that rather than thou would have looked
me in the face again, thou would have plucked thine eyes out of thy head:
and therefore reprove no more the sea, for being incresed with a little brook.
For thy love, or yt thou be mine own, I care not, as I have already told thee,
and love him again if thou can, so much as thou will, to whom for the
hatred that I have borne him, I presently do bear so much good will again,
and, for the benefit which he has done thee now. You be inamored and desire
the love of young me^, because you see their (...) somewhat fresh, their beard
more black, their bodies well shaped to dance and run at tilt and ryng, but
all these qualities have they had, that be grown to elder years, and they by
good experience know what other are yet to learn. Moreover you deem them the
better horssmen, because they can journey more miles a day than those that be of
farther years. Truly I confess, that with great force they please such (...)
Gentlewomen as you be, who do not perceive (like savage beasts) what heaps of
evil do lurk under the form of fair appearance. Young men be not content
with one lover, but so many as they behold, they do desire, and of so many
they think themselves worthy: wherefore their love can not be stable. And that
this is true, thou may now bear true witness thy self. And they thinkyng
them selves worthy to be honored and cherished of their paramors, have none
other glory but to vaunt of those whom they have enjoyed: which fault makes
many to yield themselves to those that be discrete and wise, and to such as be
no blabbes or Teltales. And where thou say that thy love is known to none,
but to thy maid and me, thou art deceived, and worsse beleuest, if thou believe
the same: for all the inhabitants of the street wherein thy lover dwells, and
the street also wherein thy house does stand, talk of nothing more than of your
love. But many times in such cases, the party whom such brute does touch, is
the last that knows the same. Moreover, young men do rob thee, where they of
elder years do give thee. Thou then (which have made such choice) remain to
him whom thou have chosen, and me (whom thou sloutest) give leave to apply to
an other: for I have found a woman to be my friend, which is of an other
discretion than thou art, and knows me better than thou do. And (...) thou
may in an other world be more certain of mine eyes desire, than thou hitherto
art, Throw thy self down so soon as thou can, that thy soul already (as
I suppose) received between the arms of the devil him self may se, if mine
eyes be troubled or not, to view thee break thy neck. But because I think thou will not do me that good turn, I say if yt Sun begin to warm thee, remember
the cold which thou made me suffer, which if thou can mingle with that
heat, no doubt thou shall feel the same more temperate. The comfortless woman
seeing that the Scholars words tended but to cruel end, began to weep and
said: Now then, since nothing can move thee to take pity for my sake, at lest
wise for the love of her, whom thou say to be of better discretion than I,
take some compassion: For her sake (I say) whom thou call thy friend, pardon
me and bring hither my clothes yt I may put them on, and cause me if it please
thee to come down from hence. Then the Scholar began to laugh, and seeing yt it
was a good while past. (...). of the clock, he answered: Well go to, for yt
woman's sake I cannot well say nay, or refuse thy request, tell me where thy
garments be, and I will go seek them, and cause thee to come down: She believing
that, was somewhat comforted, and told him the place where she had bestowed
the^. And the Scholar went out of the Toure, and commanded his servant to
tarry there, and to take heed that none went in until he came again. Then he
went to one of his friends houses, where he well refreshed himself, and
afterward when he thought time, he laid him down to sleep. All that space
mistress Helena which was still upon the Toure, and reco^forted with a little
foolish hope, sorrowful beyond measure, began to sit down, seeking some
shadowed place to bestow her self, and with bitter thoughts and heavy chere in
good devotion, waited for his coming, now musing, now weping, the^ hoping, and
suddenly dispairing yt Scholars return with her clothes: and cha^ging from one
thought to an other, like one that was werie of travel, and had taken no rest
all the night, she fell into a little (...). But yt sun which was passing hot,
being about (...), glau^ced his burning beams upon her (...) body and bare
head, with such force, as not only it singed yt flesh in sight, but also did
chip and parch the same, with such rosting heat, as she which soundly slepte,
was constrained to wake: and feeling that raging warmth, desirous somewhat to
remove her self, she thought in turning yt al her roasted skin had opened and
broken, like unto a skyn of parchment holden against the fire: besides which
pain extreme, her head began to ache, with such vehemence, as it seem to be
knocked in pieces: And no marvel, for the pament of the Toure was so passing
hot, as neither upon her feet, or by other remedy, she could find place of
rest. Wherefore without power to abide in one place, she still removed weping
bitterly. And moreover, for that no wind did blow, the Toure was filled with
such a swarm of Flies and Gnats, as they lighting upon her parched flesh, did
so cruelly bite and sting her, that every of them seemed worsse than the prick
of a needle, which made her to bestirre her hands, incessantly to beat them
off, cursing still her self, her life, her friend and Scholar. And being thus
and with such pain bitte^ and afflicted with the vehement heat of the Sun, with
the flies and gnats, hungry, and much more thirsty, assailed with a thousand
grievous thoughts, she arose up, and began to look about her, if she could hear
or see any per son, purposing whatsoever came of it to call for help. But her
ill fortune had taken away all this hoped means of her relief: for the
husbandmen and other laborers were all gone out of the fields to shrowde
themselves from heat, sparing their trauail abroad, to thresh their corn, and
do other things at home, by reason whereof, she neither saw or heard any thing,
except Butterflies, humble bees, crickets, and the river of Arno, which making
her lust to drink of ye water, quenched her thirst nothing at all, but rather
did augment the same. She saw be sides in many places, woods, shadows and
houses, which likewise did breed her double grief, for desire she had unto
the same. But what shall we speak any more of this unhappy woman? The Sun
above, and the hot Toure payment below, with the bitings of the flies and
gnats, had on every part so dressed her tender corpse, that where before the
whiteness of her body did pass the darkness of the night, the same was
become red, all arrayed and spotted with gore blood, that to the beholder and
viewer of her state, she seemed the most ill favored thing of the world: and
remaining in this plight, without hope or council, she looked rather for death
tha^ other comfort. The Scholar after the clock had sounded three in the after
noone, awaked, and remembering his Lady, went to the Toure to see what was
become of her, and sent his man to dinner, that had eaten nothing all that day.
The Gentlewoman hearing the Scholar, repaired so feeble and tormented as she
was, unto the trap door, and sitting upon the same, pitifully weeping began to
say: Rinieri, thou art beyond measure revenged on me, for if I made thee freese
all night in mine open court, thou have tosted me to day upon this Toure, nay
rather burnt, and with heat consumed me: and besides that, to die and stern
for hunger and thirst. Wherefore I pray thee for Gods sake to come up, and since
my heart is faint to kill my self, I pray thee heartely to do the same. For
above all things I desire to die, so great and bitter is the torment which I
endure. And if thou will not show me that favor, yet cause a glass of water to
be brought unto me, yt I may moisten my mouth, since my tears be not able to
cool the same so great is the drouth and heat I have within. Well knew the
Scholar by her voice, her weak estate, and saw besides the most part of her
body all tosted with the Sun: by the view whereof, and humble suit of her,
he conceived a little pity. Notwithstanding he answered her in this wise:
Wicked woman thou shall not die with my hands, but of thine own, if thou
desire the same, and so much water shall thou have of me, for cooling of thine
(...), as dampened Dives had in hell at Lazarus hands, when he lifted up his
cry to Abraham, holding that saved wight within his blessed bosom, or as I had
fire of thee for easing of my cold. The greater is my grief that the
vehemence of my cold must be cured with the heat of such a stinking carrion
beast, and thy heat healed with the coldness of most soote and sauerous water
distilled from the orient Rose. And where I was in danger to lose my limbs
and life, thou will renew thy beauty like the Serpent when he casts of his
skin. Oh I miserable wretch (said the woman) God give him such beauty gotten
in such wise, that wishes me such evil. But (thou more cruel than any other
beast) what heart have thou, thus like a Tyrant to deal with me? What more
grievous pain could I endure of thee, or of any other, than I do, if I had
killed and done to death thy parents, or whole race of thy stock and kin with
most cruel torments. Truly I know not what greater cruelty could be used
against a Trayter which had sacked or put a whole City to the sword, than that
thou have done to me, to make my flesh to be the food and roast meat of the
Sun, and the bait for licorous flies, not (...) to reach hither a simple
glass of water, which would have been granted to the (...) thief and
manqueller, when they be haled forth to hanging, yea wine most commonly, if
they (...) yt same. Now for that I see thee still remain in (...) mind, (...)
that my passion can nothing move thee, I will prepare patiently to (...) my
death, that God may have mercy on my soul, whom I humbly do beseech with his
righteous eyes to behold that cruel fact of thine. And with those words,
she approached with pain to the middle of ye terrasse, despairing to escape that
burning heat, and not only once, but a thousand times, (besides her other
sorrows) she thought to sown for thirst, and bitterly wept without ceasing,
complaining her missehappe.

But being almost night, the Scholar thought he had done enough, wherefore he
took her clothes, and wrapping the same within his servants cloak, he went home
to the Gentlewomans house, where he found before the gate, her maid sitting
all sad and heavy, of whom he asked where her mistress was. Sir (said she) I
cannot tell, I thought this morning to find her a bed, where I left her yester
night, but I cannot find her there, nor in any other place, ne yet can tell
whether to go seek her, which makes my heart to throbbe some misfortune
chanced unto her. But (sir quod she) can not you tell where she is? The
Scholar answered: I would thou had been with her in the place where I
left her, that I might have been revenged on thee so well, as I am of her. But
believe assuredly, that thou shall not escape my hands until I pay thee thy
deserte, to the intent hereafter in mocking other, thou may have cause to
remember me. When he had said so, he willed his man to give the maid her
mistress clothes, and then did bid her to seek her out if she would. The
servant did his masters commandment, and the maid having received them,
knew them by and by, and marking. well the Scholars words, she doubted least
he had slain her mistress, and much (...) she had to refrain from crying
out. And the Scholar being gone, (...) took her mistress garments and ran
unto the Toure.

That day by hap, one of the Gentlewomans laboring men, had two of his
Hogs run a stray, and as he went to seek them (a little while after the
Scholars departure) he approached near the Toure, looking round about if he
might see them. In the busy search of whom he heard the miserable plaint
that the unhappy woman made, wherefore so loud as he could, he cried out:
Who weepeth there above? the woman knew the voice of her man, and calling him
by his name, she said unto him: Go home I pray thee to call my maid, and
cause her to come up hither unto me. The fellow knowing his mistress voice,
said unto her: what Dame, who has borne you up so (...)? your maid has
sought you all this day, and who would have thought to find you there? He then
taking the staves of the ladder, did set it up against the Toure as it ought to
be, and bound the steps that were wanting, with fastenings of Willowe
twigges, and such like pliant stuff as he could find. And at that instant
the maid came thither, who so soon as she was entered the Toure, not able to
forbear her voice, beating her hands, she began to cry: Alas sweet mistress
where be you? she hearing the voice of her maid answered so well as she
could: Ah (sweet wenche) I am here above, cry no more, but bring me hither
my clothes.

When the maid heard her speak, by and by for joy, in haste she mounted up
the Ladder, which the labourer had made ready, and with his help gate up to
the ferrasse of the Toure, and seeing her Mistress resembling not a humane
body, but rather a wedden faggot half consumed with fire, all weary and
withered, lying a long stark naked upon the ground, she began with her nails
to wreke the (...) upon her face, and wept over her with such (...) as (...)
she had been dead. But her Dame prayed her for Gods sake to hold her peace,
and to help her to make her ready: and understanding by her that no man knew
where she was become, except they which carried home her clothes, and the
laborer that was present there, she was some what recomforted, and prayed them
for Gods sake to say nothing of that chance to any person. The laborer after
much talk and request to his mistres, to be of good cheer, when she was risen
up, carried her down upon his neck, for that she was not able to go so far,
as out of the Toure. The poor maid which came behind, in going down the
ladder without taking heed, her foot failed her, and falling down to the
ground, she brake her thigh, for grief whereof she began to rore and cry out
like a Lion. Wherefore the labourer having placed his dame upon a green bank,
went to see what the maid did aile, and perceiving that she had broken her
thigh, he carried her likewise unto that bank, and placed her be sides her
mistress, who seeing one mischief upon another to chance, and that she of
whom she hoped for greater help, than of any other, had broken her thigh
sorrowful beyond measure, renewed her cry so miserably, as not only the
labourer was not able to comfort her, but he himself began to weep for
company. The Sun having travailed into his Western course, and taking his
farewell by settling himself to rest, was at yt point of going down. And the
pore desolate woman unwilling to be benighted, went home to the laborers house,
where taking two of his brothers and his wife, returned to fetch the maid and
carried her home in a chair. Then cheering up his dame with a little fresh
water, and many fair (...), (...) carried her up upon his neck into a chamber,
afterward his wife made her warm drinks and meats, and putting of her
clothes, laid her in her bed, and took order that the mistress and maid that
night were carried to Florence, where the mistress full of lies devised a tale
all out of order of that which chanced to her and her maid, making her
brethren, her sisters, and other her neighbors believe, that by flush of
lightning and evil sprites, her face and body were blistered, and the maiden
stricken under the arse bone with a Thunderbolt. Then Physicians were (...) for,
who not without great grief and pain to the woman (which many times left her
skin sticking to the sheets) cured her cruel fever, and other her diseases,
and likewise the maid of her thigh: which caused the Gentlewoman to forget her
lover, and from that time forth wisely did beware and take heed whom she did
mock, and where she did bestow her love. And the Scholar knowing yt the maid
had broken her thigh, thought himself sufficiently (...), joyfully passing by
them both many times in silence. Behold the reward of a foolish wanton widow
for her morkes and flouts, thinking that no great care or more provident heed
ought to be taken in jesting with a Scholar, than with any other common person,
nor well remembering how they (...) know (not all, I say, but the greatest part)
where the Devil holds his tail: and therefore take heed good wives and
widows, how you give your selves to mockes and daliaunce specially of
Scholars. But now turn we to another widow that was no amorous dame, but a
sober matrone a motherly gentlewoman, yt by pity and money redeemed and
rau^somed a Kings son out of miserable captivity, being utterly abandoned of
all his friends. The manner and means how, the Nouel ensuing shall she we.

Camiola and Rolande.
A Gentlewoman (...) widow called CAMIOLA, of her own mind raunsomed
ROLANDE, the kings son of Sicilia, of purpose to have him to her husband, who
when he was redeemed, unkindly denied her, against whom very (...) she
inueyed, and although the (...) proved him to be her husband, yet for his
vnkindenesle, she utterly refused him.

The. xxxij. Nouel.
BVsa a Gentlewoman of Apulia, maintained ten thousand Roman soldiers within
the walls of Cannas, that were the remnaunt of the army after yt overthrow
there: and yet her state of richesse was safe and nothing deminished, and left
thereby a worthy testimony of liberality as Valerius Maximus affirms. If
this worthy woman Busa for liberality is commended by ancient authors: if she
deserve a monument among famous writers for that splendent virtue which so
brightly blasoneth the Heroical natures of Noble dames, then may I be so bold
amongs these Nouels to bring in (as it were by the hand) a widow of Messina,
that was a gentlewoman borne, adorned with passing beauty and virtues. Amongs
yt rank of which her comely qualities, the virtue of liberality glistered like
the morning star after the night has cast of his dark and cloudie mantell.
This gentlewoman remaining in widows state, and hearing tell that one of the
sons of Federick, and brother to Peter that was then king of the said Island
called Rolande, was carried prisoner to Naples, and there kept in miserable
captivity, and not like to be redeemed by his brother for a displeasure
conceived, nor by any other, pitying the state of the young Gentleman, and moved
by her gentle and courageous disposition, and specially with the virtue of
liberality, raunsomed the said Rolande, and (...) no interest or usury for the
same, but him to husband, that ought upon his knees to have made suit to be her
slave and servant for respect of his miserable state of imprisonment. An
affiaunce between them was concluded, and he redeemed, and (...) he was
returned, he falsed his former faith, and cared not for her. For which unkind
part, she before his friends inueyeth against that ingratitude, and utterly for
saketh him, when (sore ashamed) he would very feign have recovered her good
will. But she like a wise Gentlewoman well waying his inconstant mind before
marriage, lusted not to taste, or put in proof the fruits and success thereof.
The entire discourse of whom you shall briefly and presently understand.

Camiola a widow of the City of Siena, yt daughter of a gentle Knight called
Signor Lorenzo (...), was a woman of great renoume and fame, for her beauty,
liberality and shame fastness, and led a life in Messina, (an ancient City
of (...)) no less commendable than famous, in the company of her parents
contenting her self with one only husband, while she lived, which was in the
time when Federick the third was king of that (...): and after their death she
was an heir of very great wealth and richesse, which were always by her
co^serued and kept in marvelous honest sort. Now it chanced that after the
death of Federick, Peter succeding, by his commandment a great army by sea
was equipped from (...), under the conduct of John County of Chiaramonte, (the
most renewmed in those days in feats of war,) for to aid the people of
Lippari, which were so strongly and earnestly besieged, as they were almost all
dead and consumed for hunger. In this army, over and besides those that were in
pay, many Barons and Gentlemen willingly went upon their own proper costs and
charges, as well by sea as land, only for fame, and to be renowned in arms.
This Castle of Lippari was assaulted by Godefrey of Squilatio a valiant man,
and at that time Admiral to Robert (...) of Jerusalem and Sicile: which
Godefrey by long siege and assault had so (...) (...) people within, as daily
he hoped they would surrender. But having advertisement (by certain Brigandens
which he had sent abroad to scour the seas) that the enemies army (which was
far greater than his) was at hand, after that he had assembled al his navy
together in one sure place, he expected the event of fortune. The enemies so
soon as they were seized and possessed of the place, without any resistaunce
of (...) places abandoned by Godefrey, carried into the city at their pleasure
all their victualles, which they brought with them for which good hap and
chance the said Count John being very much encouraged and puffed up with
pride, offered battle to Godefrey. Wherefore he not refusing the same, being a
man of great courage, in (...) night time fortified his army with boordes,
timber, and other rampires, and having put his navy in good order, he
encoraged his men to fight, and to do valiantly the next day, which done, he
caused the Ankers to be wayed, and giving the sign, turned the prowess of
(...) ships against (...) (...) army, but Count John who thought that
Godefrey would not fight, and durst not once look upon (...) great army of the
Sicilians, did not put his fleet in order of fight, but rather in readiness
to pursue the ennimies. But seeing the courage and the approach of them that
came against him, began to fear, his heart almost failing him, and (...) him
that he had required his enemy to that which he thought never to have
obtained. In such wise as mistrusting the battle, with troubled mind,
changing the order given, and notwithstanding not to seem altogether
fearful, incontinently caused his ships to be put into order after the best
manner he could for so little time, himself giving the sign of battle. In the
mean while their enemies being approached near unto them, and making a very
great noise with cries and shoutes furiously entered with the prowess of the
ships amongs the Sicilians, which came slowly forth, and having first
thrown their (...) and grapples to stay them, they began the fight with
Darts, Crossebowes and other shot, in such sort as the Sicilians being amazed
for the sudden mutacion of Council, and all enuironned with fear, and the
soldiers of Godefrey perceiving (...) same, entered their enemies ships, and
coming to blows, even in a moment all was filled with blood, by reason
whereof the Sicilians then despairing of them selves, and they that feared
turning the (...), fled away: but nevertheless the victory reclining toward
Godefrey, many of their ships were drowned, many taken, and diverse Pinnasses
by force of their (...) escaped. In that fight died few people, but many were
hurt, and John the captain general taken prisoner, and with him almost all the
Barons, which of their own accordes repaired to those wars, and besides a
great number of soldiers, many Ensigns as well of the field, as of the galleis,
and specially the maine standerd was taken. And in ye end, the Castle being
rendered after long voyages, and great fortunes by Sea, they were al chained,
carried to Naples and there imprisoned. Among those prisonners, there was a
certain Gentleman called Roland, the natural Son of king Federick deceased,
a young Prince very comely and valiant. Who not being redeemed, tarried alone in
prison very sorrowful to see all others discharged after they had paid their
ransom, and himself not to have wherewith to furnishe the same. For King
Pietro (to whom the care of him appertained by reason he was his brother) for
that his wars had no better success, and done contrary to his
commandment, conceived displeasure so well against him, as all others which
were at that battle. Now he then being prisoner without hope of any liberty,
by means of the dampishe prison, and his feet clogged with yrons, grew to be
sick and feeble. It chanced by fortune, that Camiola remembered him, and
seeing him forsaken of his brethren, had compassion upon his missehappe, in
such wise, as she purposed (if honestly she might do the same) to set him at
liberty. For the accomplishment whereof without prejudice of her honor, she
saw none other ways but to take him to husband. Wherefore she sent diverse
unto him secretly, to confer if he would come forth upon that condition,
whereunto he willingly agreed. And performing each due ceremony, under
promised faith, upon the gift of a ring willingly by a deputy he espoused
Camiola, who with so much diligence as she could, paid two thousand Crowns
for his ransom, and by that means he was delivered.

When he was returned to Messina, he repaired not to his wife, but fared as
though there had never been any such talk between them, whereof at the
beginning Camiola very much marvelled, and afterward knowing his
unkindness, was greatly offended in her heart against him. Notwithstanding,
to the intent she might not seem to be grieved (...) reason, before she
proceeded any further, caused him lovingly to be talked withal, and to be
exhorted by following his promise to consummate the marriage. And seeing that he
denied ever any such contract to be made, she caused him to be summoned before
(...) (...) judge, by whom sentence was given that he was her husband by (...)
of his own letters, and by witness of certain other personages of good
reputation, which afterward he himself confessed, his face blushing for shame,
for that he had forgotten such a manifest benefit and good turn. When (...)
kind part of Camiola done unto him, was thoroughly known, he was by his
brethren reproved and checked for his villainy: (...) by their instigation and
the persuasion of his friends, he was contented by humble request to desire
Camiola to perform the (...). But the gentle (...) which was of great courage,
in the presence of diverse (...) were with him, when he required her thereunto
answered him in this manner: Roland I have great cause to render thanks to
almighty God, for (...) it pleased him to declare unto me the proof of (...)
unfaithfulness, before thou (...) by any means contaminate (under the color
of marriage) the purity of my body, and that through his (...), by whose most
holy name thou (...) about to abuse me by false and perjured oath, I have
foreseen thy (...) and deceit, wherein I believe that I have gained more, than
I (...) have done by thee in marriage. I suppose that when thou were in prison,
thou did mean no less, than now by effect thou she west, and did
think that I, forgetting of what house I was, presumptuously desired a husband
of the royal blood, and therefore wholly inflamed with thy love, did
purpose to begile me by denying the trothe, when thou had recovered
liberty through my money, and thereby to reserve thy (...) for some other of
more famous alliance, being restored to thy former degree. And hereby thou have
given proof of thy will, and what mind thou had so to do if thine
ability had been correspondent. But God, who from the lofty skies does behold
the humble and low, and who forsakes none that hops in him, knowing the
sincerity of my conscience, has given me the grace by little travail, to
break the bands of thy deceiptes, to discover thine ingratitude, and make
manifest thine infidelity, which I have not done only to display ye wrong
toward me, but yt thy brethren and other thy friends might from he^ceforth
know what thou art, what affia^ce they ought to repose in thy faith, and
thereby what thy friends ought to look for, and what thine enemies ought to
fear. I have lost my money, thou thy good name. I have lost ye hope which I
had of thee, thou the favor of ye king and of thy brethren: I the expectation
of my marriage, thou a true and constant wife: I the fruits of charity, thou ye
gain of amity: I an unfaithful husband, thou a most pure and loyal wife. Now
the Ge^tlewomen of Sicilia do marvel at my magnificence and beauty, and by
praises advance the same up into the heavens: and contrariwise every of the^
do mock thee, and deem thee to be infamous. The renoumed writers of each
country will place me amo^gs the rank of ye noblest dames, where thou shall be
depressed and thrown down amongs the heaps of ye most unkind. True it is,
that I am somewhat deceived by delivering out of prison, a young man of royal
and noble race, instead of whom I have redeemed a rascal, a lier, a (...) of
his faith, and a cruel beast: and take heed hardily how thou do greatly (...)
thy self, and I wish thee not to think that I was moved to draw thee out of
prison, and take thee to husband for the good qualities that were in thee, but
for the memory of ancient benefits which my father received of thine (if
Federike, a king of most sacred remembrance were thy father, for I can scarsly
believe, that a son so dishonest should proceed from so noble a gentleman as
was that famous prince.) I know well thou think that it was an unworthy
thing, that a Widow not being of the royal blood, should have to husband, the
son of a (...), so strong and of so goodly personage, which I willyngly
confess: but I would have thee a little to make me answer (at lest wise if thou
can by reason) when I paid so great a sum of money to deliver thee from
bondage and captivity, where was then the nobility of thy royal race? where
was thy force of youth? and where thy beauty? if not that they were closed up
in a terrible prison, where thou wast detained in bitter grief and sorrow, and
there with those natural qualities, covered also in obscure darkness, that
compassed thee round about. The ill favored noise and ianglyng of thy chains,
the deformity of thy face forced for lack of light, and the stench of the
infected prison that provoked sickness, and the forsaking of thy friends, had
quite debased all these perfections wherewith now thou seem to be so lusty.
Thou thoughtest me then to be worthy, not only of a young man of a royal
blood, but of a God, if it were possible to have him, and so soon as (thou
contrary to al hope) did once (...) thy natural country, like a most
pestilent person without any difficulty, haste changed thy mind, never since
thou wast delivered, (...) did call into thy remembrance how I was that (...),
that I was she (alone) that did remember thee: that I was (she alone) that had
compassion on thy missehap, and that I was only she, who for thy health did
imploye all the goods she had. I am, I am (I say) that Camiola, who by her
money raunsomed thee out of the hands of the Capital enemies of thine
auncesters, from fetters, from prison: and finally delivered thee from misery
extreme, before thou were altogether settled in despair. I reduced thee again
to hope, I have revoked thee into thy country, I have brought thee into ye
royal palace, and restored thee into thy former estate, and of a prisoner
weak, and ylfauored, have made thee a young Prince, strong, and of fair
aspecte. But wherefore have I remembered these things, whereof thou ought to
be very mindful thy self, and which thou art not able to deny? Since that
for so great benefits thou have rendered me such thanks, as being my husband
in deed, thou had the face to deny me marriage, already contracted by the
deposition of honest witnesses, and approved by letters signed with thine own
hand. Wherefore did thou despise me that has delivered thee? Yea and if
thou could have stained the name of her with infamy, that was thine only
refuge and defender, yea and would gladly have given cause to the common
people, to think less than honesty of her. Art thou ashamed (thou man of
little judgment) to have to wife a wydow, the daughter of a knight? (...) how
far better had it been for thee to have been ashamed to break thy promised
faith, to have despised the holy and dreadful name of God, and to have
declared by thy curssed unkindness, how full fraught thou art with vice. I do
confess in deed that I am not of the royal blood: not withstanding from the
cradle, being trained and brought up in the company of kings wives and
daughters, no great marvel it is, if I have endued and put on a royal heart
and manners, that is able to get and purchase royal nobility. But wherefore do
I multiply so many words? No no I will be very facile and easy in that wherein
thou have ben to me so difficult and hard by resisting the same with all thy
power. Thou have refused heretofore to be mine, and having vanquished thee, to
be such, frankly of mine own accord, I do grant that thou art not. Abide
(on Gods name) with thy royal nobility, nevertheless (...) with the spot of
infidelity. Make much of thy youthly lustiness, and of thy transitory
beauty, and I shall be contented with my widow apparel, and shall leave the
riches which god has given me to heirs more honest tha^ those yt might have
come of thee. Auaunt thou wicked young man, and since thou art co^pted to be
unworthy of me, learn with thine own expense, by what subtlety and guiles thou
may betray other dames, suffiseth it for me to be once deceived. And I for
my part fully determine never to tarry longer with thee, but rather chastely to
live without husband, which life I deem far more excellent than with thy match
continually to be coupled.

After she had spoken these words, she departed from him, and from that time
forth, it was impossible either by prayers, or admonitions to cause her change
her holy intent. But Rolande all confused, repenting himself to late of his
ingratitude, blamed of (...) man, his eyes fired upon the ground, (...) not
only the presence of his brethren but of all (...) of people, daily led
from that time forth, a most miserable life, and never durst by reason to
demand her again to wife, whom he had by disloyalty refused. The king and
the other barons, maruelling of the noble heart of the Lady, singularly
commended her, and exalted her praises up into ye skies, uncertain
nevertheless wherein she was most worthy of praise, either for that (contrary
to the covetous nature of women) she had raunsomed a young man with so great a
sum of money, or else after she had delivered him, and sentence given that he
was her husband, she so courageously refused him, as an unkind man, unworthy
of her company.

But leave we for a time, to talk of widows, and let us see what the Captain
and Lieutenant of Nocera can allege upon the discourse of his cruelties,
which although an over cruel history, yet depainteth the success of those
that apply their minds to the sportes of Love, such Love I mean, as is
wantonly placed, and directed to no good purpose, but for glutting of the
bodies delight, which both corrupts nature, makes feeble the body, lewdely
spends the time, and specially offends him who^ makes proclamation, that
whooremongers and adulterers shall never inherit his kingdom.

The Lords of Nocera
Great cruelties chanced to the Lords of NOCERA, for adultry by one of them
committed with the Captains wife of the forte of that City, with an
enterprise moved by the Captain to the Citizens of the same for rebellion, and
the good and duetiful answer of them: with other pitiful (...) rising of that
notable and outrageous vice of whoredom.

The. xxxiij. Nouel.
THE furious rage of a husband offended for the chastity violated in his wife,
surpasses all other, and ingendreth malice against the doer whatsoever he be.
For if a Gentleman, or one of good nature, cannot abide an other to do him any
kind of displeasure, and much less to hurt him in his body. how is he able to
endure to have his honor touched, specially in that part which is so near
unto him as his own soul? Man and (...) being as it were one body and one
will, wherein men of good judgment cannot well like the opinion of those good
fellows which say that the honor of one that is lusty and coragious,
depends not upon the fault of a foolish woman. For if that were true which
they so lightly vaunt, I would demand wherefore they be so animated and angry
against them which adorn their head with braunched horns, the Ensigns of a
Cuckolde. And truly nature has so well provided in that behalf, as the very
savage beasts do fight, and suffer death for such honest iealosie. Yet will
I not praise, but rather accuse above all faulty men, those that be so fondly
jealous, as each thing troubles their mind, and be afraid of the flies very
shadow that buzze about their faces. For by paining and molesting themselves
with a thing that so little does please and content them, until manifest and
evident proof appear, they display the folly of their minds imperfection, and
the weak steadfastness of their fantasy. But where the fault is known, and
the vice discovered, where the husband sees himself to receive damage in the
soundest part of his moveable goods, reason it is yt he therein be advised by
timely deliberation and sage foresight, rather than with headlo^g fury and
raging rashness to hazard the loss of his honor, and the ruin of his life and
goods. And like as the faith and sidelitie of the undefiled bed has in all
times worthily been commended: even so he that polluteth it by infamy, bears
the penance of the same. Portia the daughter of Cato, and wife of Brutus shall
be praised for ever, for the honest and inviolable love which she bare unto her
beloved husband, almost like to lose her life when she heard tell of his
certain death. The pudicitie of Paulina the wife of Seneca appeared also, when
she assayed to die by ye same kind of death wherewith her husband violently
was tormented by the unjust commandment of the most cruel and horrible
Emperor Nero. But whores and harlottes having honest husbands, and well
allied in kin and ligneage, by abandoning their bodies, do prodigally
consume their good renown: If they escape the Magistrates, or avoid the wrath
of offended husbands for the wrong done unto them, yet they leave an immortal
slander of their wicked life, and youth thereby may take example as well to
shun such shameless women, as to follow those Dames that be chaste and
virtuous. Now of this contempt which the wife bears to her husband, do rise
very many times notorious slanders, and such as are accompanied with passing
cruelties: wherein the husband ought to moderate his heat and calm his choler,
and soberly to chastise the fault, for so much as excessive wrath and anger,
do Eclipse in man the light of reason, and such rages do make them to be
semblable unto brute and reasonlesse beasts: Meet it is to be angry for
things done contrary to right and equity, but te^perance and modesty is
necessary in all occurrentes, be they with us, or against us. But if to resist
anger in those matters, it be hard and difficulte, it is also to be thought
that the greater impossibility there is in the operation and effect of any
good thing, the greater is the glory that banquisheth the affection and
mastereth the first motion of the mind which is not so impossible to govern,
and subdue to reason, as many do esteem.

A wise man then cannot so far forget his duty, as to exceed the bounds
and limits of reason, and to suffer his mind to wander from the siege of
Temperaunce, which if he do after he has well mingled Water in his Wine, he
may chance to find cause of repentance, and by desire to repair his
offense, augment his fault, sin being so prompt and ready in man, as ye crime
which might be covered with certain justice, and colored by some law or
righteous cause, makes him many times to fall into detestable (...) and sin,
so contrary to mildness and modesty, as the very tyraunts themselves would
abhor such wickedness. And to the end that I do not trouble you with
allegation of infinite numbres of examples, serving to this purpose, ne render
occasion of tediousness for you to reuolue so many books, I am contented for
this present, to bring in place an History so over cruel, as the cause was
reasonable, if duty in the one had been considered, and rage in the other
bridled and forseene, who madly murdered and offended those that were nothing
guilty of the fact, which touched him so near. And although that these be
matters of love, yet ye reader ought not to be grieved nor take in evil part,
yt we have still that argument in hand. For we do not hereby go about to erect
a scholehouse of love, or to teach youth the wanton toys of the same: but
rather bring for the these examples to withdraw that pliant and tender age of
this our time, from the pursuit of like follies, which may (were they not in
this sort warned) engender like effects that these our Histories do recompt,
and whereof you shall be partakers by reading the discourse that follows.

Ye must then understand, that in the time yt Braccio Montane, and Sforza
Attendulo flourished in Italy, and were the chiefest of yt Italian men of
war, there were three Lords and brethren, which held under their authority
and puissance Fcligno, Nocera, and Treuio, parcel of the Dukedom of Spoleto,
who governed so lovingly their lands together, as without division, they
maintained themselves in their estate, and lived in brotherly concord. The
name of the eldest of these three Lords, was Nicholas, the second Caesar, and
the youngest Conrade, gentle personages, wise and well-beloved so well of the Noble
men their neighbors, as also of the Citezens that were under their obeysaunce,
who in the end showed greater loyalty toward them, than those that had sworn
their faith, and had given pledges for confirmation thereof, as ye shall
perceive by reading that which follows. It chanced that the eldest oftentimes
repairing from Foligno to Nocera, and lodging still in ye Castle, beheld with
a little too much wanton eye, the wife of his lieuetenaunt which was placed
there with a good number of dead pays, to guard the forte, and keep under the
Citizens, if by chance (as it happens upon the new erection of estates)
they attempted some new enterprise against their sovereign Lords. Now this
Gentlewoman was fair, and of better grace singularly delighting to be looked
upon: which occasioned the Lord Nicholas, by perceiving the wantonness and
good will of the mistress of the Castle, not to refuse so good occasion,
determining to prosecute the enjoying of her, that was ye bird after which he
hunted, whose beauty and good grace had deeply wounded his mind: wherein if he
forgotte his duty, I leave for all men of good judgment to consider. For me
think that this young Lord ought rather singularly to love and cherishe his
Lieuetenaunt that faithfully and trustily had kept his Castle and Forte, than
to prepare against him so traitorous an attempt and ambushe. And if so be his
said Lieuetenaunt had been accused of felony, misprision, or Treason (yet to
speak the troth) he might have delivered the charge of his Castle unto an
other, rather tha^ to suborne his wife to folly. And ought likewise to have
considered that the Lieuetenaunt by putting his trust in him, had just cause to
complain for rauishing his honor from him in the person of his wife, whom
be ought to have loved without any affection to infrindge the holy law of
amity, the breaking whereof dissolueth the duty of each servant toward
his sovereign Lord and master. To be short, this blinded lover yelding no
resistance to love, and the foolish conceit which alters the judgments of
the wisest, suffered his fancy to roue so far unto his appetites, as on a day
when the Lieuetenaunt was walked abroad into the Castle, to view the
Souldioures and dead pays (to pleasure him that sought the means of his
displeasure) he spoke to the Gentlewoman his wife in this manner: Gentlewoman,
you being wise and curtuous as each man knows, needful it is not to use
long or Rethorical Orations, for so much as you without further supply of talk
do clearly perceive by my looks, sighs and earnest viewes, the love that I
bear you, which without comparison nippeth my heart so near as none can feel
the parching pains, that the same poor portion of me does suffer. Wherefore
having no great leisure to let you further understand my mind, it may please
you to show me so much favor as I may be received for him, who having the
better right of your good grace, may there withal enjoy that secret
acquaintance, which such a one as I am deserves: of whom ye shall have
better experience if you please to accept him for your own. This mistress
Lieuetenaunt which compted her self happy to be beloved of her Lord, and who
took great pleasure in that adventure, albeit that she desired to let him
know the good will that she bare unto him, yet dissembled the matter a little,
by answearing him in this wise: Your disease sir is sudden, if in fo little
time you have felt such excess of malady: but perchance it is your heart
that being over tender, has lightly received the prick, which no doubt will
so soon vanishe, as it has made so ready entry. I am very glad (Sir) that
your heart is so merrily disposed to daliaunce, and can find some matter to
contriue the superfluity of time, the same altering the diversity of man's
complexion, accordingly as the condition of the hourly planet guides the
nature of every wight. It is altogether otherwise (answered he) for being
(...) hither as a (...) and Lord, I am become a servant and slave: And briefly
to speak my mind, if you have not pity upon me, the disease which you call
sudden, not only will take increase, but procure the death and final ruin
of my heart. Ah sir (said the Gentlewoman) your grief is not so deeply
rooted, and death so present to succeed, as you affirm, ne yet so ready to
give over the place, as you protest, but I see what is the matter, you desire
to laugh me to scorn, and your heart craves something to solace it self which
cannot be idle, but must employ the vacant time upon some pleasant toys. You
have touched the prick (answered the Lover) for it is you in deed whereupon
my heart does joy, and you are the cause of my laughter and passetime, for
otherwise all my delights were displeasures, and you also by denying me to be
your servant, shall abbreuiate and shorten my living days, who only reioyseth
for choice of such a mistress. And how (replied she) can I be assured of that
you say? the disloyalty and infidelity of man being in these days so fast
united, and following one another, as the shadow does the body, wheresoever
it goes. Only experience (said he) shall make you know what I am, and shall
teach you whether my heart is any thing different from my words: and I dare
be bold to say, that if you vouchsafe to do me the pleasure to (...) me for
your own, you may make your vaunt to have a Gentleman so faithful for your
friend, as I esteem you to be discrete, and as I desire to (...) you (...) the
effect of mine affection, by such some honest order as may be devised. Sir
(said she) it is well and (...) spoken of you, but yet I think it strange for
such a Gentleman as you be, to debase your honor to so pore a Gentlewoman, and
to go about both to dishonor me, and to put my life in peril. God forbid
(answered the Lord Nicholas) that I be cause of any slander, and rather had I
die my self than minister one simple occasion whereby your fame should be
brought in question. Only I do pray you to have pity upon me, and by using
your courtesy, to satisfy that which my service and faithful friendship does
constrain, and bind you for the comfort of him that loves you better than
himself. We will talk more thereof hereafter (answered the Lieuetenaunts wife)
and then will I tell you mine advise, and what resolution shall follow the
sum of your demand. How now Gentlewoman (said he) have you the heart to
leave me void of hope, to make me languish for the prorogation of a thing so
doubtful, as the delays (...) which love deferreth? I humbly pray you to tell
me whereunto I shall trust: to the intent that by punishing my heart for proof
of this enterprise, I may (...) also mine eyes by reuing from them the means
for ever more to see that which contenteth me best, and wherein (...) my solace,
leaving my mind full of desires, and my heart without final stay, upon yt
greatest pleasure that ever man (...) choose. The Gentlewoman would not loose a
Noble man so good and (...): whose presence already pleased her above all other
things, and who voluntarily had agreed to his request, by the only sign of her
gests and lokes, said unto him smiling with a very good grace: Do not accuse
my heart of lightness, nor my mind of (...) and treason, if to please and
obey you, I forget my duty, and abuse ye promise made unto my husband, for I
swear unto you (sir) by God, yt I have more forced my thought, and of long time
have constrained mine appetites in dissembling the love that I bear you, tha^ I
have received pleasure, by knowing my self to be beloved by one agreeable to
mine affection. For which cause you shall find me (being but a pore
Gentlewoman) more ready to do your pleasure, and to be at your commandment,
than any other yt lives be she of greater port and regard than I am. And who
to satisfy your request, shall one day sacrifice that fidelity to the jealous
fury of her husband. God defend (said the young Lord) for we shall be so
discrete in our doings, and so (...) shall communicate and talk together, as
impossible it is for any man to (...) the same. But if missehap will have it so,
and that some ill luck do discover our dealings, I have shift of ways to
color the same, and power to stop the mouths of them that dare presume to
clatter and have to do with our private conference. All yt I know well enough
sir (said she) but it is great simplicity in such things for a man to trust to
his authority, the forced inhibition whereof shall provoke more babble, than
rumor is able to spread for all his tattling talk of our secret follies.
Moreover I would (...) very glad to do what pleases you, so the same may be
without slander. For I had rather die, than any should take us in our
priuities and familier pastimes: let us be contented with the pleasure that the
(...) of our joy may grant, and not with such contentation as shall offend
us, by blotting the clerenesse of our (...) names. Concluding then yt time of
their new acquaintance, which was the next day at noone, when yt Lieutenant
did walk into the City, they ceased their talk for fear of his enteruiew.
Who (upon his return) doing reverence unto his Lord, told him that he knew
where a wild Boar did haunt, if it pleased him to see the passetime.
Whereunto the Lord Nicholas feigned lovingly to give ear (although against his
will) for so much as he thought the same hunting should be a delay for certain
days to the enjoying, (pretended and assured) of his beloved. But she that was
so much or more esprised with the raging and intolerable fire of love,
spedily found means to satisfy her lovers suit, but not in such manner as was
desired of either parts, wherefore they were constrained to defer the rest
until an other time. This pleasant beginning so allured the Lord of Nocera,
as under the pretense of hunting, there was no week that passed, but he came
to (...) the warrener of his Lieuetenaunt. And this order continuing without
(...) one little suspicion of their love, they governed themselves wisely in
the pursuit thereof. And the Lord Nicholas used the game and sport of Hunting,
and an infinite number of other exercises, as the running of the King and
Tennis, not so much thereby to find means to enjoy his Lady, as to avoid
occasion of iealosie in her husband, being a very familiar vice in all
Italians, the cloak whereof is very heavy to bear, and the disease troublesome
to sustain. But what? Like as it is hard to beguile an (...) in the accoumpt
of his money, for his continual watch over the same, and slumbering slepes upon
the books of his reckenings and accounts, so difficult it is to deceive the
heart of a jealous man, and specially when he is assured of the grief which
his head has conceived. Argus was never so clear eyed for all his hundred
eyes over Jupiters lemman, as those lovers be, whose opinions be ill affected
over the chastity of their wives. Moreover what fool or Ass is he, who
seeing such indiscreet familiarity of two lovers, the privy gestures, and
demeanors without witness, their stolen walks at untimely hours, and
sometimes their embraceme^ts to straight and common before servant, that would
not doubt of that which most secretly did pass? True it is that in England
(where liberty is so honestly observed as being alone or secret conversation
gives no cause of suspicion) yt same might have (...) borne withal. But in
Italy, where the parents themselves be for the most part suspected, (if there
had been no fact in deed committed) that familiarity of the Lord Nicholas,
with his Lieutenantes wife was not suffrable, but exceded the bounds of reason,
for so much as the commodity which they had chosen for pos sessing of their
love, (albeit the same not suspicious) animated them afterward to frequent
their familiarity and disport to fra^kly, and without discretion: which was yt
cause yt fortune (who never leaves yt joys of me^ without giving thereunto
some great alarm,) being envious of ye mutual delights of those. (...). lovers,
made yt husband to doubt of that which he would have disse^bled, if honor could
so easily be lost without reproach, as blood is shed with out peril of life. But yt
matter being so clear, as ye fault was evident, specially in the party which
touched him so near as himself, yt Lieuetenau^t before he would enterprise any
thing, and declare what he thought, (...) thoroughly to be resolved of yt which
he saw as it were (...) in a cloud, and by reason of his conceived opinion he
dealt so warely and wisely in those affairs, and was so subtle an espiall, as
one day when the lovers were at their game, and in their most strait and
secret embracements, he viewed them coupled with other leash, than he would
have wished, and colled with straighter bands than reason or honesty did
permit. He saw without being seen, wherein he felt a certain ease and
contentment, for being assured of that he doubted, and purposed to ordeine a
sour refection after their delightsome banquet, the simple lovers ignorant by
sign or (...), that their enterprises were discovered. And truly it had been
more tolerable and less hurtful for the Lieuetenaunt, if even then he had
perpetrated his vengeance, and punished them for their wickedness, than to
use the cruelty wherewith afterward he blotted his renoume, and foiled his
hands by Bedlem rage in the innocent blood of those that were not privy to the
folly, and less guilty of the wrong done unto him. Now the captain of the
Castle for all his dissimulation in covering of his grief, and his felony
and treason intended against his sovereign Lord, which he desired not yet
manifestly to appear, was not able any more from that time forth to speak so
lovingly unto him, nor with such respect and reverence as he did before,
which caused his wife thus to say unto her lover: My Lord I doubt very much
least my husband does perceive these our common practizes, and secret familiar
dealings, and that he has some hammer working in his head, by reason of the
countenance, and vncheereful entertainment which he shows to your Lordship,
wherefore mine advise is, yt you retire for a certain time to Foligno. In the
mean space I will mark and (...) if yt his alteration be conceived for any
matter against us, and wherefore his wo^ted lokes have put on this new
alteration and change. All which when I have (by my espial and secret
practice sounded) I will speedily advertise you, to the end that you may
provide for the safegarde of your faithful and loving servant. The young
Lord, who loved the Gentlewoman with all his heart, was attached with so
great grief, and driven into such rage, by hearing those wicked news, as
even presentely he would have known of his Lieuetenaunt, the cause of his
diswonted cheer. But weyghing the good advise which his woman had given him,
paused upon the same, and (...) her to do what she thought best. By reason
whereof, giving warning to his servants for his departure, he caused the
Lieutenaunt to be called before him, unto whom he said: Captain, I had thought
for certain days to sport and pass my time, but hearing tell that the Duke of
Camerino comes to Foligno, to debate with us of matters of importance, I am
constrained to depart, and do pray you in yt mean time to have good regard
unto our affairs, and if any news (...) chance, to advertise the same: with
all expedition. Sir (said the Captain) I am sorry that now when our passetime
of hunting might yield some good recreation unto your honor, that you do thus
forsake us, notwithstanding since it is your good pleasure, we will cease the
chase of the wild Bore till your return. In the mean time, I will make
ready the coardes and (...) (...) the taking of the same, that upon your
coming, nothing want for the furniture of our sport. The Lord Nicholas, seeing
his Lieutenant so pleasantly disposed, and so little bent to choler, or jealous
fantasy, was persuaded, that some other toy had rather occupied his mind,
than any suspicion between his wife and him. But the subtle husband searched
other means to be (...), than by killyng him alone, of whom he received that
dishonor, and was more crafty to enterprise, and more hardy to execute, than
the lovers were wise or well advised to preuente and wythstande his sleightes
and policies. And albeit that the wife (after the departure of her friend)
assayed to draw from him the cause of his altered cheer, yet could she
never learn, that her husband had any ill opinion of their love. For so
many times as talk was moved of the Lord Nicholas, he exalted his praise up
into the heavens, and commended him above all his (...). All which he did,
to beguile the policies of her, whom he saw to blushe, and many times
change color, when she heard him spoken of, to whom she bare better affection
than to her husband, unto who^ (in very deed) she did owe the faith and
integrity of her body. This was the very toil which he had laid to intrappe
those amorous persons, and purposed to rid the world of them by that means,
to remove from before his eyes, the shame of a (...) title, and to revenge the
injury done to his reputation. The Mistress of the Castle seeing that her
husband (as she thought) by no means did understand her (...), desired to
continue the pleasure, which either (...) them desired, and which made the
third to die of phrenesie, wrote to the Lord Nicholas, the letter that
follows.

My Lord, the fear I had, that my husband should perceive our love, caused me
to entreat you certain days past, to discontinue for a time, the
frequentatio^ of your own house, whereby I am not a little grieved, that
contrary to my will, I am defrauded of your presence, which is far more
pleasant unto me, than my husbands (...), who cease not continually to talk
of the honest behavior, and commendable qualities that be in you, and is sorry
for your departure, because he fears that you mislyke your entertainment,
which should be (says he) so grievous and noisome unto him, as death it self.
Wherefore I pray you (...), if it be possible, and that your affairs do suffer
you to come hither, to the end I may enjoy your (...) presence, and use the
liberty that our good hap has prepared, through the little iealosie of my
husband your Lieutenant: who I suppose before it be long will (...) you, so
great is his desire to make you passetime (...) hunting within your own land
and territory.

Fail not then to come, I beseech you, and we will so well consider the
government of our affairs, as the best sighted shall not once discrie ye
least suspicion thereof, recommending my self most humbly (after the best manner
I can) to your good lordship.

This Letter was delivered to a lackey to bear to the Lord Nicholas, and not
so privily done, but yt Lieutenant immediately espied the deceit, which the
sooner was disciphred, for so much as he daily lay in wait to find the
means to revenge the wrong done unto him, of purpose to beat the iron so long
as it was hot, and to execute his purpose before his wife took head, and
felt the endeavor of his enterprise. And because that she had assayed by
diverse ways to sound his heart, and feel whether he had conceived displeasure
against the Lord her lover, the day after wherein she had written to her
friend, he sent one of his men in post to the three Lords, to require them
to come the next day to see the passetyme of the (...) and greatest Wild
Bore, that long time was bredde in the Forrestes adioynyng unto Nocera, Albeit
that the Countreye was fair for (...), and that diverse times many fair Bores
(...) been encountered there.

But it was not for this, that he had framed his errand, but to trap in one
toil and snare the three brethren, whom he determined to sacrifice to the
altar of his vengeance, for the expiation of their elder brothers trespass,
and for soiling the nuptial bed of his servant. He was the wild Bore whom he
meant to strike, he was the pray of his insatiable and cruel appetite. If
the fault had been general of all three togethers, he had had some reason to
make them pass the bracke of one equal fortune, and to tangle them within one
net, both to prevent thereby (as he thought) his further hurt, and to chastise
their leude behavior. For many times (as lamentable experience teaches) Noble
men for the only respect of their nobility, make no conscence to do wrong to
the honor of them, whose reputation and honesty they ought so well to regard
as their own. Herein offended the good prince of the Jews David, when to use
his Bersabe without suspicion, he caused innocent Vrias to be slain, in lieu
of recompense for his good service, and diligent execution of his behests. The
children of the proud Roman King Tarquinius, did herein greatly abuse them
selves, when they violated that noble Gentlewoman Lucrece, whom all histories
do so much remember, and whose chastity, all famous writers do commend.
Upon such as they be, vengeance ought to be dove, and not to defile the hands
in the blood of innocents, as the parents and kinsemen of dead Lucrece did at
Rome, and this Lieutenant at Nocera, upon the brethren of him that had sent
him into Cornwall, without passing over the seas. But what? Anger proceeding
of such wrong, surmounteth al phrenesie, and excedeth all the bounds of reason,
and man's so deuoide of wits, by seeing the blot of defamation, to light upon
him, as he seeks al (...) to hurt and displease him that polluteth his
renoume. All the race of the Tarquines for like fact were banished Rome, for
the only brute whereof, the husband of the fair ravished wife, was
constrained to avoid the place of his nativity. Paris alone violated the body
of Menelaus the Lacedemouian King, but for revenge of the ravished Greek, not
only the glory and richesse of stately Troy, but also the most part of Asia
and Europa, was ouerturned and defaced, if credit may be given to the records
of the ancient. So in this fact of the Lieutenant, the Lord Nicholas alone,
had polluted his bed, but the revenge of the cruel man extended further, and
his fury raged so far, as the guiltless were in great danger to bear the
penance, which shall be well perceived by the discourse that follows. The
Captain then having sent his message, and being sure of his intent (no less
than if he already had the brethren within his hold, upon the point to couple
them together with his wife, to send them all in pilgrimage to visit the
faithful sort, that blason their loves in an other world, with Dido,
Phyllis, and such like, that more for despair than love, be passed the
straictes of death) caused to be called before him in a secret place, all the
soldiers of the Fort, and such as with whom he was sure to prevail, to whom
not without sheading forth some tears, and she wyng heavy countenance, he
spoke in this manner:

My Companions and friends, I doubt not but ye be abashed to see me wrapped in so
heavy plight, and appear in this form before you (that is to say) bewept,
heavy, panting with sighs, and al contrary to my custom, in other state and
manner, than my courage and degree require. But when ye shall understand the
cause, I am assured that the case which seems strange to you, shall be
thought just and right, and so will perform the thing wherein I shall employe
you. Ye know that the first point that a Gentleman ought to regard,
consists not only in repelling the (...) done unto the body, but rather it
behooves that the fight begin for the defense of his honor, which is a thing
that proceeds from the mind, and resorteth to the body, as the instrument to
work that which the spirit appoints. Now it is honor, for conservation
whereof, an honest man and one of good courage fears not to put himself in all
peril and danger of death, and loss of goods, referryng himself also to
the guarde of that which touches as it were our own reputation. In such
wise as if a good Captain do suffer his soldier to be a wicked man, a
robber, a murderer, and (...) exacter, he bears the note of dishonor albeit
in all his doings he governs his estate after the rule of honesty, and does
nothing that is unworthy his vocation. But what? he being a head united to such
me^bres, if the parts of that united thing be corrupt and naught, the head
must needs bear yt blot of the fault before referred to the whole body.
(...) (said he sighing) what part is more nere, and dearer to man, than that
which is given unto him for a pledge and comfort during his life, and which is
conjoined to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, to breath forth one
mind, and think with one heart and equal will. It is of the Wife that I
speak, who being the moytie of her husband, ye ought not to muse if I say,
that the honor of the one is the rest of the other, and the one infamous and
wicked, the other feels the troubles of such mischief, and the wife being
careless of her honor, the husbands reputation is defiled, and is not worthy
of praise, if he suffer such shame unrevenged: I must (Companions and good
friends) here discover that which my heart would feign keep secret, if it were
possible, and must rehearse a thing unto you, which so sone as my mouth would
feign keep close, the mind assayeth to force the ouerture. And loath I am to do
it, were it not that I make so good account of you, as ye being (...) to me
with an inseperable amity, will yield me your comfort and aid against him that
has done me this villainy, such as if I be not revenged upon him, needs must I
be the executioner of that vengeance upon my self, that am loath to live in this
dishonor, which all the days of my life (without due vltion) like a worm will
torment and gnaw my conscience. Wherefore before I go any further, I would know
whether I might so well trust your aid and succor in this my business, as in
all others I am assured you would not leave me, so long as any breath of life
remained in you. For without such assurance, I do not purpose to let you know
yt pricking nail that pierces my heart, nor the grief that greueth me so
nere, as by uttering it without hope of help I shall open the gate to death,
and dye withont relief of my desire, by punishyng him, of whom I have
received an injury more bloody than any man can do. The Soldiers which
loved the Captain as their own life, were sorry to see him in such estate,
and greater was their dolor to hear words that tended to nothing else but
to fury, vengeance, and murder of himself. Wherefore all with one accord
promised their healpe and maine force toward and against all men for the
bringyng to pass of that which he did mean to require. The Lieutenant assured
of his men, conceived heart and courage, and continuing his Oration and
purpose, determined the slaughter and overthrow of the three Trinicien
brethren, (for that was the surname of the Lords of Foligno,) who pursued his
Oration in this manner: Know ye then (my companions and good friends) that it
is my wife, by whom I have endured the hurt and loss of mine honor, and she
is the party touched, and I am he that am most offended. And to the end that
I do not hold you longer in suspense, and the party be concealed from you,
which has done me this outrage: Ye shall understand that Nicholas Trinicio,
the elder of the three lords of Foligno and Nocera, is he, that against al
right and equity has suborned the wife of his Lieutenant, and soiled the bed
of him, whereof he ought to have been the defe^der and the very bulwark of his
reputation. It is of him my good friends, and of his that I mean to take such
vengeance, as eternal memory shall displaye the same to all posterity: and
never lords shall dare to do a like wrong to mine, without remembrance what
his duty is, which shall teach him how to abuse the honest service of a
Gentleman that is one of his own train. It rests in you both to hold up
your hand, and keep your promise, to the end that the Lord Nicholas,
deceiuyng and mockyng me, may not trust and put affiance in your force, unto
which I heartily do recommende my self. The Soldiers moved and incited with
the wickedness of their Lord, and with the wrong done to him, of whom they
received wages, swore again to serve his turn in any exploit he went about,
and required him to be assured, that the Trinicien brethren should be
overthrown, and suffer deserved penance, if they might lay hands upon them,
and therefore willed him to seek means to allure them thither, that they might
be dispatched. The Lieutena^t at these words renewing a cheerful countenance,
and she wing himself very joyful for such success, after he had thanked his
soldiers, and very lovingly embraced the chiefest of them, revealed his
devised policy, and hoped shortly to have them at his commandment within the
Fort, alleging that he had dispatched two messangers unto them, and that his
wife also privily had sent her page: unto whom he purposed to give so good a
reco^pense, as never more she should plant his horns so high, under a color of
gentle entertainment of her ribauld and friend. They were scarce resolved upon
this intent, but news were brought him, that the next day morning, the three
lords accompanied with other nobility would come to Nocera, to hunt that huge
wild Bore, whereof the Lieutenant had made so great auant. These news did not
greatly please the Captain, for so much as he feared, that his purpose could not
(conveniently) be brought to pass, if the company were so great. But when he
considered that the Lords alone, should lodge withinthe Fort, he was of good
cheer again, and stayed upon his first intent. The Triniciens the next day
after came very late, because the Lord Berardo of Varano Duke of Camerino,
desired to be one, and also the two brethren tarried for Conrade, who was at a
marriage, and could not assist the tragedy that was played at Nocera, to his
great hap and profit. To this troop came to Nocera late, and having supped in
the City, the Lord Nicholas and the Duke of Camerino went to bed in the Fort,
Caesar the brother of Trinicio tarying behind with the train, to lodge in the
city. Stay here a while (ye gentlemen) ye I say, that pursue the secret
stelths of love, never put any great trust in Fortune, which seldom keeps
her promise with you. Ye had need therefore to take good head, lest ye be
surprised in the place, where privily you give the assault, and in the act
wherein ye desire the assistance of none. See the barbarous cruelty of a
Lieutenant, which loved rather to kill his corriuall, in his cold blood, than
otherwise to be revenged, when he saw him a bed with his wife, purposely that
the era^ple of his fury might be the better known, and the secret selander
more evident, from the root whereof did (...) an infinite number of murders
and mischiefs. About midnight, then when al things were at rest under the dark
silence of the night, the Lieutenant came to the chamber of the Lord Nicholas,
accompanied with the most part of the watch, and having stopte up the yeoman
of his chamber, he so dressed the companion of his bed, as for the first
proof of his courtesy, he caused his members and privy parts to be cut of,
saying unto him with cruel disdain: Thou shalt not henceforth (wicked
wretch) welde this lance into the rest, thereby to batter the honor of an
honester man than thy self. Then lau^ching his stomach with a piercing blade,
he tare the heart out of his belie, saying: Is this the traitorous heart that
has framed the plot and devised the enterprise of my shame, to make this
infamous villain without life, and his renoume without praise? And not (...)
with this cruelty, he wreakt yt like upon ye remnant of his body, yt sometimes
the runagate Medea did upon her innocent brother, to save yt life of her self,
and of her friend Jason. For she cut him into an hundred thousand pieces,
gyuyng to every membre of the poor murdered soul her word of mockery and
contempt. Was it not sufficient for a tirannous husband to be reue^ged of his
shame, and to kill the party which had defamed him, without using so furious
Anatomy upon a dead body, and wherein there was no longer feeling? But what?
Ire being without measure, and anger without bridle or reason, it is not to be
wondered, if in all his acts the Captain ouerpassed the just measure of
bengeance. Many would think the committed murder upon Nicholas, to be good
and just: but the Justice of an offense, ought not so long time be conceyled,
but rather to make him feel the smart at the very time the deed is done, to
the end that the nipping grief of pestilent treason wrought against the
betrayed party, be not obscured and hidden by sudden rage and lack of
reason, rising in the minds first motions, and thereby also the fauite of the
guilty, by his indiscretion covered: otherwise there is nothing that can
color such vice. For the law indifferently does punish every (...), that
without the Magistrates order takes authority to (...) his own wrong. But
come we again unto our purpose. The Captain all imbrued (...) (...), entered
the chamber of the Duke of (...), whom with all she rest of the strangers
that (...) (...) (...) (...), he lodged (without speaking any word) in a
deep and obscure prison. (...), what rest they took that night, which were
come to hunt (...) Wild (...). For without trauayling (...), (...) (...) (...)
in the (...) (...) (...) (...) of the (...) (...), who when (...) (...) (...)
(...) her vermilion clear, began to thewe her self, when all the Hunters
did put them selves in a readynesse, and coupled up their Dogs to
march into the Field, behold, one of the Captains cruel ministers went
into the City, to cause the Lord (...) to come and speak with his brother
Nicholas, and entreated him not to tarry, for that he and the Duke were
disposed to show him some disport. Caesar which never suspected the least of
these chanced murders, desired not to be prayed again, but made haste to the
butcherie like a Lamb, and in the company of the Wolves them selves that were
in readiness to kill him. He was no sooner in the court of the Castle, but
seven or eight varlets apprehended him and his men, and carried him into the
chamber (bound like a thief) wherein the members of his miserable brother were
cut of, and dispersed, whose corpse was pitifully gored and arrayed in blood. If
Caesar were abashed to see himself bound and taken prisoner, he was more
astoonned when he perceived a body so dismembered, and which as yet he knew
not. Alas (said he) what sight is this? Is this the Bore. which thou have
caused us to come hither to hu^t within our very Fort: The Captain rising up,
al imbrued with blood, whose face and voice promised nothing but murder to the
miserable young ge^tleman said: See Caesar, the body of thine adulterous
brother Nicholas, that infamous whore mo^ger, and mark if this be not his
head: I would to God that Conrade were here also; that ye might all three be
placed at this sumptuous banquet, which I have prepared for you. I swear unto
thee then, that this should be the last day of all the Trinicien race, and the
end of your. tirannies and wicked life: But since I ca^ not get the effect of
that which my heart desires, my mind shall take repast in the triumph which
Fortune (...) ordained.

Curssed be the marriage and wedding at Treuio, that has hindered me of an
occasion so apt, and of the means to dispatche a matter of such importance,
as is the overthrow of so many tirants. Caesar at this sentence stood so still,
as whilom did the wife of Loath, by seeing the City on fire, and consume into
ashes: by the sight whereof she was converted into a stone of salt. For when he
saw that bloody pageant, and knew that it was his brother Nicholas, pity and
fear so stopped ye pipes of his spech, as without co^plaining himself or framing
one word, he suffered his throat to be cut by ye barbarous captain, who threw
him half dead upon yt corpse of his brother, (...) yt blood of either of the^
might cry up to yt heue^s for so loud ve^gea^ce, (...) yt of Abel did, being
slain by ye treson of his nerest bro there. Behold yt dreadful beginnings of a
heart rapt in fury, and of yt mind of him that not resisting his fond
affections, executed the terrible practizes of his own brain, and preferring
his fantasle above reason, devised such ruin and decay, as by these examples
the posterity shall have good cause to wonder. The like cruelty used Tiphon
toward his brother Osyris by chopping his body in. xxvi. gobbets, whereby
ensued the (...) of him and his, by Orus whom some do surname Appollo. And
troweth yt captain to look for less mercy of the brother of ye other twain
that were murdered, and of the Dukes kindred whom he kept prisoner? But he was
so blinded with fury, and it may be, led by ambition and desire to be made Lord
of Nocera, that he was not contented to venge his shame on him which had
offended, but assayed to murder and extinguish all the Trinicien blood: the
enheritance only remaining in them. And to come to the end of his enterprise,
this Italian Nero, not content with these so many slaughters, but thereunto
adjoined a new treason, assaying to win the Citizens of Nocera to move
rebellion against their Lord, causing them to assemble before the Forte, unto
whom upon the walls he used this or like Dration. I have hitherto (my
masters) (...) the little pleasure that my heart has felt to (...) so many true
and faithful Citizens, subject under the will and unbridled lusts of two or
three (...): who have gotten power and authority over us, more through our
own folly and cowardice, than by valiance, virtue and justice, either in them
or those which have dispoyled this Country of their ancient liberty. I will
not deny but principalities of long (...) and (...) derived by succession of
inheritance, have had some spice and kind of equity, and that Lords of good
life and conversation ought to be obeyed, defended and honored. But where
invasion and seasure is against right, where the people is spoiled, and laws
violated, it is no conscience to disobey and abolish such monsters of nature.
The Romans in their prime age of their common wealth full well declared the
same, when they banished out of their City ye proud race of the Tirant
Tarquine, and when they (...) about to exterminate all the roots of cruelty
and Tyrannical power. Our neighbors the (...) once did the like under the
conduct of Dion, against the disruled fury and wilful cruelty of Denis the
Tirant of Syracusa, and the Athenuns against the children of Pisistratus. And
ye that be sorted from the stock of those Samnites, which in times past so
long held up their heads against the Roman force, will ye be so very cowardes
and weak hearted for respect of the title of your seigniorie as ye dare not
with me to attempt a valiant enterprise for reducing your selves into liberty,
and to (...) that vermin brood of Tyrauntes which swarm through out the
whole Region of Italy. Will ye be so mated and dumped, as the shadow alone of
a fond and inconstant young man, shall hold your nose to the grindstone, and
draw you at his lust like an Ore into the stall? I fear that if ye saw your
wives and daughters haled to the passetime and pleasure of these Tirauntes, to
glutte the whoredom of those stinking Goat bucks, more lecherous and filthy
than the senseless sparowes: I fear (I say) that ye durst not make one sign
for demonstration of your wrath and displeasure. No, no (my masters of
Nicera,) it is high time to cut of the Hydra his heads, and to strangle him
within his cave. The time is come (I say) wherein it behooves you to show your
selves like men, and no longer to dissemble the case that touches you so
near. Consider whither it be good to follow mine advise, to reposside again
the thing which is your own, (that is to wit,) the freedom wherein your
auncesters gloried so much, and for which they feared not to hazard their
goods and lives. It will come good cheap, if you be ruled by me, it will
redound to your treble fame, if like men ye follow mine advise, which I hope to
let you shortly see without any great peril or loss of your Citizens blood. I
have felt the effect of the Trinicien Tyranny, and the rigor of their
unrighteous government, which having begone in me, they will not fail, if
they be not chastised in time, to extend on you also, whom they deem to be
their slaves. In like manner I have first begone to repress their boldness,
and to withstand their l^ud behauioure: yea and if you mind to understand
right from wrong, an easy matter it will be to perform the rest, the tune
being so commodious, and the discovery of the thing whereof I have made you
privy, so convenient. And know ye, that for the exploit of mine intent, and to
bring you again altogether in liberty, I have taken the two Lords Nicholas
and Caesar prisonners, attending till fortune do bring to me the third, to pay
him with like money and equal guerdon, that not only you may be free and
settled in your ancient privilege, but my heart also satisfied of yt wrong
which I have received by their injustice. Believe (masters) yt the thing which I
have done, was not without great cause, nor without open injury receued, as by
keeping it close I burst, and by telling yt same I am ashamed. I will keep it
secret not wtsta^ding, and shall pray you to take heed unto your selves, yt
by universal consent, the mischief may be prevented. Devise what answer you
will make me, to yt intent yt I by following your advise, may also be resolved
upon yt I have to do, without prejudice but to them to whom the case does
chiefly appertain. During all this (...), the wicked captain kept close the
murder which he had committed, to draw the worm out of the Nocerines (...),
and to see of what mind they were, that upon the intelligence thereof, he
might work and follow the time accordingly, He that had seen the Citizens of
(...) after that seditious Dration, would have thought that he had heard a
murmr of Bees, when issuing forth their hiues, they light amidst a pleasant
Herber, adorned and beautified with diverse colored flowers. For the people
flocked and assembled togithers, and began to murmur upon the imprisonment of
their Lord, and the treason committed by the Lieuetenau^t, thinking it very
strange that he which was a household servant durst be so bold to sease on
those to whom he did owe all honor and reverence. And do assure you that if
he had (...) below, as he was upon the rampire of the walls, they had torn
him into so many pieces, as he had made gobbets of the Lord Nicholas body. But
seeing that they could not take him, they went about to seek the deliuerau^ce
of them, whom they thought to be yet alive: and one of the chief of the City
in the name of them all shortly and briefly, answered him thus. If malice did
not well discover it self in the sugared and traitorous composition of thy
words (O Captain) it were easy enough for an inconstant people (bent to
change, and desirous of innouations,) to hear and do that, which such a
traitor and flatterer as thou art do propose: but we having (...) time
endured nothing of the (...) that sauoreth of tyranny, cruelty, or excess, we
were no less to be accused of felony, than thou art guilty of rebels crime,
by seasing upon the persons of thy Lords, if we should yield credit to thy
serpents hissing, or lend aid to thy traitorous practice, thou ghost about
against them who by innobling thee, are traitorously bereued of that which
concerned their reputation and greatness. We (...) an honest people and
faithful (...). We will not be both wicked and unhappy at once, and without
cause expel our heads out of our common wealth, when they shall perpetrate the
mischiefs which thou have alleged for example. Upon such (...) and strange
facts we shall take new advise and Council. To be short, thou shall pleasure
us to set our Lords at liberty, and thou like a wise man shall do thy duty,
and satisfy a people which easily can not endure that a subject do wrong to
those to whom he owes (...). And fear not to receive any evil of them nor
yet to feel anoyaunce, for we will take upon us by honest means to crave
pardone for thy fault how heinous so ever it be. But if thou continue thine
(...), be sure yt the Lord Conrade shall be advertised, and with all our power
we shall succor him, by force to let thee feel the nature of treason, and
what reward is incident to the practizers of the same. The Captain (...) he
was abashed with that answer, and saw that it would not be well with him, if
he did not provide speady (...) and order for his affairs, as well for the
coming of the Lord Conrade, as of the brother of the Duke (...), told the
Citizens that within three or (...) days he would give them a resolute answer,
and so it might be, (...) unto their wills, and dcliuer them whom he had in
hold. This gentle answer did nothing stay the Citizens for the accomplishment
of that which they thought (...) to do, knowing also that the gallant had not
commenced that comedy, but for other toys which his (...) head had framed for
a further intended mischief, for which cause they assembled their Council, and
concluded that one should ride in post to the Lord Conrade, (the third and
remnau^t of the brethren,) that he might come to take order for the deliverance
of Nicholas and Caesar whom they thought he had reserved still a live in
captivity. The Nocerines showed this courtesy (not but yt they would gladly
have been at liberty, if the way had been better trodden,) as well for the little
trust they reposed in the Captain, who they thought would be no more gentle
and faithful, than he showed himself to be loyal to his masters, as for that
Conrade was well beloved of the Lords his neighbors, and specially of the
imprisonned Duke and his brother Braccio Montone, who had the Italian men of
war at his pleasure, and that the Noble men would assist him with all their
power. Wherefore they considered that their fairest and best way, for avoiding
of factio^s, was to keep themselves trusty and true, and by not hearkening to
a traitor, to bind their sovereign Lord with such duty and obedience, as the
vnkindest man of the world would confess and acknowledge for the consequence of
a matter of such importance. The seditious captain on the other side void of
hope, and in greater rage tha^ (...) was before, persisted in his folly, not
without foreseeing how he might save himself, which he had pollitikely
brought to pass, if God had not shortened his way, by payment of vsurye for his
wickedness, and by the very diligence of them in (...) he reposed his trust,
the manner and how, immediately (...) follow.

So soon as he had given over the Council of the Citizens, and a little
bethought him what he had to do, he called before him two young men, whom above
all others he trusted best. To these young men he delivered all his Gold,
Silver and Jewels, that they might convey the same out of the jurisdiction of
his Lords, to the intent that when he saw himself in danger, he might retire
to the place where those gallants had before carried his furniture, and mou^ting
them upon two good steedes, he let them forth at the posterne gate, praying
them so soon as they could to return advertisement of their aboode, and that
spedely he would send after them his children and the rest of his (...), telling
them that he specially committed his life and goods into their hands, and
that in time and place he would acknowledge the benefit done unto him in that
distress. The two that were thus put in trust for sauegarde of his things,
promised unto him Golden hills and miracles: but so soon as they had lost
the sight of their master, they devised another complette, and determined to
break faith to him which was forsworn, and who made no conscience not only
to revolt, but also (...) to kill his sovereign Lords. They thought it better
to ride to (...), to tell yt Lord Conrade the pitiful end of his brethren,
and the imprisonment of the Duke of Camerino, than to seek rest for him, whom
God permitted not to be saved, sor his heinous sin already committed, and for
that which he meant to do upon his wife. For all the diligence that the
Nocerines had made, yet were the Lieuetenauntes men at Treuio before them, and
having filled the (...) of Conrade with those heavy news, and his eyes with
tears, his mind with sorrow, and sprite with desire to be revenged and as
Conrade was about to mount on horseback with the train he had, the Citizens
were arrived to disclose the imprisonment of his brethren. To whom Conrade made
answer: I would to God (my friends) that the tirant had been contented with ye
little cruelty whereof you speak, for then I would find the means to agree the
parties upon yt knowledge of their variance. But (alas) his malice has passed
further, and has beastly slain my brethren: but I swear by the almighty
God, that if he give me life, I will take such, and so cruel vengeance on him,
as he shall be a glass to all his like, to see the punishment of a fault so
horrible. Depart my friends, depart and get you home, dispose your watch and
guard about the Castle, that the traiter do not escape: and assure your selves
that this your love shall never be forgotten, and you shall have of me not a
tyrant as he (...) has protested, but rather such a Lord, and better also,
than hitherto ye have me proved. If Conrade had not been pressed with
heaviness, he had (...) goodly songs against the treason of the
Lieuetenaunt, and would have accused his brother of indiscretion, for trusting
him, whose wife he had abused, and well did know that he espied the same. But
what? The business required other things than words: and extreme folly it is
to nippe the dead with taunts, or with vain words to abuse the absent,
specially where vltion and revenge is easy, and the means manifest to
chastise the temeritie of such, and to be acquitted of the wrong done unto him
that cannot do it himself. Conrade then took his way toward Tuderto, where
then remained the Lord Braccio, and thereof was Lord and governor, and had also
under his government Perugia, and many other Cities of the (...) Church, and
who with the dignity of the great Constable of Naples, was also Prince of
Capua, to him ye Trinicien brother all be (...) with tears and transported
with choler and grief, came to demand succor for revenge of the Lieuetenauntes
trespass, saying: For what assurance (my Lord) can Princes and great Lords
hope henceforth, when their very servant shall rise, and by co^straining
their masters, make assay to usurp their seigniories wherein they have no
title or interest? Is this a revenge of wrong, in steed of one to kill twain,
and yet to wish for the third to dispatch the world of our race? Is this to
pursue his ennimy, to seek to catch him in trappe, which knows nothing of
the quarrel, and to make him to suffer the pain? My two brethren be dead, our
cousin german the Duke is in prison, I am here comfortless, all sad and
pensife before you, whom likewise this matter touches, although not so near
as it does me, but yet with like dishonor. Let us go (my Lord) let us go I
beseech you to visit our good host that so rudely entreats his gests which
come to visit him, and let us bear him a reward, that he may taste of our
coming, let us go before he save himself, yt with little travail and less
harm to an other, the ribauld may be punished, who by his example if he longer
live, may increase courage both in seruau^ts to disobey, and in subjects to
rebel, without conscience, against their heads and gouerners? It is a case of
very great importance, and which ought to be followed with all rigor and
cruelty. And he ought never to be supported, comforted or favored, which shall
by any means attempt to revolt or arm himself against his Prince, or shall
constrain him or her that is his sovereign Lord or mistress. Is not a Prince
constituted of God to be obeyed, loved and cherished of his subjects? Is it not
in him to make and ordain laws, such as shall be thought needeful and
necessary for commonwealth? Ought not he then to be obeyed of his subjects and
vassals? Ought they then to teach the head, and command the chiefest member of
their body? I do remember a tale (my Lord) recited by Menenius Agrippa that
wise and Notable (...), who going about to reconcile the commons with the
Senate, alleged a fit and conuenable example. In time past (quod he) when the
parts of mankind were at variance, and every member would be a Lord, generally
conspiring, grudging and alleging, how by their great trauail, pains, and
careful ministry, they provided all furniture and maintenance for the belly,
and that he like a sluggishe beast stood still, and enjoyed such pleasures as
were given him, in this murmr and mutine, all they agreed that the hands
should not minister, the mouth should not feed, the tee the should not make it
serviceable, the feet should not travail, nor head devise to get the same: and
whilst every of them did forsake their service and obedience, the belly grew
so thin, and the (...) so weak and feeble, as the whole body was brought to
extreme decay and ruin, whereby (said Agrippa) it appears yt the service due
unto the belly (as the chief portion of man) by the other members is most
necessary, the obeying and nurssing of whom does instill force and vigor into
the other parts through which we do live and be refreshed, and the same
disgested and dispearsed into the veins and vital powers ingendreth mature
and fine blood, and maintains yt whole state of the body, in comely form and
order. By which trim comparison applied to (...) war is deflected and
mollified the stout courage and (...) of the multitude. Even so agreeing with
Agrippa, if the members grudge and disobey against their chief, the state must
grow to ruin. To be short, in certain haps a traiter may be cherished, and he
that has falsified his first faith: but treason and perjury evermore be
detested as vices execrable. In this deed neither the thing, nor yet the doer
has any color of excuse, the trespass and cause for which it is done being
considered. Suffiseth it sir, for so much as there is neither time nor cause
of further discourse, what need we to decide the matter, which of it self is
evident? Behold me here a pore Trinicien brother without brethren, ioylesse
without a fort at Nocera. On the other part consider the Duke of Camerino in
great distress and danger, to pass yt strait of death my brethren did. Let
us go (I pray you) to deliver the captive, and by revenging these offenses and
murders to settle my City in former state and fredome, which yt villain goes
about to take from me, by encoraging my subjects to revolt and to enter arms,
thereby to expel our house from the title of the same. As Conrade spoke these
words, and with great gravity and (...) pronou^cing sundry tokens of sorrow, yt
Constable of Naples wroth beyond measure for these vnplesa^t news, and full of
grief and choler against yt traitorous lieuetena^t, swore in the hearing of
them al, yt he would never rest one good sleep until that quarrel were aue^ged,
and had quited yt outrage done to the Lord Conrade, and yt wrong which he felt
in him for the imprisonment of the Duke of Camerino. So he concluded, and the
soldiers were assembled through out all the parts of the constables lands,
upon the end of the week to march against the fort of Nocera, the Citizens
whereof had laid dilligent (...) and watch for the escape of the captain, who
without bashfulnesse determined with his men to defend yt same, and to (...)
fortune, making himself believe that his quarrel was good, and cause just to
withstand them yt should have the heart to come to assail him. The Constable
in the mean time sent a Trumpet to Nocera, to sommon the Captain to
surrender, and to tell the cause of his revolt, and at whose provocation he had
committed so detestable a Treason.

The Captain well assured and boldned in his wickedness, answered that he was
not so well fortified to make a surrender so good cheap, and for so small a
price to forgo his honor and reputation: and furthermore, yt his wit was not
so sle^der, but he durst devise and attempt such a matter without the council
of any other, and that all the deeds and devises passed till that time, were
of his own invention. And to be even with the wrong done to his honor by the
Lord Nicholas Trinicio, for the violation of his wives chastity, he had
committed ye murders (told to Braccio) being angry, that all the tira^nous race
was not in his hand to spil, to the end he might deliver his country, and put
the Citizens in liberty, albeit that fo^dly they had refused the same, as un
worthy of such a benefit, and well deserved that the tyrants should (...)
them at their pleasure, and make them also their common slaves and drudges. The
trumpet warned him also to render to him the Duke, because he was guiltless of
the fact, which the Captain regarded so little as he did the first demaundes,
which was. yt cause (the company being arrived at Nocera, and the Constable
understanding the little account the Castle gentleman made of his summones)
that the battry the very day of their arrival was laid and shot against the
place with such thunder and dreadful thumpes of Canon shot, as the hardiest of
the mortpayes within, began to faint. But the courage and little fear of their
chief, retired their hearts into their bellies. The breach being made again,
the Constable who feared to lose the Duke in the Captains fury, caused the
Trumpet to summone them within to fall to composition, yt bloodshed might not
stir their souldioures to further cruelty. But so much gained this second
warning as the first, for which cause the next day after the assault was given,
where if the assailed was valiant, the resistance was no less than bold and
venturous. But what can thirty or forty men do against the force of a whole
country, and where the general was one of the most valiant and wisest Captains
of his time, and who was accompanied with the flower of the Neapolitane
footme^. The assault continued. iiij. or. v. hours, but in the end the Dead
pays not able to sustain the force of the assailants, forsook the breach,
and assaying to save them selves, the Lieutenant retired to the Ripe of the
Fort, where his wife continued prisoner, from the time that the two brethren
were slain. Whiles they without, ruffled in together in heaps amongs the
defendaunts, the Duke of Camerino, with his men, found means to escape out of
prison, and there with all began furiously to chastise the ministers of the
disloyal Captain, which in little time were cut al to pieces. Conrade being
within, found the Captains father, upon whom he was revenged, and killed him
with his own hands. And not content with that, carried into further rage and
fury, he flashed him into gobbets, and threw them to the dogs. Truly a
strange manner of revenge, if the Captens cruelty had not attempted like
inhumanitie. To be short, horrible it is to repeat the murders done in that
stir and hurly burly. For they that were of the Captains part, and taken,
received all the straungest and cruellest punishment that man could devise.
And were it not that I have a desire in nothing to belie the author, and less
will to leave that which he has written upon the miserable end of those that
were the ministers and servants to the barbarous tirannie of the Captain, I
would pass no further, but conceyle that which does not deserve remembrance,
except to avoid the example, which is not strange, the cruelty of revenging
heart in the nature of man, in all times growyng to such audacitie, as the
torments which seem incredible, be liable to credit as well for those we
read in ancient histories, as those we hear tell of by hear say, and
chauncing in our time. He that had the upper hand of his (...), not content to
kill, but to eat with his ranenous teeth the heart disentrailde from his
adversary, was he less furious than Conrade by making an Anatomy of the
body of the Captains father? And he that (...) Galleazze Fogase into the mouth
of a Canon, tying his head unto his knees, and causing him to be carried by the
violent force of gunpouder into the city from whence he came, to bribe and
corrupt certain of his enemies army, did he show himself to be more courteous
than one of these? Leave we a part those that be past, to touch the miserable
end wherewith Conrade caused yt last tribute of the Captains soldiers to be
paid. Now amongs these, some were tied to yt tails of wild horses, and trained
over hedges and bushes, and down ye stiepnesse of high rocks, some were haled
in pieces, and afterward burnt (...) great martyrdom, some were divided and
parted alive in four quarters, other sowed naked within an ox hide, and so
buried in earth up to ye chin, by which torments they finished their lives with
fearful groninges. Will ye say that the Bull of Perillus, or Diomedes Horses,
were afflictions more cruel than these: I know not what ye call cruelty, if
these acts may bear ye title of modesty. But all this proceeded of wrath and
disdain of either parts. The one disdained that the servant should be his head,
and the other was offended, yt his sovereign lord should assay to take yt from
him, which his duty commanded him to keep. Conrade took in ill part the
treson of the Captain, who beyond measure was angry yt the lord Nicholas had
made him a brother of Vulcans order, and had registered him in the book of
husbands, which know that, they dare not speak. In su^me, the one had right,
and the other was not without some reason, and notwithstanding both surmounted
ye bounds of man's mild nature. The one ought to content himself (as I have
said) for being (...) on him yt had offended him, and the other of ye murder
done, during ye assault without showing so bloody tokens of his cruelty, and
so apparent (...) of (...), upon yt ministers of yt brutal and bloody capten
who seeing his father put to death with such martyrdom, and his men so strangely
tormented, was vanquished with choler, despair and impacie^ce. And albeit yt
he had no great desire to hurt his (...), yet was he surmounted with such rage,
as aprehe^ding her, and binding her hands and feet, she still crying him mercy,
and craving pardon for her faults at ye hands of god and him, he threw her
down from ye hiest Toure of ye kipe upon yt (...) of the castle court, not
without tears and abashme^t of al which saw yt monstrous and dredful sight:
which ye soldiers viewing, they fired ye Toure, and with fire and smoke forced
yt capten to com forth, and by like means made him, his brother and children to
tread yt da^ce yt his wife before had done. Co^rade by and by caused those
bodies to be thrown forth for fode to ye wolves, and other ravening beasts and
birds living upon yt pray of carrio^, causing also his brethren and yt
ge^tlewoma^ honorably to be bu ried, which gentlewoma^ had born yt penance
worthy for her fault. Such was yt end of yt most miserable, and ill governed
love, yt I think man has ever red in writing, and which does clearly
witness, yt there is no pleasure so great but Fortune by changing and turning her
wheel makes a hundred times more bitter tha^ desire of such joy does yield
delight. And far better it were (besides ye offe^se done to god) never to cast
eye on woman, tha^ to board or prove them to raise such sclanders and facts
which cannot be recou^ted but with the horror of the herers, nor written but to
ye great grief of those ye muse and study upon yt same: not withstanding for
instruction of our life, both good and bad examples be introduced and offered to
the view of each degree and state. To the end that whoordom may be avoided, and
bodily pleasure eschewed, as most mortal and pernicious plagues that do
infect as well the body and reputation of man, as the integrity of the mind.
Besides that each man ought to possess his own vessel, and not to couete that
is none of his, unseemly also it is to solicit the neighbors wife, to procure
thereby the disjunction and defaite of the whole bond of marriage, which is a
treasure so dear and precious, and carries so great grief to him that sees
it defaced, as our Lord (to declare the gravity of the fact) makes a
comparison of his wrath against them which run after strange Gods, and
applies the honor due unto him to others that do not deserve the same, with
the just disdain and rightful choler of a jealous husband, fraught with
despite to see himself dispoiled of the seasure and possession only given to
him, and not subject to any other, what soever he be. Learn here also (O ye
husbands) not to fly with so nimble wing, as by your own authority to seek
revenge without fearing the folies and sclanders that may ensue. Your sorrow is
just, but it behooves that reason do guide your fantasies, and bridle your
over sudden passions, to the intent that ye come not after to sing the
doleful song of repentance, like unto this foolish man, who having done more
than he ought, and not able to retire without his overthrow, threw him self
into the bottomless gulf of perdition. And let us all fix fast in memory,
that never unruled rage, and wilful choler, brought other benefit than the
ruin of him that suffered him self to run hedlong into the same, and who
thinks that all that which is natural in us, is also reasonable, as though
Nature were so perfect a work woman, as in man's corruption she could make us
Angels or half gods. Nature following the instincte of that which is natural
in us, does not greatly straye from perfection, but that is given to few, and
those whom God does love and choose. And Virtue is so seldom found, as it
is almost impossible to imitate that perfection. And briefly to say, I will
conclude with the Author of this present History:

Anger is a (...) short,
To him that can the same excel:
But it is no laughing sport
In whom (...) senseless rage does dwell.
That pang confounds each man's wits
And shameth him with open shame,
His honor fades in frantike fittes,
And blemisheth his good name.
The King of Marocco.
The great Courtesy of the King of MAROCCO, (a City in BARBARY) (...) a poor
Fisherman, one of his subjects, that had lodged the King, being strayed from
his company in hunting.

The. xxxiiij. Nouel.
FOr so much as the more than beastly cruelty recounted in the former
History, does yield some sour taste to the minds of those that be courteous,
gentle and well conditioned by nature, and as the stomach of him yt daily uses
one kind of meat, be it never so delicate and dainty, does at length loathe
and disdain the same, and utterly refuses it. I now change the diet, leaving
for a certain time the murders, slaughters, despaires, and tragical accidents,
chanced either in the love, or in the ielosie of a lover, or of a husband, and
turn my style to a more pleasant thing, that may so well serve for instruction of
the noble to follow virtue, as that which I have already written, may rise to
their profit, warely to take heed they fall not into such deformed and (...)
faults, as the name and praise of man, be defaced and his reputation decayed:
if then the contraries be known by that which is of diverse natures, the
villainy of great cruelty shall be couuerted into the gentleness of great
courtesy, and rigor shall be condemned, when with sweetness and generositie,
the noble shall assay to win the heart, service, and affected devotion of the
basest sort: so the greatness and nobility of man placed in dignity, and who
has puissance over other, consists not to show himself hard and terrible,
for that is the manner of tyrants, because he that is feared, is consequently
hated, evil beloved, and in the end forsaken of the whole world, which has
been the cause that in times past Princes aspiryng to great (...), have made
their way, more easy by gentleness and Courtesy, than by fury of arms,
stablishing the foundations of their dominions more firm and durable by those
means, than they which by rigor and cruelty have sacked towns, overthrown
Cities, depopulated provinces, and (...) lands with the bodies of those, whose
lives they have deprived by dent of sword, (...) the government and authority
over other, carries greater subjection than puissance. Wherefore Antigonus, one
of the successoures of great Alexander (that made all the earth to tremble
upon the recital of his name) seeing that his son behaved himself to
arroga^tly, and without modesty to one of his subjects, reproved and checked
him, and amongs many words of (...) and admonition, said unto him: Know
thou not my son, that the estate of a King, is a noble and honorable
servitude? Royal words (in deed) and meet for a King: For albeit that each
man does him reverence, and that he be honored and obeyed of all, yet is he
for all that, the servant and public minister, who ought no less to defend
his subject, than he that is the subject to do him honor and homage. And
the more the Prince does humble himself, the greater increase has his glory,
and the more wonderful he is to every wight. What advanced the glory of that
Julius Caesar, who first depressed the Senatorie state of government at Rome?
Were his victories achieved over the Galls and Britons, and afterward over
Rome it self, when he had vanquished Pompee? Al those served his turn, but
his greatest fame rose of his clemency and courtesy: In such wise as he showed
him self to be gentle, and favorable even to them, whom he knew not to love
him, otherwise than if he had been their mortal enemy. His successors as
Augustus, Vespasianus, Titus, Marcus Aurelius, and Flauius were worthily noted
for clemency: Notwithstanding I see not one draw near to great courage and
gentleness, joined with the singular courtesy of Dom Roderigo Viuario the
Spaniarde surnamed Cid toward King Pietro of Aragon that hyndred his
expedition against the Mores at Grenadoe: For having vanquished the (...)
King, and taken him in battle, not only remitted the revenge of his wrong, but
also suffered him to go without ransom, and took not from him so much as one
forte, esteeming it to be a better exploite to win such a king with courtesy,
than bear the name of cruel, in putting him to death, or seazing upon his
land. But because acknowledging of the poor, and enriching the small, is more
commendable in a Prince, than when he shows himself gentle to his like, I
have collected this discourse and fact of King Mansor of Marocco, whose
children (by subtle and fained religion) Cherif succeeded, the son of whom
at this day inioyeth the kingdoms of Su, Marocco, and the most part of the
(...) confinyng upon Aethiopia. This history was told by an Italian called
Nicholoso Baciadonne, who upon this accident was in Africa, and in trafike of
merchandise in the land of Oran, situated upon the coast of yt South seas, and
where the Geneuois and Spaniards use great intercourse, because the country is
fair, well peopled, and where the inhabitaunts (although the soil be
barbarous) live indifferent ciuilly, using great courtesy to strangers, and
largely departing their goods to the poor, toward whom they be so earnestly
bente, and loving, as for their liberality and pitiful alinesse, they shame
us Christians. They mainteyne a great number of Hospitalls, to receive and
intertaine the poor and needy, which they do more charitably than they that
be bound by the law of Jesus Christ, to use charity toward their
brethren, with that courtesy and human myldnesse. These Oraniens delight also
to record in writing the success of things that chance in their time, and
carefully reserve the same in memory, which was the cause that having
registered in their Chronicles, (which be in the Arabie letters, as the most
part of the Countries do use) this present history, they imparted the same to
the Geneuois merchants, of whom the Italian Author confesses (...) have
received the Copy. The cause why that Geneuois merchant was so diligent to
make that inquiry, was by reason of a city of that province, built through
the chance of this History, and which was called in their tongue, Caesar
Elcabir, so much to say, as A great Palace. And because I am assured, that
courteous mynds will delight in deeds of courtesy. I have amongs other the
Nouells of Bandello, chosen by Francois de Belleforest, and my self discoursed
this, albeit the matter be not of great importance, and greater things and more
notorious courtesies have been done by our own kings and Princes. As of Henry
the eight a Prince of notable memory in his progress in to the North the
xxxiij. year of his reign, when he disdained not a pore Millers house, being
stragled from his train, busily pursuing the Heart, and there unknown of the
Miller, was welcomed with homely chere, as his mealy house was able for the
time to minister, and afterward for acknowledging his willing mind,
recompensed him with dainties of the Court, and a Princely reward. Of Edward
the third, whose Royal nature was not displeased pleasauntly to use a (...)
Tanner, when divided from his company, he met him by the way not far from
Tomworth in Staffordshire, and by cheapening of his welfare steed (for
stedinesse, sure and able to carry him so far as the stable door) grew to a
price, and for exchange the Tanner craved (...) shillings to boot between the
Kings and his. And when the King satisfied with disport, desired to show
himself by sounding his warning blast, assembled al his train, And to the great
amaze of the pore Tanner, (when he was guarded with that (...)) he well
guerdoned his good pastime and familiare dealing with the order of (...) and
reasonable revenue for the maintenance of the same. The like examples our
Chronicles, memory, and report plentifully do auouche and witness. But what?
this History is the more rare and worthy of noting, for respect of the people
and Country, where seldom or never courtesy haunteth or finds harboroughe,
and where Nature does bring forth greater store of monsters, than things worthy
of praise.

This great King Mansor then was not only the temporal Lord of the Country
of Oran and Moracco, but also (as is said of Prete Iean,) Bishop of his law
and the Mahomet priest, as he is at this day that (...) in Feze, Sus, and
Marocco. Now this Prince above all other pleasure, (...) the game of Hunting.
And he so much delighted in that passetime, as sometime he would cause his
Tents in the midde of the deserts to be erected, to lie there all night, to
the end, that the next day he might renew his game, and (...) his men of
idleness, and the wild beasts of rest. And this manner of life he used
still, after he had done justice and hearkened the complaints for which his
subjects came to disclose thereby their griefs. Wherein also he took so great
pleasure, as some of our Magistrates do seek their profit, whereof they be so
squeymishe, as they be desirous to satisfy the place whereunto they be called,
and render all men their right due unto them. For with their bribery and sacred
golden hunger, Kings and Princes in these days be ill served, the people
wronged, and the wicked out of fear. There is none offense almost how
villainous so ever it be, but is washed in the water of bribery, and cleansed in
the holly drop, wherewith the Poets feign Jupiter to corrupt the daughter of
Acrisius fast closed within the brazen Toure. And who is able to resist that,
which has subdued the highest powers?

Now return we from our wanderings: This great King Mansor on a day (...) his
people to hunt in ye not marish and fenny Country, which in elder age was
far off from the City of Asela, which the Portugalles hold at this present,
to make the way more free into the Isles of Molncca, of the most part whereof
their King is Lord.

As he was attentife in following a Bear, and his passetime at the best, the
Elements began to dark, and a great tempest rose, and such as with the storm
and violent wind, scattred the train far of from the King, who not knowing what
way to take, nor into what (...) (...) (...) retire, to auiode the tempest, ye
greatest ye he felt in all his life, would with a good will have been accompanied
as the Troiane (...) was, when being in like pastyme and fear, he was
constrained to enter into a cave with his Queen Dido, where he performed the
joys of his unhappy marriage. But Mansor being without company, and
without any Cave at hand, wandered alongs the Champayne so careful of his
life, for fear of wild beasts, which flock together in those deserts, as
the Curtiers were (...), for that they knew not whether their Prince was gone.
And that which chiefly grieved Mansor, was his being alone without a guide: And
for all he was well mounted, he durst pass no further for fear of drownyng,
and to be destroyed amiddes those Marshes, whereof all the country was very
full. On the one side he was frighted with thunderclaps, which rumbled in the
air very thick and terrible. On the other side the lightning continually
flashed on his face, the roaring of the beasts appalled him, the ignorance of
the way so astoonned him, as he was afraid to fall into the running brooks,
which ye outrageous raines had caused to swel and rise. It is not to be
doubted, that orisons and prayers unto his great prophet Mahomet were
forgotten, and whether he were more devout than when he went on pilgrimage to
the Idolatrous Temple of Mosqua. He complained of ill luck, accusyng Fortune,
but chiefly his own folly, for giving himself so much to hunting, for the
desire whereof, he was thus straggled into unknown Countries. Sometimes he
raued and vomyted his gall against his gentlemen and household servants, and
threatened death unto his guard. But afterward, when reason ouershadowed his
sense, he saw that the time, and not their negligence or little care caused
that disgrace. He thought yt his Prophet had poured down that tempest for some
Notable sin, and had brought him into such and so dangerous extremity for
his faults. For which cause he lifted up his eyes, and made a thousand Mahomet
mowes, and Apish mocks (according to their manner.) And as he fixed his eyes a
lost up to the heavens, a flashe of lightning glaunced on his face so
violently, as it made him to hold down his head, like a little child
reproved by his master. But he was further daunted and amazed, when he saw the
night approach, which with the darkness of his cloudy mantel, stayed his pace
from going any further, and brought him into such perplexity, as willingly he
would have forsaken both his hunting and company of his servants to be quitte
of that danger. But God careful of good minds (with what law so ever they be
trained up.) and who makes the sun to shine upon ye just and unjust,
prepared a means for his sauegarde, as ye shall hear. The Africane King being
in this trance, and naked of all hope, necessity (which is the clearest thing
of sight that is) made him diligently to look about, whether he could see any
person by whom he might attain some security. And as he thus bent himself
to discry all the parts of the Country, he saw not far of from him, the
glimpse of a light which glimmered out at a little window, whereunto he
addressed himself, and perceived yt it was a simple cabane situate in the
midst of the sennes, to which he approached for his succor and defense in ye
time of that (...). He reioysed as you may think, and whither his heart lept
for joy, I leave for them to judge which have assayed like dangers, how be it
I dare believe, that the sailers on the seas feel no greater joy when they
ariue to harborough, tha^ the king of Marocco did: or when after a Tempest, or
other peril, they disery upon the prowe of their ship, the brightness of
some cliffe, or other land. And this king having felt the tempest of wind,
rain, hail, lightening, and Thunder claps, compassed round about with Marshes
and violent streams of little rieurs that ran along his way thought, he had
found a Paradise by chauncing upon that rusticall lodge. Now yt Cotage was the
refuge place of a pore Fisher man, who lived and sustained his wife and
children with Eeles which he took alongs the diches of those deep and huge
Marshes. Mansor when he was arrived to the door of that great palace, covered
and thacked with Reed, called to them within, who at the first would make no
answer to the Prince that tarried their coming at the gate. Then he knocked
again, and with louder voice than before, which caused this fisher man,
thinking that he had been some Rippier (to whom he was wont to sell his ware, or
else some stranger strayed out of his way,) spedily went out, and seeing the
King well mounted and richly clothed, and albeit he took him not to be his
sovereign Lord yet he thought he was some one of his Courtly Gentlemen.
Wherefore he said: what fortune has driven yeu (sir) into these so desert and
solitary places, and such as I marvel that you were not drowned a hundred
times, in these streams and bottomes whereof this Marrish and (...) Country
are full? It is the great God (answered Mansor) which has had some care of me,
and will not suffer me to perish without doing greater good turns and better
deeds than hitherto I have done. The kings coming thither, seemed to
Prognosticate that which after chanced, and that God had poured down the
tempest for the wealth of the Fisher man, and commodity of the Country. And
the straying of the King was a thing appointed to make void those Marshes, and
to purge and cleanse the Country. Semblable chances have happened to other
Princes, as to Constantine yt great, besides his City called New Rome, when he
caused certain Marshes and Diches to be filled up and dried, to build a fair
and sumptuous Temple, in the honor and memory of yt blessed Uirgin that brought
forth the Savior of the world. But tell me good man (replied Mansor) can thou
not show me the way to the Court, and whether the King is gone? for gladly (if
it were possible) would I ride thither. Uerely (said the Fisher man) it will be
almost day before ye can come there, the same being. x. leagues from hence.
Forsamuch as thou know the way (answered Mansor) do me so great pleasure to
bring me thither, and be assured that besides the yt good turn, for which I
shall be bound unto thee, I will courteously content thee for thy pains. Sir
(said the poor man) you seem to be an honest gentleman, wherefore I pray you
to light, and to tarry here this night, for that it is so late, and the way to
the City is very evil and combersome for you to pass. No no (said the King)
if it be possible, I must repair to the place whither the King is gone,
wherefore do so much for me as to be my guide, and thou shall see whether I
be unthankful to them that employ their pains for me. If King Mansor (said
the Fisher man) were here himself in person, and made the like request, I
would not be so very a fool, nor so presumptuous, (at this time of the night)
to take upon me without danger to bring him to his Palace. Wherefore (said the
King)? Wherefore (quod you)? because the Marshes be so dangerous, as in the
day time, if one know not well the way, the (...), (be he never so strong and
lusty,) may chance to stick fast, and tarry (...) for gage. And I would be sorry
if the King were here, that he should fall into my peril, or sufler anoyance,
and therwithal would deem my self unhappy if I did let him to incur such evil or
inco^brance. Mansor that delighted in the communication of this good man, and
desirous to know the cause that moved him to speak with such affection, said
unto him: And why carest thou for ye life, health, or preservation of our king?
What have to do with him that art so sorry for his state, and careful of his
safety. Ho, ho, said the goodman, do you say that I am careful for my prince?
Uerily I love him a hundred times better than I do my self, my wife or children
which God has sent me: and what sir, do not you love our Prince? Yes that I
do (replied the King,) for I have better cause than thou, for that I am many
times in his company, and live upon his charge, and am entertained with his
wages. But what (...) thou to care for him? Thou know him not, he never did
thee any good turn or pleasure: nor yet thou nedest not hope henceforth to
have any pleasure at his hands. What? (said the fisher man) must a Prince be
loved for gain and good turns, rather than for his justice and courtesy? I
see well that amongs you master Courtiers, the benefits of kings be more
regarded, and their gifts better liked than their virtue and nobility, which
makes them wonderful unto us: and ye do more esteem the gold, honor and
estates that they bestow upon you, than their health and sauegarde, which are
the more to be considered, for that the King is our head, and God has made him
such one to keep us in peace, and to be careful of our states. Pardon me if I
speak so boldly in your presence. The King (which took singular delight in this
Country Philosopher,) answered him: I am not offended because thy words
aproche so near the troth: but tell me what benefit have thou received of that
king Mansor, of whom thou make such account and (...) so well? For I cannot
think that ever he did thee good, or showed thee pleasure, by reason of thy
poverty, and the little furniture within thy house in respect of that which
they possess whom he loves and favors, and unto whom he she weth so great
familiarity and benefit. Do (...) me sir (replied the good man) for so much
as you so greatly regard the favors which subjects receive at their Princes
hands, as in deed they ought to do. What greater goodness, (...), or
benefit ought I to hope for, or can receive of my King (being such one as I
am,) but the profit and utility that all we which be his vassalles do
apprehend from day to day in the justice that he renders to every wight, by
not suffering the puissant and rich to suppress and (...) the feeble and
weak, and him that is (...) of fortunes goods, that indifferency be
maintained by the officers to whom he commits the government of his
provinces, and the care which he has that his people be not devoured by
exactions, and intolerable tributes. I do esteem more his goodness, clemency
and love, that he bears to his subjects, than I do all your delicates and
ease in following the court, I most humbly honor and reverence my king in that
he being far from us, does nevertheless so use his government, as we feel
his presence like the Image of God, for the peace and union, wherein we through
him do live and enjoy without (...) that little which God and fortune have
given us. Who (if not the King) is he that does preserve us, and defend us
from the (...) and pillages of those Thieves and Pirates of Arabie, which make
war and invade their neighbors? and there is no friend they have but they would
displease if the King wisely did not forbio and prevent their villainies. That
great Lord which keeps his Court at Constantinople and makes himself to be
adored of his people like a God, brideleth not so much the Arabians, as our
King does, under the Protection and sauegarde of whom, I that am a pore
Fisher man, do joy my poverty in peace, and without (...) of thieves do norish
my little family, applying my self to the fishing of Eeles that be in these
diches and fenny places, which I carry to the market towns, and sell for the
sustenaunce and feeding of my wife and children, and (...) my self right
happy, that returning to my cabane and homely lodge at my pleasure, in what so
ever place I do abide, because (albeit far of from neighbors,) by the been
(...) and diligence of my Prince, none stay my journey, or offends me by any
means, which is the cause (said he lifting up his hands and eyes aloft,) that
I pray unto God and his great Prophet Mahomet, that it may please them to
preserve our King in health, and to give him so great hap and contentation,
as he is virtuous and debonaire, and that over his ennimies (flying before
him,) (...) may evermore be victorious, for norishing his people in peace, and
his children in joy and Nobility. The King seeing that devout (...) of the
(...), and knowing it to be without guile or (...), would gladly have
discovered himself, but yet willing to reserve the same for better opportunity,
he said unto him. For so much as thou (...) st yt king so well, it is not
impossible but those of his house be welcome unto thee, and that for thy
Mansors sake, thou will help and do service to his Gentlemen. Let it (...)
you (replied he) that my heart is more inclined to the King, than to the wills
of those that serve him, (...) hope of preferment. Now being so affectionate to
the King as I am, think whither his household servant have power to command
me, and whither my willing mind be pressed to do them good or not. But me
think ye need not to stay here at the gate in talk, being so wet as you be:
wherefore vouchsafe to come into my house, which is your own, to take such
simple lodging as I have, where I will entreat you, (not according to your
merit) but with the little that God and his Prophet have departed to my
poverty: And to morrow morning I will conduct you to the City, even to yt royal
Palace of my Prince. Truly (answered the King) albeit necessity did not
provoke me, yet (...) honesty deserves well other reputation than a simple
Country man, and I do think that I have profited more in hearing thee speak,
than by hearkening to the flattering and (...) tales of Courting triflers,
which daily employ themselves to corrupt the ears of Princes. What (...) (said
the paisant,) think you that this pore coat and simple lodging be not able to
apprehend the precepts of virtue? I have sometimes heard tell, that the wise
avoiding Cities and troops of men, have withdrawn themselves into the
deserts, for leisure to contemplat heavenly things. Your skill is great replied
Mansor: Go we then, (...) you please to do me that courtesy as this night to
be mine host. So the King went in to the rusticall lodge, where in steed of
Tapistery and Turkey hangings, he saw the house stately hanged with fisher
nets and cords, and in place of rich seeling of Noble men's houses, he
beheld Canes and Redes which served both for the seeling and covering. The
fishermanaes wife continued in ye kitchen, whilst Mansor himself both walked
and (...) his own horse, to which horse the fisher man durst not once come
near for his courage and stately trappour, with one thing he was abunda^tly
refreshed, and that the most needeful thing which was fire, whereof there was no
spare, no more then there was of fish. But the King which had been daintely
sed, and did not well taste and like that kind of meat, demanded if his hunger
could not be supplied with a little flesh, for that his stomach was anoyed with
the only sauoure of the Eeles. The poor man, (as ye have somewhat perceived by
the former discourse,) was a plesaunt fellow, and delighted rather to provoke
laughter, than to prepare more dainty meat, said unto the King: It is no marvel
though our Kings do furnishe themselves with country men, to serve them in
their wars, for the delicate bringing up and little force in fine courtiers.
We, albeit the rain does fall upon our heads, and the wind assail every part
of our bodies all durtie and wet, do not care either for fire or bed, we feed
upon any kind of meat that is set before us, without seeking sause for
increasing of our appetite: and we (behold) are numble, healthy, lusty, and
never sick, nor our mouth out of taste, where ye do feel such
distemperaunce of stomach, as pity it is to see, and more ado there is to
bring the same into his right order and taste, than to ordain and dress a
supper for a whole army. The King who laughed (with displayed throat,) hearing
his host so merrily disposed, could have been contented to have heard him
still, had not his appetite provoked him and the time of the night very late.
Wherefore he said unto him. I do agree to what you allege, but perform I pray
thee my request, and then we will satisfy our selves with further talk. Well
sir (replied the Kings host,) I see well that a hungry belly has no lust to
hear a merry song, whereof were you not so egre and sharp set, I could sing a
hundred. But I have a little Kidde which as yet is not weaned, the same will I
cause to be made ready, for I think it cannot be better bestowed. The supper
by reason of the hosts courtesy, was passed forth in a thousand pleasant
passetimes, which the Fisherman of purpose uttered to recreate his guest,
because he saw him to delight in those devises. And upon the end of supper,
he said unto the King: Now sir, how like you this banquet? It is not so
sumptuous as those be that be ordinarily made at our Princes court, yet I
think that you shall sleep with no less appetite than you have eaten with a
good stomach, as appears by the few words you have uttered in the time of
your repast. But whereunto booteth it to employ time, or deined for eating, in
expense of talk, which serves not but to pass the time, and to shorten the
day? And meats ought rather to be taken for sustentation of nature than for
provocation or motion of this feeble and transitory flesh? Uerily (said the
King) your reason is good, and I do mean to rise from the table, to pass
the remnant of the night in rest, therewith to (...) my self so well as I have
with eating, and do thank you heartily for your good advertisement. So the King
went to bed, and it was not long ere he fell a sleep, and continued (...)
the morning. And when the Sun did (...), the Fisherman came to wake him,
tellyng him that it was time to rise, and that he was ready to bring him to
the Court. All this while the Gentlemen of the Kings train were searching
round about the country to find his majesty, making cries and hues, that
he might hear them. The King knowing their voices, and the noise they made,
went forth to meet them: and if his people were glad when they found him, ye
Fisherman was no less, amazed to seethe honor which the courtiers did unto his
guest. Which the courteous King perceiving said unto him: My friend, thou (...)
here, that Mansor, of whom (...) thou made so great account, and whom thou
saydst, that thou did love so well. Be (...), that for the (...) thou have
done him, before it be long, the same shall be so well acquitted, as for ever
thou shalt have good cause to remember it. The good man was already upon his
marybones beseeching the King that it would please him to pardon his rude
entertainment, and his overmuch familiarity which he had used unto him. But
Mansor causing him to rise up, willed him to depart, and said yt within few
days after he should hear further news. Now in these fennes and marrish
grounds, the King had already builded diverse Castles and lodges for the
pleasure and solace of hunting. Wherefore he purposed there to erect a goodly
City, causing the waters to be voided with great expeditio^, which city he
caused to be builded immediately, and compassing the circuit of the appointed
place, with strong walls and deep dyches, he gave many immunities and
privileges to those, that would repair to people the same, by means whereof,
in little time, the same was reduced to the state of a beautiful and welthie
City, which is the very same, that before we said to be Caesar Elcabir, as
much to say, The great Palace. This goodly work being thus performed, Mansor
sent for his host, to whom he said: To the end from henceforth thou may more
honorably entertayne Kings into thy house, and may entreat them with
greater sumptuositie, for the better solacyng of them with thy Courtesy and
pleasant talk, behold the City that I have builded, which I do (...) unto
thee and thine for ever, reserving nothing but an acknowledgemente of good
will, to the end thou may know, that a Gentleman's mind nousled in
villainy, is discovered, when forgetting a good turn, he incurreth the vice of
Ingratitude. The good man seeing so goodly an offer, (...) present worthy of
such a King, fell down upon his (...), and kissyng his foot with all
humility, said unto him: (...) if your liberality did not supply the
imperfection of my merit, and (...) (...) what wanted in me, to attain so
(...) state, I would excuse my self of the charge which it pleases you to
give me, and whereunto for lack of trainyng up, and use of such a dignity, I
am altogether unfit. But (...) that the graces of God, and the (...) of Kings
ought never to be rejected, by acceptyng this benefit with humble thanks for
the clemency of your royal majesty, I rest the servant and slave of you and
yours. The King hearing him speak so wisely, took him up, and embraced him,
saying: Would to God and his great Prophet, that all they which rule Cities,
and govern Provinces, had so good a nature as thine, then I durst be bold
to say, that the people should live better at their ease, and Monarchs
without great charge of conscience, for the ill behauiours of their officers.
Live good man, live at thine (...), maynteyne thy people, observe our laws,
and increase the beauty of the City, whereof from this time forth we do (...)
thee possesser.

And truly the present was not to be contemned, for that the same at this day
is one of the fairest that is in Africa, and is the land of the black people,
such as the Spaniards call Negroes. It is very full of gardens, furnished
with abundance of Spices brought from the Molucces, because of the martes and
(...) ordained there. To be short, Mansor showed by this gift what is the force
of a gentle heart, which can not abide to be vanquished in courtesy, and less
suffer that under forgetfulness yt memory of a received good turn be lost.
King Darius whilome, for a little garment, received in gift by Silofon, the
Samien, recompensed him, with the gaiue and royal dignity of that city, and
made him sovereign Lord thereof, and of the Isle of Samos. And what greater
virtue (...) illustrate the name of a noble man, than to acknowledge and
prefer them, which for natural shame and (...), dare not behold the majesty
of their greatness? God sometimes with a more courteous eye does look upon the
presents of a poor man, than the fat and rich offerings of him that is great
and wealthy. Even so a benefit, from what hand soever it proceeds, cannot
choose to bring forth the fruits of his liberality that gives the same, who
by using largess, feleth also the like in him, to whom it is employed. That
magnifice^ce no long time past used the Seigniorie of Venice, to Francesco
Dandulo, who after he had dured the great displeasures of the Pope, in the name
of the whole City, upon his return to Venice, for acknowledgement of his
patience, and for abolishmente of that shame, was with happy and uniform
acclamation of the whole state elected, and made Prince and Duke of that Commonwealth. Worthy of praise truly is he, that by some pleasure (...) an other to
his courtesy: but when a noble man, acknowleageth for a (...), that which a
subject is bound to give him by duty and service, there the proof of praise
caryeth no fame at all. For which cause I determined to displaye the history
of the barbarous king Mansor, to the intent that our Gentlemen, norished and
trained up in great (...), may assay by their mildness and good education, to
surmount the courtesy of that Prince, of whom for this time we purpose to take
our Farewell.

The Conclusion, with an Advertisement to the Reader.
(...) thou have gained for thy better instruction, or what conceived for
recreation by reading these. (...). Nouells, I am no judge, although (by
deeming) in reading and perusing, thou may (at thy pleasure) gather both. But
how soever profit or delight, can satisfy mine appointment, wherefore they
were preferred into thy hands, contented (...) I that thou do vouchsafe them.
Good lessons how to shun the darts and pricks of insolency, thou find
in the same. The virtuous noble may savor the fruits and taste the licour that
stilleth from the gummes or buds of Virtue. The contrary may see the blossoms
fall, that blome from the shrubs of disloyalty and degenerat kind. Young
Ge^tlemen and Ladies do view a plot founded on sured ground, and what the
foundation is, planted in shattring (...), with a fashion of attire to garnish
their inward parts, so well as (sparelesse) they employ upon the vanishing
pomp. Every sort and (...) that warfare in the field of human life, may
sent here the sauourous fruit (to outward liking) that fanished the sensual
taste of Adams wife. They see also what griftes such fading fruits produce unto
(...): what likewise the lusty growth and spring of virtues plant, and what
delicates it brauncheth, to those that carefully keep the slips thereof, within
the orchard of their minds. Diverse Tragical she (...) by the pens
description have been disclosed in greatest number of these histories, the same
also I have (...) and sweetened with the course of pleasant matters, of purpose
not to (...) the deyntie minds of those that shrink and fear at such
rehersall. And because suddenly (contrary to (...)) this volume is risen to
greter heap of leaves, I do omit for this present time sundry Nouels of merry
devise, reserving the same to be joined with the rest of an other part, wherein
shall succeed the remnant of Bandello, specially such (suffrable) as the
learned French man Francois de Belleforrest has selected, and the (...) done
in the Italian. (...) also out of Erizzo, Ser Giouani Fiorentino, Parabosco,
Cynthio, Straparole, Sansouino, and the best liked out of the Queen of (...),
and other Authors. (...) these in so good part with those that have and shall
come (...), as I do offer them with good will, courteously (...) such faults and
errors, as shall present themselves, either burying (...) in the (...) of
(...), or prefermitting them with the beck of Courtesy. The which in deed, or
the most part, had not offended thee, if time had not ben spent before the
Printer could (...) to an end hereof.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman for Nicholas England. ANNO. M. D.
LXVIL. Nouembris. 8.

Diverse Faults escaped in Printyng.
Faults. Correction. In the Summarie of the Nouels. Tarquinus Tarquinius Fol.
5. line. 12. because for that Fol. 39. page. 2. line. 19. On Or Fol. 41. line.
22. conciacion Conciliacion Fol. 47. line. 33. and to Fol. 53. page. 2. line.
26. these the Fol. 76. page. 2. xiij. Nouel. xij. Nouel. Fol. 87. line. 7.
xiiij. Nouel. xiij. Nouel. (...). Fol. line. 22. the these Fol. 92. line. 15.
page. 2. she a word (...) Fol. 94. line. 2. (...) Sestertios Eodem. line. 28.
(...) (...) Eodem. page. 2. line. 8. must be was Fol. 95. line. 5. Nouel. xv.
Nouel. xiiij. Eodem. Zenobia Queen of. etc. who although she was a gentle
Queen, yet a Christian Princess. etc. Zenobia Queen of. etc who although she
was a Gentile Queen, yet a Princess so worthy of. etc. Fol. 102. line. 31.
(...) sustained Fol. 105. line. 12. committing to commit Fol. 135. line. 25.
Dicilia Sicilia Fol. 141. line. 27. Paolina Paola Eodem. line. 3. In a word
(...) Fol. 154. page. 2. Tinnagoras Timagoras Fol. 161. line. 26. fawcons (...)
Fol. 163. line. 8. grisly (...) Fol. 167. page 2. line. (...). insu^mate
insinuate Fo. 178. line. 2. page. 2. qualitied qualified Fol. 185. line. 8.
page. 2. Romida Romilda Fol. 214. line. 22. To a word (...) Fol. 242. line. 22.
then when Fol. 249. line. 6. pa. 2. Sansantino San Fantino Fol. 292. page. 2.
line. 3. his her Fol. 306. page. 2. line. 17. arrived approved Fol. 359. line.
30. ssued issued Fol. 404. page. 2. line. 32. man's man is Fol. 407. line. 22.
To So

Le buone parole onzeno, Le cattiue ponzeno.

