Perlegi Tractatum hunv cui Titulus est (A relation of the Christians in the
World) eumque typis mandari permitto.

Iulij 29. 1639. Sa. Baker.

A RELATION Of the CHRISTIANS in the World.

Revelations 7. 9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great Multitude which no man
could number, of all Nations, and Kinreds, and People, and Tongues, stood
before the Throne and before the Lamb.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks. Anno Domini. 1639.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Honoratissimo, Domino Gulielmo
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primatiac Metropolitae, Regiae
Majestati a Consilijs Sanctioribus, Academiae Oxoniensis Cancellario, and
Patrono suo Colendissimo.
HAbes in libello isto (amplissime Praesul) Ecclesiae Catholicae statum, et
pomoeria. In quo, Augustam Ecclesiam Catholicam, non angustis modo Romani
Pontificis limitibus, (ut incassum somniant Pontificij) circumscriptam; nec in
obscuro aliquo, ut Africae, angulo, (ut non minus olim vane concluserunt
Donatistae) coarctatam; sed vere Catholicam: Hoc est, Universaliter extensam,
and ab Orient in Occidentem, et a meridie in Septentrionem sparsim diffusam
videri licet. Et mihi certe summa delectatio, et consolatio fuit, cum legendo
invenissem, et contemplando intellexissem, quam magna sit domus Dei
Omnipotentis; quam ingens possessionis ejus locus; quam fortis Ecclesia,
columna Dei viventis; contra quam, nec tyrannorum bujus mundi malitia, nec
potestatum infernarum astutia, quicquam sint praevalitura. De Dedicatione huius
Operis, (cum argumentum sacrum sit, ac Ecclesiasticum) non diu deliberandum
fuit, cuius tutelae Consecrarem. Tibi (Illustrissime ac Reverendissime Praesul,
(qui in Anglia nostra summus es Sacrorum Praeses, et Ecclesiae Patronus, non
vigilantissimus modo, sed et verissimus,) optimo iure dicari debet.

Ignosce itaque (Reverendissime Praesul) huic meae in dedicando (...): et
dignare etiam (suppliciter oro) hoc meum qualecunque sit opusculum, sub alarm
vestrarum umbra protegere.

Ego sane iam annosus, et senio confectus, hoc opus non sine magno labor and
multis vigilijs concinnatum, ad lucem publicam, (Reverentiae vestrae patrocinio
fretus,) fidens expono. Mibi quidem, in istiusmodi rhapsodijs conscribendis,
coepisse sat est. Nunc, ut alij, long me eruditiores, ad gumentum isthoc
prosequendum et illustrandum instigentur, vestrum erit. Quod ut usui publico
sit, Deum Optimum Maximum precor, per Iesum Christum, ut Authoritatem vestram
Ecclesiae tranquillitati quam diutissime servet.

Amplitudini vestrae addictissimus, and Reverentiae vestrae servus humillimus,
Ephraim Pagitt.

In Europe are 4 Sorts of christians The Protestants Papists Moscouits Greeks
These two last agree With the Protestants and are not subject to the Pope

In Africa are The Cophtie Under the Patriarch of Alexandria And the Abassin
christians in Aethiope Under their Abunna or Patriarch

In Asia are the christians Under the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Antioch, the
Armenians, Georgians, Circassians Christians in Cazan and Astracan ect. Under
the Patriarch Mosco. of ASia the less, and Under the Patriarch of Musall, The
Iacobits, Christians of St Thome Maronites ect



A Relation of the Christians in the WORLD.
HAving made a diligent enquiry of the estate of the Church of God upon Earth,
I do find, that it is not confined to any one Country or Nation; nor impaled
within any one Bishops Dioces; but truly Catholic or universal, dispersed
over the face of the whole Earth. Our blessed Lord and Savior being ready to
ascend into Heaven, commanded his Apostles, saying: Go ye Mat. 28. 19.
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost; And this his Commandment the holy Apostles (being
inspired from above) put in execution. They went forth and preached every
where, the Lord Mar. 16. 20.
working with them. In the Ecclesiastical Histories the Countries and Nations
are named in which, and to whom, they preached. And although some are persuaded
that those Churches are altogether perished, or become heretical; yet
according to our Lords promise of Assistance (not only to his holy Apostles,
viz. I am with you always but also to their Successors preaching after them even
to the Mat. 28. 20.
latter end of the world) Christianity in the substantial and essential
points of it remains in many of these Countries to this day. And truly it is
to me a matter of great consolation, (in so many changes of this World, and
oppositions of wicked men against them that do profess the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ) to see the Church of God preserved, and propagated upon the face
of the Earth: and not only the Doctrine of Christian Religion but also the
ancient Ecclesiastical Policy and government of Bishops to be mainted, The
Turks do not only permit but defend every man in the exercise of his Religion.
and defended, (through the providence of Almighty God) not only by Christian
Princes, but also by Mahumetan and Pagan Kings.

The world may be divided into the Old, known to the ancients which may be
subdivided into Europe, Asia, Africa, The division of the World.

New, late found out which may be sub-divided into America. the North and
South unknown lands.



EVrope has in Longitude (as some write) from the further part of Ireland
West, and the River Tanais East, about 2166 Miles, and in latitude 2220 Miles,
or there abouts. Africa is about twice as large as Europe; and Asia is
esteemed to be larger than them both.

I find in Europe four sorts of Christians: viz.

Protestants, Romanists, Muscovites, and Greeks.


The Protestants who inhabit the 1 Protestants England. Scotland. Cambdens
Brit. page 2. Ireland.
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, being about 1836 miles in compass, and
Ireland containing about 400 Miles in length, and 200 in breadth. Gildas
writes, that Britanie received the Faith in the time of Tiberius. Nicephorus,
Dorotheus, and others also write, that the Ecclesia Occidentalis, Reformata in
Regnis, Angliae. Scotiae, Hiberniae, Daniae, Norvegiae, Succiae, Transilvaniae.
Inhabitant etiam hi Christiani, Pontifi. cijs mixti, Germaniam, Poloniam,
Eranciam, Helvetiam, Rhetiam, Hungariam, Bohemiam, Belgiam.
Pontificia, in Hispania Italia, Francia.
nhabitant etiam hi Christiani, Protestantibus mixti partem Germaniae,
Poloniaae, Franciae, Belgiae, Helvetiae, Rhetiae, Hungariae, Bohemiae.

Orientalis Graeca, sub Patriarcha Constantinopolitano, Antiocheno,
Alexandrino, Hierosolymitano, Moscoviae, Bulgariae, Iberiae seu Georgianorum.
Chaldaea, aut Chaldaeis lingua vicina: haec Ecclesia dividitur in eam cui
imputatur, quod sit Nestoriana sub Patriarcha de Mosul alijsque ^hiChristiani
Mahumetanis and infidelibus mixti, inhabitant, Babyloniam, Assyriam,
Mesopotamiam, Parthiam, Mediam, Catthaiam, Tartariam, Indiam, etc.
Monophysitica Armeniorum, Iacobitarum, Coptorum seu Christianorum
Aegyptiacorum, Aethiopum seu Abassinorum.



Apostle Simon Zelotes preached in Britanie, and that he was Crucified, and
lies buried there: some suppose that he came with Ann. Anno. 35. addit. mar.
manu. S. quae habetur in Bibliotheca vaticana.
Joseph of Arimathea into Britanie: which Joseph you may read in Cardinal
Baronius his Annals, to have arrived here about the five and thirtieth year of
our Lord. Aristobulus, one of the seventy Disciples, Dorotheus.
was one of the first Bishops of Britanie. Some write that the Scots had a
Bishop called Palladius about the year 196. in the time of Donald, who first of
all the Kings of Scotland stamped the Cross upon his coin, being the badge of
Christianity. Merm. de conv. p. 60 Quorum sancta praedicatione rex Lucius and
totius Britanniae primates Baptismum susceperunt. Lib. sa. Teilai Ecclesiae
landaven. Archiep.


The memory of these Archbishops following, (viz.) Of Patrick in Ireland,
Palladius in Scotland, and of David in Wales; who Preached the most sweet Name
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in these Countries before named, will
never be forgotten.

In St. Peter's Church in Cornehill, London, remains a Monument, declaring
that King Lucius founded that Church for a Bishops See, and of a succession of
Archbishops there for 400 years. Elvanus sat Archbishop there, by whose
preaching, with others, King Lucius had been converted: as also Restitutus, a
married Bishop, who with other British Bishops subscribed the Synod at Arles,
Anno 350. Neither is Vodinus, one of the Archbishops Arles anno 350.
of London, to be left in oblivion, who was murdered for reproving King
Vortiger for putting away his wife, and marrying Rowen daughter to Hengist an
Infidel. Reverend Bid tells us of many Learned men and Bishops, in Britany
before and about the coming of Austin the Monk: As also of Bishop Aidan and
Finan, who are at this day reckoned among the Romish Saints although they would
have no Communion with the said Austin. Likewise, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Ridley, Bishop Latimer, and others, who restored Religion to the ancient
Purity, and sealed their Confession with their Blood, will be had in
Everlasting memory. There are now in the Kingdoms above named eight
Archbishops, and about eighty Bishops. The Clergy in these Kingdoms are
learned, best provided for, and the most honorable of the reformed Churches.

The Bishops are Barons, and sit in their Parliaments: and two of the English
Bishops, As there have been of the Clergy about 160. Lord Chancellours of
England, 80 Lord Treasurors, and all the Lord Keepers of the Privy Seal, were
generally Clergy men. The masters of Roles were all clergy men until the 26.
year of K. Henry 8. There have bin 12. Clergymen Lord chief Justices of
England. The victorious K. Edward 3. having a great care to advance such
persons in the great Offices of his kingdom and household, as did excel others
in innocence of life, About the 39. of his reign, had these clergy me^
officers. The Lord Chancellor, the L. Treasurer, the L. Privy Seal, the Mr. of
the Roles, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Treasurer of the Household, the
Mr. of his Jewel house, with many others. Vide Stow, p 266. Moreover in the
absence and minority of the Kings, diverse Clergymen have bin Custosses or
Vice-royes of the Kingdom.
viz. Durham and Eley, have some regalities in their Diocesses. In ancient time
the Kings of England placed Clergymen in the greatest Offices of the Kingdom.
The Protestants also inhabit the Kingdom of Denmark, with the Balticke
Islands, and the great Islands in the Ocean, as Islands part of Freisland.

The Kingdom of Norway being in length about 1300. miles, and not half so
much in breadth. There are in Denmark and Norway two Archbishopricks, and
fourteen Bishoprics. These Kingdoms received Christianity from the
Apostles or Disciples, as Merman Merm theatru^ convers. page 83.
affirms. There were two Danish Bishops in the first Council of Nice, viz.
Marcus Metropolitanus and Protogenes.

The Kingdom of Sweden bigger then France and Italy, in which Kingdom is one
Arch-Bishopricke, and seven Bishoprics. Mirae. de stat. relig. p. 128.
Transylvania.


The Kingdom of Transylvania in a manner entire.

In the Kingdom of Poland (being of no Poland. Brerw. enquire pref.
less space than Spain and France laid together) the Protestants in great
numbers are diffused through all the quarters thereof; having in every Province
their public Churches orderly severed, and bounded with Dioces.

There are also in Polonia many Greeks, or Russes, who have eight Bishops,
whose Metropolitan is the Archbishop of Kiovia. These Bishops are not
beggarly, but well provided for, and of good esteem. Isidore, Archbishop of
Kiovia, Matthew. a Micou. l. 2.
before named, went to the Council of Florence, attended with 100. Horse.

There are also many Armenians Christians, whose Bishop is resident in Leopolis.

In France the Protestants had at the conference of Poisie 2150 Congregations.
France.


In this Christian Kingdom, Philip the Apostle, with many holy Bishops,
preached the faith: as Dionysius Disciple of S. Paul, the first Bishop of Paris
and Martyrs, Lazarus Photinus Disciple of Polycarp, and Irenaeus B. of Lions,
Hilary B. of Poicteurs, Lazarus was the first Bishop of Masillea. Doroth. in
Synop.
who took great pains to purge France from the Arrian Heresy; Remigius
Bishop of Rhemes, who baptized Clodoveus the first Christian King of France.
Neither should we forget Germanus Bishop of Anxer, nor Lupus Bishop of Tros,
who Bed. l. 1. c.
crossed the Seas to aid the British Bishops against the Pelagians.

The Protestants have also the greatest Part of Germany.
part of Germany: all the temporal Princes of note, being of late Protestants,
except the Dukes of Bavaria and Clear, and in a manner, all the Free Cities
and Hanse Thesaur. Polit. Apot. 6
Towns. The Protestants detain also in their possessions the Archbishopricks
of Mirae de stat. Relig. lib. 1. cap. 33.
Magdenburgh and Breame, with the Bishoprics unto them belonging. As also the
Bishoprics of Verdden, Halberstad, Osnaburgh, and Minden. When Magdenburgh
Market. pa. 134.
was converted to the Faith, Albert was there Bishop. Cresceus Disciple of
Saint Paul was one of the first Bishops in Germany; and Winibrode an
Englishman, commonly Theat. convers. page 57.
called Boniface, is Famous amongst the Archbishops of Ments, whom the Pagans
murdered in hope of prey, and found only in his Coffers a few books and
Relics. The first Bishop of Wertburgh was Burchard a Britain: this Bishop is
Duke of Franconia, and Lord of part of Vortland. The first Archbishop of Breme
was Ausgarius, who converted Erick the third King of Denmark. Also in these
later times, the memory of Doctor Luther, (who caused Reformation in some parts
of Germany) is very precious in the Countries by him reformed.

They have also half the Netherlands: Parts of the Netherlands
there were lately Bishops in these parts, as amongst others, Amandus Bishop of
Utrecht, who converted the Gauntois to the Christian Faith. As also Frederick,
Bishop of the said See, who for reproving Lodowick the Emperor, for keeping
Judith, was put to death, but now in these Countries, and some others, they
have no Bishops: but appropriating the Church Livings to themselves, they give
their Ministers Pensions. But I fear, that in this their taking to themselves
the Church Livings, set apart by their Forefathers for the service of Almighty
God, and paying their Ministers pensions, they do no otherwise than a King of
Spain did, who taking very much from the Church, built a Monastery, or two; of
whom the Proverb went, That he had taken a Sheep from Almighty God, and given
him again out of it the Trotters. Now what the miserable Effects are, which
follow upon the want of Bishops in those Countries, let the abundance of
Heresies, Sects, Schisms, and Religions amongst them, testify to the world.

Also, they have more than half Switzerland, Switzerland, Grisons.
and the Grisons Country, in which Countries have been many Bishops.

The Protestants also live mingled with the Romanists in Hungary, Austria,
Bohemia, Hungary. Austria. Bohemia.
Piemont, and other places. Severinus is accounted the Apostle of Austria. In
those Countries have been many holy Bishops and Doctors, who have shined like
Stars in the Firmament, illuminating the Darkness of the blind World, with the
light of their Celestial Doctrine.

The second sort of Christians in Europe, are The Roman Catholics: Romanists.
Who inhabit
SPain, being in compass 1893 miles, or Spain.
thereabouts, in times past divided into many Kingdoms; but now united into
one. In this great Kingdom, are about Damianus a Goes, reckons eight
Archbishops, and 48 Bishops.
eleven Archbishops and many Bishops, men of great Dignity and Estate. Saint
James is affirmed to be the Apostle of Spain, as also Saint Paul: Osius Bishop
Eugenius was the first Bishop of Toledo. Damian. a Goes Hispan. page 19. Dam.
p. 21.
of Corduba, (whom Constantine honored for the marks of Jesus Christ that he
bore) and Isidore Bishop of Sivill, are famous for opposing the Arrian
Heretics with Illefonsus Archbishop of Toledo, Isidorus Scholar, Fulgentius,
and others. The revenues of the Spanish Bishops are very great. As the
Archbishop of Toledo has 250000 Ducats per annum: more than some Kingdoms.

Italy, being as some write 900 miles Italy.
in length, and in breadth from the Adriatic Sea to the Ligurian shore 240
miles, growing narrower in breadth, until it shut itself into two horns,
either of which are not above 14 miles in breadth. Of this Country the King of
Spain has a part; as the Kingdom of Naples and the Duchy of Millaine. In
it also, the Venetians; The Duke of Florence, and other Princes and
Commonwealths have several Dominions. In Italy also resideth the Bishop of
Rome, who as he has many Cardinals, Metropolitans, Archbishops, and Bishops
under him; so also many temporal Dukedomes and Principalities, of which he is
absolute Prince and Lord. The Bishops of Rome for the first 300 years, were
most of them Martyrs: as Clement who was tied to an Anchor, and cast into the
Sea: Fabian, who did prohibit the Emperor Philip to enter the Church without
some show of penitence: Cornelius who was banished, revoked, whipped and
beheaded, etc. Paul and Barnabas preached Christ first in Merm. Theat. Convers.
Rome: and afterward, was the first Bishop of Millaine, where Saint Ambrose
also sat.

France, mingled with Protestants as France. Doroth. in Synop.
before, being about 200 leagues square, in which is reckoned, Loraine, Saboie,
and Avignion (belonging to the Pope) and Geneva with four Territories not
subject to the French King. The Church Gallican is best privileged of all the
Churches in Christendom, that are under the Pope. It is more free from
payments to the Pope than the Church of Spain: as also to the King they pay
only the Disme; whereas in Spain the King has his Tertias, Subsidio, Pila,
Escusado, in all, a moitie of the Church Livings.

In France are reckoned 12 Archbishopricks, Relation of the most famous
Kingdoms, page 174.
104 Bishoprics, 540 Archpriories, 1450 Abbeyes, 12322 Priories, 567
Nunneries, 130000 Parish Priests, 700 Convents of Friars, 259 Commendants of
the Order of the Knights of Malta: six of the French Bishops are Peers of
France, who Bodin.
are to aid the King with their Council.

Poland, mingled with Protestants and Poland.
Greeks, as before: there are in Poland two Archbishopricks, and many
Bishoprics. The Archbishop of Guesne is Primate, and in the Imper. mu^d.
Catal. p. 40.
vacancy has regal Authority, precedeth in Council, proclaims the new
King, etc.

Some part of Germany, in which Country Part of Germany.
are reckoned seven Archbishops, and about 47 Bishops: Three of their
Archbishops are Princes Electours.

Half the Netherlands in which there Netherlands
are two Archbishopricks, and many Bishoprics.

One third part of Switzerland, and the Grisons Country, Austria, Hungaria,
Bohemia, Switzerland Grisons.
and some other Countries, mingled with Protestants as before.

The third sort of Christians in Europe, are the Moscovites
Under the great Emperor of Moscovia, whose Dominions in Europe and Asia:
extend from Narve to Siberia, West and East about 4400 Verstes, and from Cola
to Astracan, North and South 4226 Fletcher.
or thereabouts. A Verst is about three quarters of a mile. They received the
Fabr. relig. Moscov. page 170.
Christian Faith from Saint Andrew the Apostle, as their Histories report. They
have the holy Scriptures in their own tongue translated by St. Jerome, they
use the service of St. Chrysostom, translated into the vulgar; neither is
their Clergy mean, base or beggarly.

The now Emperor Michael honored his father Theodore with the Patriarkship of
Mosco: their Patriarch, Metropolitanes, Archbishops under him are men of great
dignity and honor: what their Clergy want in learning, they have and make good
in devotion and holiness of life. Some of their Bishops have 2000, some 3000
Rubbles per annum.

The fourth sort of Christians are the Greeks
Under the Patriarch of Constantinople, Greeks.
who live mingled with the Turks, and make two thirds and more of the
Inhabitants in many places of the Turks Dominions.

The Grand Signior allows the Christians Boter. Relat. par. 2. Grand. Turco.
the liberty of their Religion, they paying a tribute, and the Bishops their
Ecclesiastical Government. The Patriarkship Godin. Curiop. page 276.
of Constantinople being void, Sultan Mahumet the Emperor, that subdued
Constantinople, invested Gennadius into it with great solemnity, giving to him
his Pastoral staff, and many gifts. This Patriarch had 28 Provinces under his
jurisdiction: and yet has at this day many Metropolitans, Archbishops, and
Bishops under him. Stachis was their Doroth. in Synop. Romans 16.
first Bishop, placed there by St. Andrew, and now Cyril governs the
Patriarchall See, in a continued succession from Stachis before named. In this
Church the holy Apostles constituted many Bishops: As St. Paul placed Timothy
in Ephesus, Titus Doroth.
in Crete, Silas in Corinth, Silvanus in Thessalonica, with others: As St.
Andrew Merman. convers. Theatr. page 41. 42.
constituted Stachis (before named) Bishop of Bizantium, now called
Constantinople: Philologus Bishop in Sinope, Calistus Bishop in Nice, Polycarp
Disciple to St. John, was Bishop of Smyrna. In time following, this Church had
many holy Patriarchs, as St. Chrysostom, Gregory, Nazianzen, Paul the
Patriarch, (whom the Arrians banished, and strangled) with others, who governed
this Church, whose memories shall remain for ever.

The Patriarchs of Constantinople, before the Turks Conquest, were men of
great dignity and estate: as Theophylact about the year 936, kept 2000 Horse:
and Cedreu.
Alexander, An. 1043, died worth 800000 Crowns. The Patriarch now has (as
Chytraeus writes) about 20000 Dollers De stat. Eccles. pa. 45. He has yearly
from them 500. Scutes. Poss. muscov. p. 1.
yearly for his maintenance. He has also out of Moscovia some pension, which
was in time past under his jurisdiction. The Greeks of Corcira, Candy, and
other Islands, are subject to the Venetians, who have Archbishops, and Bishops
under them.

In Asia are the Christians
1 Under the Patriarch of Jerusalem, 1 Jerusalem.
who absolutely moderateth in Judea, and over all professors of the Greek
Religion throughout Syria. This Patriarch has had 101 Bishops under him. Tyrr.
histor. bells sacri, lib. 14. c. 12.
St. James (called the Just and the Brother of our Lord) was the first Bishop
there, and now Theophanes sits in that See: Simon Cleophas succeeded James:
among these Bishops Cyrillus was famous, a man greatly hated by the Arrians,
and deposed by them. This Church is most ancient: The Law went out of Syon, and
the Word of Isay 2. 3.
God from Jerusalem. This City was Emporium, The mart of the Christian Faith,
and the Mother of all Churches, as Theodoret Hist. Eccles. ^b. 5. cap. 9.
says.

2 Under the Patriarch of Antioch, 2 Antioch.
Who had 141 Bishops under him. Their first Bishop was St. Peter, and now
Athanasius. Tyrr. histor. bell. sacr. lib. 14. page 247.
The Disciples were first called Christians there. Ignatius the holy Martyr was
Bishop of this Church, and Cyril, who was slain for denying Numerian the
Emperor, son of Charus, to enter his Church, because he had sacrificed to
Idols. Charus was slain by Thunder, and Numerian by Aper.

3 The Georgians in Iberia, who have 18 3 Georgians. Chyt. de stat. Eccles. p.
22.
Bishops under their Metropolitan, or Patriarch.

4 The Circassians who inhabit a Country 4 Circassians.
about 500 miles long, and 200 miles broad.

5 The Mengrellians, who live as the 5 Mengrellians.
Circassians do, (by themselves) not mingled with the Mahumetans.

6 The Christians in Asia the less, who 6 Asia the less
except, the Cilitians and Isaurians are subject to the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Merman. Theatrum conver. p. 93.
These Churches of Asia the less St. John governed, and placed Bishops in them.

7 The Christians in the Kingdoms of 7. Christians of Casan and Astracan.
Cazan and Astracan, and other Countries in Asia, under the dominion of the
Emperor of Muscovia, who has under him, in Europe, and Asia, a greater extent
of Land than the Roman Catholics have in Europe. All the Asiatick Christians
before named are of the Greek communion, and observe the Greek rites.

8 The Armenians, under their two 8 Armenians.
chief Patriarchs: one of these Patriarchs lives under the Turk, the other
under the Persian. In Cardinal 'Baronius Annals, you may read of 1000 Armenian
Bishops: Thaddaeus (whom they much esteem) Annal. Tom. 12. p. 319. Relatio
Hist. duae duar. legate. Colon. An. 1611. p. 5.
preached the Faith to them: Now I hear the Patriarch of the greater Armenia,
to be called Moses. As these Christians live in Armenia the greater and lesser,
so also in many Countries and Cities of Asia, Africa, and Europe.

About the year 324, Gregory (whom Nicephor. li. 7. cap. 12.
they call Illuminator) was Bishop of Armenia, who suffered Martyrdom under
Licinius the Emperor.

In the year 1609, Abbas, the Persian Herb. relat.
Emperor, put to death 1000 of these Christians, upon a Letter fained to be
written from their Patriarch to the Pope of Rome, acknowledging him to be Head
of the Church.

9 The Iacobites, who inhabit a great part of Asia, and other places mingled 9
Iacobites.
with Mahumetans and Pagans. Their Patriarch Thom a Jesus. convers. l. 7. cap.
14. Zonor, annal Tom. 3. in Heraclio Brer. p. 150.
having many Bishops under him keeps residence in Caramite, the Metropolis of
Mesopotamia: we may read of a Patriarch of the Iacobites, in the time of
Heraclius the Emperor.

10 The Chaldean and Assyrian Christians, Chaldean under the P. of Mozul.
with others, under the Patriarch of Mozul, who have many of them their
Services in the Syrian Tongue, being the language in which our Lord preached.
These Christians inhabit, mingled with Mahumetans and Pagans, a great part of
Brerwood. enquire.
the Orient; for beside the Countries of Babylon, Assyria, Mesopotamia,
Parthia, Media, etc. wherein many of these Christians are found. They are
scattered far and near in the East, both Northerly in Cathaia, and Southerly
in India. Trigautius Hispan. exped. apud Sinab. p. 125.
reckons 14 Metropolitans, viz. of India, China, Cambaia, Mogor, Hilam,
Nzivin, Prath, Assure, Bethgarmi, Halack, Passes, Mauzeor, xam Raziqueor,
besides many Archbishops, and Bishops.

Cardinal Vitriacus in his History of the East, reports, these Christians
with the Hist. Orient. c. 77. p. 149.
Jacobites, to be more in number then the Latins and Greeks. These Christians
were converted by Saint Thomas the Apostle: and in their Service Book they have
this Hymn, as Trigantius reports. The Indians, Hisp. exped. apud Silias,
lib. 1. p. 124.
the Chinoises, the Persians, and other Islanders, and they that are in Syria,
Armenia, Grecia, and Romania, in commemoration of S. Thomas, do offer praise
to thy holy Name.

11 The Maronites in Mount Libanus, 11. Maronites.
who have a Patriarch; and eight or nine Bishops under him.

12 The Indians of Saint Thome, so called, 12 Indians of St. Thome.
because they received the Christian Faith from Saint Thomas the Apostle. These
Christians inhabit many places in the East Indies, as Melia-par (where Saint
Thomas was buried, and has a goodly Temple erected to his name) Angamall
(where an Archbishop resideth) Cranganor, Negapatan, Vaipecotan and others,
Trigautius writes that when the Hisp. exped. apud Sina, lib. 7. p. 125.
Portugals arrived at Cochin, that the Lord Jacob ruled the Malabar Church, who
styled himself Metropolitan of India and China, and that Joseph succeeded him.
Josephus Indus borne in Cranganor, in East India also writes of a great
Prelat, to Inter relat. novi. orb. p. 145.
whom twelve Cardinals were subject with two Patriarchs, and many Archbishops
and Bishops.

13 The Chinoises possess a Country 13. China. Imp. mund. catal. p. 159
Trigautius. Hisp. exped. apud Sinas, page 125. Kirk. prodro. page 58.
little less then all Europe. Saint Thomas preached the Gospel first amongst
them, afterward they had a supply of Preachers from Judea. K. Tay with Neu
huanti, reigning in the year 782. They erected a Monument, declaring the
bringing in of the Gospel into China in what Provinces Idem Pat. Eman. Dia^ in
Epist. 23. Aug. 1625. Pa. Francis. vid, Kirk. p. 58.
it was promulgated, and how many years it flourished. The Monument is graven
with Syrian Letters with these words:

Adam sacerdos Presbyter and Papalis Zinostan seu regionis Sinarum: in the
margent of this Monument, there are diverse names engraven of them that brought
the sweet Name of our Lord Jesus Christ among them, as Constantinus Saba cusio
seu Aethiops, Dominus Sergius, etc. Paulus Venetus writes of a Christian
Church in De Region. Orient. lib. 2. cap. 64.
the great City of Quinsay. I read also of Gaspara a China Bishop.

14 Cathaia is one of the largest Empires 14 Cathaia.
upon the face of the whole Earth, in which there be also many Christians. They
write of a Christian King of Tenduc, whose native Subjects are Christians:
besides he rules far and wide over many Provinces, whose inhabitants are
also for the most part Christians.

To conclude, there is neither speech nor language, but his voice has been
heard among them. The sound of the Gospel is gone out into all Lands, and the
Word of God into the ends of the World.

In Africa are these Christians Africa.
following
1 Under the Patriarch of Alexandria, 1 Alexandria.
whose jurisdiction has been from the River of Nilus, to the Gaditan straits.
In the City of Caire only are thought to be 200000 Christians, Saint Mark was
their first Bishop, and now Metrophanes governs and precedeth there, brought
up in Oxford, sent hither by Cyrill the then Patriarch to our late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. In Cardinal Baronious Annalls, you may read of a
Succession of Bishops from Saint Mark, to Gabriell, the then Patriarch. There
is a service in the Syrian tongue, set forth by Severus Patriarch of
Alexandria: also a service in the Cophts Language set forth in print by
Kirkerus. The Cophts are the native EEgyptians, and have a Patriarch of their
own.

Moreover Demetrius of Thessalonica has set forth a Service used in Cair, and
among the Christians in Arabia. The Holy Bishop Athanasius, who opposed the
Arrian World, was six and forty years Patriarch of Alexandria, with many
other Holy Bishops, as among others Poterius Bishop Evagr. li. 2. cap. 8.
of Alexandria, who was slain by the Eutychian Heretics, haled through the
streets, his body cut in pieces, and his Entrails chewed by them. The
Patriarchs of Alexandria have been great Princes, and wear a Crown: His
title is Oecumenick Judge.

So many Holy men lived in this Merman, theat. convers. pa. 30.
Church in ancient time, that it was called the Paradise of God.

2 The Abassine Christians, under the Abassines.
Emperor of Aethiopia, who inhabit many Kingdoms of Africa: They received
the Faith first from Philip, and afterward Saint Matthew the Apostle preached
among them: they have a Patriarch, or Abuna, a-man of great esteem and estate.
Their Abuna (when Alvares was in Aethiopia) was called Mark, a Reverend old
Alvar. sect. 14 pa. 1089. Purch.
Man, aged about 110, a man gracious in his speech, never speaking without
blessing of God, and giving of Thanks: when he goes out of his Tent he
rides upon a Mule, well attended: Their Churches are builded round, adorned
with rich hangings and Plate; They have their Service in their own tongue.
Zago Zabo Bugana Raze, that is, The Viceroy of Bugana, an Ethiopian Damian. a
Goes de Aethiop. morib page 203.
Bishop, was sent Ambassador from the Ethiopian Emperor, to John King of
Portugal, who remained in Europe many years; whose Confession of faith is set
down by Damianus a Goes. As also the Ethiopian Rites are set forth in Print
by Alvares, a Portugal Priest, who was some years Leidger in Aethiopia, sent
thither by the King of Portugal. Thomas a Jesuit De convers. omnigent. pa.
373.
writes of a long succession of the Abassin Abunas. There is also a succession
of the Christian Abassin Emperors, from Abraham called the Saint, who reigned
about the year 427, to Abbas and Claudius their late Emperors: It is
reported, Vid Gaulter Jesuit in Chronolog.
that the Turk has subdued much of the Prets Country; yet the Abassine
Religion may continue, which the Turk takes not from any.

3 The Christians also inhabit the Kingdom 3 Cephala. Cosmograp. fol. 99.
of Cephala. Thevet writes that they received the faith by the preaching of
the Abassines.

4. Moreover the Matacasian Kingdom 4 Matacassia^s Thevet. ib.
received Christianity by the means of the King of Cephala. The Matacasian King
placed over his Churches eight Bishops, and over them a Primate, or Patriarch,
whom they call Elchadie, or Ismael.

In time past Christianity flourished 5 North-west of Africa.
in the North-west part of Africa. We read of Synods there of above 200
Bishops, and in one Province called Zingitana, (where Carthage stood) of 164
Bishops to be under one Metropolitan. When these Churches flourished, they
opposed the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome over them, as appears by
writings of St. Cyprian, St. Augustine, the sixth Council of Carthage, and by a
Synod at Melevis, in both which the African Fathers forbad appeals to Rome. In
the North-west parts of Africa do remain only now two Bishopriks: (viz)
Septa and Tanger: And whereas in Barbary, Algier, and other places, there are
many thousands of Christians in Captivity, they are allowed by their Patrons,
the Moors, the liberty of their Religion: and the learnedest or eldest, is to
the rest in stead of a Priest.

6 Beside the subjects of Prester John, very many people of the neighbor
Kingdoms, mixed with Mahumetans, and Heathen people do profess the Religion,
Miraeus de stat. Relig. lib. 3. p. 196.
and Rites of the Abassin Christians, as Miraeus affirms.

7 In Congo, called by some Manicongo, there are, or have been some
Christians. Idem ibid.
Miraeus reokoneth up a succession of nine Christian Kings in that Kingdom.

8 In Monomopata there have bin some Monomopata.
Christians: and they have had a King baptized.

9. In the Isle of Zocotora there are some Zocorara. Herbert. relat.
Christians, who have also a Protomist, or Bishop over them.

10 The Portugals and Spaniards inhabit certain Towns and Forts in Africa, as
also the English and Hollanders reside in some places of Africa.

Miraeus sets down Alphabetically the Bishoprics of Africa, and reckons
about 430; but howsoever many of the Bishoprics are not, but ruinated and
dissolved; yet the Fame of the Sanctity, and learning of their Holy Bishops
heretofore, shall continue for ever: As of St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage: St.
Austin Bishop of Hippo: Aurelius Bishop of Carthage: Athanasius Patriarch of
Alexandria; Origin, Tertullian, Arnobius, and others, who governed the Church
of God after a most singular manner, and having finished their course, rest
with God in Heaven.

But by the way, to add a word or two, for the better understanding of this my
Relation: Whereas you have heard of many Bishops in Europe, Asia, and Africa,
it will not be impertinent to set down what manner of men these Bishops in the
Primative Church were: for some suppose Bishops and Elders to be all one,
(which was the Herefie of Aerius) and that they lived meanly upon Alms and
Stipends.

For the first, the Office of a Bishop is set down by St. Paul, Titus the 1.
and 5. For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou should set in order
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City. Here we see Elders,
or Pastors to be in every City: But Titus, the Bishop, had the charge to order,
and ordain Elders for the whole Island, in which we read 100 Cities to have
been, besides Towns: Titus was their first Bishop, and there is now an
Archbishop residing there, who has Bishops under him.

For the second, whereas some suppose that Bishops then lived upon alms or
stipends, hear what Saint Augustine has left written of his little
Bishopric of Epist. 225. Bishop of Hippo, anno 395.
Hippo, in Africa. (Saint Augustine was a Patricians son, and had a fair
estate from his Father:) I (says he) went not from Riches, but to Riches: my
fathers estate left me, was not the twentieth part in comparison of the Farms
and other Estates which I was Lord of by being Bishop of Hippo. In the 60
Epistle of Saint Cyprian, Cyp Ep. 60. Bishop of Carthag. an. 250.
you may perceive the estate of the Church of Carthage, of which place he was
Bishop. Also Eusebius sets down Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 42. Cornel Bishop of
Rome, anno 252.
the condition of the Church of Rome, under Cornelius the Bishop and Martyr:
who had under him 155 Clergy men, besides a multitude of Widows and Poor, who
were abundantly relieved, and lest any man should think this to be done
penuriously. The said Cornelius, writes to Fabian Bishop of Antioch, that so
great a multitude were by the Providence of God made rich, and abounding in all
plenteousnesse. In ancient time the Church Goods were divided into four Read
Do. Saravia, lib. 2. of honor due to Prelates, c. 12.
parts, one to the Bishop for the mayntenance of his Dignity and State, the
second to the inferior Clergy, the third to the poor, and the fourth for
building, repayring and adorning of the Church, and other uses.

But whereas, some think, the chief points of Reformation to be put down
Bishops, and to ceaze upon Church Livings, and to put their Ministers to
stipends. I suppose it to be a great plague laid upon a Church, to make their
Ministers Stipendaries: and so to depend upon the benevolences of their people,
it being the curse of God denounced upon the Priests of the Posterity of Elie,
to bow for a piece of silver, and to crowch for a morsel of bread: For the
miserable condition of 1 Samuel 2. 36.
Stipendarie Ministers, read Doctor Saravia, Lib. Honor due to Prelates, c.
32.
who sets down the poorness of their Stipends, as also the difficulty of
attaining those little Pittances allotted to them, viz. that often the Ministers
are compelled to travel no small iourneyes to their Pay Masters, in most
humble manner (as if it were begging their Stipends) and yet many times sent
away with empty Purses, and laden with reproachful words, and this not only by
the Treasurers, but all by men of base condition, as Shoomakers, Tailors,
Curriers, etc. who are ready to reproach their poor Ministers, saying, You are
our servants, we pay you your wages: he reports also that he heard some of
their Burgomasters say, We must take heed to these our Ministers, especially,
that their Stipends be not so great: they that too much pamper their servants,
shall find them stubborn and contumacious.

The greatest of the Primative Persecutours, is affirmed, to be Julian the
Emperor: Lord Coke 2 part of his Reports.
Who although he set forth no Mandate to put Christians to death; yet he
endeavored by subtle means to undo Christian Religion: forbidding Christian
Schools, and the use of Learning, debarring them from all offices of
government, and burthening them with heavy taxes and payments: he robbed the
Church, and spoiled Spiritual Persons of their Revenues, and took away their
mayntenance:

Whereas other Tyrants persecuted Presbyterors: the Presbyters, or Ministers
Julian persecuted Praesbyterium, the whole Order of Ministers, or Priesthood:
by which means none would apply themselves to the study of Divinity, when
after long, painful, and costly study, they should have nothing to live upon.
Such Reformations before-named, may rather be called Persecutions than
Reformations of a Church.

Is this a Reformation, to dispoyle their Bish^ps of their Livings, which they
enjoyed from the very beginning of Christianity amongst them, and to root out
the very name of Bishops from among them.

Is this a Reformation to appropriate to themselves, or convert to profane
uses the Livings of their learned Pastors, set apart by their forefathers for
their maintenance, and put them to pour Stipends, and often pay them as the
Soldiers are paid in some places with Flemmish cheese?

Is this a Reformation to pilfer and pill Churches of their Plate and rich
Ornaments, which many a devout Saint had offered to the service of Almighty
God, and to convert them to profane uses, which the very Goths and Vandals
durst not touch (no not in their Enemies Churches) for fear of Gods heavy
indignation upon them?

Is it a Reformation to pluck down Churches, built to the honor of God with
great labor and cost? (I have heard one tell me, that he saw the great Church
at Redding, overthrown with a Mine) God be merciful to us, and deliver all
them that bear the name of Christ from such Reformations. But whom should I
exclaim upon for this exercrable wickedness: upon the Reformers, God forbid?
they I hope, had no such intent, or upon the Ministers who had delivered their
Magistrates from their slavery to the Pope: alas, by this means they were
brought to misery and slavery. But upon some covetous persons, men void of all
Religion, who under color of Religion and Piety, joining with the Reformers,
made a prey of the Church, and brought it to this misery.

How can these men expect an inheritance with Christ in Heaven, who have
defrauded him here in earth? But what do I telling them of Heaven. If Almighty
God did punish Ananias and Saphyra with sudden death, who gave much to the
Church, and kept back only some part dedicated to God, and that of their own:
how shall these men stand in judgment that never gave any thing of their own,
but have seized upon those livings, which not they, but their Pious
Forefathers, with many Execrations had given and dedicated for the Service of
Almighty God.

In this their execrable dealing, they have given great offense, not only to
the Romanists, but to them who are displeased with the Roman Superstitions and
Doctrines, and would willingly make a separation from them: but they see in
these Reformations, not a secession from their enormities, but rather a
defection from all Antiquity. In my poor opinion, to overthrow the Policy
and Government instituted by Christ in his Church, and continued to this our
age, and used in all Churches else, cannot be a Reformation, but rather a
Deformation. All this I write not that I blame that which is reformed, but for
the amendment of that which is deformed, which Almighty God grant in his good
time. Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, was wont to say, That it is in a
manner all one to have no Clergy at all, as a beggarly or base one.

In America.
THere are some Christians, both Roman Catholics, and Protestants. The King of
Spain is said to have in America four Regions, or at least the Maritine parts
of the said Regions.

The Regions are New Spain, Castella, Neuva, Peru, and Brasile.

The Hollanders have surprised a great part of Brasile.

Some write that the Indians had some knowledge of Christ before the Spaniards
arrived there.

For the Estate of Religion in West India, under the Spaniard, most of the
Inhabitants Breew. p. 20.
of the Inland Countries, and wilder parts, continue in their Paganism. Thomas
a Jesus writes. Although De convers. omni Gent. lib. 1. page 4.
(says he) the Indians have long enjoyed the Husbandry of Ministers, so that
all are baptized, yet very many of them worship Idols, who taking offense at
the covetousness of their Parish Priests, blaspheme the Christian Faith.

In America also are diverse Plantations of Protestants, English and Dutch, not
only in the Islands, but also in the continent. And thus much I have related of
the Christians in the World: but whereas many places of the World are unknown
to us, so also are the sheep of our great Shepherd, who cannot all be
counted, we being ignorant of the Pastures in which they feed. The Spaniards
have in West India some Bishops.

2 What manner of Christians.
AS I have in the first place reckoned up these several sorts of Christians
before named. So in the Second place my purpose is to set down what manner of
Christians these be, both for soundness of Faith, and holiness of life: For
the first, these Christians are all Baptized in the Name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. They receive the Holy Eucharist in both kinds;
according to our Lord and Saviors institution. They Believe the Creed, retain
the Canonical Scriptures; yea, from some of these Churches, both we, and the
Roman Catholics, have received the Sacraments, and holy Scriptures. Seeing
then that these Christians use the same Sacraments as we do: Seeing they
believe in Jesus Christ, and profess to fight under the Banner of Christ
Crucified, and rejoice in their suffering for his sake: far be it from us
ever to think these Christians to be cast away and rejected from being of the
household of Faith.

Of these Christians Brocard the Monk testifies.

Moreover, those whom we judge to be damned Heretics, as the Nestorians,
Iacobits, Maronites, and Georgians, and such like are found to be, for the
most part, honest and simple men, living uprightly Terr. Sanct. descrip. page
325.
toward God and Man. But to answer some particular objections made by some
Roman Catholic against these Churches.

And first for the Greek Christians, Greeks.
whom some Roman Catholics account erroneous in their opinion concerning the
proceeding of the Holy Ghost, whom they affirm to proceed from the Father by
the Son. Now they do acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the
Son, as well as of the Father; because the Apostle says, He is the Spirit of
the Son: and in the Gal. 4. John. 16.
Gospel he is called the Spirit of Truth. Now seeing it is no other thing to
be the Spirit of the Father and the Son, then to proceed from the Father and
the Son. They agree with us in Judgment, though they differ in Words, so
says Lombard, Thomas a Jesus, and also Cardinal Tolet affirms, the
understanding Greek (saying In Joan. Cap. 15. not 25.
That the Holy Ghost proceeds by the Son) signifies thereby nothing but
that which we our selves profess. But for full satisfaction in this point,
Read the Book lately set forth by the most reverend Father in God, the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury Page 24. 25.
his Grace, (my Honorable Patron) in which it will appear: The Greeks to
differ from us in form of Words only: So the Greeks deny not the Holy Ghost,
whom they acknowledge to be the third Person in Trinity, God equal with the
Father: Neither are they Heretical in this point, as some affirm them to be:
so Condemning and casting into Hell so many Millions of Christian souls,
redeemed with the precious blood of his dearest Son Jesus Christ, and for
this point only: Moreover Guido the Carmelite, Prateolus, and others, impute
unto the Grecians diverse errors, which Lucianus of Cyprus, a Bishop, a learned
Dominican, and a worthy man (as Possevine the lesuite accounts him) shows
to be falsely ascribed to them. Possevine biblioth. li. 6. cap. 1.
As that they teach, simple Fornication to be no sin, That it is no sin to
lend upon Usury: That it is not necessary to make restitution of things
uniustly taken away, with other things being mere slanders. Thomas a Jesus
writes, that one of the principal Convers. omn. Gent. l. 7. par. 1 c. 33
things that makes the Grecians so averse from the Latins is, that they are
wronged by them by untrue reports, and slanderous imputations. Of the Greek
Communion are the Muscovites, the Russes in Poland, the Georgians, Circassians,
Mengrellians, and Melchites, all these observe the Greek Rites.

2 Again, a great part of the Christians in Asia, Persia, Tartaria, and other
Provinces are Heretics; Who affirm, That there were two Persons in Christ, as
well as two Names: But this Error they have rejected, as Onuphrius writes,
they hold nothing In vita Iulij 3. p. 389. Edit. Col. 1626.
savouring of that Error. These Christians, indeed, make a scruple of calling
the blessed Virgin the Mother of God, left they should seem to make her the
Mother of the holy Trinity and divine Essence.

3 The Christians in Egypt, Aethiopia, with the Iacobites in Syria, are
accused to be infected with the Heresy of Eutyches, whereas they curse Eutyches
for an Heretic, for confounding the two Natures of Christ. They affirm, The
two Natures in Christ to be so united, that there is one personated Nature
arising of two Natures, not personated without mixtion or confusion. As Thomas
a Jesus, and others affirm.

4 They scandal also the Abassine Christians for using Circumcision: If you be
circumcised, you are fallen from Grace, and Christ profits you nothing;
whereas they circumcise not for any Religion; but only it being an ancient
custom of the Aethiopians. They accuse them also of Anabaptisme, For that they
wash themselves yearly in the floods, in memorial of Christ's Baptism: As the
Spaniards do yearly in memorial of Saint John Baptist: And the like are the
imputations laid upon other Churches. To conclude this point, through the
merciful goodness of God, all these different sorts of Christians (by reason
of delivering certain points of Faith, mistaking one another; or variety of
opinion touching things not Fundamental; yet) agree in one substance of Faith:
and are so far forth Orthodoxe, that they retain a saving Profession of all
duties absolutely necessary to salvation, and are members of the true Catholic
Church of God. As these Christians are Orthodoxe in the main: so for their
holy lives and conversations they are to be admired, and may be exemplary unto
others.

Holiness of Lives.
FIrst, for their Reverence in Churches, no man is allowed to walk, talk, or
sit Reverence in Churches. Godig. de Abas. rebus page 133.
in them, especially, in the time of Divine Service. In Aethiopia, old men are
allowed to use Crutches in the Church, and weak men to lean against the walls.
Johannes Faber reports of the Rasses, that he has Religio Moscov. page 188.
not seen the like of them, for their frequenting Prayer, and devotion in
their Prayers; who lying prostrate upon the ground, pour out their devout
Prayers unto Almighty God.

For their Chastity, they permit no Chastity.
Stews, nor Brothel-houses among them. They punish Adultery with death. The
Adulterer (among the Aethiopians) is accounted to dishonor the Emperor from
whom all Honor is derived: Adulterers among them are cast alive unto the Lions.

They are (among other virtues) great In Epist. apud Fra. Hesse in itinerario.
Godig. lib. 1. cap. 16.
lovers of Truth. Among us (says Pretegian) if any man willingly tell a lie,
he is accounted a man worthy of death: for the first he is admonished; for the
second he does penance; for the third he is led by a rope about his neck, out
of the Town or City, and banished into some Desert, where commonly he perish
for hunger.

For their Fasts, they keep them very strictly, far unlike the Roman
Catholics in the West, who allow men to drink Wine and to eat sweet Meats
in their very fasts. Thomas a Jesus writes, that De convers. omn. Gent. p. 284.
the austere living of the Greeks, causes them to contemn the Latins: but
let the Greeks know (says he) that Christian Righteousness does not consist
chiefly in macerating the Body; but in Charity, Faith, Hope, and other
virtues. Although these Christians are not so learned as we suppose the
Christians in the West to be; yet they got far beyond them for godliness
and devotion. And if these Christians shall be excluded Heaven, who join
believing and doing, Faith and Works together: alas! where shall they appear
that come far short of them?

But as you have heard of the great multitude of Christians in the World; of
their Religion, holy Lives, and Conversations: we may in the next place
consider what has been the bane of the Church, Bane of the Church.
(viz) Ambition; which was the ruin of the Angels in Heaven, and caused man to
lose Paradise: Of this our Lord gave special warning to his Apostles, when
they strove who should be greatest. And St. Paul, more especially to Romans 11.
the Romans: Boast not thy self against the Branches: Be not high minded, but
fear.

A great Controversy arose among the Bishops in the west parts of the World
who should be greatest. The Bishop of Rome sitting in the Imperial City,
claimed superiority above his fellow Bishops, precending a Canon of the
Counsel of Nice: As also the donation of Constantine the Emperor. Likewise
the Patriarch of Constantinople (the Emperors Court being removed thither)
claimed the like pre-eminence, by the Decree of a Council, also by Donation 4
Gener. coun. at Calcedon. can. 9. ibi. terminentur.
of Maurice the Emperor. Indeed the Eastern Church may challenge to her self
some pre-eminence, in regard of her great privileges and prerogatives, as
having all the Apostles Sees, the greatest number of Patriarchs, being the
bigger Church, and more ancient.

The Majesty of the Emperor of Constantinople for above 1000 years, which
has with stood Paganism, and Mahumatisme: And of the Emperor of Moscho, and
Trebizond, for some hundred of years. The authority of seven general Counsels
held among them. The Syrian Language, in which the Son of God delivered his
Holy Oracles: the Hebrew and Greek Tongues, in which they were Registered: and
which has had not only the Holy Apostles, but also Christ himself, when he was
in his flesh, preaching among them. And this Church we are forced to confess
(with the Bishop of Bitonto) to be our Mother Church, from whom the Latin
Church has received the Holy Scriptures, the Creedes, the Sacraments, and
Christianity it self; as the very names of Baptism, Eucharist, Bishop,
Deacon, Presbyter, and many other sacred things do testify,

Moreover, they have (as they affirm) St. Peter's Chair, who was Bishop of
Antioch, Allegations of the Patriarch of Antioch, and Germanus Patriarch of
Constantinople, excommunicating the Pope. Math. Paris. p. 465
and governed that Church many a year: He was there Incathedrated, with great
reverence received and esteemed: But going to Rome, he was there most vily
used, and put to a most cruel death, with his fellow Apostle St. Paul. They
also affirm that the City of Antioch (commonly called Theopolis, that is, The
City of God) must needs be much dearer to St. Peter, which honored and
reverenced him, than the City of Rome, which most unworthily used him, and put
him to death. They moreover affirm, that he must rather leave the Keys to the
Greek Church, than to the Romish, defiled with Simony, Usury, Avarice, and all
other Vices whatsoever. The Greeks also charge the Latins with diverse errors
besides the challenging of the Supremacy, which they hold to be most grievous
and intolerable: to teach all, and to be taught of none, and Dictator-like to
give Laws to bind other Churches, yea, in things against their Consciences, as
is their Doctrine of Purgatory, of Image Worship, abusing their Fasts, making
no conscience to drink in them al day long: that they scarce read the Sacred
rules, Irenaus Rodoginus. page 18.
and holy Scriptures; (saying) That the Popes Commandments, who for the time
sits in the Sea of Rome, are their Canons and Laws.

That they make no account of Perjury, yea that the Pope freeth them of idem
ibidem
all Perjury, whenever they intend to break any bargain or covenant made
with any man.

That the Pope and his Priestly train remit slaughter, Perjury, and all kind
of crimes past, or to come; by which remission there is a gate opened to
villainy: And that which is most ridiculous, for the future time, they will
remit to a determined time of Months or Years, that the Latin Bishops are
accessory to the death of Christian people, the Pope especially, who
pronounces the killer of Christians, such as resist the Papacy, blessed and
happy.

That they shut up by their Laws all Priests and Deacons from marriage, and
hold it an abomination to receive the Sacrament from married Priests.

That there are many Church Men among them, that commit whoredom, Idem. p. 23.
and all kind of uncleanness most securely, without punishment.

They accuse the Latins of many more Errors, both in their Doctrine, as also
in their manners; some of which you may find in Cardinal Baronius Annalls.
Tome 11 Anno Christi 1054. with some Iren. Rodog. page 30.
answers to them by the Cardinal. But this Church God has humbled, being
subdued by the Mahumetans, living as the Israelites in their Aegypticke
Bondage. We may see their lamentable estate in the late Martyrdom of learned
Cyril, late Patriarch of Constantinople, who had long and wisely governed that
Church. And it seems that this his Crown of Martyrdom was not to him
unexpected: as appears by a clause of a letter, written by him to our late
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, viz.

For the Name of Christ (says he) which we profess, and whose marks we bear
about in our Bodies, it is a joy to us to be afflicted and vexed. so also if it
be the Will of God, to abide the utmost extremity of their cruelty; that in
the fiery trial our Faith may shine more bright, and God receive the greater
glory.

This Church has been humbled (as before) but the Bishops of Rome have
exalted themselves, not only above their follow Bishops, but also above their
Lords the Emperors, and the whole Church of God.

For the First, Pope Boniface the third having obtained of Phocas the Tyrant,
Anno. 606.
the glorious Title of Universal Bishop, by little and little the Bishops of
Rome, subdued diverse Bishoprics under them. As Donus the first subjected
Ravenna, about the year 676. Pope Stephen the ninth subdued Millaine, Anno
1057. and so others. Yea Urban the 2. exacted an oath of Bishops, for the
further establishing of their Authority.

For the Second, Leo Isaurus being perplexed with war in Asia, and
Constantinople it self being besieged by the Caliph, Pope Gregory the second
stirred up the Princes of Italy against the said Emperor, who took Italy from
him; of which the Pope has a part, now called St. Peter's Patrimony, which the
Emperor could never again recover: The Bishops of Rome dividing the Empire
into the East and West, Pope Leo the third proclaimed Charles of France
Emperor, about the year 881. And Pope John the thirteenth, translated the
Empire about the year 968, from the French to the Germans.

Thus by little and little the Emperors waxed weaker, and the Popes stronger,
until the time of Gregory the seventh, who founded (as Aventine writes) the
Pontifical Empire. To this Annal. li. 5. a. 447. In vit. Greg. 7.
Man (says Onuphrius) the Church of Rome is beholding for her freedom, and
that she is preferred above all Kings and Emperors, whom before they obeyed
as their Lords, acknowledging themselves to be their Vassalls; as manifestly
appears among other Records, by the Dating of their ancient Bulls and
Charters, thus expressed: Such a one, our Lord and Emperor reigning. As also
by the Letters of the Bishops of Rome, Guichard. lib. 4.
written to the Emperors; as of Pope Leo the first to Martian: By all means
we are to be obedient to your Piety, and most Religious Will: As also of
Gregory the great Epist. 59.
to Maurice the Emperor: I being subject to your command; and of diverse
others, as of Liberius to Constantius: Leo the first to Theodosius: Simplicius
to Zeno: Foelix to the same Emperor: Pope Anastatius to Anastatius Epist. 6.
the Emperor: Martin to Constantine, with many more. And some of the Epist. 3.
In sexta Synod. Constant. act. 4. Epist. 1.
Bishops show a reason of this their Obedience to be, because they are
commanded so to do in Holy Scripture: St. Peter himself commanding Obedience
to the King, as 1. Pet. 2. 13. To the K. as unto the superior.
supreme.

Thus they were for many hundred years subject to the Emperors: but now they
claim a superiority above Kings and Princes, and challenge to themselves
plenitude of Jurisdiction, to take away, and to give Empires and Kingdoms at
their pleasures, bringing the Emperors in subjection.

Pope Constantine gave his Feet to kiss to Justinian the Emperor. Gregory the
seventh compelled Henry the fourth to wait barefooted at his Door three days
and three nights, craving Absolution. Alexander the third set his feet upon
the Emperor Fredericks neck.

And as they have lift up themselves over their fellow Bishops, and their Lords
the Emperors, so also over the whole Church of God, (viz.) Above General
Counsels: A General Council is the representative Church of God upon Earth:
they claiming power to judge and control all men, her self to be judged of
none: yea, to make new Articles of Faith. And as the Donatists falling from the
unity of the Church, fell also into this Heretical Opinion, That the
Catholic Church of God was no where to be found, but in a corner of Africa,
where they dwelt, and amongst them. So the Romanists affirm the Catholic
Church of God to be only in Rome, and in the Countries subject to their
Bishop. And therefore they term themselves Catholics, excluding all other
Christians in the World out of the Catholic Church, and so Heaven, and putting
them into the state of damnation, (though never so Orthodox and Pious) for not
being subject to their Bishop only. Yet many of these Christians, by them so
damned; suffer grievous persecutions for Jesus Christ's sake; which they might
quit themselves of, if they would renounce their Savior; and also attain
great privileges and preferments. And that which is more, some of these
Churches so damned, and condemned by them, never heard of the Bishop of Rome.
Postel writes a Book of the great multitude of Comp. Cosmog.
Christians unknown to the Latin World. Before, the Papacy of Julius the
third (writes Miraeus) the name of the Chaldean Patriarch Miraeus de stat.
relig. l. 2. cap. 5.
was unknown to us: Neither do I find any mention of him in the Popes
Records. And yet Cardinal Amuleius reports, Narratio Card. Amulei. ad
Con-Trident. pa. 195. acta conc. Tride^t.
That he and his Bishops had long kept the Faith, and also many of them had
suffered Martyrdom for Christ's Name. Also the Indian Christians of Taprobane,
and the Islands adjacent (says Thevet) nor their Cosm. lib. 12 cap. 2. fo. 421
Fathers never heard of the Pope of Rome, nor his Cardinals, nor of the Greek
Patriarchs, nor of the Counsels, until the Portugals came among them; and yet
they kept the Ceremonies of the Primative Church, which they received from the
Apostles, and their Disciples.

God forbid that all these Christians, and especially they that have given
their Bloods for Jesus Christ's Name, and glory in his Cross, should be
excluded for having any share, or benefit by Christ's Blood; and this for not
being subject to the Pope of Rome, and for not being members of the Roman
Catholic Church, which they never heard of.

By this their uncharitableness, do not the Romish Catholics cut themselves
off from the unity of the Catholic Church: As Firmilian writes to St.
Cyprian, of Pope Stephen Excommunicating other Cypr. Ep. 75. p. 204.
Churches.

Thou have cut off thy self from the unity of the Churches: Deceive not thy
self; he is a true Schismaticke that makes himself Apostate from the
Communion and Union of the Churches: Thou think they are divided from thee,
but thou only art separated from them.

As the Church of Rome has exalted her self above all other Churches, so also
the Roman Catholics are accused for devising, and adding some new Articles of
Faith to the old ones, much advancing the state and profit of their Clergy
which the other Christians will not, nor dare admit of, having received only
twelve from the holy Apostles.

As first, they have made the Popes Supremacy (before named) an Article of the
Faith, (viz.) That their Bishop is head Exttra. de major and obedient. cap.
unam sanctam.
of the whole Church of God; and that every soul must be subject to him upon
necessity of salvation.

Secondly, Gregory the great the 62. Pope of Rome writes that none of his
Predecessors took that name upon them.
That their Bishop cannot err in Cathedra.

Thirdly, That their Bishops has power to depose Kings, and to dispose of
their Kingdoms.

Fourthly, For the honor of the inferior Clergy, they have made
Transubstantiation a The word Transubstantiation is not in our ancient writers,
found first in Hovenden. p. 304. who lived about the year 1204. Biel Canon
missa.
Doctrine of Faith, by which every Priest has superlative power given him. As
a Reverend Bishop writes (viz.) To do a greater work daily than God did in
the Creation: For therein Almighty God made but Creatures: But in this the
Priest (as they say) can make his Maker.

Fifthly, for the more honor of the Clergy, They allow them, the only use of
Christ's Blood in the Eucharist, prohibiting the Laity the use thereof: Which
all the Christians in the Universe enjoy, but only the Romish Catholic
Laity, and for this they have made a Decree flat against Christ's institution.
viz.

Although the Lord Christ in his last Supper did deliver this venerable
Sacrament in both kinds, etc. Yet, non obstante, they do approve and decree
for a Law, the custom of receiving in one kind.

Again, for the better Maintenance of their Clergy, they have invented new
devises; as Purgatory, with the horrible pains thereof, as with Burnings,
Boylings, and Roasting of souls; they do so fright simple people, that they
get much money from them. Of this place the Bishop of Rome has jurisdiction
(the other Orthodox Patriarchs having nothing to do with it) commanding out
whom he will: much Treasure is got hereby.

2 Pardons, which are grounded upon Purgatory. Pardons began (says Fisher,
Bishop of Rochester) when men were frighted with Purgatory.

3 The inferior Clergy does also share with the Pope in the profits of
Purgatory; for they have turned the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist into a
Sacrifice, true, real, and propitiatory, under the name of Mass, in which
they do say, that the Priest does truly and really offer up Christ to God his
Father: but this is done by way of bargain and hire, for remission of sins,
and freedom of souls out of Purgatory. And of this they make great profit.

4 They have made a Canon for the These Saints we had in England.
Worshipping of Images,; and for this cause they have in every Church an Image
or more of some of their Saints; many of Inquire for St. Radegonds Chapel in
the Temple London. The barren women were wont to knock at one of the Knights
Templat chamber doors, by whom she was brought to the Saint for help. St.
Bartilmew was Purveior to St. Thomas Becket: they that would have a
male-childe, offered to him a Cock; they that would have a Female offered a
Hen, Vid. Lamber. peramb. page. 511.
which, simple people, and especially foolish women, are made to believe, to
have some special virtue to help, as St. Radegond can make barren women
fruitful. St. Bartilmew can make women to conceive a Male-child or a Female,
according to their desires. St. Margart Enquire for St. Uncomber in St. Paul's
Church in London. To this Saint they offered Oats. Shrined at Wilton.
can give them easy labor. St. Uncomber can make peace between married folk.
St. Edith can keep corn from blasting. And to these Saints simple people did
trot with rich Offerings, and Worship these Saints with kneeling, bowing, and
praying before Adoration of Images not used in England many 100 of years after
Christ. Alcwine writ a Book against it subscribed by our Bishops and Princes.
Read Roger Hovenden, Simon of Durham. Flores Hisstoriarum. Histor. of Rochester.
them: yea, the Priests carry them about in Procession with great pomp, playing
at noddy with the simplicity of the people.

5 They have also devised a Treasury, in which is reserved the surplussage of
the Sufferings of Christ, and of the Saints. Whereas (say they) the least drop
of Christ's Blood had been sufficient to have saved all the World. And that
Christ shed all his blood; and also that many holy men suffered more than their
sins deserved: least their sufferings should be in vain, they are reserved in
this Treasury for the Pope to bestow where he list.

The other Orthodox Christian Patriarchs having nothing to do with this
Treasury. With this, and such like devises they get much money from simple and
silly people.

For the confirmation of these things, although they have no Scriptures, yet
they will store you with multitudes of Miracles and Visions.

These, with some other the Church of Rome has Canomzed for Articles, or
Doctrines of Faith: as if the Apostles Creed should be defective, which the
other Christians in the world think to be complete enough.

About these Additions is the contestation between the Roman Catholics, and
the other Christians of the world. These are urged by the Romanists under their
Popes curse; and these additions are rejected by others fearing Gods curse,
being Articles not left by the holy Apostles, nor found in holy Scriptures: The
societies of Christians before named (excepting the Romanists) do all
genegenerally (as I find) deny the Popes Supremacy, viz.

First, That every soul must be subject to him upon necessity of salvation.

Secondly, they affirm the Roman Bishops to be subject to Error, as other
Bishops are.

Thirdly, they deny that he has power to depose Kings, and to dispose of their
Kingdoms.

Fourthly, they teach not works of Supererogation.

Fifthly, they admit not of Purgatory.

Sixthly, nor pray for deliverances of souls, from any temporal punishment
after this life.

Seventhly, they reject the Romish Doctrine of Pardons and Indulgences.

Eighthly, they allow not private Masses.

Ninthly, they administer the Communion in both kinds, daring not to keep the
Cup, the symbol of our Lord Jesus Christ's Blood from the Laity.

Tenthly, they believe not the Romish Transubstantiation.

Eleventhly, nor the now real sacrificing of our Lord Jesus Christ to quit
souls out of Purgatory.

Twefthly, they have married Priests.

Thirteenthly, they make no Image of God.

Foureteenthly, they have most of them their Service in their own, or a known
Language.

And these are some of the causes of the bitter contentions between the Roman
Catholics, and these other Churches: And as the Roman Church excommunicateth
In praefatione ante acta Theolog. Witerberg. and Hieremiam Patriarcham. Sacran.
ca. 2. Error 3. Thevet. Cos. lib. 9. catho. tr^^. quae 2. Thev. Cosm. lib. 10.
Brerw. enqu. page 159.
these Churches; so do they excommunicate the Roman Church: For example; the
Patriarch of Constantinople does yearly excommunicate the Pope and his Church
for Schismatics: The Moscovites do the same, as counting the Pope an
Heretic. The Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Antioch have done likewise. The
Christians under the Patriarch of Mozul, call the Pope the Reprobate Bishop:
other call him Antichrist. The Copts account the Roman Church Heretical and
avoid the communion and conversation of the Latins no less then of the Jews.

Thus some of the Popes of Rome have been like Ismael, whose hand was against
every man, and every man's hand against him. The Turks in their Mahumetan
Worship. The Pagans in their adoration of the Sun and Moon. The Egyptians in
the service of Isis and Osyris, use diversity of worships and Rites, and yet
still retain the ill-tied knot of Friendship in their Idol-worship. But
Christians differing, thunder calumnies, and bolt out excommunications one
against another, and after their excommunications usually follow eradications
of Kingdoms, people, and estates by Conspiracies, rebellions, and hostile
machinations by general Massacres, and particular torments: As how many Kings
and great persons have been murdered by their desperate Assassins.

The said Massacre in France is not to be paralelled by any ancient cruelty.

The Acharonticall Powder treason, for the heinousness thereof, will seem
incredible in the Ages to come. Examples are infinite; yea, so great is the
uncharitableness and cruelty of the Roman Catholics to the Christians of the
Reformed Churches, that if any of them dye among them; they setting themselves
(as if it were) upon Gods Tribunal, (in whose secret Cabinet is blessing and
cursing) give sentence of damnation against them, sending their souls packing
to hell, and denying their bodies Christian Burial. Barbarous cruelty, void of
Charity! John 13. 35. Damian. a Goes de Aethiopum Morib. page 235.
As a tree is known by his Fruit, so is the true Church by Charity: By this
(says our Lord) all men shall know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one
another.

Zaga-Zabo, an Ethiopian Bishop, and sent Ambassador from the Emperor of
Aethiopia to the K. of Portugal, complains: his words are these: The Romish
Doctors (I know not how piously) forbad me the communion of our Lords Body, all
the time I was in Portugal, even the space of seven year; and (which I cannot
relate without grief and tears) I was reputed among the Romanists as a Heathen,
and Anathema: upon which their doings, let him that governs all things look:
to whose judgment I commit these their doings. This their uncharitableness
does not only offend other Christians; but also it makes the very Mahumetans
to loath our Profession, to condemn our Faith, and to persecute our Persons.
Good Jesus! when shall these iarrings have an end? when shall the Church
Catholic live in union of faith, and communion of Charity? O miserable
Christians, return unto the Lord, and he will cure you: Earnest Prayer,
endless Devotion, volumnes of penitentials, Ninives fastings, Peter's weeping,
Paul's conversion, is the Metredate and true Alexipharmacon to cure this Ulcer,
to heal this never enough to be lamented Schism. Alas, who shall furnish my
eyes with floods of water? who shall make my head a living Spring, that I might
water my Couch with sorrowful tears? As for us Clergy men, let us not so much
endeavor to make the Christians our adversaries odious to our people; as to
move them to commiserate their estates, and so to make our joint prayers to
Almighty God, (not for their confusion) but for their Conversion. Oh would to
God, the Potentates and Monarchs of Christendom would join hand in hand, to
make up the breaches of Zyon, and to build up the walls of Jerusalem.

Oh sweet Jesus, that cleansed thy Church by thy most precious blood, Prince of
Peace, and author of love, grant us thy peace. To conclude, my most humble
prayer to Almighty God is, that he would vouchsafe us, most unworthy, to enjoy
that Legacy which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ left unto us, viz. My Peace
I give unto you; my Peace I leave with you. And for this cause, I humbly
supplicate his Divine Majesty, that he would incline the great Bishop of Rome,
Pope Urban, whom he has endued with many gifts and graces; with the hearts of
the Lord Cardinals and Prelates of the Church of Rome; that they would submit
themselves to retrograde from some of their new Canons, to the ancient
Primative Canons of their Church. viz. That they would restore to the Church of
God, of which they have cure, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, The Cup, the
symboll of our Lord Jesus Christ's blood, according to our Lords holy
institution, and practice of the ancient Roman Church, and of all the other
Christian Churches in the World.

That they would suffer our Lord Jesus Christ's sheep to drink of the Waters
of Life, (viz.) to have the use of the Holy Scriptures in the Vulgar tongue,
(from which they are now restrained) with their Service in their own tongue.

That they would permit Marriage to all men, and repress Stews and
Brothel-houses, permitted by them, scandelous not only to all the Christians
in the World; but also to them which are without: with some other like things;
which may admit of reformation.

And also, whereas some other Churches pretend to abhor Idols, I wish from
the bottom of my heart, that they would also abstain from committing of
Sacrilege. And whereas they cry out of permitting of Stews and Brothel-houses
in the Roman Church; that they would be as zealous in not permitting oppressing
Usury among them: both which are alike abominable in the eyes of Almighty God.

Sweet Jesus! what should not a man do? yea, what should he not suffer, to
quench the fire of Contention in the Christian world!

There was a time, when the Roman Church did acknowledge her self a sister,
and not a mistress.

There was a time, when as, with an Harmonious concord, she suffered with the
rest of her Sisters, even when as Arrianisme had in a manner overwhelmed the
world.

There was a time, when she gave her helping hand (as at the famous Counsels
of Nice, Ephesus, Constantinople, Chalcedon) and did not rule after a Dictatory
manner.

Let none foster Schism against Conscience to maintain themselves in
dignities, wealth, and promotions, to the ruin of the Christian World.

Christ's Coat is rent, his Garment is torn in pieces: The World is distracted
and distempered with the raging waves of Opinions: By which means, the Turk
over-ruleth the flourishing and most famous parts of Christendom: and have
erected the worship of Mahumet, even in the stately Oriental Basilisks.
Constantinople, the Queen of Beauty, is become a Mansion of Mahumetans: And,
if these devisions continue still, the rest of the Christian world is likely to
be in great danger. The good God of Peace, make peace in Christendom: and
grant that all that confess his Holy Name, may agree in the Truth of his Holy
Word; and live in Unity and godly Love. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 5. in marg. read quod habetur. p 9. l. 5. r. Lazarus first Bishop of
Massilia. ibid. l. 18. r. Cleve p. 10. l. 11. r. Wertzhurg. l. 13. r. Voitland.
p. 14. Tit. r. Romanists. l. 14. r. Barnabas. p. 15. Tit. r. Romanists. p. 24.
l. 11. r. accounted. mar. r. Sinas. p. 30. l. 20. r, a Jesu. p. 36. l. 16. r.
to put. p. 38. l. 12. r. Presbyteros. p. 41. Tit. r. Bishops in ancient times.
p. 43. l. 7. after continent. r. the Spaniards have in West India some Bishops.
p. 53. l. 13. r. almost all. p. 59. l. 14. r. 801. p. 65. mar r. extra. mar. r.
missae. p. 73. l. ^. r. l^te. p. 72. l. uit. Assassinates. p. 7^. l. 22. r.
has.


