BRISTOLLS MILITARY GARDEN.

A Sermon preached unto the Worthy Company of Practisers in the Military Garden
of the well Governed City of Bristoll.

By THOMAS PALMER, Master of Arts, and Vicar of St. Thomas, and St. Mary
Redcl^ffe in the same CITY.

Quam mol^^tum est n^scire homines, qu^^^^ pro^^^re ^^^^ant galeati.

Socrates. LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, 1635.

December. 7. 1635.
Perlegi hanc Concionem habitam Bristolia a Mro PALMER Sanctae Mariae de
Redcliffe Vicario, una cum daplici Epistola Dedicatoria, quae continent folia
14em, in quibus non reperio al quid sanae doctrinae aut bonis moribus
repugnans, quo minus cum publica utilitate imprimi queant, ita tamen ut si non
intra tres menses typis mandentur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

GVILIELMUS HAYWOOD R. R. P. Archiep. Cant. Capell. domest.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND TRULY NOBLE, PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke and
Montgomery, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's Noble Family, etc. Lord high
Steward of the City of BRISTOLL.
Right Honorable,
A Reverend Doctor of our Church did formerly dedicate his expositions of this
first Book of Samuel unto that Julium Sidus, Dr. Willet.
that Mirror of Martial Activitie, Prince Henry. To whom then can I better
consecrate my explication of this Paragraph, this small parcel of the same
Book than unto your Honor? unto whom the same Prince gave the deserved Prize
for your unparalleled dexterity in the feats of Arms. As my discourse is
Martial: so my Dedication does discover one quality of a Soldier, boldness.
In daring to kiss so Honorable a hand with so poor a Present. But my
Particular service, and the general obligation of our City (whereof your
Honor has the gracious Protection) have given the encouragement. Though this
poor Soldier is pressed for your Lordships service, yet (without your Honorable
pass) like one of the forlorn hope it shall dye in despair, and be buried
in silence. If (like the Centurion) you shall bid him go, He dares enter the
List of a doubtful Censure. His Dialect is (like the language of a Soldier)
plain and blunt. His weapon is the Sword of the Spirit. His posture is (like a
Churchman) upon his knees: upon which your humble Orator does daily pray. That
the days of your Honor may be as the days of Heaven, and the Glory of
Heaven the Period of your days. So prays

Your most humbly devoted Servant, and unworthy Chaplain, THOMAS PALMER.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mr. Richard Holworthy Mayor, Mr. William Cann, and
Mr. William Hobson, Sheriffs of the City of Bristoll: To Captain Tailor,
Captain Aldworth, Captain Elbridge; Captains of the Train Bands. To Mr.
Richard Long. At the time of my Preaching.
then President: Mr. Walter Ellis, now President of the Military Garden: And to
all the rest of that Martial Society.
Right Worshipful,
SHould the exercise of Arms be generally laid aside, that Respond in our
English Liturgy, might be taken in the strictest acception of a literal
Sense. There is none that fights for us, but only Thou O God. Therefore as
Moses wished that all the Lords People were Prophets: So Gods Prophets wish
that everyone of the Lords People were a Moses, An able Soldier, a complete
Warrior to fight the Battles of the Lord of Hosts. His Majesty has granted,
and by his Counsel confirmed a Freedom unto your City, for your practice of
Martial Discipline: It was your own Petition. Then let not your Omission of
Exercise return a Quod petit spernit unto so gracious a Commission. Saul armed
David, as you shall find in this discourse. And David immediately put himself
into action Our King has in like manner armed you, that you may gird on your
Swords, and exercise your Arms with safety. You that are Stars to fight in
your course against Sisera, prove not falling Stars: Fall not from the
diligent prosecution of such an Honorable intendment. A house begun, and
never finished, is called the Founders folly. Proceed then upon this
Honorable foundation: Least that become your folly, which is your Glory. Let
your Council house give encouragement to your Campus Martius; your field of
Martial exercise. Let it not be said of any in your City, He is a good
Merchant, but a bad Soldier. As they pay unto their King the Custom of their
Goods; let them pay unto their Country, the Custom of their Bodies, in the
Customary Practice of Arms. It is probable that they that will not, dare not
bear Arms. And when need requires, will prove rather a burden, then a help
unto their Country. Judge. 5.23.
Liable unto the curse of Meros, and the Inhabitants thereof, because they come
not out to help the Lord against the mighty. Improve your service on the Land,
to be answerable to your experimented dexterity on the Sea; and J shall not
easily find your Parallel. I am sure thas in your Spiritual Service,
Especially Redcliffe, which for a Parochial Chapel is not paralleld by any
Church in our kingdom. Ecclesiarumvmnium parochialium (quas unquam vidi)
elegantissima. Cambden.
for the statelines of your Churches, For our conformity, we are generally
obliged unto the religious care of our Reverend Diocaesan.
and the general coformity both of Clergy and Laity, you give place unto none.
Both your Policy and Religion have imboldned me to dedicate this sling of
David, to your Nursery of Arms. And my self to be

Your fellow Soldier in the Lord: THOMAS PALMER.

BRISTOLLS MILITARY GARDEN.
1 SAMUEL 17. chap. and part of the 39. verse. And David said unto Saul, I
cannot go with these: for I have not proved them.


THe first of Challenges (that ever we read of) is discovered in this Chapter,
The Coherence.
and had his pass from the mouth of an uncircumcised Philistine, a Goliath:
accepted and answered by a true Israelite, a David. This Duel was performed
not in a private, but a pitched field: not in the time of peace, but in the
action of war. It was rather a general Battle, then a single Combat. Both
of them fight for the body of an army, and a whole army fights in their bodies.

David though as yet but obscure, yet no private man. He was the anointed of
the Lord, the appointed of God for this design. Licet quosdam singular
certamen inivisse divina prodat historia, nunquam tamen ut pro lege teneatur,
divina sanxit auctoritas. Lancelot. Jur. canon. lib. 4.
No warrantable pattern for our modern Duellists, who being but private
persons unsheath the particular sword of revenge in trivial quarrels: who for
the breath of a lie will venture the breath of their nostrils. Like Simeon and
Levi to fight upon a private quarrel, and in their anger to slay a man, Genesis
34.25.
is but armata nequitia, armed impiety. Duellum est issicitum, nisi per
revelatione^ divinam sit susceptum. Sicut David in nomine Domini singular
certamen inivit contra Goliam, sicut divinae justitie executor. Lyra in locum.
But David was armed with a more lawful quarrel, when he was in qpparatu
militari, in his preparation for arms. Saul arms David, v. 38. And David
makes choice of his arms in this verse: for the whole verse runs thus. And
David girded his sword upon his armor, and he assaied to go: for he had not
proved them. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these: for I have not
proved them.

The body of my Text divides it self into three parts. The Analyticall
division.
1. The Soldier, David. 2. His refusal: I cannot go with these. 3. The
reason of his refusal: for I have not proved them.

These three particular Circumstances will afford us three substantial
Aphorisms of war. The Syntheticall Propositions.
First, the Soldier was David, and that a Volunteer, not a pressed Soldier.
Consider him here as a Martiallist, not as a Duellist. For he was a member of
the Army, as well as a Champion for the Army. Then from this Instrument I note
the lawfulness of the Action. The lawfulness of war. It is not mine, but S.
Austines observation, Noli existimare neminem placere Deo posse qui rebus
bellicis ministrat. Aug. ad Bonifac.
In his enimerat Sanctus David, cui Dominus tam magnum perhibuit testimonium.
Suppose not the action of war unlawful for any, wherein David was an Agent,
whereof God himself gave such a notable testimony. Secondly, David's refusal
was not of the Action, but of the arms. I cannot go with these. There is a
choice of others intimated in the refusal of these weapons. Though he refused
these, he used his own. Hence I note that there is both a necessity, and a
choice of arms. Lastly, the reason of his refusal was his want of skill at
those weapons: for I have not proved them. Hence I note the necessity of a
Military discipline, of a Military exercise. Of these three Martial
propositions in their order, as I shall be enabled by the God of order.

From David the warlike Precedent here in my text, my first proposition was
this. That the Action of war is lawful.

For the explication, and application whereof I will methodically discover the
Original of war.

Then the Nature of war. Then the lawfulness of war. And then in what
cases it may be lawful.
First, the Original. Original of war.
If you demand when war began. I must answer by an inverted speech of our
Saviors. Non sic erat in principio. It was not from the beginning. God created
the world, as Solomon built his Temple, he used no Iron tools that made a
noise. The voice that made the world was a still voice. The foundation was laid
in peace. When man was created the worlds Augustus, there was a general peace
amongst all the Creatures, in their submission unto man, in their union among
themselves. But when he that was to govern the Creatures could not govern
himself, this blessed union was converted into a bloody war. The Creatures
fell from man when man fell from God. The fall of man was the raising of a
double war. Man against himself, there was bellum innatum, or connaturale, an
intestine war, the spirit against the flesh. And the soones of men against the
sons of men; there was bellum nationale, a national war. The one
internal, the other external. This was the first Original of war.

For the Nature of it. The nature of war.
Some define war to be a violent and hostile dissension undertaken by a
lawful edict for the repressing of injuries. This is a true inferior active
definition. But God who is a man of war knows best how to define it. He has
proclaimed it unto the world by a Prophetical trumpet, To be a divine scourge
for sin in the hand of the warrior, Esai. 10.26. It is a scourge. A divine
scourge. A scourge for sin.

It is a scourge. War is a scourge.
War is the sword of God to punish sin: the scourge of God to whip out
security. The father of discontent, the Mother of change. A fury that is
attended by sword, fire, famine and murder. A miserable necessity in nature. A
necessary Corrector of the worlds impiety. Are not these lashes sufficient to
prove it a fearful scourge? It is virga furoris, the scourge of Gods fury. The
sword of the warrior is Gods rod of Iron. The that will not tremble at it
shall perish under it.

Yet some desperate wretches (having naught to loose) entertain no news with
better welcome then the rumor of war. The abuse of this scourge.
War is Gods Scourge, the Camp his house of Correction; yet Aristat. lib. 5.
de Animal.
like hungry vultures, they are never well till they follow it. Decayed
Soldiers, (such as wholly depend upon wars, pretend a Warrant for this their
bloody desire. Penes caeteros imperii praemia, penes ipsos servitii necessitas.
In the time of peace they can commonly show no coin but marks. It is an abuse
that savours neither of Christianity nor policy, that any approoved Soldier
should be put to his shifts. Tacitus. Hist. lib. 2.
That Iulium Sidus Julius Caesar had never such a malevolent aspect, as at any
time to suffer it. But though misery may constrain a man to desperate
resolutions, it does not warrant them.

The sum is this. The use of many things may be good (says Calvin) yet the
things themselves naught. The use of a Soldier is necessary, but to be a
professed Soldier, to live no otherwise but by blood and spoil, is no way
warrantable.

Nehemias builder may be the Soldiers Emblem: A sword in one hand, a trowell
in the other, with Caesar's motto inverted: Ex utroque miles. A Soldier must
have both one hand to fight, another to work. If there be no use of the
sword, he must make use of the trowell: He must get his living as by blood, so
by sweat, as he is best accommodated, by the sweat either of body, or brain.
Moses and David were both Soldiers, and Shepherds; when they left the Army,
August. epist. 205. ad Bonifac.
they followed the Flock. Pacem habere debet voluntas, bellum necessitas.
War should not be our delight, but our necessity. For a man to serve in the
cause of his Country is honorable. Qui solum questu^ spectant; velubi, causa
dubia est, ultro ac citra necessitatem obedientiae sese ad militiam offerunt.
Estius. lib. 3. in sentent. did. 37.
But to be a Mercenary slave unto any quarrel, or Religion, is more
heathenish, then Christian. The Lord will scatter those that delight in war:
and what profession more scattered, then the Mercenary soldier? I think that
David was as valiant as the best of these. And yet he did not leap into his
Arms, until God was blasphemed, his King like to be unthroned, and his
Country endangered.

Now as War is a Scourge, War a Divine Scourge.
so it is a Divine Scourge. God himself has been known to be the motive,
missive, and permissive Author.

The motive Author.] The Lord stirred up the Philistines, and the Arabians
against Judah, 2 Chronicles. 21. And the same Lord stirred up the Spirits of the
Medes, and Persians against Babylon. Esa, 13.17. When the forces of the enemies
came against them, they shot the Arrows; but the Lord may be said to bend the
Bow.

The missive Author.] The Lord sent against the kingdom of Judah, bands of the
Aramites and bands of the Caldees. 2 King. 24. And the same Lord sent
Nebuchadnessar against Iorusalem to destroy it. Ier. 25.9. when the enemies
bent their forces toward them, they came not so much of themselves, as about
the Lords business.

The Permissive Author. Though the Lord give motion, and mission to the enemy;
yet they cannot prevail without Gods Permission, without his assistance. The
Lord delivered the Israelites into the hands of the spoiler that spoiled them:
As it is in the second Chapter of Judges. And the same Lord delivered Goliath
into the hands of David, as it is in this Chapter.

In the action of War Kings are but Gods Liefetenants or at most his
Colonels. God is the Author of war, therefore should be our confidence in
war.
God is the General, the chief Leader. Let him be the highest pitch of our
confidence. We shall never need to fear the foe, if we have Him to our
friend; nor to dread any enemy, if so mighty a General be on our side. As the
action of War is the Lords, The Lord is a Man of War, Exodus 15.3. So the end
of War, In victory, God is to have the praise.
Victory is the Lords, 1 Chronicles. 29. God has the key of Victory, and when it
shall please Him to lend us that key, it should open our lips to set forth
his praise.

And as God is the Terminus a quo, Gods Glory should be the principal end of
war. Plutarch.
so let him be the Terminus ad quem. As war is from the Lord, so let it be
for the Lord. If Caesar's honor was touched, his Soldiers were so prodigal of
their blood, so desperately furious, that they were invincible. They gave unto
Caesar that which was Caesar's: let us give unto God, that which is Gods; the
expense of our dearest blood for the maintenance of his Cause.

As War is a Scourge, a divine Scourge, War is a scourge for sin.
it is a Scourge for sin. It is almost a general surmise in the World, that
war is but a thing of course, because it has been common in all ages.

But we must know that a just God never inflicts a punishment without a just
cause. We take notice of a secondary cause of war, the pride or malice of
the enemy: Not the primary impulsive cause the sin of a People, the impiety
of a Nation. War is a punishment for sin. The Lord of Hosts affirms it. If
he sin, says the Lord; 2 Samuel 7.
there is the primary impulsive cause, and that is sin. I will chasten him
with the rod of men; there is the secondary isntrumental cause, the Sword, and
fury of the enemy. War is sent into the World for our sins, to correct us
for them, to deter us from them. War is a divine scourge for sin.

Thus you have heard the original of War, and the Nature of War. The
lawfulness of it I thus prove:

By the course of Nature.
By the course of Religion.
First by the course of Nature. Quideulpatur in bello? an quod moriuntur
quicunque morituri: ut dominentur in pace victuri? Hoc reprehendisse ti
midorumest, non religiosorum. August. cont. Manich.
The desolation of kingdoms, the devastation of Cities, the profanation of
Holy things, with the confused slaughters that are wrought in the fury, and
heat of War, have made the cowardly consciences of the Manichee and the
Anabaptist, to suppose war to be unnatural. It is true that war may seem
unnatural, being the destroyer of nature in her individualls: And yet is truly
natural, as it is the preserver of nature in her generals. It is the bread of
tear's as it is destructive, but it is the bread of necessity as it is
defensive. Nocendi cupiditas libido dominandi, etc. Haec sunt quae in bellis
iure culpantur. August. idid.
Take away the hunger of Ambition, and the thirst of Blood, and War should
not be distastefull unto the most tender conscience.

Natura non deest in necessariis, etc. Thom. 1. p. q. 76. a. 5.
Aquinas is of opinion, that as nature has given to brute beasts horns,
hooses, teeth and talents for offense, and defense: So having left man
destitute of these, she has given him reason, and hands in stead of these.
Reason to invent offensive, and defensive weapons: hands to compose and use
them. Now the only necessary and lawful action wherein to employ weapons, is
the action of War. Violentiae per vim repulsio est secundum jus natural.
Gratia^. decret. distinct. 1. War lawful by the course of Religion.
Vim vi repellere licet. It is a rule of nature to repel force by force.

As war is lawful by the course of Nature, so also by the course of
Religion. Religion, and obedience unto God bind all Men to guard themselves
either with the offensive or defensive means of safety, with a submission of
the issue unto the Will of the principal Agent, the Lord of Hosts. The Spirit
of Truth is not the spirit of error, to persuade us to an error in religion.
But the same spirit was upon Iehazael exhorting Judah, and Jerusalem that they
should not be afraid, because the battle was not theirs, but Gods, 2 Chronicles.
20.

Offenses must come says our Savior, and woe unto them by whom they shall
come, but not unto them by whom they shall be decided. Both Nature and
Religion do conclude that war must take place where equity is excluded. It
brings the fatal and final compremiser of National controversies. The rule
of war is no way opposite unto the rule of faith: Abraham made war, yet lost
not his faith in the action; for it yet lives more renowned then his victory.
Absurda prorsus, and in Christianos Principes admodum injuriosa est ea cujusdam
assertio, bellu^ non aliud esse, quam commune multorum homicidium, ac
latrocinium. Estius in sentent. lib. 3. distinct. 33.
Is it religiously lawful for the subordinate Magistrate to inflict a severe
punishment upon a particular violence? and shall it not be lawful for the
Supreme, (who cannot appeal higher then himself) to cut off such by the hand
of war who offer a public violence to himself and to his kingdom? God as
he is universal, so he is just; and a general act of justice is no way
derogatory unto the glory of God.

But it seems that our Savior is no friend to war, when he tells us that
all they that take up the sword shall perish by the sword. I answer, that
place is meant of such as take up the sword of revenge, before a lawful
authority has put it into their hands. David in this Chapter took up the
sword, yet perished not, but proved victorious: But Saul armed David before he
used his arms; there was David's authority.

If that other place be objected Mat. 5.39.
that he which shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him thy left.
August. in Sermon. de puero Centur.
Saint Austine makes the answer, that this and the like precepts are
necessary, magis ad praeparationem cordis, quam ad opus quod in aperto fit,
etc. for the inward preparing of the mind unto a charitable disposition in our
private injuries: not to cut off the general action of war, which must have
a greater reference to the public, then to the private good. When the
soldiers came to John the Baptist, he bad them to be contented with their
wages, not refuse their wages. He does direct their calling, not reject it: A
calling therefore no way contradictory unto the glory of God.

And thus you have heard the Original of war, the nature of war, and the
lawfulness of war. I will now demonstrate in what cases it may be lawful:
most of which I find listed in the Warlike proceedings of David here in my
Text.

The end is the first in intention, In what cases war may be lawful.
though the last in execution: And I find the first legitimation of David's
proceedings to be in fine, in the end for the which they were undertaken. They
were, pro Lege, pro Rege, pro Grege; for his Religion, for his King, and for
his Country. verse. 26. Secondly, In modo, in the manner of it. It was
defensive, verse. 36. which though it does not exclude an offensive war, it
precedes it in equity. Thirdly, In auctoritate, in the lawful authority. He
had both the approbation and commission of his Prince. verse. 37. These are the
same in substance with those three things which Aquinas makes requisite unto a
lawful war. Aquin. 2a. 2a. quaest. 40. artic. 1
Authoritas Principis, Cansa justa, Intentio recta. First, lawful Authority.
A lawful Commission, a just Occasion, an upright Intention. August. lib. 22.
cont. Faust. cap. 75.


First, war must have a lawful Commission, that is, the authority of the
Prince. Laconica Monarchia. Arist. Polit. 1.
Suscipiendi belli authoritas, atque Consilium penes Principem sit, etc. Non
pertinet ad privatam personam bellum movere sine Principis authoritate, quia
potest jus suum in jadicio superioris prosequi. Nichol. de Orbellis. lib. 4.
distinct. 25.
The authority of levying Forces, or proclaiming War, belongs to the Prince.
It is the Prerogative of sovereignty to have the sole power of War and Peace.

Opera magis pertinent ad imperantem quam ad exequentem.
If this jurisdiction were granted to inferiors, what could ensue but the
confusion of a State! They that offended in this point amongst the Romans, were
in case of Treason. Our own kings have been so severely jealous in this case;
that some of their Subjects have been scrupulous whether (without Commission)
they might levy forces for the repressing of Rebels: Counting it a more
Politic safety to be too slow, then to forward: None being legally accounted
public enemies, until by supreme authority they are so proclaimed. They that
fall to spoiling upon a private motion, are capital enemies both to Prince,
and State. Reum faciat Regem iniquitas imperandi. Innocentem autem Militem
estendat ordo serviendi. August. cont. Manich. Secondly, the goodness of the
cause.
But where there is the authority of the Prince, the soldier ought not to
question the goodness of the cause.

The cause does denominate War, as well as Martyrdom: and the goodness of
the cause does crown them both. Partem quam inspicit justam ibi dat Palmam,
says Saint Austine. God does usually crown that part with victory, which is
armed with equity. Ovid.
Frangis, and attollit vires in milite causa; The cause as it is good or evil,
dulleth or whetteth the courage of the Soldier. Polity as well as religion
has made the discovery. Philip. de Comin. lib. 4.
This is the reason why Princes when they would pick a quarrel with their
neighbors, though it be unjust, yet they always pretend the cause to be
fair and honest.

The Justice of the cause consists in these points. First that it be necessary.
Live. dec. 4. li. 9.
Instum bellum quibus necessarium, etc. That war is just to whom it is
necessary, who have no other refuge but in arms. It must not be upon every
slight occasion that the treasure of a kingdom should be consumed, and the
flower of her subjects cut off. Necessity, not ambition must be the cause of
war: A State that is brought to a solid maturitie is better preserved by a
safe peace, than enlarged by a doubtful war. Adrian the emperour-held it the
safest strength to pacify his neighbors with peaceable conditions. That war
is just which is either defensively or offensively necessary.

Pugnabe pro sacris, and legibus, pro aris and focis. Melanct. praesat. com. in
epist. ad Romans In publices hosts omnis bomo miles. Tert. Apol. c. 2.
Defensive war is that which is made in defense of our Religion, of our
country, Defensive war.
of our lives, and of our liberty. This was the case of Ioab. Be strong, and
let us be valiant for the people, and for the Cities of our God. 2 Samuel 10.12.
This was the justice of the Romans upon the Gauls, with other Barbarous
intrenching neighbors. The same justice had the ancient Brittanes against the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normanes, though not with the same success. In
this case the cause is unquestionably just: But in no case against a lawful
Sovereign. Quid si Rex impia jubeat? Neparete. At male multator: patere.
Saravia de imperand. author. Eccles. 10.4
If kings command such things as are absolutely evil, we must not resist in
body, but in spirit, not performing what they injoyne, but tollerating what
they inflict. Eccles. 10.4.
In this case it is better to be a Martyr than a Traitor.

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? The Injuries that may arm a
Prince unto an offensive war are these. Offensive war.
Either when the law of Nations is infringed. As when a harmless passage is
denied unto a desolate nation. Innoxius transitus filiis Israel negabatur,
atque ideo justa bella gerebant. Aug. in quaest. numeri. Justa bella solent
definiri, si gens vel civitas non reddit quod per injuriam ablatu^ est. August.
Justum est bellu^ quod ex edicto geritur de rebus repetendis. Isid. Etymolog.
l. 20
This justified the war of the Israelite with the Amorite. Or when a Prince
intrencheth upon that which is another, or withholds it. Bellum quod rebus
repetitiis geritur. Says Tully. Qui facit justum bellum suum facit quicquid
capit ab host quousque sibi sit satisfactum de omni damno, veldonec ipse
hostis offerat se adjus, and velit satisfacere Nichol. de Or. bellis. l. 4.
did. 25
A war that is made after demand of things wrongfully taken, or unjustly
detained. This is the usual quarrel betwixt bordering kingdoms. * But if
satisfaction be offered, it is not justice to prosecute them by arms who submit
themselves to the law of arms. The French refusing those fair offers made by
the black Prince, gave him the happy occasion of their unfortunate overthrow
in the field of Poicters.

This Case is as current upon the sea, as upon the Land, upon the stay or
seasure of our shipping, and goods in foreign parts, if restitution be
denied. The Prince may recover it by way of Reprizall. Much more may he
suppress the violence of sea-theeving Pirates.

-- Qui medio venantur in aequore puppes.
who bid men to stand upon the Ocean.
Those sea vermin or rather the Devils water-Rats. Those sea Guls that are
the perpetual plague unto noble traffic. Those Monsters of the sea who raise
a storm in fair weather: and Fallit Pontus and ipse fidem.
make men to suffer shipwreck in the haven. The Prophet denounces a woe unto
those that spoil where they are not spoiled. Such roguing roving Pirates, if
the law cannot suppress them, the Cannon should subvert them.

And most of all it is lawful for a Prince to defend the Title and
Jurisdiction of his Seas: and offend those who would entrench upon them. If
Necessity make a cause lawful, this is most lawful, because most necessary.
This case may be ours. The Sea is our Wall. And our best (though wooden)
Battlements is our Navy. It was an experimental conclusion of judicious
Rawleigh, that the chief strength of our kingdoms consists in our sea forces.
The safeguard of our kingdom, the terror of our enemy is principally steered
at the helm. Our moving towers are our best forts, our winged-horses our best
Cavaleery, and victory is sooner spied from our maine top than from our maine
battle.

Custodit te Princeps ab hostibus, debes itaque ei tributum. Theophylac. in
Luc. cap. 20. Inexpugnabile munimentum est amor civium: Senoc.
And God be thanked, it is a provident care of our gracious Sovereign to
incircle our Island with a stately Royal Navy. Let us praise God for him, and
be thankful unto him in our loyal and liberal assistance. Quis dabit jura,
si publicum cessabit subsidium? Deo decimas, Regi censum dabant. August.
Let not our purse be narrow, because our seas are so. Imperator sacrilegium
esse scribit, de eo quod a principe factum est disputare. Saravia de imperand.
author. lib. 2. c. 55.
Demosthenes calls Treasure (...), the sinews of war. And the Convulsion of
these finewes may endanger the body of a state, if not overthrow it.

To question the designs of a Sovereign argues a want both of judgment and
loyalty. The Romans Soldiers when they were sent out by their Senate, knew
not at their departure the place where they should fight. And this Politic
ignorance made neither the common people the more curious: nor the common
Soldier the less fortunate.

The designs of State should direct our prayers, not busy our tongues: we
should pray for their consultations, not prye into their counsels. What Ioab
said concerning God himself; suffer me (with reve rence) to invert it
concerning Gods Deputy. Insuperabiles nisi separabiles. 2 Samuel 10.12.
Let us be strong, and let us be valiant for our People, and for the Cities of
our God, and let our Lord the King do what is good in his eyes.

Besides, Sanctaolim apud Ethnicos jura belli firma, and inviolata pacis
fuerunt soedera. Cic. de Offic. lib. 1, and desenectute.
If leagues or covenants be not observed; or if the fame of a Prince be abused
by disgrace; or violence offered unto his Personal Instrument, his
Ambassador, an offensive war may be a lawful course of revenge. Upon the
like injury done unto David's messengers by the king of Ammon, David revenged it
by arms, 2 Samuel 10. Or if a real injury be done unto a Princes friend,
Allies or Confederates, it is a warrantable ground for an offensive war.
Injury was done unto Lot by his violent surprisall: And Abraham his kins-man
rescued him by the sword. Ambros. de Offic.
Fortitudo quaeper bella defendit a latronibus socios, Populus Romanus sociis
defendendis terrarum omnium potitus est. Cicer.
plena justitia est. To defend our oppressed friends from the violence of the
oppressor, is the height of Justice. This kind of defense laid the first
foundation of the Roman Monarchy.

And thus I have discovered in what cases war may be lawful; and yet none
of these lawful, but in case of extremity. But as an extremity must force us
to the action of war: Sicut bellanti, and resistenti violentia redditur: ita
victor capte misericordi^ jam debetur; maxim in que pacis perturbatio non
timetur: August. ad Bonifac.
So in the execution there must be no extremity either of rigor, or cruelty,
It is neither Honor to kill our enemies dis-armed, nor Justice to kill our
prisoners in cold blood, unless our own safety do enforce it: which was the
case of our English, when they put their Prisoners to the sword after the
battle of Poicters. But the Women, the Children, and the Aged, who cannot be
the subject of our sear, Thou shall not slay the in nocent. Exodus 23.7.
should not be the subject of our cruelty, but should be exempted from the
fury of the Soldier; save where God and the superior Magistrate command the
contrary.

And thus war being lawful in the Action, An upright intention in war.
lawful in the Execution, there must also be intentio recta, an upright
intention. And that will be discovered in the lawful end. Finis est primus in
intention.

The End is the first Object of the intention. The ultimate end of war, must,
be Gods Glory, as I have already proved. Non Pax quaeritur ut bellum
exerceatur; sed bellum geritur ut pax acquiratur. August. ad Bonifac.
The subordinate end, must be Peace and Tranquillity. Definitur bellum esse
studium Pacis. Aquin. 2.2. q. 40. a. 1. Vt mali coerceantur, and honi
subleventur.
What should be the end of a bloody war, but a blessed Peace? Sapientes
Pacis cause bellum gerunt. Wise men maintain War, to obtain Peace: -- Pax
optima rerum.

Quas homini novisse datum est. Pax una Triumphis
Innumeris potior. --
Peace the best Mistress that a man can court:
To which a world of triumphs do come short.
Peace is the worlds Jubilee, the Crown of a body Politic: the Supporter both
of Church and Commonwealth. In Peace, the Gospel finds a free and a glorious
passage. In Peace, Faith the mother of Charity is abundantly fruitful in good
works. In Peace every one sits quietly under their own Vine, and enjoyes the
fruit of his own labor. But in the exercise of War our Plow-shares should
be turned into Swords, and our Sithes into Spears: our Garments should roll
in blood. There would be a famine of Bread, a cleanenesse of Teeth, a dearth of
all good things. Our Faith staggerd, the lips of the Priest that should
preserve knowledge, sealed up: the tongue of the blasphemour set at liberty:
Holy things profaned: the Church despised. Then that Petition in our English
Lyturgy is as needful, as warrantable: From battle and murder, and from
sudden death, good Lord deliver us.

It is true, our fear might be the less, were every Soldier a David, as
religious, as valiant. Therefore as David's Action has been a lawful
precedent of war, so let David, Person be a religious Parterne for a
Soldier: which shall be the particulat Application of the general
Proposition.

He was a just Man, adorned with all virtue; David a Pattern for a soldier.
valiant beyond comparison, yet moderate and courteous. Thus he is
uncharacterized by Joseph. Antiq. lib. 7. cap. 12.
Josephus.

He that bears Arms with David, should bear his Character. Though every
Soldier cannot be a worthy with David, yet like him, he should be a worthy
Soldier, a Man after Gods own heart, as religious as resolute. As Saints may
bear Arms; so they that bear Arms, should be Saints. As God is a Man of
War; so a Man of War, should be a Man of God.

Quam mitis David, humilis spiritu, sedulus cord, facilis affatu, fort is in
praelio, mansuetus in imperio? Ambros.
In Gods list in the time of the Law, they were sanctified Ones, which God
himself set apart for Military employment, Esaias, 13.3. Genesis 14.4.
Abraham had a Train-Band in his Household: and he trained them up as well for
Gods Service as his own. This was the resolution of Warlike Iosuah, I and my
House will serve the Lord. An honorable Service: God was the Lord of his
House, though his House was a Camp.

It was prophesied of Camps under the Gospel, that on the bells of their
horses, should be written Holiness. Zach. 16.20.
In the list of the Gospel you shall find a faithful Centurion. A devout
Cornelius, who feared not the enemy, yet feared God: And Ecclesiastical
Histories have registered the best Soldiers sometimes for the best men. Iulians
thundering Legion. Constantine who was as good as great. And the Theodosii who
were as pious as victorious.

The good life of the General should be a Sermon unto the Soldiers. And the
good lives of the Soldiers should be a repetition of that Sermon. Justum
bellum esse debet, ergo religione non careret. Cas. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 10.
I am persuaded that the religious, exact, and impartial Discipline of the
Sueden Army, made them so constantly victorious. Religion makes men valiant.
The Righteous are bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. How can they fear the Enemy,
that fear not Death, their gate unto Heaven? Religion is prevalent. We must
be Jacobs, or we cannot be Isreal's prevailing with God, and then we shall
prevail over men. Religion confines a Soldier unto the obedience of his
Commander. Like the Isractite to Ioshuah, or the servant to the Centurion.

The reason why the Soldiers of our time do so degenerate, is because our
Captains, do invert the course of Dinit Galba legi, a so Milite^ non emi.
Tacit.
Galba. They do buy, not choose their Soldiers.

Legio a delectu Militum dicta. A band of soldiers is denominated from their
choice. If they be not selevted, they loose that title. The body of an Army,
should not Ex omnium gentium Colluvie.
(like Hannibals) consist of the scumme of the Sea, of the excrement of the
Land. A Commander should have more then a common care in the choice of the
common soldier. A matter of great weight, but of little regard. War is now
counted but the spleen of a body politic, to draine out the ill humors.
Pecuniola proponitur: and ecce coeunt aliqui igneti, ignerantesque, purgamenta
urbium, quibus ab egestatem, and maxima flagitia peccandi necessitudo est,
assueti latrociniis, bellorum inso^^tes.
When occasion of service is offered, tattered Jayle-birds, and masterlesse
vagrants are the greatest part of master Constables choice. Amongst whom it
would grieve the sold of any honest subject to be an Associate.

It is no Christian policy to choose such sinful instruments for such a serious
Action. God will not be the Leader of that Army, where sin reigns in the
maine battle. Sin is the only Ramora that stoppes the happy proceedings of
the most numerous Army. A guilty Conscience does chill the blood, and dull the
edge of the most daring resolution. The sight of wounds and death must needs
startle that wreteh, who has had the wounds and death of his Savior too often
in his mouth, but never in his heart. And the terror of death must needs
affright him, who cannot expect the death of the body, without the damnation of
the soul. A soldier must be prepared for death, as well as for danger, which
none can be, but he that is Religious. Let us fight with our sins, before we
fight with our enemies. The conquest of the former will assure us of the latter
conquest. Then shall we be blessed in our going out, and in our coming in,
then our enemies shall be smitten before our face, Levit. 26.36. Donabit
certanti victoriam qui certandi dedit audaciam. Goliam magnu^ robustum, armis
terribilem ingentique turba munitum David solus, parvus atque inermis uno
lapidis ictu prostravit. August. contra quinque her. in principto.
If they be David's (though their enemies were Goliahs) they shall be
conquerours: not only in their life, but in their death. Though they dye in
War, they shall depart in Peace. Everlasting Peace shall be the Crown of
their temporal conflicts, if they be religious David's, and fight the Lords
quarrel.

And thus I pass from David the lawful Precedent of war, and the religious
Parterne of a soldier: I come now to his refusal, which was not of the
Action, but of the Arms.

I cannot go with these.]

There is as I told you, There is a necessity of arms.
a choice of others intimated in the refusal of these weapons: whence I noted,
that there is both a necessity, and a choice of Arms. A necessity, for David
went not without weapons. A choice, for he refused some, and made choice of
others.

David was armed, though but weakly: He had an offensive weapon a sling, says
the Text. A defensive weapon, a breast plate says Josephus. There is a
necessity of Arms: we have now no sufficient warrant that God will destroy our
enemies immediately, as he did the Host of Senacherib; or miraculously, as he
did Jericho. God does now confine us unto the means: To despise this, were to
contemn the subordinate instrument, which God has appointed. As it is an
Atheistical impiety to prefer the sword of Gideon, before the sword of the
Lord: So it is an unwarrantable presumption to separate the sword of the Lord,
and the sword of Gideon. The sword of the Lord is to direct: the sword of
Gideon to execute. The sword of the Lord is the primary efficient: the sword of
Gideon the subordinate instrument. The first without the last will do nothing:
the last without the first can do nothing. David did not trust in his bow, nor
his sword, Psalm. 44.6. yet he might use them both. He might use the
instrument, and trust in the principal Agent.

The danger of these times does prompt us to the practice of our Saviors
lesson. Let him that has no sword sell his coat and buy him one, Luke 22.38.
Reipublicae fundamentum bonae leges and bona Arma. Match. Princip. cap. 12.
If there be not a spear, and a shield in this our Israel, to say God shield
us will be no warrant of safety. If our enemies have the instruments of cruelty
in their habitation, let us have the weapons of safety in ours.

-- Ebrietas in Pralia trudit inermem. It is a desperate sottishness that
brings unarmed soldiers into the field. Non de pugna, Veget.
sed de fuga cogitant, qui nudi in acie exponuntur ad vulnera. Vnweapond
soldiers think more of the flight, then of the fight; for they can only take
blows, not give them. It is not now Pugno been uteris inquit, C. Crassus,
festiviter taxans inermem, cui pro gladio pugno sit utendum. Eras. 6. Apotheg.
Pugna a pugnis. Soldiers go not now into the field (as in the worlds
infancy) to cuffe or scratch one another. Every stroke of War (if not
repelled by the force of Arms) does wound or kill. It is the loss of a limme,
or of a life. Therefore we must have arms for our men, as well as men for our
Armies. 1 Chronicles. 12.33.37.
Zebulon, Reuben, Gad, Manasses, the voluntary assistants of David, came not
unarmed, but completely furnished with all their usual instruments of War.
Arms are as useful, as hurtful; as defensive, as offensive. Armaab arcendo.
A weapon scars a thief, and the want of it makes a thief. We must have a
temporal, as well as a Spiritual Pa^oply.
Arms are the strength of a Kingdom, the terror of the Enemy. The want of
Arms, does arm the adversary, and make him with a secure boldness to rob and
spoil.

This necessity of Arms gives a deserved check unto the trecherons
transporters of Munition. This is an insensible mischief, too much winked at,
too much tolerated. The danger hereof will be sooner felt, then discovered: and
the public State will smart for it, if private offenders do not.

Now as there is a necessity, There is a choice of arms.
so there is a choice of Arms:

Armae antiqun, manus, unguts, dentesque fnerunt.
Hands, Lucret.
nails, and teeth, were the old Primitive Arms.
These were seconded with stones, Herodetus.
and clubs for offensive weapons; and the skins of Beasts for defensive
harness. But as the times, and designs grew more cruel, so the weapons more
dangerous. Eusebius praepar. Evang.
That Moses was one of the first Inventors of Warlike weapons, is somewhat
probable: because the Jewish Magazine was (in those times) the best furnished
with weapons both Defensive; as Helmets, Breast-Plates, coats of Male,
Habergions, Greaves, Bucklers, Shields, and Targets: Offensive; Swords,
Daggers, Spears, Lances, Hand-staves, Battle-Axes, Darts and Slings. The same
weapon, which David made choice of in this Chapter.

But we are now no more confined unto their weapons, then unto their policy:
Succession of times, and the cruelty of invention, have enlarged the Catalogue
of Arms; and have made them more exquisite, more terrible. The Munition of
ancient times (says Bodine) being compared with ours, are rather childish
toys, then Warlike weapons. We should now be rather mad then politic, to
make choice of Stone-bowes, and Slings against Cannon and Musket: our choice of
Arms, must be accommodated unto the times. We must be sure to match, if not
over-match our enemies in the convenience and force of Arms.

-- Infestisque obvia signis. Lucan.

Signa pares aquilas, and pila minantiae pilis.
We must not be to choose our weapons,
when we are to encounter the enemy.
Paulus Aemilius dicebat Militi haec tria esse curanda: corpus validissimum,
Arma apta, animum adsubitae imperia paratum Live. lib. 44.
And as Arms must be fitted to the times, so to the Persons that bear them.
Sueton.
Julius Caesar would have his soldiers accomplished with the compleatest
Arms, that they might the more decently, and the more resolutely keep them.

Our General Musters, are instituted for a strict survay of Arms, and
Munition: at which discovery, you shall see some Rustiques sent into the field,
clad in rust and dust, rather then steel. Some of their Pikes and Muskets, as
serviceable as Reeds and Pot-guns; as if they meant to play at boys play, when
their Country lies at stake. It is ill jesting with edged tools; defect of
arms is not laughing matter: it should rather be severely punished, then
slightly laughed at. Such jesting may loose a Kingdom in earnest.

Though David entered the List no better armed then with a sling, it is no
warrant for us. He was a Prophet as will as a Soldier, and foresaw that
victory, unto which that weapon would prove sufficient: or else David made
choice of a sling, because his most experienced weapon. Aurel. vict. Sucton.
As Domitian would use no arms but the bow, at which he was the wonder of
dexterity. As the Benjamite could sling, so he could shoot almost at a hairs
breadeth. David knew that it was as good not to take up arms, as not to know
how to use them: Therefore he used his own, refused the arm's of Saul, because
unaccustomed, unpractised: That is the reason of his refusal. And David said
unto Saul, I cannot go with these, for I have not proved them.

Many Expositours are of opinion, that David refused Saul's arms because unfit,
unproportionable: but I rather subscribe to the fairer probability of the
golsse. Lyra in Loc.
Non est intelligendum, etc. It cannot with any probability be conceived, that
Saul armed David with those arms which were appropriated unto his own body,
their statures being unequal, for Saul overtopped all Israel by the head, 1 Samuel 10. Osiander Martyr.
It is more probable that it is entitled Saul's armor, because taken our of his
armory. Armis suis,] id est, Davidi datu a Saul, and ipsius co pori
accommodatis. Nam tanta fuit Saulis proceritas, ut arma ipsius Davidi convenire
non potue. int. Piscator in locum.
Though David had been heretofore Saul's armor bearer, yet the best expositors
conceive that hitherto he had been no practitioner of arm's. Therefore David
lays down these weapons, not for his unfitness to we are them, but to use
them; being unskilful at them, unpractised in the^. I cannot go with these, for
I have not proved them

This reason of David's refusal does intirnate, that he is unfit to bear
arms that knows not how to use them: Osiander. Dr. Willet.
this knowledge comes not without proof, The necessity of a Military exercise.
without practice. Whence we may infer both the necessity, and the commodity of
a Military exercise, of a Military discipline. Without this, whedn men should
bear arms for the service of their Country, they will be forced to fly to
David's refusal here in my Text. I cannot go with these: for I have not proved
them.

Finis Instrumenti consistit in usu. Prooved from the end of warlike
instruments.
Instruments of war (as all other) are made to no other end but to use them.
And to use them without skill were to invert that of S. Paul, He fought with
beasts after the manner of men: but we should fight with men after the manner
of Et sic bellum ^ belluis.
beasts. The Denomination of an army is either Exercitus, From the Denon
ination of an army.
an Army in Exercise; or Acies, an Army in battle array. There is in the
former, practice: In the latter there is Order, and skill, the effect of that
practice. Strength that is not directed by the experience of Order, is like a
horse without a Rider, of it own self it destroys it self. As in every
action it is odious to err; so in the action of war it is most dangerous.
Because one miscarrying is enough to overthrow an whole army. Whereon may depend
the rack of a Commonwealth, the loss of a Kingdom.

In the infancy of war before men knew any manner of military order: From the
effect of Military skill
the victory was ever carried by the stronger part. But since they have learned
to order themselves in rank and file, the Conquest now is not so proper to the
strength of men, as to this experimented Order. Nemo facere metuit qui se been
didicisse confidit. The experience of skill makes a man both dexterous and
courageous. A multitude that is disordered is disheartened, and no way able to
withstand an inferior number that shall assault them with order, and skill. If
our gate be warlike, it is Practice that must set us on our feet. That body of
an Army is but inutile truncus, an unprofitable bulk, where the feet of
exercise are fettered, and the limbs of Practice benumbed. Quantitatis nulla
est efficacia. Quantity is of no force. It is quality that must denominate our
forces. The most numerous Armies have not always carried away the victory.
Witness the victory of Alexander over Darius, Of Caesar over Pompey, Of
Hannibul over the Roman Consuls, Of Edward the black Prince over John king of
France in that most renowned battle of Poicters. Where not the most, but the
best (though fewest) soldiers were Lords of the Field.

Then what follows but a diligent Practice of that Martial Aphorism?
Vegetius.
Formentur Milites omni armorum exercitio, usuque Militiae. Soldiers must be
trained up in all kind of Martial exercise. In the right use of their Arms,
in all the beats of the Drum, in all Military motions, to march well, to
face, to wheel, to countermarch, to double ranks, and files; And to do all
these either by the sign, or word of Command. Without this knowledge soldiers
are more exposed to the slaughter than to the fight.

The Jews though miraculously victorious, From Example
and securely confident of the protection of a Deity yet they were disciplined
in arms. The train Bands of Abrabam, Moses, Iosuah, Saul, David, Solomon,
Iehosaphat, Asa, Vzziab make it very probable, that the Jews had a School for
the warrior, as well as for the Prophet. The ancient Gauls (that most warlike
Nation) were so accustomed to the bearing of Arms, that they made their
Coucell house an armory, they went armed unto their Councels. Where the
Plaudite of an Oration was not the clapping of hands, but the clattering of
Arms. It was Military exercise, and experience that enlarged both Greece and
Rome into Monarchies.

We also have a Customary Annual training of our Counties: But sometimes so
trivial, A Check to modern T ning.
so superficial, that it improves rather our sport, than our skill. The
ignorant Rustiques wink when they give fire. The Captain winkes at it, and
the spectators laugh at it. Such a military Discipline is sitter for a May Game
than for a field. It may be heartily wished that their Martial Instructors
were more industrious, their training more frequent, and serious. Let a
diligent exercise improve our skill: Lest when we are unexpectedly provoked
unto Arms, there should be impar Congressus, The experienced enemy should
over match us, And the want of Practice in the exercise of Arms should drive
us to the Confession of our ignorance in the words of my Text, we cannot go
with these: for we have not proved them.

But I leave a general importunity, Application to the Company.
and come unto the particular Opportunity, the present occasion: The Martial
body of my discourse being almost spent. Adagium.
Res ad Triarios redijt. The Rere of my discourse shall bring in the Rere, the
ancient Quarter Band of the Triarij, Those soldiers that were most completely
disciplined: Who were the very Soul from whence the body of the Army had both
life and motion.

To you I do now direct my exhortation, who are the Nursing Fathers, and the
Generous Associates of our Nursery of Arms. I have proved unto you the
lawfulness of the General Action of war, The necessity and choice of the
Instruments of war. But what is munition without men? Or what are men without
skill? And where is skill sooner attained than in the School of Martial
Exercise? It would be dangerous tarrying from this School until our Enemies
whip us to it. A rod of Iron is soon made for the back of the Lazy Trivant.
Whereas readiness and dexterity in Martial discipline would startle the Enemy,
for fear he should be scourged with his own rod.

Then let not your Nursery of Arms miscarry like an untimely birth: Or so
fair a Garden (like Ionahs Gourd) perish in a night. Prefer not a Bowling
green before a Military Garden: but rather follow a Captain, than a Jacke.
Recreation is convenient, but Practice is necessary: Jure ab Aristotele Phale
as reprehenditur, quod in descripta sua civitate nullam Mart is imaginem
delineaverit. Arist. polit. lib. 2. c. 5.
And that in the time of Peace. Such ever taste the less troubles in the
tempest of war, which sail with a martial foresight in the time of Peace.
In Peace to provide for war is the best security. The wings of our Peace are
not so clipped, but she may take the wings of a Dove, and fly away with our
Olive Branch. Israel had peace forty years, yet even then their aged Peace did
take her flight, Judge. 3.11.12. We cannot be securely confident of peace, and
rest, until we have letters of Ease from the King of heaven. But we find no
such Patent upon Record. Though your Land be entailed unto you and your
Heirs: Though you enjoy it by the firmest Title; yet a time may come when it
cannot be held by any other Title but the sword. And then they that show the
best Instruments, and the best skill, will have the possession. Prove. 24.6.
By wise Counsel thou shall make thy war, says Solomon. They which are to
be Counselors in a warlique Action should be men of Practice.

This honorable City may be compared unto the seafaring Tribe of Zebulon,
that was a Haven for ships. Genesis 41.9. And so is this. The men of that Tribe
were expert in war: They could keep rank, they were skillful at all the
Instruments of war. 1 Chronicles. 12. And so may the men of this City; If there
would more of them, and more often frequent the School of war. One virtue of
a soldier is silence, A Maiden virtue: Maids must be seen, not heard.
Soldiers though they must not be heard, yet they must be seen. It will
redound more to their honor than shame to make a frequent Appearance. The
spoils of Salmacis were without sweat or blood. Your Military Exercise costs
you no blood. You may well spare a little excrement, a little sweat. See, we be
afraid here in Judah, how much more if we come to Keilah against the host of
the Philistines. 1 Samuel 23.3.
It will cost you blood abroad. Then let not the melting of a little sweat melt
the courage of your industrious resolution in the attaining of so honorable a
science.

Truly Honorable, Martial Desert being the ancient Principal Herald for the
Titles of Honor: Most of them from Majesty to Gentry, from the Emperor to the
Squire have quartered their Coats of Honor from this Quarter. The Sword of
the Warrior finds an honorable Parallel with the sword of the Magistrate.
They are both drawn for the execution of Justice. Experience and skill are
requisite to the managing of them both. Let the Magistrate countenance the
soldier in the time of Peace. And the soldier shall defend the Magistrate in
the time of war.

Our Antiquaries record that it was an ancient encouragement unto our Chevalry
when they were abroad. That the Church of England was upon her knees for them.
In the mean time that blessed Church (whereof you are members) will not be out
of Practice: but make use of her spiritual weapons. Though she dare not lift
up the sword in battle with Iosuah: She will not cease to lift up her hands
in prayer with Moses. Oratiocoelos penetrat, and hosts in terra vincit. Origin.
Preces and Iejunium sunt Arma Ecclesiae. Prayer and Fasting are the weapons of
the Church. Her frequent, and fervent Devotion shall be this: That the Lord of
Hosts would repair the breaches of his My beloved is a Garden enclosed. Cant.
4.12.
enclosed Military Garden, his Church Militant here on earth. That he would
preserve those three principal borders which amongst us he has planted, and
united under one Government. That as that God of peace has taught us those
things which belong unto our peace: so that Man of war would teach our hands
to war, and our fingers to fight; that neither the sword of the Magistrate,
nor of the warrior may be drawn wrongfully, or in vain. That the end of our
temporal warfare may be a blessed peace upon earth: and of our spiritual, an
eternal peace in the heavens. Unto which Peace the God of Peace bring us all.
Amen.

FINIS.

