THE ALLEGIANCE OF THE CLERGY. A Sermon preached, at the meeting of the whole
Clergy of the Dyocesse of Rochester, to take the Oath of Allegiance to his
most excellent Majesty, at Greenewich, Nouem. 2. 1610.

By SAMVEL PAGE, Doctor in Divinity.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Simon Waterson, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Crown. 1616.

TO THE MOST Reverend Father in God, my most Honorable good Lord, the Lord
Bishop of London.
MOst reverend, and my honorable good Lord, in these fruitful times wherein so
many painful in Gods husbandry, do make daily Presents to the Church, of
their profitable Labors: I thought my self behinde-hand too much, to sit out
so long, without giving some testimony of my equal desire, to advance so good
a Work. I am too co^scious of my insufficiencies, to press in with the first,
and I fear to do nothing. These days afford plenty of readers, if plenty of
writers ouer-charge, variety may delight. These my meditations have hope of
welcome from the Argument, which is our own loiall Allegiance to his Majesty,
who are the Preachers of Loyalty to our People: and from your Honorable
protection and countenance, to whom the Church of God here owes many
acknowledgements of honorable service hy you performed to her, and to whom I
best know how much my self in particulars do stand obliged. I pray God for
the increase of his best blessings, on you and yours, and rest wishing your
Lordsh:

S. P.

THE ALLEGIANCE OF THE CLERGY. The first Sermon.
ROMANS 13.2. And they that resist, shall receive to themselves Judgment.


GOD is a God of Order, against the Anabaptisticall doctrine of Anarchie; and
confusion: he has made men on earth, as he has distinguished the stars in
the firmament, one star differing from another in glory: he has taken the
advancement of men into his own hands: his wisdom says, By me Princes
reign, Pro. 8.15. and David says, Preferment comes not from the Est, etc.
he confesses that Gods hand is in that work, as Paul in this chap. says, the
powers that be, are ordained of God. The Relative to these Powers, is
Submission; Extent of this Submission, omnis anima, every Soul. I think Saint
Paul preuentingly, and by prophetical spirit, provided in this caution against
all Aequinocators and Mentalists, who are ready to tender their Sovereigns
some outward and formal Submission, without the Soul, and inward affection,
therefore he says, Let every soul submit.

The foundation of this Law of Loyalty, is laid in the conscience of a
Christian man, not because of wrath only, but for conscience sake. The
illation following on the premises, is my Text. The proposition whereof is
indefinite, and equivalent to an universal; They that resist, all they shall
receive judgment. If any ask, what is the Extent of this power, which God
gives to his anointed servants the Kings and Princes of the earth; let them
learn of Israel, who tendered this Allegiance to Joshua:

All that thou have commanded us, we will do, and whither-soeuer thou sendest
us, we will go: as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee: only
the Lord thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses, Josh. 1.16.17. So far
then, as GOD is with our Princes, and that their commands, be no prejudice to
the superior ordinances of God: every soul does owe them submission, and must
swear them their obedience: for whatsoever the person of the Prince is, the
power is of God: even Pilates power is of God, though he armed it against
Christ, by our Saviors own testimony, John 19 11. saying, Thou could have
no power against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore Christ
submitted himself to that power, even he that could say, To me is given all
power in heaven and in earth, Matt. 28.18.

Our gracious, sovereign King, reading in the bloody practices of his
rebel-Popish-subiects, the danger of his own royal person, and of his
hopeful posterity, has with the most honorable Parliament devised a
Shiboleth, even this oath of Allegiance (which is how tendered to us of his
Clergy of this Diocese) to distinguish betwixt his Israelites and his
Ephraimites, between his faithful, loving, and peaceable Protestants, and the
tumultuous, factious, and Popish Incendiaries, who desire to see our Jerusalem
turned to dust and ashes. This Oath will show him who has most disciples in his
kingdom: this Paul our Apostle that taught the Romans, omnis anima, let every
soul submit; or Paul the fifth that now teaches the Romans, and all his Romish
Catholics, the Contradictorie to his doctrine. Non omnis anima, let not every
soul be so obliged. I wonder at Burgese of Rome, that being so opposite to
Saint Paul, he would usurp his name, at his investiture in the Papacy, except
he meant to set Paul against Palu, Romans against Romans, his Breues against
Saint Paul's Epistles; our Apostle cast off a name upon his conversion, that
would become his Holiness of Rome much better.

But concerning the power of Secular Princes, by this Paul the fifth, and his
usurping Predecessors strangely restrained to make their peace with S. Paul,
they do thus understand my Text; They that resist; that is, They of the Laity
that resist: for says their Gloss, Ecclesiastical persons, and
Ecclesiastical causes are exempt.

The quarrel is well known between the Pope, and the State of Venice, for
their judicial process pursued to the execution, and death of a soul
malefactor of their Clergy, and the Pope (if he had been strong enough to
revenge such a quarrel) would have made it known much better. Therefore it
concerns his most excellent Majesty, to understand how his Clergy affect
his government, and what subjection and Allegiance they will perform to him:
which shall discover, whether we follow the example of the old Romans, who in
their purer, and Primitive times gave unto Caesar that which was Caesar's, or
whether we resist with the late Roman Catholics, turning Caesar all into
Name, and diuesting him of all his Roialties.

Saint Bernard epist. 42. to the Archbishop of Senona urges that place of
Saint Paul, omnis anima, Let every soul be subject: thus, Si omnis, and
vestra, quis vos excipit ab vniuersitate? Si quis tentat excipere, conatur
decipere. If every soul must be subject, then yours, that is, those persons
who are Ecclesiastical: who excepteth you when he names All? he that
assayes to except you (of the Church) goes about to deceive you.

Therefore to sort this Preface to the occasion, and to the present hearing
more properly, I learn of S. Bernard thus to limit to my self; they of the
Clergy, Ecclesiastical persons, that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation. And herein we have our high Priest for an example, of whom S.
Bernard says, Conditor Caesaris non cunctatus est reddere censum Caesari,
exemplum enim dedit vobis, vt and vos ita faciatis. He that made Caesar, paid
tribute to Caesar, for therein he gave ensample to you, (to you of the
Clergy) that you should also do the like: thus did Saint Bernard teach, who
flourished eleauen hundred years after Christ.

Origin interpreting this Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, upon this
Chapter lib. 9. gives a reason, why the Apostle in an Epistle to the Brethren
in Antiochia, Syria, and Cilicia, Acts 15.29 does only admonish them to
abstain from things sacrificed to Idols, from the strangled, and from blood,
not adding any prohibition of adultery, murder, theft, etc. Superfluum
videbatur, ea diuina lege prohibere, quae sufficienter humana lege plectuntur:
It seemed to him more then needed by divine decrees to inhibite those things
which humane laws did sufficiently punish. His collection from hence is very
notable, and sorteth with my present Argument: Ex quo apparet, iudices mundi
parte^ maxima^ Dei legis implere, omnia enim crimina quae vindicari vult Deus,
non per antistites, and principes Ecclesiarum, sed per mundi iudices voluit
vindicari. Hence it appears, that the Secular Judges do fulfill the greatest
part of the Law of GOD; for all crimes which GOD will have punished, he
refers to the vindication of these, and not of the Prelates, and chief
Priests in his Church. And herein he has met with the Church of Rome, in an
evasion learnd of the Donatists, and detected, and despised by Saint Augustine,
contra Parmenianum Donatistam Episcopum. libr. 1. saying; Nisi forte
(quemadmodum nonnulli eorum sane imperitissimi intelligere solent) de honoribus
Ecclesiasticis dictum esse velint, vt gladius intelligatur vindicta
spiritualis: cum prouidentissimus Apostolus satis aperiat; quid loquatur,
dicens, propter hoc tributa praestatis. Unless perchance (as some most
foolishly are wont to interpret these words) they would understand Saint Paul,
as speaking of Ecclesiastical powers, that by the Sword is meant
Excommunication: whereas the Apostle wisely provided, to prevent any such
interpretation, and expresses himself plainly, when he says, For this
cause pay you tribute, and Tribute is not due but to Secular powers.

And Saint Ambrose makes good this interpretation Tom. 5. upon this place,
saying; Principes hos reges dicit, qui propter corrigendam vitam, and
prohibenda aduersa creantur, Dei habentes imaginem, vt sub vno sint caeteri.
The Apostle Paul in this place means Kings, who are created for the
correction of men's lives, and the defending of them from adversity, bearing
the Image of God, that one should sit above the rest.

And Theophilact (as for the most part he does) follows Saint Chrysostom, in
the interpretation of this Text, saying; Vniuersos erudit, sieve Sacerdos sit
ille, sieve Monachus, sieve Apostolus, vt se principibus subdant.

He teaches all sorts of men, whether he be Priest, Monk, or Apostle, he
must submit himself to his Sovereign Prince. And the holy Apostle Saint
Peter whom the Roman Usurpers boast to succeed, taught the same general
doctrine, 1. Pet. 2.13. etc. Submit your selves to all manner ordinance of man,
for the Lords sake, whether to the King as superior, or unto governors as
sent of him, etc. for so is the will of God.

Saint Gregory the great who sat Bishop of Rome six hundred years after our
Lord and Savior Christ, knew no other, nor taught none other doctrine: for
hereof, his Epistles give good witness.

Mauritius the Emperor had made a Decree, That no old Soldiers should be
admitted or received into any of the Monasteries, because he perceived that
many of them used this as a shift to shun and escape from going to the
wars, and he was thereby likely to be the worse served: such power had that
Christian Emperor to decree in matters concerning the Church, and Gregory
then Bishop of Rome, grieved at this constitution of the Emperor, did not
convent the Emperor to his Consistory, drew not out against him the sword of
Excommunication, did not menace him with interdiction, deprivation, or any
other show of Papal jurisdiction, but as an humble and duetifull subject,
addressed to him his earnest petition, by an Epistle, wherein he pleads for
the Church, and as if it became him ill to contest with his Sovereign, he
brings in Christ Jesus, thus expostulating with him. Ego te de notario
comitem excubitorum, de comite Caesarem de Caesare imperatorem, and patrem
imperatorum feci: In a word, I have advanced thee from low to high degree;
Sacerdotes meos tuae manni commisi. I have given thee charge and government of
my Priests, Registr. lib. 3. epist. 61.

And to make his suite more possible, he wrote an earnest Letter to Theodorus
the Emperors Physician, to entreat him, who might best choose an opportune
time, to solicit this request, in which he complayneth, saying; Epist. 64.
Valde mihi durum videtur, vt ab eius seruitio milites prohibeat, qui dominari
illum, non solum militibus, sed etiam Sacerdotibus concessit. It seems hard
to me, that he whom God has made to rule, not only Soldiers, but Priests
also, should restrain Soldiers from doing service to that GOD: So making
Theodorus his competitor to the Emperor, for repeal of that Law.

But this Gregory the first of that name, was so far from the present
Antichristian pride of his successor, as that he would not suffer the Title of
Oecumenicall Bishop to be put upon him; herein following Pelagius his most
worthy predecessor. He writ an angry reprehension to Eulogius, Patriarch of
Alexandria, for stiling him Universal Bishop, in an Epistle sent to him: And
when John Patriarch of Constantinople, had usurped that title, he wrote to him
to rebuke him for it. And to Mauritius the Emperor, whose love to him and the
Church could have affoorded him so honorable a title, he said, whosoever
assumeth to himself, or admits of any such title, Elatione sua Antichristum
praecurrit, he does fore-runne Antichrist in his pride. He calls that title,
Ne fandum, stultum, superbum vocabulum, a wicked, foolish, and proud title. He
says that the counsel of Calcedon offered it to his predecessors, to be so
styled, sed tamen nullus sibi hoc temerarium nomen arripuit: none of them took
this rash and in considerate name upon him.

He would have staid the pride of that Roman See at the first: for when in
respect of the Empire seated at Rome, the chamber of that great Monarchy,
there was given the first place in Councels to the Bishop of Rome: the next
ambition was to be chief Bishop: and then to be universal over all the
Church, as Heart says, the Pope cannot be non resident, for all the world is
his Diocese. and what was then left, but to intrude upon the rights of
temporal Princes, as in succeeding times they did, and at this day do? But we
hear God promising, Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy
nurces; not Bishops, not Popes, and Prelates, Esaias 49.23. Two proofs let me
but name, because we have them fully pressed by most learned and judicious
Divines, which express the power of Princes over the Church.

First, their invention of general Counsels, so Pighius himself confesses,
Constantinus primus auth^r fuit conuocandi generalia consilia: Constantine was
the first who devised to assemble general Counsels, but the power hereof was
by GOD himself given to Moses, to whom he committed the making and using of
the two silver Trumpets, and from him derived to all Princes and States
imperial. And the Church story since Christ makes it plain, how Emperors
and Kings in their several dominions, have both called Counsels, and sat
Presidents, to order the meeting, to censure and punish offenders, to keep
them to the point that would digress, and in their absence to depute secular
Judges in their places, and at last to dissolve their meeting at their
pleasure. Yea sometimes the great Bishop of Rome has made request to the
Emperor, as Leo for example, for the calling a Counsel in Italy, and
prevailed not. And lastly, the Canons of Counsels were by the imperial power
ratified, and without that sovereign approbation had no strength.

Secondly, for Appeals, the Princes have bin in the Church, the end of them
all, even in causes Ecclesiastical. More, Socrates reports libr. 5. cap. 10.
That many Bishops differing in judgment, concerning the Doctrine of the
Trinity, Theodosius the Emperor conuented them before himself, he took the
several Coppies of their Doctrines; and praying first to God to assist him, in
that holy business, that he might choose and maintain his truth against all
heretical opinions: after mature advice, he resolved upon the truth of
Doctrine, and in the presence of all the Assembly, he tore in pieces all the
rest: and this truth he did not measure by the depth of his own judgment, but
by comparison with that Canon of Faith, which both holy Scriptures, and former
Counsels had sufficiently maintained. And this was in a matter merely
Ecclesiastical. And for Ecclesiastical persons; the law of Appeals in our
Land, when Popery passed for true religion, in the reign of King Henry the
second, had this Process, from the Archdeacon, to the Bishop of the Diocese,
from the Bishop of the Diocese to the Archbishop of the Province, and from
him to the King, which was the final hearing and determination, beyond which
there was no further provocation, but to leave all to God. Therefore we
determine, that our Causes and our Persons are all vassalles, and subject to
our Sovereigns; and the immunities and liberties which we possess, we hold
them of the indulgence, and gracious favor of our most worthy, and loving
Princes, and our Solomon, our Ecclesiastes requires of his Clergy, no undue
obedience, that the judgment remains most just. They that resist (even of
the Clergy) shall receive unto themselves damnation.

They resist this power, who refuse this Oath of Loyalty to his most excellent
Majesty, as all Popish Recusants do, who set up a demy-god, as Bellarmine his
Parasite fawneth, and faineth, De Pontif. 5.6. qui potest mutare, confer, and
auferre principibus regna: who has power to change, to give, and take away
Kingdoms from Princes.

Our Sovereign does not set up an Inquisition, to find out Papists, as Rome
does to discover Protestants: he does not make bare suspicion quarrel enough
to apprehend, convent, imprison, rack, and torture men, to force them to
selfe-accusation: he only deuiseth to know sheep from goats, loyal
subjects from heretical rebels; he is the Image of that King of whom we
read, Matt. 21.5. Ecce, rextuus venit tibi mansuetus: Thy King comes to thee
meek, and gracious. It is the glory of a King to pass by an offense. How
many Princes of the earth would have put up such an attempt as the Gunpowder
treason was, with such patience? Might not Christian Princes have thought his
anger just, if it had drawn his Sword against all of that Religion, till none
of them had been left, and it had been no more then the equity of my Text,
for they that resist must receive judgment here, by just Magistrates, who
bear not the Sword in vain, and hereafter damnation, by the Sentence of the
great Judge of Quick and Dead. The Israelites thought this Sentence just; for
thus they say to Joshua; Joshua 1.18.
Whosoever will rebel against thy Commandments, let him be put to death: And
God gave a fearful example hereof in the rebellion of Corah. The reason is
given by the Almighty himself in this case of opposition to sovereign
dominion, why he takes it so to heart: For he said to Samuel, They have not
cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not reign over them.
1. Sam. 8.7.


In these cases of resisting, GOD is most sensible, for his own Scepter of
Rule is touched in them: For by me Princes reign, says his Wisdom.
Therefore the usurping pride of Rome, struggling and wrestling with the Holy
one of Israel for the Scepter of Regiment, may now look, that the censure of
Saint Gregory the Great then Bishop, given upon the Patriarch of
Constantinoples ambition of the name of Oecumenicall, may turn into a
prophecy of these times, and then Elatio tanto citius rumpitur, quanto magis
inflatur. And we may all expect the breaking of the head of Leuiathan in the
great waters. David said, they that hate thee have lifted up the head. Saint
Augustine upon that place says, Nec capita, sed caput quando eo peruenturi
sunt, vt etiam illud caput habeant, quod extollitur super omne quod dicitur
Deus, and quod colitur, quod Deus interficiet spiritu oris sui: that is, he
says not their heads, but they shall lift up the head, seeing they shall come
to that pass, that they shall have that head which is lifted up above all that
is called God, or is worshipped, which GOD shall destroy with the breath of his
mouth.

The time of my warning to this place, and the time limited to this short
Preface to a long business, are both impatient of prolixitie. Let me therefore
address my speech to you my reverend Brethren, in the holy Ministry of the
word of God, to stir you up, not only to express and approve your own
undoubted loyalty to your Sovereign, by your oath publicly given for the
same, but further, to employ the uttermost of your wits, and tongues, and
pens, to recover so many of our recusant brethren, as are not frozen in their
dregs of superstition, but led in blindness, for want of light, to the
unity of our Church, and the obedience of our Sovereign: and withal, to
stir up the Magistrate to zeal and fervor in the cause of God, to detect,
and pursue recusant Papists, and to lay them at the foot of our gracious Lord
the King: For Solomon says right well; A King that sits in the throne of
Judgment, chaseth away all evil with his eye, Prou. 20.8. or if they be so
grounded in their disloyalty, that they dread not the power of that Sword which
he bears, and not in vain: if they be so blinded with superstition, that
they cannot see in the Majesty of Sovereign government, the ordinance, and
Vicegerencle of God. A wise King (as a wise King says) scatters the wicked,
and makes the wheel to turn over them: verse 26. Our King has Wisdom like
an Angel of God, to dispute with them, and confute them: Even a divine
Sentence is in the mouth of our King, Prouer. 16.19. He has Justice like the
Deputy of of the most High, to punish them that are obstinate, he has mercy
like the Son of God, to manage Justice, with moderation, and to pardon those
that offend, not of malicious and precipitate rebellion, but of ignorant and
misled oversight. And his search tending to the detection of Gods enemies, I
wish my Text written by the finger of Gods spirit, in the royal heart and hand
of our most gracious Lord the King, that all his faithful subjects may read
it in his practice; They which resist, shall receive to themselves judgment.

For, what greater discouragement to our Ministry, then this, to see the bold
freedom of recusant Papists, daring to affront our Church, to impugn our
doctrine, to despise our Bishops, to scorn our Ministry, and to pronounce; us
all damned to the second death without hope of redemption; and all this with
such assurance, as if they had no law to contradict them, or no Magistrate to
see the law executed upon them. God himself has written a law against such,
in their blood, and let Gods subordinate Deputies on earth from the King that
sits upon the throne, to the lowest Magistrate trusted with the Sword of
Justice, lay to heart the speech of God by his Prophet to Ahab, 1. Reg. 20.42.
Because thou have let go out of thy hand, a man whom I appointed to die, thy
life shall go for his life. Let this sentence fall upon the Kings enemies, and
rather then one hair should fall from the head of the Lords anointed for his
remissenes herein to those whom God has appointed to die: let his milke-white
mercy be dyed into a crimosin tincture of judgment. Exurgat Deus, dissipentur
inimici. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered. What their mercy is, the
day shall declare it, the fifth of November shall declare it to posterity,
their vault, their powder, their bars of iron, their logges, and billets of
wood, even all their instruments of sudden and cruel death, which if men
should forgot, God would remember, for though men wink and sleep, the holy
one of Israel sees, and God the auenger will arise, and They that resist shall
receive to themselves condemnation. The Pope that absolueth others, herein
cannot be absolved. Saint Paul has sealed Paul the fifth, now living and dying
in his present Religion, to condemnation: and my Text is sufficient proof,
that no Romish Catholic, living and dying in the obedience of the Bishop of
Rome, and in disloyal rebellion, and resistance to their lawful Sovereigns,
can hope by the revealed will of God to be saved: for his sin is resistance
to Gods ordinance, which is flat Theomachie.

Let us all therefore be instant and earnest in the maintenance of this truth:
our tepidity and luke-warmenesse in religion makes us justly tataxed to
resemble the church of Laodicea, which is threatened to be cast out of Gods
mouth. It is the cause of God, it is the cause of Jesus Christ, the cause of
the Church, the cause of the Commonwealth. It is the cause of the supreme head
of the Church and Commonwealth next under Jesus Christ, our wise, learned,
gracious, and peaceable Solomon. He is neither good Christian, nor good
subject, that is not stowe, and confident, in so religious, and loyal a
quarrel.

I presume I have but spoken the thoughts and affections of all my reverend and
learned brethren in the holy Ministry; and I say no more but Amen. Let God
ratify and confirm it: even so be it for Jesus Christ his sake: to whom with
the Father and the holy Spirit, be given all glory, and power, and dominion,
now and evermore. AMEN.

Laus Deo.

