The Palace of Pleasure Beautified, adorned and well furnished, with Pleasant
Histories and excellent Nouelles, selected out of diverse good and commendable
Authors.

By William Painter Clarke of the Ordinance and Armarie.



1566

IMPRINTED AT London, by Henry Denham, for Richard Tottell and William Jones.



To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, Ambrose, Earl of Warwike, Baron
Lisle, of the most excellent order of the Garter Knight, General of the
Queens Majesty's Ordinance within her Highness Realms and Dominions,
William Painter Clarke of the same office, prays long life, increase of Honor
and felicity.
PROVOKED, or rather vehementlye incited and moved, I have been (right
honorable my very good Lord) to ymagine and devise all means possible to
avoid that ugly vice of Ingratitude (which as it is abhorred among creatures
void of reason and divine knowledge, so of me^ indewed and full possessed with
both, it is specially to be detested.) And to the intent I might not be
touched with that unkind vice, odible to God and man, I have many times, with
my self debated how I might by any means show my self thankful and
beneuolent to your honor, which has not only by frequen^e talk unto my
friends priuatelye, but also upon my self openly employed benefits and
commendacion undeserved. The one I have received by friendely report of your
dear and approved friends, the other I do feel and taste to my great stay
and comfort. For when it pleased your Honor, of courteous inclination, upon the
first view, willingly to consent and agree to the confirmation of that which I
do inioye: for that bounty then, ever since I have studied by what means I
might commend my good will and affection to the same. Wherefore incensed with
the generositie, and natural instinct of your noble mind, I have purposed many
times to employ mine endeavor by some small beginnings, to give your honor to
understand outwardlye, what the inward desire is willing to do, if ability
thereunto were correspondent. And as opportunity served, (respiring as it were
from the wayghtie affairs of that Office wherein it has pleased our most
dradde Sovereign Lady worthelye to place you the chief and General) I
perused such volumes of Noble Authors, as wherewith my poor Armarie is
furnished: And amongs other, chanced upon that excellent Historiographer
Titus Liuius. In whom is contained a large Camp of noble factes and exploites
achieued by valiant personages of the Roman state. By whom also is remembered
the beginning and continuation of their famous common wealth. And viewing in
him great plenty of strange Histories, I thought good to select such as were
the best and principal, wherein travailing not far, I occurred upon some
which I deemed most worthy the provulgation in our native tongue, reducing them
into such compendious form, as I trust shall not appear unpleasant. Which
when I had finished, seeing them but a handefull in respect of the multitude, I
fully determined to proceed in the rest. But when I considered mine own
weakness, and the majesty of the Author, the cancred infirmity of a
cowardely mind, stayed my conceived purpose, and yet not so stayed as utterly
to suppress mine attempt. Wherefore aduauncing again the Ensign of courage, I
thought good (leaving where I left in that Author, til I knew better how they
would be liked) to adventure into diverse other, out of whom I decerped and
chose ( raptim) sundry propre and commendable Histories, which I may boldly so
term, because the authors be commendable and well approved. And thereunto have
joined many other, gathered out of Boccaccio, Bandello, Ser Giouanni
Fiorentino, Straparole and other Italian and French authors. Al which I have
recueiled and bound together in this volume, under the title of the Palace of
Pleasure, presuming to consecrate the same and the rest of my beneuolent mind
to your honor. For to whom duly appertains mine industry and diligence, but
to him that is the Patron and Imbracer of my well doings? Whereunto also I may
apply the words of that excellent Orator Tullie in his first book of Offices.
De beneuolentia aeutem, quam quisque haebeaet erga nos, primum illud est in
officio, vt et plurimum tribuamus, a quo plurimum diligimur. Of benevolence
which each man bears toward us, the chiefest duty is to give most to him,
of whom we be most beloved. But how well the same is done, or how praise worthy
the translation is, I refer to the skillful, craving no more praise therefore,
than they shall attribute and give. To nothing seek I to aspire by this my
presumption (right honorable) but cherefull acceptance of the same at your
hands: desirous hereby to show my self studious of a friend of so noble
vocation. And where greater things cannot be done, these small I trust shall
not be forsaken and comtempned: which if I do perceive to be favored,
hereafter more ample endeavor shall be employed to achieue greater, if ability
thereunto be consonant. In these histories (which by another term I call
Nouelles) be described the lives, gestes, conquestes and high enterprises of
great Princes, wherein also be not forgotten the cruel acts and tyranny of
some. In these be set forth the great valiance of noble Gentlemen, the terrible
combats of coragious personages, the virtuous minds of noble dames, the
chaste hearts of constant Ladies, the wonderful patience of puisaunt Princes,
the mild sufferance of well disposed Gentlewomen, and in diverse, the quiet
bearing of adverse fortune. In these histories be depainted in lively colors,
the ugly shapes of Insolency and Pride, the deforme figures of Incontinencie
and Rape, the cruel aspectes of Spoil, breach of order, treason, ill luck
and mischief of States, and other persons. Wherein also be intermixed, pleasant
discourses, merry talk, sporting practices, deceytful devises, and nipping
tau^tes, to exhilarat the readers minds. And although by the first face and
view, some of these may seem to entreat of unlawful Love, and the foul
practices of the same, yet being thoroughly read and well considered, both old
and young may learn how to avoid the ruin, overthrow, inconvenience, and
displeasure, that lascivious desire, and wanton will, does bring to the suitors
and pursuers of the same. All which may render good example for all sorts to
follow the best, and embrace the virtuous, contrariwise to reject the worste,
and contempne the vicious. For which intent and purpose be al things, good and
bad recited in histories, Chronicles, and monuments, by the first authors and
elucubrators of the same. To whom then may the same (wherein be contained many
discourses of nobility) be offered with more due desert than to him, that in
nobility and parentage is not inferior to the best? To whom may factes and
exploites of famous personages be consigned, but to him whose prowess and
valiant acts be manifest and well known to Englishemen, but better to
strangers, which have felt the puissance thereof? To whom may the combats,
gestes, and courses of the victorious be remembered, but to him, whose frequent
use of mighty in country and terrible shocke of shield and Lance: is familier
in the Court, and famous in the town and country? In whom may pacient bearing
of adversity, and constant suffrance of Fortunes threats more duly to the
world appear, than in him that has constantly sustained and quietly passed
over the bruntes of the same? To whom may be given a Theater of the world, and
stage of human misery, more worthily, than to him that has with comely
gesture, wise demeanor, and orderly behavior, been an actor in the same? Who
is he that more condignely does deserve to be possesin a Palace of Pleasure,
than he that is daily resiant in a palace of renowned fame, guided by a
Queen adorned with most excellent beauty and shape, indewed and garnished
with great learning, passing virtues and rare qualities of the mind. To whom
(I say) may constancy of Ladies, and virtuous deeds of Dames, nore aptly be
applied, than to him that has in possession a Lady and Countess of noble
birth (whose sire was the old Earl of Bedforde, a grave and faithful
councelor to her Majesty's most noble Progenitors, and father is the same, in
dear estimation and regard with her highness, under who^ he trustily and
honorably serves) whose courteous and countess like behauior glistereth in the
court amongs the troop of honorable Dames: and for her toward disposition,
first preferred by the Queen's Majesty, into her secret chamber, and after
advanced to be Countess of your noble Earldom. Besides al which rare
gifts, by Nature ingrafted in your honor, and by her bountifully bestowed upon
the same, the perfect piety and brotherly love between you and the right noble
and virtuous the Earl of Lecester, your honorable brother, is had in greatest
admiration. Whose noble courage in deeds of honor and passing humanity to his
inferiors, is very commendable to the world. But here I will stay my self,
lest whilst I go about to extol your fames, I do (for want of skill in due
praise) seem to diminishe that which among all men by daily experience is
sufficiently renowned. And as your honor does with great prudence govern that
office of the Ordinance (whereof I am a member) even so, the same has with
great care and diligence commended such to the Queen's Majesty, to join and
serve in the same, as officers right worthy their vocations, specially the
worshipful Edward Randolfe Esquire, Lieutenaunt of that office, a man for his
experience and good advise rather fostred in the bosom of Bellona her self,
than nourced in kentish soil (although in the scholehouse of courtesy and
humanity he appears full carefully to have been trained up by his virtuous
parents) which is familiarly known unto me and other that domestically (as it
were) do frequent his company. But alas my Lord, among the midde of my
rejoice of those before remembered, I can not pretermit the lamentable loss of
the best approved gonner that ever served in our time his Prince and country,
Robert Thomas, the Master Gonner, who for skill and service both, a title of
Prince of Gonners iustlye did deserve: And see the luck, when he thought best
to signify his good will, to honor Hymeneus bed, at Nuptial night, a clap of
that he never feared did end his life. Such is the dradfull fury of Gonners
art, and hellish rage of Vulcanes work. And therefore that dangerous service
in skillful men is specially to be recommended and cherished. Whereunto as your
honor hitherto has borne singular affection, by preferring to her Majesty
such as from their infancy have been trained up in that necessary service,
and very painefully have employed the same, in the time of the Queen's majesty
that now is, and her progenitors, even so I humbly beseech your honor for
continuance of the same, specially in those, that be indewed with greatest
experience, in whom only rests the brunt of our defense. A service so
commendable and needeful, as none more. But what need I to provoke the willing
mind, whose honor is more pressed to cherish such, than I am able by wishing
heart for to conceive. Finally yet once again, I humbly beseech your honor
gratefully to accept this book, and at your leisure and convenient time to
read and peruse the same. By reuoluing whereof your honor I trust shall be
delighted with the rare histories and good examples therein contained, such as
to my knowledge heretofore have not ben made common to our countrymen, which
with all my good will and endeavor I duetifully exhibit. Beseching Almighty God
favorably to defend and govern your honor, prosperously to maintain and keep
the same, godly to direct my right honorable Lady in the steps of perfect
virtue, bountifullye to make you both happy parents of many children: and
after the expense of N^stor years in this transitory life, mercifully to
conducte you to the unspeakable joys of his kingdom.

Nere the Tower of London the first of January. 1566. By your L. most bounden
William Pamter.

A Recapitulacion or brief Rehearsal of the Arguments of every Novel, with
the places noted, in what Author every of the same or theffect be read and
contained.
Titus Liuius.
The Romans and Albanes being at wars, for injuries mutually inferred.
Metius Suffetius, the Albane Capten, devised a way by a Combat to join both ye
Cities in one. Uictorie falling to the Romans, the Roman victor kills his
sister, who notwithstanding is condemned to dye. Afterward upon his fathers
suit he is delivered. The first Novel. Folio. 1. Sextus Tarquinius rauisheth
Lucrece who bewayling the loss of her chastity kills her self. The.ij.
Novel. Folio. 5. The siedge of Rome by Porsenna, and the valiant delivery
thereof by Mntius Scoeuola. The.iij. Novel. Folio. 7. Martius Cortolanus going
about to repress the common people of Rome with dearth of Corn, was vanished.
For reuengement whereof, he persuaded Accius (...). King of ye Uuolcians to make
wars upon the Romans, and he himself in their aid, came in his own person.
The city brought to great misery the fathers devised means to deliver the
same, and sent into the Uuolscian camp, the mother, the wife and children, of
Cortolanus Upon whose complaints Cortolanus withdrew the Uuolscians. And ye
city was reduced to quietness. The.iiij. Novel. Folio. 9. Appius Clandius
one of ye Decemuiri of Rome, goes about to ravish Virginia a young maide^,
which endeavor of Appius, when her father Virginius understood, being then in ye
wars, he repayreth home to rescue his daughter. One that was betrouthed unto
her, does claim her, whereupon rose great contencion. In the end her own
Father, to save ye shame of his stock, killed her with a Butchers knife, and
comes into the Forum, and cries vengeance upon Appius Then after much
contencion and rebellion, the Decemviri were deposed. The.v. Novel. Folio. 13.
Herodotus.
Candiules king of Lydia, showing the secrets of his wives beauty, to Gyges
one of his Guarde: was by counsel of his wife, slain by the said Gyges, and
deprived of his kingdom. The.vj. Novel. Folio. 19. King Craesus of Lydia
reasons with the wyseman Solon, of the happy life of man. Who little esteming
his good advise, understood before his death, that no man (but by virtue) can
in his life attain felicity. The.vij. Novel. Folio. 21.
AElianus.
Of a Father that made suit, to have his own son put to death. The.viij.
Novel. Folio. 24. Water offered of good will to Artaxerxes the king of Persia,
and the liberal reward of the king, to the giver. The.ix. Novel. Folio. 24.
The love of Chariton and Menalippus. The.x. Novel. Folio. 25.
Xenophon.
King Cyrus persuaded by Araspas, to dispose himself to love a Lady called
Panthea, enters into a pretty disputacion and talk, of Love and beauty.
Afterward Araspas himself falls in love with the said Lady, but she
endued with great chastity, auoideth his earnest Love. And when her husband was
slain in ye service of Cyrus, she killed herself. The.xj. Novel. Folio. 27.
Quintus Curtius.
Abdolominus is from poor estate, aduau^ced by Alexander the great, through
his honest life to be king of Sydone. The.xij. Novel. Folio. 33. The Oracion
of the Scythian Ambassadors to Alexander the great, reproving his ambicion,
and desire of Empire. The.xiij. Novel. Folio. 34.
Aulus Gellius.
The words of Metellus of marriage, and wyuing, with the praise and disprayse
of the same. The.xiiij. Novel. Folio. 36. Of Lais and Demosthenes. The.v.
Novel. Fol. 38. C. Fabritius and Aemilius Consulls of Rome, being promised
that king Pyrrhus for a sum of money should be slain (which was a notable
enemy to the Roman state) advertised Pyrrhus thereof by letters, and of other
notable things, done by the same Fabritius. The.xvj. Novel. Folio. 38. A
Scholemaister, trayterouslye rendering the noble men's sons of Fale^^a, to
the hands of Camillus, was well acquitted and rewarded, for his pains and
labor. The.xvij. Novel. Folio. 39. The History of Papyrius Pretextaetus.
The.xviij. Novel. Folio. 41. How Plutarche did beat his man. And of pretty
talk touching signs of anger. The.xix. Novel. Fol. 42. A pretty tale of
Aesope, of the Lark. The.xx. Novel. Folio. 42. A merye ieft uttered by
Haniball to king Antiochus. The.xxj. Novel. Folio. 44. The marvelous knowledge
of a Lion being acquainted with a man, called Androctus. The.xxij. Novel. Fol.
44. A pretty disputacion of the Philosopher Phaeuorinus, to persuade a woman,
not to put forth her child to nursse, but to nourishe it her self with her
own milk. The.xxiij. Novel. Folio. 45. Of Sertorius a noble Roman
Captain. The.xxiiij. Novel. Folio. 48. Of the books of Sybilla. The.xxv.
Nouel. Fol. 49. A difference and controversy between a Master and a Scholar
so subtle, that the Judges could not give sentence. The.xxvj. Novel. Folio.
50.
Plutarche.
Seleueus King of Asia, gave his wife to his own son in marriage, being his
mother in law: Who so feruentlye did love her, that he was like to dye. Which
by a discrete and wise inuencion was discovered to Seleueus by a Phisician.
The.xxvij. Novel. Folio. 51. Of the strange and beastlye nature of Timon of
Athenes enemy to mankind, with his death, burial, and Epitaphe. The.xxviij.
Novel. Folio. 57.
S. Hierome and Pietro Messia.
The marriage of a man and woman, he being the husband of xx. wives: and she
the wife of.xxii. husbands. The.xxix. Novel. Folio. 59.
Bocaccio.
How Melchisedech, a Jew, by telling a pretty tale of three Kings, saved his
life. The.xxx. Novel. Folio. 60. One called Guglielmo Borsiere with certain
words well placed, taunted the covetous life of Ermino Grimaldi. The.xxxj.
Novel. Folio. 61. Master Alberto of Bologna by a pleasant answer, made a
Gentlewoman to blushe, which had thought to have put him out of countenance, in
telling him that he was in love with her. The.xxxij. Novel. Folio. 63. Rinald.
of Esti being robbed, arrived at Castle Guglielmo and was succored of a
widow: and restored to his losses, retourning safe and sound home to his own
house. The.xxxiij. Novel. Fol. 64. Three young men having fondlye consumed all
that they had, became very poor, whose nephewe (as he returned out of
England into Italy, by the way) fill in acquaintance with an Abbot, whom
(upon further familiarity) he knew to be the king of Englandes daughter, which
took him to her husband. Afterward she restored, his uncles to all their
losses, and sent them home in good state and reputacion. The.xxxiiij. Novel.
Folio. 68. Land^lfo Ruffolo being inpouerished, became a Pirate, and taken by
the Geneuois, was in danger of drowning, who saving himself upon a little
Coafer full of rich Iewelles, was received at Corsu, and being cherished by a
woman, returned home very rich. The.xxxv. Novel. Folio 73. Andreuccio of
Perugia, being come to Naples, to buy horse, was in one night surprised, with
three marvelous accidents. All which having escaped, with one Rubie he returned
home to his house. The.xxxvj. Novel. Folio. 76. The Earl of Angiers being
falsely accused, was banished out of France, and left his two sons in
sundry places in England, and retourning (unknown) by Scotland, found them
in great authority, afterward he repaired in the habit of a servant to the
French kings army, and being known to be innocent, was again advanced to
his first estate. The.xxxvij. Novel. Folio. 85. Gilettae a Physicians daughter
of Narbona, healed ye French king of a Fistula, for reward whereof, she
demanded Beleramo Count of Rossigliont to husband. The Count being married
against his will, for despite fled to Florence, and loved an other. G^^etta
his wife, by policy found means to lie with her husband, in place of his
Lover, and was begotten with child of two sons. Which known to her
husband, he received her again, and afterward she lived in great honor and
felicity. The.xxxviij. Novel. Folio. 95. ^ancredi prince of Salerne, caused
his daughters lover to be slain, and sent his heart unto her in a cup of
Gold: which afterward she put into poisoned water, and drinking thereof dyed.
The.xxxix. Novel. Folio. 100.
Bandello.
Mahomet one of the Turkishe Emperors, executes cursed cruelty upon a Greek
maiden, whom he took prisoner at the winning of Constantinople. The.xl.
Novel. Folio. 107. A Lady falsely accused of adultery, was condemned to be
devoured of Lions, the manner of her delivery, and how (her innocence being
known) her accuser felt the pain for her prepared. The.xl. Novel. Folio.
112. Didaco a Spaniarde is in Love with a poor Maiden of Valentia, and
secretly maryeth her, afterward lothing his first marriage, because she was of
base parentage, he maryeth another of noble birth. His first wife by secret
messinger prays his company, whose request he accomplisheth. Being a bed
she and her maid kills him. She throws him into the streate. She in
desperate wise confesses ye fact before the Magistrates, and is put to death.
The.xlij. Novel. Folio. 125. Wantonness and pleasant life being guides of
Insolency, does bring a miserable end to a fair Lady of Thurm, Whom a noble
man advanced to high estate. Wherein he executes great cruelty upon his said
Lady taken in adultery. The.xliij. Novel. Folio. 135. The love of Alerane of
Saxon, and of Adelasia the daughter of the Emperor Otho the third of that
name. Their flight and departure into Italy, and how they were known
again, and what noble houses of Italy descended of their race. The.xliiij.
Novel. Folio. 201. The Duchess of Sauoie being the King of Englandes sister,
was in the Duke her husbands absence, iniustlye accused of adultery: by a
noble man, his Lieutenant. And should have been put to death, if by the
prowess and valiant combat of Don John di Mendozza (a Gentleman of Spain)
she had not been delivered. With a discourse of meruellous accidents, touching
the same, to the singular praise and commendacion, of chaste and honest Ladies.
The.xlv. Novel. Fol. 226. A King of England, loved the daughter of one of his
noble men, which was Countess of Salesburie, who after great suit to achieue
that he could not win, for the entire love he bare unto her, and her great
consta^cie, made her his Queen and wife. The.xlvj. Novel. Folio. 258.
Ser Giouanni Fiorentino.
A Gentleman called Galgano long time made suit to Madonna Minoccia, her
husband (not knowing the same,) diverse times praised and commended the same
Gentleman to his Lady: by reason whereof, in the absence of her husband, she
sent for him and yielded her self unto him, telling him what words her husband
had spoken of him, for recompense whereof he refused to dishonest her.
The.xlvij. Novel. Fol. 279. Bindo a notable Archietect, and his son
Ricciardo with all his famlie, from Florence, came to dwell at Uenice, where
being made citizens for diverse monuments by them made there, through his
inordinat expenses is forced to rob the Treasure house. Bindo being slain by a
policy devised by the Duke and the State, Ricciardo by fine subtelties
delivers himself from four dangers. Afterward the Duke (by his own
confession) understanding the slight, gives him his pardon, and his daughter
in marriage. The.xlviij. Novel. Folio. 282.
Out of Straparole.
Philenio Sisterno a Scholar of Bologna being mocked of three fair
Gentlewomen, at a banquet made of set purpose, was revenged upon them all.
The.xlix. Nouel. Fol. 289.
Out of Heptameron of the Queen of Navarre.
The pitious and chaste death of one of the Muleters wives of the Queen of
Navarre. The D. Novel. Fol. 296. A king of Naples abusing a Gentleman's wife,
in the end did wear the horns him self. The.Lj. Novel. Fol. 298. The rash
enterprise of a gentleman against a Princess of Flaunders, and of the damage
and shame which he received thereof. The.Lij. Novel. Fol. 302. The love of
Amadour and Florinda wherein be contained many sleights and dissimulations
together with the renowned chastity of the said Florinda. The.Liij. Novel.
Fol. 306. The incontinencie of a Duke and of his impudency. The.Liiij. Novel.
Fol 326. One of the French kings called Frauncis the first of ye name declared
his gentle nature to Count Guillaume, that would have killed him. The.Lv.
Novel. Fol. 330. A punishment more rigorous than death, of a husband toward
his wife that had committed adultery. The.Lvj. Novel. Fol. 332. A President
of Grenoble advertised of the ill government of his wife, took such order
that his honesty was not diminished and yet reue^ged the fact. The.Lvij.
Nouel. Fol. 334. A Gentleman of Perch suspecting injury done unto him by his
friend, provoked him to execute and put in proof the cause of his suspicion.
The.Lviij. Novel. Fol. 336. The Simplicity of an old woman that offered a
burning candle to saint John of Lions. The.Lix. Nouel. Fol. 338.
Out of a little French book called Comptes du Monde.
A Doctor of the Laws bought a cup, and by the subtlety of two false verlets
lost both his money and the cup. The.Lx. Novel. Fol. 339.
To the Reader.
NOTHING in mine opinion ca^ be more acceptable unto thee (friendely Reader),
than often reading and dailye perusing of variety of Histories, which as they
be for diversity of matter pleasant and plausible, even so for example and
imitacion right good and commendable. The one does rejoice the weary and
tedious mind, many times inuolued with ordinary cares, the other prescribes
a direct path to tread the trace of this present life. Wherefore if in these
news or Nouelles here presented, there do appear any thing worthy of regard,
give thanks to the noble Gentleman to whom this book is dedicated, for whose
sake only, that pain (if any seem to be) was wholly employed. Enjoy therefore
with him this present book, and courteously with friendly talk report the
same, for if otherwise thou do abuse it, the blame shall light on thee, and
not of me, which only of good will did mean it first. But yet if blaming
tongues and unstayed heads, will needs be busy, they shall sustain the
shame, for that they have not yet shown forth any blameless deed to like
effect, as this is meant of me, which when they do, no blame but praise they
can receive. For praise be they well worthy for to have, which in well doing
do contend. No virtuous deed, or zealous work can want due praise of the
honest, though faulting foles and youthly heads full often do chau^t the
faultlesse check, that Momus mouth did once find out in Venus Slipper. And
yet from faults I will not purge the same, but whatsoever they seem to be, they
be in number ne yet in substance such, but that thy courteous dealing may sone
amend them or forget them. Wherefore to give thee full aduertisment of the
whole collection of these Nouelles, understand that.vj. of them have I selected
out of Titus Liuius, two out of Herodotus, certain out of Aelianus, Xenophon,
Aulus Gellius, Plutarche and other like approved authors, Other Nouelles have I
adjoined, chosen out of diverse Italian and French writers. VVherin I confess
my self not to be so well trained, peradventure as the fine heads of such
trauailers would desire. And yet I trust sufficiently to express the sense, of
every of the same. Certain have I culled out of the Decamerone of Giouan
Boccaccio wherein be contained one hundred Nouelles, amongs which there be some
(in my judgment) that be worthy to be condemned to perpetual prison, but of
them such have I redeemed to the liberty of our vulgar, as may be best liked,
and better suffered. Although the.vj. part of the same hundredth may full well be
permitted. And as I my self have already done many other of the same work,
yet for this present I have thought good to publishe only.x. in number, the
rest I have referred to them that be able with better style to express the
authors eloquence, or until I adioyne to this another to me, if none other in
the mean time do prevent me, which with all my heart I wish and desire:
because the whole works of Boccaccio for his style, order of writing, gravity,
and sententious discourse, is worthy of entire provulgation. Out of Bandello I
have selected.vij. chosing rather to follow Launay and Belleforest the French
Translators, than the barren soil of his own vain, who being a Lombard does
franckly confess himself to be no fine Florentine, or trim Thoscane, as
eloquent and gentle Boccaccio was. Diverse other also be extracted out of other
Italian and French authors. All which (I trust) be both profitable and
pleasant, and will be lyked of the indifferent Reader.

Profitable they be in that they disclose what glory, honor, and preferment
each man attayneth by good desert, what felicity by honest attempts, what good
success, laudable enterprises do bring to the coragious, what happy joy and
quiet state godly love does affect the Imbracers of ye same. Profitable I say
in yt they do reveal ye miseries of rapes and fleshly actions, the overthrow
of noble men and Princes by disordered government, the tragical ends of them
that unhappily do attempt practices vicious and horrible. VVilt thou learn
how to behave thy self with modesty after thou have achieued any victorious
conquest, and not to forget thy prosperous fortune in the glorious triumph of
the same, by committing a fact unworthy of thy valiaunce: read the first Novel
of the valiant Roman Horatius? VVilt thou understand what dishonor and
infamy, desire of libidinous lust does bring, read the rape of Lucrece? VVilt
thou know what an unkind part it is unnaturally to abuse the state of thine
own country, read Martius Coriolanus? VVilt you learn what fruit is reaped of
wicked lust, to dispoile virgins and maids of their greatest virtue, see the
history of Appius Claudius and sir Didaco the Spanish knight? Desire thou to
know, how closely thou ought to keep the secrets of honorable marriage,
peruse the history of Candaules? Do you covet to be advertised what is true
felicity, read of king Craesus and the wise man Solon? Has ye Lady,
Gentlewoman, or other of the feminine kind desire to behold a mirroure of
Chastity: let them read over the Nouelles of the Lady Panthea, of the Duchess
of Sauoie of the Countess of Salesburie, of Amadour and Florinda? Is the noble
man affected to understand what happy end, the virtue of Loialtie and
fidelity does co^duce, the Earl of Angiers may be to him a right good
example? Will Gentlemen learn how to prosecute virtue, and to profligat from
their mind, disordinate Love, and affection; I refer them to the history of
Tancredi, and to Galgano of Siena? Is not the merchant contented with his
goods already gotten, but will needs go seek some other trade. Let him note
and consider the dangers wherein the aduenturer Landalpho was? Is he disposed
to send his factor beyond the seas, about his affairs, let him first bid
him to peruse Andreuccio, and then command him to beware of Madame
Floredelice. If the yeoman intends to be careful of his business, meaning
to reap that he has sown in due time let him take heed how he repose any
trust in friends and kinnesmen, lest in harvest he be deceived, which Aesopes
Lark does pretelie note. If the Artificer will not faithfully deal according
to the trust reposed in him, I would not wish him to suffer that which Bindo
did, but advisedly to read the history, and trustelie to accomplish that he
takes in hand. If scornful speech or flouting sport do flow in ripe wits
and lavish tongues of womankinde, let them beware they do not deal with
learned sort, least Master Alberto with Physic drougues or Philenio with
Sophist art do stain their face, or otherwise offend them with the innocence
of their great Graundmother Eve when she was somoned from Paradise joy. If the
pore maiden of base birth be advanced (by fortunes grace) to high estate: let
her fix in mind the Lady of Thurin. Finally, for all states and degrees, in
these Nouelles be set forth singular documents and examples, right commodious
and profitable to them that will vouchsafe to read them.

Plesaunt they be for that they recreate, and refresh weried minds,
defatigated either with painful travail, or with continual care,
occasioning them to shun and avoid heaviness of mind, vain fantasies, and
idle cogitations. Pleasant so well abroad as at home, to avoid the grief of
VVintersnight and length of Summers day, which the trauailers on foot may use
for a stay to ease their weried body, and the Iourneors on horseback, for a
chariot or easier mean of travail in stead of a merry companion to shorten
the tedious toil of weary ways. Delectable they be (no doubt) for all sorts
of men, for the sad, the angry, the cholerike, the pleasant, the hole and
sick, and for all other with whatsoever passion rising either by nature or use
they be affected. The sad shall be discharged of heaviness, the angry and
cholerike purged, the pleasant maintained in mirth, the whole furnished with
disporte, and the sick appaised of grief. These Nouelles then, being
profitable and pleasant histories, apt and meet for all degrees: I trust the
indifferent Reader, of what complexion, nature and disposition so ever he be,
will accept them in good part, although perchance not so set forth or decked
with fine and eloquent style, as this age more brave in tongue than manners does
require, and do pray thee to receive them into thy courteous hands, with no
less good will, (though not with like regard) than Alpho^sus king of Aragon
did Quintus Curtius, out of whom be some of these selected. Who upon a time
being sick at Capua, receiving at the hands of diverse Physicians many
medicines, in his greatest fit called for the history of Quintus Curtius, In
whom having great delight for his eloquent description of the gestes and
factes of king Alexander, when he was restored to health, said. Farewell
Auicen, Adieu Hipocrates and other Physicians, welcome Curtius the restitutor,
and recovery of my health. Whereby he declared what pleasure he had in the
exercise and reading of histories, not contempning for all that, the honorable
science of Physic, which in extremities he holesomely used. What commodity
and pleasure histories do yield to the diligent serchers and trauailers in the
same, Tullie in his fifth book, De finibus bonorum et malorum ad Brutum does
declare, who affirms that he is not ignorant what pleasure and profit the
reading of histories does import. And after he has described what difference
of commodity, is between fained fables, and lively discourses of true
histories, concludes reading of histories to be a certain provocation and
allurement to move men to learn experience. If Tullie then the prince of
Orators, does affirm profit and pleasure to be in perusing of histories, then
fitly have I entitled this volume with the Palace of Pleasure. For like as the
outward show of Princes Palaces be pleasant at the view and sight of each man's
eye, bet decked and garnished with sumptuous hangings and costly Arras of
splendent show, wherein be wrought and be with gold and silk of sundry
hewes, the deeds of noble states: Even so in this our Palace here, there be at
large recorded the Princely parts and glorious gestes of renowned wights
represented with more lively grace and gorgeous sight, than Tapestrie or Arras
work, for that the one with deadly shape does show, the other with speaking
voice declare what in their time they were. Upon who^ do wait (as meet it
is) inferior persons, each one vouchsafing to tell what he was; in the
transitory trade of present life. Wherefore accept the same in grateful wise,
and think upon the mind of him that did the same, which fraughted is with no
less plenty of good will, than the coafers of king Craesus were, with store of
worldly pelf. And so fare well.

Authors out of whom these Nouelles be selected, or which be remembered in
diverse places of the same.
Greek and Latin Authors.
Titus Liuius. Herodotus. Aetianus. Xenophon. Quintus Curtius. Aulus Gellius.
S. Hierome. Cicero. Polidorus Virgilius. Aeneas Syluius. Paludanus. Apuleius. L
Caecius Rhodoginus.
Italian, French and English.
Pietro Messia de Siuiglia. Boccaccio. Bandello. Ser Giouanni Fiorentino.
Straeparole. The Queen of Navarre. A book in French entitled Comptes du monde.
Francois Belleforest. Pierre Boaistuau surnome Launay. Froisarde. Fabian.
THE PALACE of Pleasure.
The Romans and the Albanes being at wars, for injuries mutually inferred,
Metius Suffetius the Albane capitain devised a way by a combat, to ioigne
both the cities in one. Uictorie falling to the Romans, the Roman victor
kills his sister who notwithstanding, is condemned to die. Afterward upon
his fathers suit he is delivered.

The first Novel.
NVma Pompilius the second king of the Romans being dead, Tullus Hostilius
succeeded, a lusty and courageous young gentleman: For as Numa was given to
peace, so was he to wars and valiance. It chanced in his time that certain
peasantes of the Roman dition, and the like of the Albanes, was foragyng and
driuyng of boties the one from the other. At that time reigned in Alba one C.
Cluilius. Ambassadors from both places were sent to redemau^de the things
stolen. Tullus commanded his people that they should deliver none, til
commandment were given in that behalf: for he knew right well that the
Alban king would restore nothing, by which occasion be might upon just cause,
proclaim wars. He received the Alban Ambassadors in very courteous manner,
and they as courteously celebrated his honorable and sumptuous
interteignemente. Amity proceeded on both parts, till the Romans began to
demand the first restitucio^: which the Albanes denied, and summoned wars
to be inferred upon them within thirty days after. Whereupon the
Ambassadors craved license of Tullus to speak, which being granted, they
first purged themselves by ignorance, that they knew no harm or injury
done to the Romans, addyng further that if any thing were dooen that should
not please Tullus, it was against their wills, hopyng he would remember that
they were but Ambassadors, subject to the commandment of their prince.
Their coming was to demand a restitucion, without which, they were straightly
charged to proclaim defiaunce. Whereunto Tullus answered. Tell your master,
that the king of the Romans does call the gods to witness, whether of them
first makes the quarrel, to the intent all men may expecte the revenge of
those wars. Which answer the Albane Ambassadors returned to their
master. Great provision, for the wars was made on both parts, much like
to a civil contencion, almost between the father and the son. For the city
of Lauinium was builded by the Trojans, and Alba by the Lauinians, of whose
stock the Romans took their beginning. The Albanes seeing that they were
defied of the Romans, began first to enter in arms, and with a maine power
perced the land of the Romans, and encamped within five miles of the city
enuironyng their camp with a trenche, which afterward was called Fossa
Cluilia, by the mean of their captain, wherein Cluilius the king died. Then
the Albanes appointed one Metius Suffetius to be their Dictator. Tullus
understanding the death of their prince with great expedicion marched into the
country about Alba, passing by the Albanes camp in the night which by the
watch and scoutes was skried. Then he retired, to lodge as nere the enemy as
he could, sendyng an Ambassador before, to require Tullus that he would come
to Parle before they fought, wherein he had a thing to say, no less
profitable to the Romans, then to the Albanes. Tullus not co^tempnyng that
condition, agreed. Whereupon both did put themselves in readiness, and before
they foigned, both the captains with certain of their chief officers, came
forth to talk, where Metius said these words. The mutual injuries that
has been dooen, and the withholdyng and keeping of things carried away,
contrary to the truce: and that our king Cluilius, is the author and beginner
of these wars, I do hear and assuredly understand for a trothe. And I do
not doubt, Tullus, but thou also do conceive the same, to be the only
occasion of this hostility. Notwithstanding, if I may speak rather the
truth, then utter any glosyng words by way of flaterie, the ambicious
desire of both the Emperes, does most of all stimulate and provoke both the
Cities, being of one affinite, and neighbors, to frequent this force of
arms. But whether this my conjecture be right or wrong, they ought to
consider, which first began the wars. The Albanes have created me their
Captain, of this their enterprise. I come to give advertisement to thee, O
Tullus, of this one thing. Which is, that the Thuscans being a great nation,
and of power right famous, does enuirone us both round about, and the nerer
they be unto you, the more knowledge you have of the^. They be mighty upon
the land, and of great power upon the sea. Call to thy remembrance and
consider, that when thou give the sign and watch word of the battle, our
two armies shall be but a ridiculous spectacle to them. So sone as they do
perceive us twoe to be spent, and weried with fightyng, they will both assail
the vanquished, and him also that does overcome. Wherefore if the gods do
favor either of us, let us not show our selfs to be weary of our liberty
and franchise that is certain, and hazard the Dice to incur perpetual
servitude and bondage. Theerfore let us devise some otherwaie, whereby the
one of us may govern the other, withont effusion of bloodde of either parts.

This condition nothing displeased Tullus, although in courage, and hope of
victory, he was more fierce and bolder then the other. And being in
consultacio^ about that purpose, fortune ministered an apt occasion to them
both: for in either camps there were three brethren, of age and valiaunce
semblable. The brethren that were in the Roman camp were called Horatij, the
other Curiatij. Whereupon a co^bate was thought meet between these six
persons. After the Romans had used their solemn manners of consecratyng the
truces, and other rites concerning the same, either parts repaired to the
combat. Both the armies stood in readiness before their camps, rather void
of present peril then of care: for the state of either of their Empires,
consisted in the valiautce and fortune of a few. Wherefore their minds were
wonderfully bent and incensed upon that unpleasant sight. The sign of the
combat was given. The three young men of either side do ioigne with furious
and cruel onsette, representing the corages of two battelles of puissaunt
armies. For the loss consisted in neither those three, but the public
gouernemente or common thraldom of both the cities, and that was the future
fortune, which they did try and prove. So sone as the clashyng armure did
sound at their first incountrie, and their glitteryng swords did shine, an
incredible horror and fear perced the beholders, and hope inclining to neither
parts; their voice and minds were whist and silent. But after they were
closed together, not only the mouyng of their bodies, and doubtful weldyng
and handlyng of their weapons, but blooddie wounds appeared, two of the
Romans falling down stark dead one upon an other: but before, the three
Albanes were sore hurt. Whereat the Albane host shouted for joy. The Roman
Legions were void of hope, amazed to see but one, remain against three: It
chanced that he that lived which as he was but one alone, an unmeet match
for the rest, even so he was fierce, and thought himself good enough for them
all. Therefore to separate their fight, he flees back, meaning thereby to
give every of them their welcome as they followed. When he was retired a good
space from the place where they fought, lookyng back, he saw them follow a
good distance one from an other, and one of them was hard by him, upon who^ he
let drive with great violence. And whiles the Albane host cried out upon the
Curatij, to help their brother, Horatius had killed his enemy, and demanded
for the second battaill. Then the Romans incoraged their cha^pion with
acclamations and shoutes, as fearful men be wont to do upon the sudden, and
he spedeth himself to the sight. And before the other could overtake him,
which was not far of, he had killed an other of the Curatij. Now they were
equally matched one to one, but in hope and strength unlike. For the one was
free of wound or hurt: cruel and fierce by reason of double victory, the
other fainct for loss of bloodde, and weary of runnyng: with pantyng breath,
and discomfited with his brethrens slaughter, slain before him, is now
objected to fight with his victorious enemy, which was no equal match.
Horatius rejoicing said, two of thy brethren I have dispatched: the third,
the cause of this battaill, I will take in hand: that the Romans may be
lords of the Albanes. Curiatius not able to sustain his blow, fill down,
and liyng upon his back, he thruste him into the throat with his sword,
which dooen he dispoiled him of his armure. Then the Romans in a great
triumph and rejoice interteigned Horatius, and their joy was the greater, for
that the fear of their overthrow was the nerer. This combat being ended, the
Albanes became subject to the Romans, and before Metius departed, he asked
Tullus if he would command him any further service. Who willed him to keep
the young soldiers still in interteignemente, for that he would require their
aid against the Vere^tes The Army dissolved, Horatius like a Conqueror
marched home to Rome, the three spoils of his enemies being borne before him.
The said Horatius had a sister, which was espoused to one of the Curatij that
were slain, who meetyng her brother in the triumph, at one of the gates
called Capena, and knowing the Coat armure of her paramour, borne upon her
brothers shulders, which she wrought and made with her own hands: She tore
and rent the hear of her hedde, and most pitiouslie bewailed the death of
her beloved. Her brother being in the pride of his victory taking the
lame^tacion of his sister, in disdainful part, drew out his sword, and
thruste her through, saying these opprobrious words. Auaunte with thy
unreasonable love, get thee to thy spouse. Have thou forgotten the death of thy
two brethren that be slain, the prosperous success of thy victorious
brother, and chiefly the happy deliverance of thy country? Let that Roman
woman what soever she be, take like reward, that shall bewail the death of
the enemy. Which horrible fact seemed most cruel to the fathers and
people. For which offense he was brought before the king, whom he delivered to
be judged according to the law. The law condemned him. Then he appealed to
the people. In which appeal P. Horatius his father spoke these words. My
daughter is slain, not without just desert, which if it were not so, I would
have sued for condign punishment, to be executed upon my son, according to
the natural piety of a father. Wherefore I beseech you do not suffer me,
whom you have seen in time past, beautified with a noble race and progeny of
children, now to be utterly destitute and void of all together. Then he
embrased his son emonges them all, and showed the spoils of the Curatiens,
saying. Ca^ you abide to see this noble champion (O ye Romans) whom lately ye
beheld to go in order of triumph in victorious manner, to lie now bound
under the gibet, expecting for torments of death? Which cruel and deformed
sight, the Albanes eyes can not well be able to behold, go to then thou
hangman, and bind the hands of him, who has achieved to the Roman people a
glorious Empire: Go I say and cover the face of him that has delivered this
city out of thraldom and bondage. Hang him upon some unhappy tree, and
scourge him in some place within the City, either emonges these our triumphs,
where the spoils of our enemies do remain, or else without the walls,
emonges the graves of the vanquished. Whether can ye dauise to carry him, but
that his honorable and worthy acts, shall revenge the villainy of his cruel
death. The people hearing the lamentable talk of his father, and seeing in him
an immovable mind, able to sustain all adversity, acquitted him rather
through the admiracion of his virtue and valiance, then by Justice and equity
of his cause. Such was the straicte order of justice emonges the Romans, that
although this young gentilman had vindicated his country from seruitute and
bondage (a noble memory of perfect manhood) yet by reason of the murdre
committed upon his own sister, they were very straict and stacke of grauntyng
him pardon: because they would not incorage the posterity to like
inconvenience, nor provoke well doers in their glory, and triumph, to
perpetrate things unlawful.

Sextus Tarquinius rauisheth Lucrece, who bewailyng the loss of her chastity,
kills her self.

The second Novel.
Great preparacion was made by the Romans, against a people called Rutuli,
who had a city named Ardea, excellyng in wealth and richesse, which was the
cause that the Roman king, being exhausted and quite void of money, by reason
of his sumptuous buildings, made wars upon that country. In the time of the
siege of that city the young Roman gentlemen ba^queted one an other, emonges
whom there was one called Collatinus Tarquinius, the son of Egerius. And by
chance they entered in communicacion of their wives, every one praisyng his
several spouse. At length the talk began to grow hot, where upon
Collatinus said, that words were vain. For within few hours it might be
tried, how much his wife Lucrecia did excel the rest, wherefore ( q he) if
there be any liuelihod in you: Let us take our horse, to prove which of our
wives does furmou^t. Wherevpo^ they rode to Rome in post. At their coming they
found the kings daughters, sportyng themselfes with sundry pastymes: From
thence they went to the house of Collatinus, where they found Lucrece, not as
the other before named, spendyng the time in idleness, but late in the night
occupied and busy, emonges her maids in the mids of the house spinning of
Wolle. The victory and praise whereof was given to Lucretia who when she saw
her husband, gently and lovingly interteigned him, courteously biddyng the
Tarquinians welcome. Imediatlie Sextus Tarquinius the son of Tarquinius
Superbus, that time the Roman king was attached and incensed with a libidious
desire, to construprate and defloure Lucrece. When the young gentlemen had
bestowed that night pleasantly with their wives, they returned to the Camp.
Not long after Sextus Tarquinius with one man returned to Collatia unknown to
Collatinus, and ignoraunte to Lucrece, and the rest of her household, for what
purpose he came. Who being right heartily interteigued, after supper was
conueighed to his chamber. Tarquinius burning with the love of Lucrece, after
he perceived the household to be at rest, and all things in quiet, he with
his naked sword in his hand, goes to Lucrece being a sleep, and keeping her
down with his left hand, said. Hold thy peace Lucrece ( q he) I am Sextus
Tarquinius, my sword is in my hand, if thou cry, I will kill thee. The
gentlewoman being sore a fraied, newly awaked out of her sleep, and seeing
iminent death, could not tell what to do. Then Tarquinius confessed his love,
and began to entreat her, and therewithal used sundry menacyng words, by
all means attemptyng to make her quiet: when he saw her obstinate, and that
she would not yield to his request, notwithstanding his cruel threats, he
added shameful and villainous words, saying. That he would kill her, and when
she was slain, he would also kill his slave, and place him by her, that it
might be reported she was slain, being taken in adultery. She vanquished with
his terrible and infamous threat. His fleshly and licencious enterprise,
overcame the purity of her chaste heart, which done he departed. Then Lucrece
sent a post to Rome to her father, and an other to Ardea to her housbande,
requiryng them that they would make speed to come unto her, with certain of
their trusty friends, for that a cruel fact was chanced. Then Sp. Lucretius
with P. Valerius the soonne of Volesius, and Collatinus with L. Iunius Brutus,
made haste to Lucrece. Where they found her sittyng, very pensife and sad,
in her chamber. So sone as she saw them, she began pitiouslie to weep. Then
her housebande asked her, whether all things were well, unto whom she said
these words.

No dear housebande, for what can be well or safe unto a woman, when she has
lost her chastity. Alas Collatine, the steps of an other man, be now fixed
in thy bed. But it is my body only that is violated, my mind God knows
is gililes, whereof my death shall be witness. But if you be men, give me your
hands, and truth, that the adulterer may not escape unrevenged. It is
Sextus Tarquinius who being an enemy, instead of a friend, the other night
came unto me, armed with his sword in his hand, and by violence carried a way
from me, and took to himself a pestiferous joy. Then every of the^ gave her
their faith, and comforted the pensife and languishyng lady, imputing the
offense, to the aucthor and doer of the same, affirmyng that her body was
polluted, and not her mind, and where consent was not, there the crime was
absent. Whereunto she added. I pray you consider with your selves, what
punishment is due for the malefactor. As for my part, though I clear my self
of the offense, my body shall feel the punishemente: for no unchaste or ill
woman, shall hereafter take example of Lucrece. Then she drew out a knife,
which she had hidden secretly, under her kirtle, and stabbed her self to the
heart. Which done, she fell down grouelyng upon her wound, and so died.
Whereupon her father and housebande made great lamentacion, and as these were
bewailyng the death of Lucrece, Brutus plucked the knife out of the wound,
which gushed out with abundance of blood, and holdyng it up said. I swear by
the chaste blood of this body here dead, and I take you the immortal gods
to witness, that I will drive and extirpate out of this City, both L.
Tarquinius Superbus, and his wicked wife, with all the race of his children and
progeny, so that none of them, ne yet any others shall reign any longer in
Rome. Then he delivered the knife to Collatinus. Lucretius and Valerius
merueilyng at the strangeness of his words: And from whence he should
conceive that determinacion. These al swore that oath. And followed Brutus as
their captain, in his conceived purpose. The body of Lucrece was brought
into the markette place, where the people wondered at the vileness of that
fact, every man co^plainyng upon the mischief of that facinorous rape,
committed by Tarquinius. Whereupon Brutus persuaded the Romans, that they
should cease from tears, and other childishe lamentacions, and take weapons in
their hands, and show themselves like men. Then the lustiest and most
desperate persons within the city, made theimselues press and ready, to
attempt any enterprise. And after a guarrison was placed and bestowed at
Collatia, diligente watch and ward was kept at the gates of the city, to
the intent the king should have no aduertismente of that slurre. The rest of
the soldiers followed Brutus to Rome. When he was come to Rome, the armed
multitude did beat a meruellous fear throughout the whole city: but yet
because they saw the chiefeste personages go before, that thought, that the
same enterprise was not taken in vain. Wherefore the people out of all places
of the city, ran into the marketplace. Where Brutus complained of the
abominable Rape of Lucrece, committed by Sextus Tarquinius, whereunto he added
the pride and insolent behavior of the king, the misery and drudgerie of the
people, and how they, which in time paste were victours and Conquerours, were
made of men of war, Artificers and Laborers. He remembered also the infamous
murder of Seruius Tullius their late kpng. These and such like he called to
the peoples remembrance, whereby they abrogated and deposed Tarquinius,
banishyng him, his wife, and children. Then he levied an army of chosen and
piked men, and marched to the camp at Ardea, committing the gouernemente of
the city to Lucretius, who before was by the king appoineted Lieutenant.
Tullia in the time of this hurly burly, fled from her house, all the people
cursyng and criyng vengeance upon her. News brought into the Ca^pe of these
euentes, the king with great fear returned to Rome, to repress those
tumultes. And Brutus hearing of his approach, marched an other way, because he
would not meet him. When Tarquinius was come to Rome, the gates were shut
against him, and he himself commanded to avoid into exile. The ca^pe received
Brutus with great joy and triumph, for that he had delivered the city of
such a tiraunte. Then Tarquinius, with his children fled to Caere, a city
of the Hetrurians. And as Sextus Tarquinius was going, he was flain by those
that premeditated reuengement, of old murder and injuries by him done to their
predecessors. This L. Tarquinius Superbus reigned.xxv. years. The reign of
the kings from the first foundation of the city continued. CC.xliiij years.
After which government two Consuls were appoincted, for the order and
administracion of the city. And for that year L. Iunius Brutus, and L.
Tarquinius Collatinus.

The siege of Rome by Porsenna, and the valiaunte delivery thereof by Mutius
Scaeuola.

The.iij. Novel.
WHen P. Valerius and T. Lucretius, were created Consuls, Porsenna king of
Hetruria, upon the instigacion of the banished Tarquinians, came before the
City with an huge army. Whose same did wonderfully appail the Senate: for the
like occasion of terror, never before that time chanced to the Romans, who
did not only fear their enemies, but also their own subjects, suspecting
lest they should be forced to retain the kings again. All which afterward
was through the wisdom and discrecio^ of the fathers, quietly mitigated and
appeased, and the city reduced to such a unity and courage, as all sorts of
people despised the name of king. When the enemies were approached, the rural
people abandonyng their colonies, fled for rescue into the city. The city
was divided into guarrisons: Some kept the walls, and some the way over
Tybre, which was thought very saufe and defensible. Although the wodde^
bridge made over that River, had almost been an open way for the enemies
entry, whereof Horacius Cocles, as fortune served that day, had the charge.
Who so manfully behaved himself, that after he had broken up and burned the
bridge, and dooen other notable exploites, he defended that passage with such
valiance, that the defense thereof seemed miraculous, to the great
astonisheme^t of the enemies. In fine Porsenna seeing that he could little
prevail in the afsault, returned to the Camp, determynyng nevertheless to
continue his siege. At which time one Caius Mutius, a young gentleman of Rome,
purposed to adventure some notable enterprise: saying to the Senators these
words. I determine to pass the River, and enter if I can, into the camp of
the enemies, not to fetch spoil, or to revenge mutual injuries, but to
hazard a greater enterprise, if the Gods be assistaunt unto me. The Senate
understanding the effect of his endeavor, allowed his devise. And then having a
sword under his garmente, went forth. When he was come into the throng, he
conueighed himself as uere to the kings pauilion as he could. It chanced that
he was paiyng wages to his soldiers, by whom his Secretary did sit in
such apparel, almost as the king himself did wear. Mutius being a ferde to
demand, which of them was the king, lest he should betraie himself,
suddenly killed the Secretary instead of the king, and as he was making way
with his blouddie sword to escape, he was apprehended, and brought before the
king, and with merueilous stoutnesse and audacitie, spoke these words. I am a
citizen of Rome, and my name is Mutius, and being an enemy, I would feign have
killed mine enemy. For which attempt I esteem no more to die, then I cared
to commit the murder. It is naturally given to the Romans, both valiantly
to do, and stootely to suffer. And not I alone have conspired thy death, but a
great number of us, have promised the like, and hope to aspire to seblable
praise and glory: wherefore if this beginning do please thee, make thy self
ready every hour to expecte like peril, and to fight for thy self. And make
account, that every day even at the door of thy lodgyng, thy enemy armed
does awaite for thee: we alone young gentlemen of the City do stand at
defiance, and pronounce upon thee this kind of battaill. Fear no armies or
other hostility. For with thee alone, and with every one of us, these wars
shall be tried. The king astoned with that hold and desperate enterprice, fill
into a great rage and fury, commaundyng Mutius presently to be consumed with
fire, unless he would out of hand tell him the order of the purposed and
divised treason. Behold O king ( q he) how litell they care for their bodies,
that do aspire and seek for fame and glory. And then he thrust his right
hand into the fire, and roasted the same in the flame, like one that had been
out of his wits. The king amazed with the strangeness of the fact, stepped
down from his seat, and caused him to be taken from the fire, saying. Away
friend ( q the king) thou have killed thy self, and adventured hostility upon
thy self, rather then against me. Surely I would think my self happy, if like
valiance were to be found in my country. Wherefore by law of Arms I set
thee at liberty, untouched and without harm, whereunto Mutius for acquilyng
that deserte, answered. For as much as thou have thus honorably delte with
me, I will for recompense of this benefit, say thus much unto thee, which by
threats thou should never have gotten at my hands. Three hundred of us,
that be young noble men of Rome, have conspired thy death, even by the like
attempt. It was my lofte to come first, the rest when fortune shall give
opportunity of time, every one his turn will give the adventure. Whereupon he
was dismissed, and afterward was called Scaeuola, for the loss of his right
hand. Then peace was offered to the Romans, who upon co^dicions that the
enemies guarrisons should be withdrawn from Ianiculum, and that the country
won of the Veientines, should be restored again, gave hostages. Emonges
whom there was a gentlewoman called Cloelia. delivered into the hands of the
Hetrurians, who deceiuyng her keepers, conueighed her self and the other
pledges from their enemies, and swimmyng over the river of Tybre, arrived at
Rome in sauftie, which being redemau^ded by Porsenna, were sent back again.
The king driven into a wonderful admiracion for the desperate and manly
enterprises, done by the Roman nation, returned the maiden home again to
Rome. In whose honor the Romans erected an Image on horseback, placed at the
upper end of the street called Sacra via. And so peace was concluded, between
Porsenna and the Romans.

Martius Coriolanus going about to repress the common people of Rome with
dearth of Corn, was banished. For reuengemeut whereof, he persuaded Accius
Tullius King of the Volscians to make wars, upon the Romans, and he himself
in their aid, came in his own person. The city brought to great misery,
the fathers devised means to deliver the same, and sent into the Volscian
camp, the mother, the wife and children of Coriolanus. Upon whose co^plaintes
Coriolanus, withdrewe the Volscians. And the City was reduced to qiuetnesse.

The.iiij. Novel.
IN the year that Titus Geganius and Publius Minutius were Consuls, when all
things were quiet abrods, and dissensio^ at home appeased, an other great
mischief invaded the city. First a dearth of victuals, by reason the land
was untilled, by the peoples departure, then a famine, such as chances to
the besieged: which had brought a great destruction of people, had not the
Consuls forseen the same, by provision in foreign places. They sent purueiors
into Scicilia: but the malice of the cities adioynyng, stayed the provision
that was made a far of. The Corn provided at Cumas was stayed for the goods
of Tarquinius by Aristodemus the tirant, which was his heir. The next year
following, a great mass of corn was transported out of Scicile, in the time of
the Consuls. M. Minutius and A. Sempronius. Then the Senate consulted, upon the
distribucion of the same unto the people. Diverse thought that the time was then
come, to bridle and oppress the people, whereby they might recover those
privileges, that were extorted from the fathers. Emonges which Martius
Coriolanus a young gentleman was the chiefest, who being an enemy to the
Tribune authority, said these words. If the people will have victualles and
corn at that price, whereat it was assised and rated in time past, then it is
mete and necessary, that they render to the fathers, their aunciente
authority and privilege. For to what purpose be the plebeian Magistrates
ordained? For what consideracion shall I suffer my self, to be subiugated
under the authority of Sicinius, as though I were conversant emonges thieves?
Shall I abide these injuries any longer to continue, then is necessary? I that
could not suffer Tarquinius the king, shall I be pacient with Sicinius? Let
Sicinius depart if he will, let him draw the people after him: the way yet
is open to the sacred hill, and to the other mountaignes. Let them rob us of
our Corn, which they took away from our own land, as they did three years
pass, let them inioye the victualles, which in their fury they did gather. I
dare be bold to say thus much, that being warned and tamed, by this
present penury, they had rather plowe and till the land, then they would
suffer the same to be vncultured, by withdrawyng the^ selves into Armure. It is
not so easy to be spoken, as I thank it may with facility be brought to
pass, that upon conditions the prices of victualles should be abated, the
fathers might remove the authority of the Tribunes, and disanull all those
laws, which against their wills, were ratefied and confirmed. This sentence
seemed cruel to the fathers, and almost had set the people together by the
ears, who would have torn him in pieces, had not the Tribunes appoincted a
day for his appearance. Whereupon their fury for that time was appeased,
Coriolanus seeing the peoples rage to increase, and considering that they should
be his Judge, when the day of his appearance was come, he absented himself,
and for lack thereof, was condemned. Then he fled to the Volscians, of whom
he was gently interteigned: and lodged in the house of Accius Tullius, the
chief of that city, and a deadly enemy to the Romans. Upon daily conference
and consultacion, had between them, they consulted by what slight or
policy, they might comence a quarrel against the Romans. And because they
doubted, that the Volscians would not easily be persuaded thereunto, being so
often vanquished and ill entreated, they excogitated some other new occasion. In
the mean time T. Latinius one of the plebeian sort, perceiuyng that the
Romans went about to institute great pastimes, conceived a dream, wherein he
saw Iuppiter to speak unto him, and said that he liked not the towardness
of those games, and in case the same were not celebrated, with great roialtie
and magnificence, they would engender peril to the city, which dream he
declared to the Consuls. Then the Senate gave order, that the same should be
addressed with great pomp and triumph: whereunto through thinstigacion of
Accius, a great number of the Volscians resorted. But before the plates
begone, Tullius according to the compacte agreed upon, between him and
Coriolanus, secretly repaired to the Consuls, and taking them a side, declared
that he had to say unto them, a matter iouchyng the public wealth of their
city, vtteryng these words. I am forced against my will to signify unto you
a matter, concerning mine own subjects and country men. I come not to accuse
them, for that they have already admitted any thing, but I come to give you a
premonicion, left they should perpetrate some occasion, contrary to the order
of your city. The disposition of my country men, is more inconstant then I
would wish: which we have felt, to our great loss and decaie. The cause of
our security at this present, is rather suffered by your patience, then by
our desert. Here be at this instaunte, a great multitude of Volscians Here be
games prepared, and the city thoroughly bent to behold the same. I do
remember what was done upon like occasion in this city, by the Roman youth.
I tremble to think, what may be rashely attempted, wherefore I thought good
both for your own sakes; and for auoidyng of displeasure, to foretell you of
these things. And for mine own part, I purpose immediately to return home,
because I will avoid the danger and peril, that may chance by my presence.
When he had spoken those words, he departed. The Consuls immediately recompted
the request of Accius to the Senate: who more estemyng the personage, from
whence the same did proceed, then the matter that was spoken, determined to
provide a remedy for the same, and immediately caused the Volscians to avoid
the city, sendyng officers about, to command them to depart that night:
upon which sodein commandment, at the first they began to marvel, what
should be the cause. And afterward they conceived a great grief and offense,
for that vnneighbourly enterteignement. And as they were passing out of the
city in a long train, Tullius being upon the top of the hille called
Ferrentine, to wait for the people, as they passed by, called unto him the
chief and principal personages, to provoke them to take that aduau^tage, and
then assembled the multitude in the valleie, hard by the high way, to whom he
pronounced these words. Forgetting all injuries and displeasures past, done by
the Roman people against the Volscia^s, how can you abide the contumelte
committed this day, wherein to our great shame and ignomie, they begin to
ostentate and show forth their plays. Do not you believe, that even to day,
they triumph over you? Is not your departure (think ye) ridiculous, to all the
Romans, to strangers, and other cities adioynyng? Be not your wives and
children (trow ye) now passing homewardes, laughed to scorn? What think you
your selves be, which were warned to depart, at the sound of the trumpet?
What (suppose ye) will all they think, which do meet this multitude
retiryng homewardes, to their great reproach and shame? Truly except there be
some secret occasion, whereby we should be suspected to violate the plays,
or commit some other crime, and so forced to relinquishe the company and
fellowship of the houest, I know not what should be the cause of this repulse?
Were we living, when we made such festinacion to depart? If it may be
called a departure, and not a runnyng away, and shameful retire. I perceive
ye did not account, this to be a city of our enemies, where I think, if ye
had tarried but one day longer, ye had all been slain. They have denounced
wars upon you, which if you be men of courage, shall redounde to the utter
destruction of them, which first gave the defiaunce. The Vollcians perceiuyng
themselves greatly derided, for consideracions before remembered, determined by
common accord, to infer wars upon the Romans, under the conduccion of
Accius Tullius, and Coriolanus. After they had recovered diverse of the Roman
Cities, they proceeded further, and in sundry places spoiled and destroyed the
same, encampyng theimselues five miles from Rome, besides the tre^ches called
Fossas Cluilias. In the mean time contencion rose, between the people and the
fathers, howbeit the fears of foreign parts, linked their minds together, in
the bands of concord. The Consuls and fathers reposed their whole confidence
in battaill, which the common peoplem nowise could abide. Wherefore they were
constrained to assemble the Senate, wherein was determined, that Ambassadors
should be sent to Coriolanus to demand peace: who returned them again with
a froward answer: to this effect, that first they should restore to the
Volscians their Country, which they had conquered, that done, he willed them
to seek for peace. Yet they sent again Ambassadors, but in nowise they were
suffered to come into their camp. Then the priests cladde in their
ornaments, and other divine furniture, were sent humbly to make peticion for
peace. And yet they could not persuade them. Then the Roman Dames repaired to
Veturia the mother of Coriolanus, and to his wife Volumnia. But whether the
same was dooen by common consent, or through the feminine kind, it is
uncertain. It was appoincted that Veturia, being an aunciente gentlewoman, and
mother of Coriolanus, and Volumnia his wife, with her two young children,
should go into the Camp, to the intent they by their pitiful lamentacion,
might defend the city, which otherwise by force, was not able to be kept. At
their arrival Venturia was known by one of her soonnes familier friends,
standyug between her daughter in law, and her two neuies, who carried word
immediately to Coriolanus saying I am very much deceived, but that thy mother,
thy wife and children be here in the Camp. Coriolanus hearing him say so,
descended from his seat, like one not well in his wits, and went forth to
embrase his mother. The old gentlewoman from supplicacions, fill into a great
rage, speaking these words. Abide a while before I do receive thy
embracementes, let me know whether I am comen to mine enemy, or to my soonne,
or whether I am a prisoner in thy Camp, or thy mother. Alack how long have I
prolonged these ancient years, and hoare hears most unhappy, that now
first I do behold thee an exile, and then view thee mine enemy. Can thou
find in thy heart, to depopulate and destroy, this thy country, wherein thou
waste begotten and brought up? Could not thy rage and fury be mitigated and
appeased, when thou did first put foot, into the limits of this thy
country? Did not natural zeal pearce thy cruel heart, when thou did
first cast thine eyes upon this city? Is not the house of thy mother, and her
domestical Gods, contained within the walls of youder city? Do not thy
sorrowful mother, thy dear wife and children, inhabit within that compass?
Wherefore (O I cursed creature) if I had never had child, Rome had not been
now assailed. If I had never brought forth a son, I should have laid mine
old bones, and ended my life in a free country. But I could never have
sustained, or suffered more misery, then is now incident and fallen unto me,
nor never more dishonor, then to behold thee in pitiful plight, a traitor
to thine own country. And as I am the most wretched wight of al mothers, so
I trust I shall not long continue in that state. If thou proceed in this
thine enterprise, either sudden death, or perpetual bondage be thy reward.
When his mother had ended these words, the whole train of gentlewomen, brake
into pitiful tears: bitterly bewailyng the state of their Country, which at
length did mitigate the stomach of Coriolanus. And when he had imbrased his
wife and children, he dismissed them. Then he withdrewe the Volscian camp from
the city, and out of the Roman Province. Upon the displeasure of which
fact, he died. It is said, that when he was an old manne he used, many times
to speak and utter this sentence. That very miserable it is, for an old
manne to live in banishemente. The Romans disdained not to attribute to women,
their due praise. For in memory of this delivery of their Country: They
erected a Temple, Fortunae Muliebri, to women's fortune.

Appius Claudius one of the Decemuiri of Rome, goes about to rauishe Virginia
a young maiden, which endeavor of Appius, when her father Virginius understood,
being then in the wars, he repaireth home to rescue his daughter. One that
was betrouthed unto her, does claim her, whereupon rose great contencion. In
the end her own father, to save the shame of his stock, killed her with a
Bochers knife, and comes into the Forum, and cries vengeauce upon Appius.
Then after much contencion and rebellion, the Decemuiri were deposed.

The.v. Novel.
SPurius Posthumous Albus, Aulus Manlius, and P. Sulpitius Camerinus, were
sent Ambassadors to Athenes, and commanded to write out the noble laws of
Solon, and to learn the Institucions, orders, and Laws of other Greek citees.
Upon whose return, the Tribunes were very instant, that at length laws
should be enacted and confirmed. And for that purpose, certain officers were
appoincted, called Decemuiri: with sovereign authority and power, to reduce
the same into writing, which were thought meet and profitable for the common
wealth. The principal and chief of which number, was Appius Claudius, who
committed no less filthy fact, then was done by Tarquinius, for the rape of
Lucrece. The said Appius conceived a libidinous desire, to rauishe a young
virgin, the daughter of one Lucius Virginius, then a capitain in the wars at
Algidum, a man of honest and sober life, whose wife was also of right good
behavior, and their children accordingly brought up, and instructed. They had
betrouthed their daughter, to one L. Icilius of the order of the Tribunes, a man of great stoutnesse and tried valiance, in the cause of the people. This
young maid being of excellent beauty, Appius at the first began to woe by
gifts and fair promises: but when he saw that she was impregnable, he
devised by wicked and cruel policy, to obtain her, committyng the charge of
that enterprise to one of his friends, called Marcus Claudius, who went about
to prove and maintain, that the maid was his bondwoman, and in nowise would
give liberty to her fre^des, to have time to answer the process made in that
behalf, thinkyng by that means, in the abse^ce of her father, he might at his
pleasure enjoy her. As the virgin was going to schole in the Forum, thesaid
Claudius, the minister of mischief, laid hands upon her, claimed her to be
his bondwoman, for that she was borne of a servile woman, and commanded her to
follow him. The maid being afraied was amazed, and the Nursse that waited
upon her, cried out. Whereupon the people ran out of their doors, to know the
cause of that stir. Claudius seeing the maid like to be rescued, by the
multitude that was assembled, said, that there was no need of that hurly
burly, for that he attempted nothing by force, but that he was able to prove
by law. Whereupon he cited the maid to appear, her friends promised that she
should according to the law, make her apperance, being come before the
consistory, where Appius sat in judgment, Claudius began to tell a tale, and
process of the cause, whereof Appius beyug the deviser, understood the
effect. The effect of the tale was, that the maid was borne in his house, and
was the daughter of his own bondwoma^, who afterward being stolen away,
was carried to the house of Virginius, and supposed to be his child, which
thing he said, he was well able to prove, and would refer the judgment of
his cause to Virginius himself: unto whom the greater part of his injury did
appertain. In the mean time, he said that it was meet, the maid should
follow her master: whereunto the advocates of the maid replied, and said
that Virginius was absent, about the affairs of the Common wealth, but if he
were advertised of the matter, they knew well he would be at home, within
two days after: wherefore they said, that it were against equitee and
Justice, that process and suite should be made, for claim of children, in
the absence of the parents, requiryng them to deserre the suite, till the
return of the father. Appius not regardyng the justice of the case, to the
intent he might satisfy his own lust and pleasure, ordained in the mean
time, that Claudius the assertor and plaintiff, should have the keeping and
placyng of the maid, till the father were returned. Against which wrong, many
did grudge, although none durst withstand it. But as fortune chanced,
immediately after that decree and order was so pronounced, Publius Numitorius,
the maids uncle by her mothers side, and Icilius her beloved, were comen home:
upon whose return, incontinently Icilius approached nere to Appius, and being
put back by the Sergeant he cried out a loud in these words. Thou oughteste
to put me back from hence (O Appius) with a sword that thou might without
let, enjoy the thing thou would have kept close and secret. It is I that
do purpose to marie this maid, who I doubt not, is right honest and chaste:
and also a pudique and pure virgin. Wherefore call together thy Secgeantes, and
cause the rods and ares, to be made pressed and ready. For I assure thee, the
spouse of Icilius shall not remain out of her fathers house. No although thou
have taken away from the Roman people, their Tribunes aid and appeals,
which be two strong fortes and holds, of their common liberty. Is
authority given thee, libidinously to abuse our wives and children? Exercise
thy cruelty behind our backs, and upon our lives if thou list, so that thou
do not contaminate, and defile the the virtue of chastity. Whereunto if thou
infer any damage or injury, I will for mine own part, and for the love of
my beloved, cry out for the aid of the Romans that he present, and Virginius
shall do the like of the soldiers, in the quarrel of his own daughter. And
al we together, will implore for the succor of the gods and men. And trust
to it, that thou shall not enjoy thy purpose, before some of us have lost our
lives. Wherefore Appius I advise thee, take heed in time. For when Virginius
does come, he will seek remedy to defend his daughter, and will know in
what condition and sort she is ordered, if she be referred to the servitude of
this man. And for my part, my life shall sooner fail, in defending her
liberty, then my faith to her betrouthed. Appius perceiuyng the constancy of
Icilius, and that the people was in a great mutine, and stir, differred the
cause of Virginia till the next day: whose friends hoped by that time, that
her father would be at home: wherefore with all expedicion, they addressed
messengers unto him into the camp, for that the saufgarde of his daughter,
consisted in his presence. In the mean time, the Assertor required the maid,
offering to put in sureties: the like offer made Icilius, of purpose to
contriue and spend the time, till the arrival of Virginius. The multitude of
their own accordes, held up their hands, promisyng to become surety for
Icilius, unto whom he gave thanks, weeping for joy, to see their kind
behavior, and said. I thank you most heartily my beloved friends to morrow I
will use your frendely offer, but at this present I have sureties sufficient.
Whereupon Virginia was bailed. Then Appius repaired home, and wrote to his
friends in the camp, that in nowise they should give Virginius leave to come
to Rome, which ungracious devise came to late, and took none effect.
Whereupon Virginius returned home, and in poor and vile apparel, repaired
into the Forum, after who^ followed a great number of matrones and advocates.
Then he began to require them all of succor and aid, alledgyng that he was a
soldier, and one that adventured himself, for the saufgarde and defense of
the^ all: with such like persuasions to the multitude. Semblable words were
uttered by Icilius. All which doings being viewed and marked by Appius, in a
great fury ascended the consistory. Then M. Claudius the plaintiff began to
renew his suit: and before the father could make answer to that plea, Appius
gave sentence that the maid was bond, which sentence, seemed so cruel, that
it appalled the whole multitude. And as Claudius was laiyng hands upon the
virgin, Virginius stepped to Appius, and said. I have betrouthed my daughter
to Icilius, and not to thee Appius. My care in the bringyng of her up, was to
marry her, and not to suffer her to be violated and defloured. Is it your
manner, like savage and cruel beasts, indifferently thus to use your
libidinous affections? I cannot tell, whether the multitude here present, will
supporte this enormitie, but I am sure the armed soldiers, and such as carry
armure will not suffer it. Marcus Claudius being repulsed by the women, and
advocates that were present, silence was proclaimed by the Trumpet. Then Appius
began to declare how he understood, that all the night before, that certain
companies were assembled within the City, to excite and move sedicion. For
which cause he came with armed men, not to hurt any man that was quiet,
but according to the authority of his office, to bridle and repress those,
that were troublers of the public state. Wherefore go Sergeant ( q he) make
room emonges the multitude, that the master may enjoy his servant. Which
words he thundered out with great fury, and therewithal the multitude gave
place, leaving the poor Puselle to be a pray to the enemy. Her father seeing
that he was void of succor and help, to defend the innocence of his
daughter, spoke to Appius in this sort. I first do beseech thee Appius, if
I have used any unreasonable words against thee, to pardon me, and to impute
the same to the fathers grief and sorrow. Suffer me I pray thee, to examine
the Nonrsse, in the presence of the wench, of the whole circumstance of this
matter, to the intent that if I be but a supposed father, I may depart hence
with quiet conscience satisfied and contented. Virginius having license to
talk to his daughter and Noursse, departed a side into a place called
Cloacina, where the shoppes be, now called Taberne Nouae, and pluckyng a sharp
knife from a Bocher that stood by, he thruste the same to the heart of his
daughter, saying. By this only means (daughter) I can make thee free: and
loking again toward the Judgment feate, he said. This bloodde Appius I
consecrate and bestow upon thee. Which done, with his sword he made way, to
pass through the throng, to conueigh himself out of the city. Then Icilius
and Nnmitorius took up the dead body, and showed it to the people, who cried
out upon the wickedness of Appius, bewailyng the unhappy beauty of that
fair maiden, and deplored the necessity of the father. The women exclamed in
lamentable wise, saiing: Is this the condition and state of them, that bring
forth children? Be these the rewards of chastity? With such like pitiful
cries, as women are wont to make, upon such heavy and dolorous enentes.
Virginius being arrived in the camp, which then was at the mount Vicelius,
with a train of four hundred persons, that fled out of the city, showed
to the soldiers the blooddie knife, that killed his daughter, which sight
astonished the whole Camp: in so much as every man demanded, what was the
cause of that sudden chance. Virginius could not speak for tears, but at
length he disclosed unto them, the effect of the whole matter, and holdyng up
his hands toward the heavens, said. I beseech you (dear companions) do
not impute the wickedness of Appius Claudius upon me, ne yet that I am a
parricide and murderer of mine own children: the life of my dear daughter had
been more acceptable to me, then mine own life, if so be she might have
continued a free woman, and an honest virgin. But when I saw she was led to
the rape like a bondewoman, I considered, that better it were her life to be
lost, then suffered to live in shame: wherefore my natural pity was converted,
to a kind of cruelty. And for mine own part, I do not pass to live long
after her, if I thought I should not have your help and succor, to revenge
her death. Consider that your selves have daughters, sisters, and wives, think
not therefore, that the fleshly desire of Appius is satisfied with the death of
my daughter. And the longer that he does continue in this securite, the more
vnbrid^led is his appetite. Let the calamity of an other be a sufficient
docume^t for you, to beware like injuries. My wife is dead, by natural fate
and constellacion, and because my daughter could continewe no longer, in
honest and chaste life, death is befallen unto her: which although it be
miserable, yet the same is honorable. There is now no place in my house for
Appius, to satisfy his filthy lust. And I will fail of my purpose, if I do
not revenge the death of my daughter, with so good will upon his flesh, as I
did discharge the dishonor and servitude of her, from his violente and crnell
hands. This succlamacion and pitiful complainte, so stirred the multitude,
that they promised all to help and relieve his sorrow. Whereupon, the whole
Camp were in a mutine and marched in order of battle to the mou^te Auentine,
where Virginius persuaded the soldiers, to chose ten principal capitaines,
to be head and chief of that enterprise: which with honorable titles of the
field, should be called Tribuni. And Virginius himself being elected the chief
Tribune, said these words to the soldiers. I pray you reserve this
estimacion, which you conceive of me, until some better time and apter
occasion, as well for your commodity, as for my self. The death of my daughter,
will suffer no honor to be pleasant or welcome to me, during my life.
Moreover in this troubled state of the Common wealth, it is not meet for them
to be your governors, that be subject and occurant to envy and reproach, if
my service shall be profitable unto you, when you have thus created me a
Tribune, it shall be no less commodious, if I do still remain a private
manne. When he had spoken those words, they chose ten Tribunes. And like as
the Camp at the mount Auentine, was provoked and stirred to this sedicio^:
even so by means of Icilius and Nomitorius before remembered, the army then
being against the Sabines, began to revolt and made the like number of
Tribunes, which in arraie of battle, marched through the city, at the gate
Collina with banner displaied, to join with the ca^pe upon the mount Auentine.
And when both the camps were assembled, they those out two emonges the
twenty Tribunes, to be their generalles, called M. Oppius, and Sextus
Manilius. The Senate careful and pensife for these euentes eftsons assembled,
but no certain determinacion was agreed upon. At length they concluded, that
Valerius and Horatius, should be sent to the mount Auentine to persuade the
people, but they utterly refused the message, unless the Decemuiri were first
deposed. The Decemuiri made answer, that they would not give over their
authority, till such time as those Laws were ratified, which were treated
upon, before they were elected to that office. Of all these contencions the
people was advertised by M. Duillius their Tribune. And when both the armies
were joined at the mount Auentine, aforesaied: All the multitude of the city,
me^ women, and children, repaired thither, in sort, that Rome was like a
forlorn and abandoned place. The fathers seeing the city thus relinquished,
Horatius and Valerius, with diverse of the fathers, exclamed in this wise. What
do ye expecte and look for, ye fathers co^scripte? Will ye suffer all things
to run to extreme ruin and decaie? Shall the Decemuiri still persiste in
their stubberne and froward determinacions? What manner of gouernmente is this
(O ye Decemuiri) that ye thus lay hold upon and enjoy? Will ye pronounce and
make laws within your own houses, and the limits of the same? Is it not a
shame to see in the Forum a greater number of your Catchpolles and Sergeantes,
then of other sober and wise Citizens? But what will ye do, if the enemy upon
the sudden, does approach the walls? What will ye do if the people
understanding that we care not for their departure, do in arms assail us?
Will ye finishe your government, with the overthrow of the city? But either
we must expel and abandon the people, or else we must admit the Tribunes.
We shall sooner want our fathers and Senators, then they their plebeian
officers. They bereued and took away from us the Fathers, a new kind of
authority, which was never seen before, who now feelyng the sweetness
thereof, will never give it over. For we can not so well te^per our
authority and gouernemente, as they be able to seek help and succor. The
Decemuiri perceiving that they were hated, so well of the Senate, as of the
people, submitted themselves. And thereupon Valerius and Horatius were sent to
the camp, to revoke the people upon such conditions as they thought most
meet. Then the Decemuiri were commanded, to take heed of the peoples fury.
So sone as the Ambassadors were come to the camp, they were received with
great joy and gladness of the people, because they were the beginners of that
stir, and supposed that they would make an end of the commocion, for which
cause they rendered to them their humble thanks. Then Icilius was appoincted to
speak for the people, who required to have the authority of the Tribunes
restored, and their appeal renewed, with restitucion of those laws, which
before the erection of the Decemuiri, were ratefied and confirmed. They
demanded also an impunite and free pardon, to those that first encouraged and
incited the soldiers to that enterprise, and the restoryng of their
liberties. They required to have their enemies the Decemuiri, to be delivered
into their hands. Whom they threatened to put to death by fire. Whereunto the
Ambassadors answered in this wise. Your requests be so reasonable, that they
ought willingly to be granted. All which ye desire to obtain, as a defense
and comfort for your liberty, and not to persecute and infest others. Your
fury and anger ought rather to be pardoned, then permitted or granted. Ye
bear a face and seem to detest and hate severity, and ye your selves
incur, and run hedlong into all kind of cruelty: and before ye be made
free your selves, ye desire to be lords over your adversaries. Shall our city
never be void of tortures and oppressions: sometime of the fathers toward
the people, some time of the people toward the fathers? You had more need of
a shilde to defend you, then of a sword to fight. That manne is of a base
state and courage, we suppose, that lives in a City, and bears himself so
vprighte, as neither he infers injury to others, ne yet suffers wrong
himself. If ye show your selves so terrible, then it is to be supposed, that
after ye have recovered your laws and magistrates, and be placed again in
your former authority and preeminence: ye will also ordeine and appoincte
Laws over us, that shall concern our lives and goods, and every other
lightmatter. But for this present I would wish you, to be contented with your
former freedom. After the Ambassadors had willed them, to consulte upon some
determinate answer, they returned to Rome, to make report to the Senate, of
the peoples requests. The Decemuiri perceiuyng, that contrary to their
expectacion, no likelihode was of any persecucion, to be done upon them,
condescended to those demau^des. Appius being a man of nature cruel and
malicious, measuryng the malice of others, by his own malign disposicion:
spoke these words. I am not ignoraunte what fortune is now imminente. For I
do plainly see, that whiles weapons be delivered to our adversaries, the
combat is deferred against us. With bloodde, envy must be rewarded. I will
not any longer delaie the time, but deprive my self of the Decemuirate. When
the Senate was advertised by the Ambassadors, Valerius and Horatius, of the
peoples answer: they decreed that the Decemuiri should be deposed, and that
Q. Furius the chief bishop, should create the plebeian Tribunes. Wherein also
was enacted, that the departure of the people, and mutine of the soldiers
should be pardoned. When these laws were renewed, the Decemuiri went
forth, and openly in the assembly deposed themselves, to the great joy and
comfort of them all. All which being reported the people: both the
soldiers, and the rest of the multitude, repaired before the Ambassadors,
unto whom the Ambassadors spoke these words. We now beseech you all, to
return into your country, to your domestical Gods, your wives, and
children, which we trust shall be right good, happy, and profitable unto you,
and to the common wealth. But your modeste and sober behavior, for that no
man's ground is violated and destroyed, considering many things, could not
suffice the hugeness of this multitude, that part of modesty, I say, carry
with you into the City, to your immortal fame and glory. Get ye therefore
to the mount Auentine, from whence ye departed, whereas in a place most
happy, ye renewed the foundacions of your ancient liberty, and there ye shall
create your Tribunes. The chief bishop shall be present, to keep the
Comirialles. Then the Roman people made Aulus Virginius, Lucius Icilius, and
P. Numitorius the Tribunes who with their assistauntes, first aduannced and
confirmed the liberty of the people. Afterward Virginius was appointed to be
the accuser, and Appius chosen to be the defendant. At the day appointed,
Appius resorted to the Forum, with a great company of young gentlemen, of the
patriciall order, where Virginius began to renew the cruel and abominable
fact, which Appius committed in the time of his authority, and said.
Oracion was first devised and found out, for ambiguous and doubtful causes:
therefore I will neither consume time, in accusyng him before you, from whose
cruelty, ye have by force defended your selves, nor yet I will suffer him to
join to his former wickedness, any impudente answer for his defense.
Wherefore Appius all those things, which he wickedly and cruelly one upon an
other, thou haste dooen these two years paste, I do freely forgive thee. But
if thou canste not purge thy self of this one thing, that against the order and
form of Law (thou thy self being Judge) would not suffer the freman, to
enjoy the benefit of his freedom, during the process made of servitude, I
will presently command thee to prison. Appius Claudius being now a prisoner,
and perceiuyng, that the just complaints of Virginius, did veheme^tty incite
the people to rage and fury, and that the peticions and prayers of his
fre^des, in nowise could mollify their hearts, he began to conceive a
desperacion. And within a while after slew himself. Spurius Oppius also an
other of the Decemuiri, was immediately sent to prison, who before the day of
his iudgeme^te died. The rest also of that order fled into exile. Whose goods
were confiscate. Marcus Claudius also the Assertor was condemned, howbeit
Virginius was contented he should be banished the city, and then he fled to
Tybur. Thus upon the filthy affeccion of one nobleman, issued parricide,
murder, rebellion, hatred, depriuyng of magistrates, and great mischiefs
succedyng one in an others neck. Whereupon the noble and victorious city, was
like to be a pray to foreign nations. A goodly documente to men of like
calling, to moderate themselves, and their Magisterie with good and honest
life, thereby to give incouragemente of virtue, to their vassalles and
inferiors: who for the most part do imitate and follow the lives, and
co^uersacion of their superiors.

Canduales king of Lydia, showing the secrets of his wives beauty, to Gyges
one of his Guarde: was by counsel of his wife, slain by the said Gyges, and
deprived of his kingdom.

The.vj. Novel.
OF all follies wherewith vain men be affected, the folly of immoderate love,
is most to be detested. For that husband, which is beautified with a comely
and honest wife, whose rare excellency does surpass other, as well in
lineamentes proporcion, and feature of body, as with inward qualities of
mind: if he can not retain in the secrecy and silence of his breast, that
excellyng gift and benefit, is worthy to be inaugured with a laurel croune
of folly. Beauty each man knows, is one of natures ornaments, by her
wisdom ordained, not to enter in triumph, as victours use upon gain of
victory, with bravery to ostentate their glory, by sound of Shalme and
Dromme, but thankfully for the same, to proclaim the due praise to the
aucthour of Nature. For there is nothing more frail and fadyng, then the
luryng looks of Dame beauties eyes, altogether like the flaryng Marigolde
flower, which in the most fervent heat of the Summers day, does appear
most glorious, and upon retire of the nights shadow, appears as though it
had never been the same. And therefore he that conceiueth, rejoice in her
uncertain state, is like to him that in his slombryng dream, does imagine he
has found a perelesse jewel, of price inestimable, besette with the
glistering Diamonde: and perfectly awaked, knows he has none such. If God
has endued a man with a wife that is beautiful and honest, he is furnished
with double pleasure: such, as rather thanks to him, then vain ostentacion
is to be remembered. Otherwise, he doateth, either in Ielosie or opens proud
vauntes thereof, to such as he thinks, to be his most assured friends. What
joy the sequel thereof does bring, let the history insuyng report.

Candaules king of Lydia, had a merueilous beautiful gentlewoman to his Queen
and wife, whom he loved very dearly, and for that great love which he bare
her, thought her the fairest creature of the world. Being in this loving
concept, he extolled the praise of his wife, to one of his guarde called Gyges,
the son of Dascylus (whom he loved above all the rest of his household, and
used his counsel, in all his weighty causes) with in a while after he said
unto Gyges these words. It seems unto me Gyges, that thou do not greatly
believe the words, which I speak unto the, of the beauty of my wife, but
because eyes be better witnesses of things then ears, thou shalt see her
naked. With these words Gyges being amassed cried out, saying. What words be
these (sir king) me think you are not well advised, to require me to view and
behold the lady my maistres in that sort? For a woman seen naked, does with
her clothes, put of also her chastity. In old time honest things were
devised for man's instruction, emonges which was used this one thing. That
every man ought to behold, the things that were his own. But sir, I do
believe assuredly, that she is the fairest woman in the world, wherefore desire
me not to things that be unlawful. In this sort Gyges replied, and yet
feared lest some danger might happen unto him. Whom Candaules encouraged,
saying. Be of good there, and be not afraid, that either I or my wife, go
about to deceive thee, or that thou shalt incur any danger. For I will
take upon me so to use the matter, as she by no means shall know, that thou
haste seen her. I will place thee behind the portall of our chamber. When I
go to bed, my wife commonly does follow. And she being in the Chamber, a
chair is set ready, upon which she lays her clothes, as she puts them
of. Which done she shows her self a good time, naked. And when she rises
from her chair to go to bed, her back being toward thee, thou may
easily conueighe thy self out again, but in anywise take heed, she do not
see thee, as thou go out. Whereunto I pray thee, to have a special
regard. Gyges seeing that by no means, he could avoid the vain request of
the king, was ready at the time appoincted. Candaules about the hour of bed
time, went into the Chamber, and conueighed Gyges into the same, and after the
King, the Queen followed, whom Gyges beheld at her going in, and at the
puttyng of her clothes. When her back was toward him: (as he was going out)
she perceived him. The Queen understanding by her housbande, the circumstance
of the fact, neither for shame did cry out, ne yet made countenance, as
though she had seen Gyges: but in her mind purposed, to revenge her husbands
folly. For emo^ges the Lydia^s (as for the most part, with all other nations)
it is coumpted a great shame, to see a naked man. The gentlewoman
counterfaited her grief, and kept silence. In the morning when she was ready,
by such of her servants, whom she most trusted, she sent for Gyges, who
thought that she had known nothing, of that which chanced. For many times
before, he used to have access to the queen when he was called. Being come
before her presence. She said unto him, Gyges I offer unto thee now two
conditions, take whether thou will. For either thou must kill Candaules, and
take me to thy wife, and the kingdom also, or else thou must die thy self, that
thou may understand, how in all things not meet to be known, it is not
necessary to obeie Candaules. For either he must needs die, which gave thee
that counsel, or thy self, which did see me naked, and thereby committed
a thing unlawful. Which words for a while, did wonderfully amase Gyges,
then he beseched the Queen, that she would pardon him from that unlawful
choice. When he saw that he could nor persuade her: he required her to show
him by what means, he might attempt that enterprise. Marie ( q she) even in
that place, where thou saw me naked, when he is a sleep, thou shalt
commit that fact. After they had devised the treason, night approached. And
Gyges with stout courage, bente himself thereunto. For he saw no remedy, but
that he must kill, or else be killed. Wherefore with a Dagger, which the Queen
delivered him, he killed Candaules, when he was a sleep. And so got from him
both his wife and kingdom. A goodly example to declare, that the secrets of
Marriage, ought not to be disclosed. But with reverence to be covered, lest
God do plague such offenses with death, or other shame, to manifest to the
world, how derely he estemeth that honorable state.

King Craesus of Lydia reasons with the wiseman Solon, of the happy life of man. Who little esteming his good aduisee Understoode before his death. that
no man (but by virtue) ca^ in this life attain felicity.

The.vij. Novel.
A Noble gentleman of Athenes called Solon, by thappoinctment of the Athenians,
made laws for that city, and because none of the same laws should be
abrogated, for the space of ten years, he bound the Citizens by oath. And
that the same might the better be observed: he himself travailed into far
countrees, as into Egipte to visit king Hamasis, and so to Sardis to king
Craesus, where he was liberally interteigned. This Craesus was king of Lydia,
son of Haliattes, that brought to subjection great Countries in Asia and
Graecia, and gathered together an innumerable mass of money, and richesse. Who
three or four days after the arrival of Solon (which was led about by
his servants, to view his notable wealth and substance) said unto Solon
these words. My friend of Athens, because thy famous wisdom is well known
to the world, and I have heard tell of the excellency thereof, and of the
greatenesse of thy travel, where thou haste attaigned to the singular
knowledge of Philosophy: I desire to learn of thee (now having seen my great
treasures) who is the happiest man and most blessed, that thou know in the
world. Thinkyng he would have judged him to be the same. But Solon made
answer, that Tellus was the happiest. Who was an Athenien, and had virtuous
and honest soonnes, and they likewise had honest children, all which were
that time living. And when by the space of many years, he had led a virtuous
and godly life, he died an honorable death in the wars, which the
Athenians had with their neighbors, at the battaill of Eleusina. Where he was
endued with sumptuous funeralles, to his great honor and praise. Then Craesus
asked him, who was happy next Tellus: thinkyng he would have attributed to
him, the second place. For so the ( q he) that is Cleobis and Bito, which were
Argiues, and lived a contented life. And in all pastimes, to prove force and
maisterie, they bare away the prise and victory. And of them these things
be remembered. When the feastfull day of Iuppiter, was celebrated emonges the
Argiues. Tkeir mother should be carried to the Temple in a Chariotte, drawn
with a yoke of Oxen, which were not come out of the country, at the
appoincted time. The young men seeing that the hour was come, entered into the
yoke theimselues, and drew the chariotte the space of xlv. stades to the
Temple. After this act seen of all the people there, the end of their life was
such, as certainly God gave to understand by them, that better it is to dye,
then live. For the Argiues that were assembled about Bito and Cleobis, with
shoutes and acclamacions, praised the good wills of those children, and the
women themselves, said that happy was the mother, which brought for the
such lineage. Their mother then joyful for that fact, and of the reputacion
of of her sons, kneled down before ye Image of Juno, humbly beseching her to
give to her so^ns, ye thing yt were best for a man to attain unto. Her prayer
ended, she made her sacrifice, which done, the.ij. young men presently died in
the temple. In toke^ of whose noble lives, the Argiues erected.ii. images at
Delphos. And to the^ Solo^ appointed the second place of blisfulnes. Craesus
moved with these words, said unto Solo^. Thou stranger of Athenes, is our
felicity in such little reputacion with thee, that thou do prefer before
us these private me^: Solon answered. Sir, shall I assure you of humain
things, knowing that God enuieth the state of men, and troubles the^ so
often? In length of time many things be seen, which me^ would not se, and
many things be suffered, that men would not suffer. Let us assign to ma^s
life, the term of.lxx. years. In which years are the number of.xxv.M.cc.
days, in which computacio^ the leap month, which is February, is not
comprehended But if you will that other years be longer, by reason of that
month, to the end the hours may be adioined to the^, that want then the leaps
months, makes ye time to amount (above.lxx. years) to.xxv. months, and the
days of those months amou^t to M.v.C. But admit that.lxx. years, with their
leap months, be the total sum of man's life, then is producted the so^me
of.xxvi M.CC. days. Truly one day is not like an other in effect. Even so
Craesus I conclude, that man is full of misery. But although your grace,
seemyng both in wealth, and also in multitude of men, to be a rich and mighty
king, yet I cannot answer fully your demand, before I se how well you do end
your life. For ye rich man is not happier, because he has long life, except
to his riches fortune grant yt he lead a good and honest life. Many men be
very rich, and yet for all that be not blessed and happy. And many that have
but mean wealth, be fortunate. He that is rich and welthie, and therwithall
not happy, excels him that is fortunate and happy only in.ij. things,
but the other surmounteth the rich man in many things. The.ij. things wherein
the rich excels the other be these. The One in satisfiyng his lust and
affection, the other in power and ability, to sustein ill fortune and
adversity. And as the mean man is inferior to the rich in those.ij. poinctes,
which by fortune be denied him, yet he does excel him, because he never
has experience of the^, he lives in good and prosperous health, he never
feleth adversity, he does nothing yt is wicked he is a father of good
children, he is endued with formosttie and beauty who if besides al those
things, he die welt. It is he who^ you demand that worthily may be called
blessed and happy. For before he die he can not be called blessed: But
fortunate he may be termed. For to obtein al (whiles you be a living man) it
is impossible. For as one country is not able to serve it self with all
commodities, but having one, it lacks an other: Yet the same country that
has most commodities is the best: And as a man's body having one prefeccio^
is not perfect, because in having one, he lacks an other: Eue^ so he that
has most virtue, and is endued with greatest number of the aforesaied
commodities, and so quietly departs his life, he in mine opinion is worthy to
be entitled with the name of a king. A man must expect the end of every thing
whereunto it tends. For God plucketh up by ye roots many men, to who^ he has
given abundance of wealth and treasure. Craesus misliking the words of Solo^
suffered him to depart (saying he was a fool, that measured present pleasures
no better. After whose departure, ye gods began to bend their indignacio^ and
displeasure upon him, because he thought himself the happiest of al men. Long
time after Craesus receiuyng courage and comfort from Apollo at Delphos:
Attempted wars against Cyrus king of Persia. Who in those wars was
overthrown, and taken prisoner, after he had reigned.xiiij years, and was
brought by the Persians to Cyrus. Then Cyrus caused a stacke of woodde to be
piled up, and Craesus fettered with gives, was set upon the same. Who then
reme^bryng the saying of Solon, that no living man was blessed, or in all
poincted happy, cried out in lamentable wise. O Solon, Solon, Solon, which
Cyrus hearing, caused his interpreters, to demand of him, what the same Solon
was. Craesus with much difficulty told what he was, and declared all the
talk, between him and Solon. Whereof when Cyrus heard the report, he
acknowledged himself to be also a man, and sore repented, that he went about
to burn him, which was equal unto him in honor and richesse, confessyng
nothing to be stable and certain in the life of man. Whereupon he commanded
the fire to be taken away, which then began to flame And so with much a do,
he was delivered. Then Cyrus asked him, who gave him counsel to invade his
country, to make his friend his foe. Even my self (said Craesus) through
unhappy fate, by the persuasion of the Grekishe GOD, which gave me counsel,
to make wars upon thee. For there is no man so mad, that had rather desire
war then peace. For in peace sons hurt their fathers, but in wars,
fathers hurt their children. But that these things be come to pass I may
thank the Deuels good grace. Afterward Cyrus interteigned him very
honorably, and used his counsel, which he found very wholesome and good.

Of a father that made suite, to have his own soonne put to death.

The.viij. Novel.
THere was a man borne in Mardus (which is a Country adioynyng unto Persia)
called Rhacon, that had seven children. The youngest of them (named Cartomes)
afflicted diverse honest men, with great harms and mischifes. For which
cause, the father began to reform him with words, to prove if he would
amend. But he little waiyng the good discipline of his father: It chanced upon
a time that the Justices of the country, repaired to the Sessions in that
Town, where the father of that child did dwell. Who taking his son, and
bindyng his hands behind him, brought him before the Judges. To whom he
remembered by way of accusacion, all the mischiefs, which his soonne from
time to time had committed, and desired the Judges, that he might be
conde^pned to die. The Judges amassed at that request, would not them selves
give sentence against him, but brought both the father and the soonne, before
Artaxerxes the king of Persia: In whose presence the father still persisted, in
the accusacion of his son. Why ( q the king) canste thou find in thy heart,
that thine own soonne should be put to death before thy face? Ye truly ( q
the father). For at home in my garden, when the young Lactuse begin to grow,
I cut of the bitter and sower stalks from the same. For pity it were, the
mother Lactuse should sustain any sorrow, for those bastard and degenerate
shrubbes. Which being taken away, the prospers, and increases so great
sweetness and bigness. Even so (O king) if he be hanged, that hurts my whole
family, and offends the honest conversation of his brethren, both my self
shall be increased, and the rest of my stock and ligneage shall in like sort
prospere and continue. The King hearing those words, did greatly praise the
wisdom of Rhacon, and chose him to be one of his Judges, speaking these
words before the multitude. He that dare thus severely and justly pronounce
sentence upon his own child, doubtless he will show himself to be an
incorrupt and sincere Judge, upon the offenses of other. Then the king
delivered the young man, from that present fault, threatenyng him with most
cruel death, if after that time, he were apprehended with like offense.

Water offered of good will to Artaxerxes the king of Persia, and the liberal
reward of the king, to the giver.

The.ix. Novel.
THere was a certain Persian called Sinaetas, that far from his own house
met king Artaxerxes, and had not wherewith to present him. (For it was an
order emonges the Persians, instituted by Law, that every man which met
with the king should give him a present.) Wherefore the poor man, because he
would not neglecte his duty, ran to a River called Cyrus, and taking up
both his hands full of water, spoke to the king in this wise. I beseech God
that your majesty, may evermore reign emonges. As occasion of the place, and
mine ability at this instant serves, I am come to honor your majesty, to
the intent you may not pass without some present. For which cause I give
unto you this water. But if your grace had ones encamped your self, I would go
home to my house, for the best and derest things I have to honor your majesty
withal. And peradventure the same shall not be much inferior to the gifts,
which other now do give you. Artaxerxes delighted with this chance, said
unto him.

Good follow I thank thee for this present, I assure thee, the same is so
acceptable unto me, as the most precious gift of the world. First, because
water is the best of all things, then because the River, out of the which
thou did take it, does bear the name of Cyrus. Wherefore I command
thee, to come before me, when I am at my Camp. When he had spoken those
words, he required his Eunuchs to take the present, and to put it into a
Cup of gold. The king when he was lodged in his pauilion, sent to the man a
Persian robe, a Cup of gold, and a thousand Darices (which was a coigne
emo^ges the Persians, whereupon was the Image of Darius) willing the messenger
to say unto him, these words.

It has pleased the king, that thou should delight thy self, and make merry
with this gold, because thou did exhilarate his mind, in not suffryng him
to pass, without the honor of a present: but as necessity did serve thee,
diddeste humbly salute him with water. His pleasure is also, that thou shalt
drink of that water in this cup of gold, of which thou made him
partaker.

Artaxerxes hereby expressed the true Image of a princely mind, that would not
disdain cherefully to behold the homely gift (in our estimacion rude, and
nothing worth) at the hands of his poor subject: and liberally to reward
that ductifull zeal, with things of great price and valor. To the same
Artaxerxes, ridyng in progress through Persia, was presented by one called
Mises, a very great Pomegranate in a Sieve. The king merueilyng at the
bigness thereof, demanded of him out of what garden, he had gathered the
same. He answered out of his own. Whereat the king greatly reioysyng,
recompensed him with princely rewards, saying. By the Son (for that was the
common oath of the Persian kings) this manne is able with such travel and
diligence in my judgment, to make of a little city, one that shall be large and
great. Which words seem to declare, that all things by care, sufficient
pain, and continual labor, may against nature, be made more excellent and
better?

The love of Chariton and Menalippes.

The.x. Novel.
I Will rehearse a fact of the tyrant Phalaris far discrepante from his
condictons. For it favors of great kindness and humanity, and seems not
to be dooen by him. Chariton was an Agrigentine borne, and a great lover of
beauty, who with ardente affection loved one Menalippus, which was also borne
in the City, of honest conditions and excellent beauty. This Tyrant Phalaris
hindered Menalippus in a certain suit. For when he contended in judgment with
one of Phalaris friends, the tyraunte commanded him, to give over his suite:
whereunto because he was not obediente, he threatened to put him to death,
except he would yield. But Menalippus over came him in law, and the noble men,
which were the friends of Phalaris, would give no sentence, and brought the
same to a Nonesuite. Which the young manne taking in ill part, said, he had
received wrong, and confessed to his friend Chariton, the wrong he had
sustained, requiryng his aid to revenge the same upon the Tirant. He made
other young men privy to that conspiracy, such as he knew would be ready
and apt for that enterprise. Chariton perceiuyng the rage and fury of his
friend, knowing that no man would take his part, for fear of the tyraunte,
began to dissuade him, saying: that he himself went about the like attempt, a
little before, to deliver his country into liberty, out of present servitude,
but he was not able to sort the same to any purpose, without great danger.
Wherefore he prayed him to commit the consideracion thereof unto him, and to
suffer him to epsy a time apt and convenient. Menalippus was content. Then
Chariton reuoluyng with himself that devise, would not make his dear friend a
partaker of that fact lest it should be perceived but he alone took upon him to
do the deed, that only himself might sustain the smarte. Wherefore taking a
sword in his hand, as he was sekyng the way to give the assault upon the
Tiraunte, his enterprise was disclosed, and Chariton apprehended by the Guarde,
which for the Tirantes defense, diligently attended about him. From thence he
was sent to the Iaole, and examined upon interrogatories to bewraie the rest
of the conspiratours. For which he suffered the rack, and the violence of
other torments. Afterward Menalippus remembryng the constancy of his
friend, and the cruelty by him stoutly suffered, went to Phalaris, and
confessed unto him that not only he was privy to that treason, but also was
the aucthour thereof. Phalaris demaundyng for what cause he did it, told him
the consideracion before rehearsed, which was the reuokyng of sentence, and
other injuries done unto him. The Tirant merueiling at the constante friendship
of these twain, acquitted the^ both. But upon condition, that both should
depart out of the city and country of Scicilia. Nevertheless, he gave them
leave to receive the fructes and commodities of their revenues. In record and
remembrance of whose amity Apollo, sange these verses.

The Raisers up of heavenly love,
emonges the human kind:
Were good Chariton and Menalippe,
whose like vnneths we find.
This Phalaris was a most cruel Tyrant of the city of Agrigentine in
Scicilia, who besides other instruments of new devised torments, had a Bulle
made of brass, by the art and inuencion of one Perillus. Into which Bulle,
all such as were condemned to death were put, and by reason of extreme heat
of fire, made under the same, those that were executed, yelled forth terrible
soundes and noyses, like to the lowyng of a Bulle. For which ingine and
devise, Perillus thinkyng to obtain great reward, was for his labor, by
commandment of the Tyrante, thrown into the Bulle, being the first that
showed the proof of his devise. Within a while after, also Phalaris himself,
for that his great cruelty, could be sustained no longer, was by a general
assault, made upon him by the people, haled into the same Bull, and burned. And
although this Tyrant far excelled in beastly cruelty, yet there appeared
some spark of humanity in him, by his mercy extended upon Chariton and
Menalippus, the two true lovers before remembered. the same Phalaris wrote many
proper and short Epistles, full of virtuous instructions, and wholesome
admonicions.

King Cyrus persuaded by Araspas, to dispose himself to love a lady called
Panthea, enters into a pretty disputacion and talk, of love and beauty.
Afterward Araspas himself falls in love with the said Lady, but she
endued with great chastity, auoydeth his earnest love. And when her husband
was slain in the service of Cyrus, she killed her self.

The.xj. Novel.
BEfore the beginning of this historic, I have thought good by way of a
Proeme, to introduce the words of an excellent writer called Lodouicus Caelius
Rhodoginus. Saint Hierome (says he) that most holy and eloquent father,
affirms that virtues are not to be pondered by the sex or kind, by whom
they be done, but by the mind. Wherewith if ever any woman was affected, truly
it was the fair lady Panthea, wherein I would no man should blame me of
ungodliness, or indiscrecion, for that I do remember a woman, mentioned in
profane aucthours, being not minded at this present, to make a view of
Christ his secrets, which are his divine scriptures, wherein be contained,
the ghostly lives of sacred dames, wherein also abundauntly does shine and
glitter, the celestial mercy of our heavenly father. Let the reader
remember, that we now be conuersaunte in the ancient monumentes, of other
profane aucthours, and out of them do selecte the pleasantest flowers, to
adorn this Palace, whereby we may be able to delight the weried beholders of
the same. This Panthea therefore as Xenephon writes, and partly as S. Hierome
reports, was the wife of Abradatas, a noble personage, and in warlike factes
very skillful, derely beloved of Cyrus king of Persia, with whom this Lady
Panthea was captive, at the overthrow of the Assirians. Netherto the words
of Calius. King Cyrus when his enemies were vanquished, hearing tell of this
gentlewoman, called unto him one of his gentlemen, named Araspas, which was a
Median borne, the very minion, play fellow, and companion of Cyrus, from his
youth. To whom for the great love that he bare him, he gave the Median robe of
from his own back at his departure from Astiages, into Persia. To this
gentleman, king Cyrus committed the custody of the Lady, and of her tent.
Abradatas her housbande (when she was taken prisoner) was before sent in
Embassage to the king of Bactria, by the Assirian king, to entreat of peace,
because he was his familiare friend. When Araspas had received the keepyng of
the Lady. He asked Cyrus, whether he had seen her. No truly said Cyrus. Then
have I, said ( Araspas): and have chosen her specially for your own person.
And when we came into her Pauilion, none of us could tell, which was she, for
she set upon the ground, with all her women about her, and her apparel was
like unto her maids. But we desirous to know, which was the maistres,
beheld them all, and by and by she seemed to excel them all, although she
satte with her face covered, lookyng down upon the ground. And when we had
her to rise up, all the rest rose up also. She did far surmounte her maids,
as well in making and lineamentes of body, as in good behavior and
comeliness, although she was attired in simple apparel, the tears manifestly
ran down her eyes, falling upon her garments, and distillyng down to her
feet. To whom he that was most ancient emonges us said. Be of good chere
Lady. We here that you have a very valiant man to your housbande,
notwithstanding we have chosen you for a gentleman, that is not inferior to
him, either in beauty, force, wisdom, or valiance. But as we think, if
there be any man in this world, worthy of admiracion, it is Cyrus our Prince
and lord, whose paragon we have chosen you to be. When the lady heard them
say so she tare the attiremente from her head and body, she cried out, and
all her maids skriched with her. At what time the greatest part of her face
appeared, and so did her neck and hands. And assure your self ( Cyrus) that to
us, which viewed her well, it seemed impossible, that such a creature could be
borne of mortal parents in Asia. Therefore sir, look upon her in any wise. To
whom Cyrus said. The more praise ye give her, the less mind I have to see
her, if she be such a one as you have said. And why so (quod) Araspas.
Because (said Cyrus) if I should go to see her hearing you make this report
of her beauty (leisure not seruyng me thereunto) I am a fraied, lest she would
sone allure me, to go many times to behold her. Whereby I might perchance,
grow negligent in my matters of greatest importance. The young manne smilyng,
said. Think you Cyrus that the beauty of a woman, can force a man unwilling,
to attempt a thing that should not be for the best If nature have that force in
her, she would compel all men a like. Do you not see, that fire burns all
men, after one sort, because it is his nature? Beautiful things be not had
in equal estimacion, some be of great price, some not so, some do regard
this, some that. For love is a voluntary thing, and every manne loves what he
list. The brother is not in love with the sister, but of an other she is
loved. The father is not in love with the daughter, and yet she is loved of an
other. For fear and law is sufficient to refrain love. But if there were a
law made to command men, that they which did not eat, should not be
hungry, and they that did not drink, should not be a thirst, and that no man should be cold in Winter, and hot in Summer, that law could not
compel men to obey those things. For men by nature be subject unto
them. But to love is a thing free and voluntary. Every man loves those
things, that be his own, as his apparel and other his necessaries.
Whereunto Cyrus replied. If love be voluntary: how can it be that a man may
abandon the same, when he list? But I have seen men weep for sorrow of love, I
have known them that have been slaves to love, who before they have loved,
have thought thraldom, the greatest evil: giuyng away many things, which
had been better for them to have kept: and have prayed to God to be exonerated
of love, above all other diseases, and yet could not be delivered, being
bound with stronger imprisonment, then if they had been tied with chains,
yeldyng themselves to their lovers, seruyng them with all obedience. And when
they be hampered with such mischieues, they seek not to avoid them. They
do so in deed as you say (answered the young man,) And therefore such
lovers be miserable, whereby they wish to dye, still continuyng in their woe
and calamity. And where there be a thousand ways to be rid of life, yet
they will not die. Some of them fall to stealyng and robbyng of other men.
And when they have robbed, you with the first thinkyng theft unnecessary, do
condemn the thieves, whom you do not pardon, but punish. In like manner the
beautiful, do not counsel men to love them, or covet that is not lawful.
But miserable men, showing themselves inferior to all lusts and desires, do
in the end accuse Love, to be the aucthour of their misery. Good and honest
men, although they desire gold, beautiful horses, and fair women, yet they
can abstain from them all, as not subject to them, more then is meet. For I
my self have beholden this woman, which seems to be a surpassyng fair
wight: and yet I am now with you, I ride, and do other things, according to
my duty. Paraduenture (said Cyrus) you went sooner away, then love could
have time to fasten upon a man. For fire touching a man, does not strait
burn him: And woodde is not by and by in flame, yet would I not willingly
touch fire, nor behold beautiful persons. And I would give you counsel
Araspas, to beware how you suffer your eyes to roll, and wander upon fair
women. For the fire burns the^, that touch it: And beautiful folk, do
kindle them that behold them a far of, in such wise that they burn for
love. I warraunte you Cyrus (said Araspas). For if I do continually look
upon them, I will not so be drowned in love, that the same shall provoke me to
do any thing that does not become me. You say well said Cyrus. Therefore
keep this woman as I bid you, and see well unto her. For paraduenture she is
taken in good time. And so they departed.

The young gentleman markyng the singular beauty of the Lady, and perceiuyng
her great honesty, he having the custody of her, thought he would do her
pleasure, and by gesture saw that she was not ingrate and unthankful, but
very diligent on her part, to cause her servants, that all things at his
coming should be ready: And if he were by chance sick, he lacked no keeping,
upon which occasions, he fell in love with her. And no meruell. For she was
(as before is said) a woman very fair and amiable. Afterward king Cyrus
desirous to send a spy into the country of Lydia, to learn what the
Assirians did: Araspas which had the keeping of the fair Lady, seemed most
meet for that purpose. But Araspas chanced to fall in love with the Lady, in
such wise as he was forced, to break his mind to her, that he must needs
satisfy his pleasure. Which request, like a faithful and loving woman to her
housbande in his absence, she denied. Howbeit she would not accuse Araspas to
Cyrus, being afraied to set variaunce between two friends. Araspas thinkyng
it a great shame and reproach unto him, not to obtain his desire: threatened
the Lady, that if she would not yield to his request, he would have it
perforce. Then the woman fearyng violence, kept the thing no longer secret,
but sent one of her Eunuchs to Cyrus, commaundyng him to discover the whole
matter. Which when he heard, he laughed a good pace at him, who said that he
was superior to love, sendyng Artabasus with the Eunuche, to command him,
not to force the woman: but if he could by fair means allure her, he would
not be against it. When Artabasus came to Araspas: he rebuked him, both for
his infidelity, in the thing committed unto his charge and also for his
wickedness, injury, and incontine^cie. Wherewithal Araspas wept for sorrow,
being oppressed with shame, and confounded with fear, for the displeasure of
Cyrus. Which thing Cyrus understanding called him, and priuelie said thus
unto him.

I see Araspas that you be afraied of me, and much ashamed. But be content,
for I know that the Gods have been vanquished with love, and do
understand, what things the wiseste men have suffered for the same. And I have
accused my self, because I could not co^teine, being in company with fair
personages. And hereof I my self am the occasion. For I compelled you to that
invincible matter. Araspas making answer, said: You be in this thing, O
Cyrus, even like unto your self, as you be in all other. You be merciful, and
full of clemency. But other men's report is, that, which makes me most
pensite. For so sone as the rumor of my calamity, is dispersed, mine enemies
will rejoice, and my friends will counsel me to flee, lest your majesty do
hainously take revenge for mine offense. Well Araspas, said Cyrus: By that
opinion and brute, you shall do me great service, emonges my confederates.
How can that be (said Araspas? How can I therein do you any service? If
presently ( q Cyrus) you do make as though you fled from me, and by going
unto mine enemies, you may win of the^ great credit. Uerely (said
Araspas) I suppose that I and my friends, might raise a rumor in deed, that I
am fled from you for fear. So may you (said Cyrus) return unto us again,
when you know our enemies secrets. For I think they will make you privy to
al their counsel and aduises, because you shall be incredite with them, nothing
shall be co^cealed from you, that we desire to know. I will even now depart
(said Araspas) for it is very likely, that this my departure, may seem to be
an argument of truth, because I fled for fear of punishment. Can you in
that manner forsake fair Panthea ( q Cyrus?) Truly (said he) it evidently
now appears, that I am endewed with two minds. And with the one I have played
the Philosopher, with love that untrue Sophistre. For there is no one mind,
which is good and badde, and at one time, loves good and evil things, and
can not at one instant, perpetrate and do one thing. Wherefore it is manifest,
that there be two minds. When the good mind rules, it does things that
be honest, when the evil is superior, it woorketh ill. And now the good
mind, by making you his friend and confederate, does puissauntlie govern.
Well (said Cyrus) if you go, you must beware, that your credit may increase
emonges them. Tell them hardely, the some of our endeavors, but in such wise,
as our doings may be lettes to their enterprises. And this shall let the^
much if you say that we determine to invade their country. For hearing this,
they will not assemble their whole power, every man fearyng his private part.
And see that you tarry with them a good space. And look what parts, they mean
nerest to approach, the same be most convenient for us to know. And bid them
to be ready, when soever they think time. For when you shall be departed from
them, and thought that you know their order, they must needs keep the same,
and be a fraied to alter it, which if they do, they will confound them
selves, through the sudden change.

Thus Araspas departing, tellyng his most trusty servants, what he would
have dooen in this matter, went his way. But Panthea hearing that Araspas was
gone, sent to Cyrus, saying.

Be not sorry Cyrus for the departure of Araspas, to your enemies. For if you
will suffer me, to send for my husband, I do promise you, that he shall be a
far more assured friend, then Araspas was. And I know he will come with so
great power (for your aid) as he is able to make. For the father of the
Assirian king, which now reigns, was his friend. But this king upon a time,
went about to make a diuorcement, between my husband and me. Therefore,
knowing that this king, does disdain his good fortune, I am sure he would
sone be persuaded, to serve so noble a Prince as you be. Cyrus hearing her
say so, commanded her to send to her husband, which she did. Abradatas
knowing his wives tokens, and understanding the effect of her message, spedely
came to Cyrus with M M horsemen. They that were the Persian spies, sent to
Cyrus, declaryng what he was. Cyrus commanded that forthwith, he should be
brought unto his wife. When the wife and husband saw each other, they
imbrased like two, that met after such troublesome adventure. Then Panthea
declared the goodness, temperaunce, and clemency of Cyrus toward her.
Abradatas hearing of her interteignemente, said. What shall I do Panthea, to
render thanks to Cyrus, for you and me? What other thing (said Panthea) but
to endeavor your self, to be such a trusty friend to him, as he has been
toward you. Then Abradatas went to Cyrus, and when he saw him, he took him
by the right hand and said. For the pleasures that you have done me, O Cyrus,
I have no more to say, but that I assure my self unto you, as your friend,
your servant and confederate. And what soever I see you desire, I shall
imploye my self, to the vttermoste of my power, to aid and help you in the
same. To who^ Cyrus said I accept you, and for this time dismiss you, to go
and suppe with your wife. Then you shall again be placed in my Lent, with
your friends and mine. And when Abradatas saw the preparacion of Cyrus, that
he made against his enemies, he addressed to make provision for himself. His
wife Panthea, had made of her treasure, a Curate and an helmet of gold, and
likewise his vambraces, and had furnished the horses of the Chariot with
brazen barbes. When Cyrus had made diverse oracions, for the incoragyng of his
army, and had taken order, how all things might prosperously succeed,
diuidyng his Capitaines into several battles, appoinctyng every of the^
their charge: Abradatas showed himself very brave, and martial in his
Chariot. Who being about to put on a linen breast plate, according to his
Country manner: his wife Panthea brought him an armure of gold, and a Purple
goune down to his feet, after Robe fashion, and a Crimsen skarfe. These
things had she priuelie wroughte for her housbande, knowing the measure of his
harness, which when her housbande saw, he marueiled, and said to Panthea.
Wife, have you not defaced your Jewels, to make me this armure? Truly (said
Pa^thea) I have a more precious Jewel then this. For if you seem to other, as
you do to me, you are my dearest Jewel. In saying thus, she armed him, and
would that no man should have seen her: for the tears distilled down her
chekes. Abradatas being in the front of the army, armed after this manner,
appeared a gallante and brave captain, whose nature and complexion, agreed to
his comeliness. And taking the raines of the Chariot in his hands, he
prepared himself to mount up.

Then Panthea, all other being commanded to stand back, said. Truly
Abradatas, if there be women, that esteem their housebandes, more then their
own lives, I think you know that I am one of the^. Therefore what need I to
express, every particulare thing. My factes, as I think, do persuade you,
more then words. And thus indeuouryng my self toward you, our mutual love
is such, that I had rather be buried quick with you, being a noble manne,
then to live in shame. I esteem you with the best, and my self not as the
worst. Great thanks we owe to Cyrus, for his Princely interteignemente of
me, being a captive, and chosen for himself, not like a prisoner with shame,
but free, without spot or blemish to mine honor. And used me, as though I had
been his brothers wife And after Araspas departed from him, which had the
custody of me, I promised him, that if he would give me leave to send for you,
that you should become more loiall, and assured to him, then ever Araspas was.
Abradatas delited with her chaste communicacion, and tenderly laiyng his hand
upon her head: Looking up to heaven, made this prayer. O most mighty
Iuppiter, grant that I may show my self an housbande, mete for Panthea, and
a friend worthy of Cyrus, who has so courteously dealt with us. Thus speaking
at the entry of the Chariot seat, he went up to the same, when he was set
down, the governor of the Chariot made fast the seat. Panthea having now
nothing to embrase, kissed the Chariotte seat. And he went forth. But
Panthea followed him priuelie, till he turned and spied her, to whom he said.
Be of good comfort Panthea, A dieu and farewell. Then her Eunuchs and women,
conueighed her to her own Chariot, coueryng the same with curteines.

Cyrus after the battle and victory, had against Craelus: called diverse of
his men unto him, and demanded if they saw Abradatas. For I marvel (said
he) he comes not unto me now. For before the battle, many times he appeared in
my presence. Whereunto one of his men answered. The cause is (sir) that he is
not a live. For he was slain in the battle, as he invaded the Aagiptians. The
rest of his company, except his own soldiers, fled from him, when they
saw him incountre with the Aegiptian battle. And when he was dead, his wife
Panthea took him up, and laid him in her own wagon: conueiyng him to a
certain place, by the River Pactolus. And (they say) that her Eunuchs do
dig a grave to bury him. His wife sits upon the ground, apparrelled with
those furnitures that he did wear, leanyng her head upon her knees. With
which words, Cyrus was driven into great sorrow, strikyng himself upon the
thigh, and by and by mounted upon his horse. And taking with him M. horsemen:
he went to mourn for his friend Abradatas. More over he commanded Gadatas and
Gobryas, to carry the fairest apparel they could get, to his good and
honest friend that was dead, and to assemble his ore^ and horse, and all his
beasts and cattle wheresoever they were, that they might be sacrificed to
Abradatas. But when he saw Panthea, sittyng upon the ground, and the dead
corpse liyng by her, he wept for sorrow, and said. Alack good woman, thou
trusty and faithful wife, do thou thus depart and leave us alone? And with
those words he took her by the rght hand, and therwithall was presented the
dead hand of Abradatas, which the Aegiptia^s in the battle had cut of:
which when Cyrus saw, he then lamented, more then he did before. And Panthea
cried out. Who comforted by Cyrus, kissed the dead hand, laiyng the same
again in his place, so well as she could, and said.

Thus it is chanced Cyrus: but why do you beheld the dead body? This I
know ( q she) he has suffered for me, being none of the lest adventures,
which he has hazarded for my sake. And perchance Cyrus, he would have done
no less for you. For I exhorted him (like a fool as I was) to attempt this
enterprise, that he might have showed himself a friend, of worthy
remembrance. But he obeyed that request, not only for my sake, but to
pleasure you: He has valiantly bestowed his life and is dead, and I
unhappy caitife that gave him first counsel, do sit hear alive. But
Cyrus for a certain space holdyng his peace, powered furthe abundance of
tears, and then said. This gentleman (Lady Panthea) has a commendable end,
for he died in victory. But take these furnitures, and adorn him
therewithal. For Gobryas and Gadatas were come with goodly and very
excellent apparel. Then he said, be sure he shall be honored with greater
things then these. A monumente also, according to his worthiness, shall be
erected upon his grave. Sacrifice shall be offered, meet for a man so valiant
and puissaunt. Thou likewise shall not be left comfortles. For in consideration
of thy great chastity and virtue. I will honor thee, and appoincte a garrison
to convey thee into what place thou art disposed to go. To whom Panthea said.
Be of good chere Cyrus, I will not hide from you the place, wherein I am
determined to bestow my self. Cyrus hearing her say so, went away, pitiyng
the woman, that was bereued of such a housebande, and lamentyng the manne,
that had left such a wife behind him, and was like no more to see her
again. But Panthea commanded her Eunuchs to go out of the place, till she
had satisfied her self with tears, and lamentacions for her housebande. For
the prepared to kill her self, requiryng her Nursse to tarry by her,
co^maundyng her, that when she was dead, she should shroude her and her
husband, in one garment. The Nursse persuaded the Lady, with humble words
and supplicacions, from her determinacio^. But she could not prevail: and when
she saw that her maistres, took her words in ill part, she satte down and
wept. But Panthea with a sword, which she had prepared a long time for that
purpose, killed her self, and laiyng her head upon her husebandes breaste, she
yielded from her chaste body, her innocente ghost. The Nursse seeing that,
cried out, and covered them both, as she was commanded. Cyrus understanding
the woman's fact, was amazed, and speedily went to see, if she might be helped.
The Eunuchs (being three in number) seeing their maistres dead, they likewise
drew out their swords, and killed themselves in the place, where they were
commanded to stand. For memory of which fact Cyrus created a noble monument,
to the perpetual praise of chastity, and honest love. Which (as Xenopho^
reports) remained to his days, with their names engraven in Syrian letters.

Abdolominus is from poor estate, advanced by Alexander the great, through
his honest life, to be king of Sydone.

The.xij. Novel.
ALexander the mighty and noble Emperor, after he had subdued Darius the
Persian king: at length came to Sydone, a famous city, by reason of the
ancient fame of the first founders. The same city was under the government of
Strato, and maintained by the puissance of Darius, who yelding more by force of
the people, then by free will, was thought unworthy, to reign and rule there.
Alexander at the request of his friend Ephestion, willed him to appoinct one to
be king, whom the Citizens should think most worthy of that state. After
profers of Ephestion, to diverse of the young gentlemen of that city, and
refusal made of their parts: they alleged that none ought to enjoy the
dignity of their king, but such as were descended of the royal bloodde.
Thinking none to be more mete for that state, then one Abdolominus, who being
of the royal race, for poverty was enforced to inhabit a little cotage
without the city. His good life was the cause of his poverty, as it is to
many other: and labouryng in his daiely travel, understood not the brute of
the war, that troubled all Asia. Ephestion and the young gentlemen repaired to
his garden, with garments to garnish him like a king, and found him making
clean his garden, whom they saluted, and said. You must exchange your
homely clothes, with these rich robes, wherewith we here present you. Wash
your body that now is foul and unclean, take upon yon the courage of a king:
and in this state (whereof you be worthy) express the same sobriety and
continency, you do presently use. And when you sit in your regal seat,
vsyng the authority of life and death of your subjects: Do in no wise
forgette the fortune, wherein you were before you were made king, ne yet for
what purpose you did receive it. The matter seemed to Abdolominus like a dream:
and demanded of them, if their wits were found, that did deride him in
that sort. But when he saw them bind by oath, their doings to be of troth,
he washed himsef, and taking the garment, which was purple and gold, went
with them into the palace. The fame was diversely bruted of this fact. Some
favored the cause, and some did froune against it. But such as were rich,
did reprove his poverty and base estate, to those that were nere about
Alexander, which made the king to send for him. And when he had long be
holden his manner and order, said. Your personage does not degenerate, from the
fame of your progenitors. But I would feign know, how pacie^t you were, in the
time of your poverty. I would to God ( q Abdolominus) I could bear my
prosperity in like case now I am king. These hands did get that I desired.
And having nothing, I lacked nothing. Which words made Alexander, conceive a
good opinion of him. To whom he restored the riches of the king before, and
diverse other things, taken away by the Persians.

The oracion of the Scythian Ambassadors to Alexander the great, reprouyng
his ambicion, and desire of Empire.

The.xiij. Novel.
TVllie in the first book of his Offices says, that very miserable, is
ambicion and desire of honor: and that most men, which be given to cupidite
of government, honor and glory be forgetful of Justice. The truth of which
grave words, vttred by a Prince of eloquence, the rude and barbarous
Ambassadors of Scythia, in plain and homely talk, boldly did pronounce to
king Alexander (surnamed Magnus) when he was about to invade their country.
For when he had within three days finished twelve thousand boats, to
transport his army over the famous river of Tanais (which deuideth Asia from
Europa) against the poor Scythians, twenty Ambassadors of the Scythians came
to Alexanders ca^pe, to speak with him, to prove if they could by words,
withdraw his intended purpose: Before whom when they were placed, the eldest
of them spoke these words. If the gods had given thee a body, according to
the immoderate desire of thy mind, the whole world could not be able to hold
thee. With one of thy hands, thou would touch the Orient, and with thy
other hand the Occident. And when thou haste gotten that: thou will desire to
know, where the brightness of the Divine Majesty is placed. Thus thou
couetest after the thing, thou art not able to receive. Out of Europa thou
marchest into Asia, and out of Asia thou passest into Europa. Afterward, if
thou do vanquishe all mankind: thou must make war with wooddes and
snowes, with rivers and wild beasts. What? Do thou not know, that great
trees grow long, and yet be rooted out of the ground in a moment: He is a
fool that looks after the fruict; and does not measure the height of the
Tree, whereon it grows. Take heed lest while thou do contend to clim to
the top, thou fallest down with the bows, which thou do embrace. The
Lion also sometime is made the feed of the smallest birds. And rust consumes
Iron. There is nothing so firm, that is not in peril of the weak. What have
we to do with thee? We never touched thy land. What thou art, and from
whence then come, is it not lawful for us to to be ignoraunte, that live in
the waste wooddes? We can not be subject to any manne, and we desire not to
rule. We have certain gifts peculiar unto us, because thou shalt not be
ignoraunte, of the state of our nation. The yoke of Tren, the Plough, the Dart,
and the bowl: Those things we use, both with our fre^des, and against our
enemies. Unto our friends we give the fruictes, gotten with the labor of our
oxen. And with them in our Bowl, we sacrifice wine to the Gods. Our enemies
we strike with the Dart a far of, and with the spear nere at hand. After
that sort in time past, we overcame the king of Scythia, and afterward the
king of Media and Persia, and the way was open unto us into Aegipt. But thou
which do boaste, that thou art come to persecute Thieves, art the common
thief of all nations, whereunto thou make thy repair. The Country of Lydia
thou haste taken. Thou have enjoyed Syria. Thou do possess Persia, and the
Bactrianes be under thy power. Thou dooest go into India. And now thou
extendest thy unstable and gredie hands upon our cattall. What need haste thou
of those riches, which do make thee so hungry? Thou art the first of all
men, which with sacietie have gotten famine, that the more thou haste, the
more gredelie thou couetest after things thou have not. Do thou not
remember, how long thou have slicked about Bactria? And whiles thou go
about to bring them in subjection, the Sogdians begin to reuolte. Thus war
does grow unto thee of thy victory. For be thou never so great, and
puissant over other, yet there be none that can induce to be governed by
strangers. Pass now Tanais, thou shall perceive what breadth it bears, and
yet thou shall never overtake the Scithians, whose poverty is swifter, then
thy army, which carries the spoil of so many nations. For when thou shall
think us to be far of, thou shalt see us within thy camp, with like
swiftness we follow, and flee away, I hear that our deserts and void
places, be mocked by the Greek proverbs, we covet rather those deserts and
places uninhabited, then cities and plentiful soiles. Therefore hold fast thy
fortune, for she is tickle and can not be holden against her will. Follow thou
the counsel that is good, specially whiles the time does serve. Bridle thy
felicity, and thou shall rule it the better. Our country me^ say, that
Fortune is without feet, and that she has only hands and wings, but when
she stretches forth her hand, she will not suffer her wings to be touched.
Finally, if thou be a God thou ought to give benefits to mortal men, and
not to take away the commodities they have alredie: but if thou be a man:
consider that thou art alwaie the same that thou art. It is foolish part to
remember those things, and to forget thy self. Those people that feel not thy
wars, thou may use as thy fre^des. For friendship is most firm and stable
emonges equal, and those seem to be equal, that have not used force and
violence emonges themselves. Beware thou take the^ not for thy fre^des, whom
thou do subdue, and bring in obedience. There is no friendship between the
master and the servant, and in peace the law of arms is observed. Believe
not that the Scythians do bind friendship with any oath. For they make their
oath, by obseruacion of faith. The manner of the Greeks, is to justify their
factes, by inuocacion of their Gods to witness. But we know, that Religion
consists in faith her self. They which do not renerence to men, do begile
the Gods. Thou haste no need of him to be thy friend, of whose friendship thou
sta^dest in doubt. Thou haste us as kepers of Asia and Europa. For we should
touch the Country of Bactria, were it not for Tanais, which deuideth us. And
beyond Tanais al is ours so far as Thracia, and the fame is that Thracia
bordreth upon Macedonia: we being neighbors, to both thy dominions, chose
now whether then will have us, frended or foes. These were the words of the
Scythians. Howbeit these homely and plain aduertisementes, could not diuerte
king Alexander from his intended enterprise, and according to his desired
success, he overcame them.

The words of Metellus of marriage, and wiuyng with the praise and dispraise
of the same.

The.xiiij. Novel.
IN the presence of many learned men of Rome, Metellus surnamed Numidicus, for
his victories and triumph over Iugurtha King of Numidia, a Country in Africa:
In the time of his office of Censor, made an Oracion beiwe the Roman people,
of marriage of wines, upon occasion that he himself, by diverse of his fre^des,
was persuaded to that state. Against which he used many vehement inuectiues and
terms, which Aulus Gellius omitteth, for that he was loath to offend (when
report thereof should be bruted) the nice cares, and loving minds of the
matrones, and dames of that City. Knowing well that both they, and their
successors: would not forgette, reprochefullie to combat, with his spirit
and shadow, when they were not able (being prevented by earthly vermin) by
any means to impeche his corpse, in tomb fast closed and buried. But when I
do remember, how the same was said, and also noised emonges a band of
Heathen souls, whose minds for want of godly skill, could not digest such
heinous blastes, as sounded in a time profane, wherein no sacred voice of
christian lore, was breathed unto redeemed flock: I call to mind that now I
may, in time of grace, right frankelie write, without offense to humble state
of matrone kind, in these our days, inspired with spirit of humble heart,
whose ears no tauntyng talk can griue. Wherefore with blushles face, and
unstaid pen, I mean the words, of that well learned wighte, in open
audience to pronounce, and by this book, to such elected sort for to
declaire. But leth for to offend, as one well bet in marriage schole, I must, a
paena and culpa, forgiveness crave: lest some shreude Heathen dame (for other
doubt I not) do from her grave Al'Arme cry out. And then to fight with buried
ghostes: my manhood will not serve, but by and by with postyng legs, and
fliyng fast for to retire. But doubts here be brought forth, where
doubting cause is none. Gellius therefore in person of the unmarried knight, in
words right few, this sentence of the married state, does utter and proclaim.

O ye Romans, if we could be without wives, then all we should want that
grief. But because nature has so provided, that neither with them we can
live and pass our time conveniently, nor yet by any means be without the^
satisfied, we ought rather to make preparacion, for perpetual health, then for
short pleasure. With which words, diverse of the Romans were displeased, and
found fault with Metellus who (for that he went about, to exhort the people
to marriage) ought not by any means, to confess any griefs and incommodities,
to be in the same. But in these words he seemed rather, to dissuade and
terrify, then to persuade and encourage. But contrarily he ought, rather to
have affirmed no sorrows and perpierities, to be in wedlock, and if perchance
any chanced to be, they were but light, and easy to be borne and suffered,
which for greater commodities and pleasures, might full well be forgotten,
and those that were, happed not through Natures vice, but by the defaulte and
ill behavior of some married folk. How beit, Titus Castritius supposed that
Metellus, spoke well and worthily.

For (said he) a Censor ought to speak like a Censor, a Rhetorician like one
that professed Rhetorike: It is given to Rhetoricians, to use false sentences,
bold, subtle and capcious: if so be, they be likely, and may by any action,
move the hearts of men. Moreover he said, that it was a shame for a
Rhetorician, in an evil matter, to leave out any thing untouched. But truly
Metellus (quod he) is a holy man endued with gravity and fidelity, and that
it was not decent for so honorable a personage, as he was, to speak any thing
to the Roman people, but that he thought to be true, and likely to seem true
to all men: specially sith he entreated of such a matter, as by daiely
knowledge, common experience, and frequented use of life, might well be
comprehended and known. Therefore in giuyng to understand, a grief notorious
to all men, he has deserved by that oracion, a fame of a diligent and faith
full man, because (to be short) he easily and redely persuaded, that a city
can not prospere and continue, without the use of Matrimony, which of all
things is most assured and true. This Titus Castritius was a teacher of
Rhetorike in Rome, and in the same City for declamacion and teaching, was in
greatest reputacion. A man of right great gravity and authority: and of
the Emperor Adrian, for his virtue and learning well esteemed.

Of Lais and Demosthenes.

The.xv. Novel.
PHocion a peripatetique Philosopher, in a book which he made, entitled
Cornucopia, writes this history of Demosthenes and Lais the harlot of
Corinth, saying: That Lais by reason of her excellent beauty, and pleasant
favor demanded for the use of her body, a great sum of money. Unto whom
was resort, of all the rich men of Graecia: but she would not admite them to
that fact, except they would first, give unto her, her demand. The
quantity of which sum was exceeding great, whereof rose the Proverb Non
cuiuis homini contingit, adire Corinthum.

Not every man can well attain
To go to Corinthe town.
He that traueiled to Corinthe to Lais, not able to give and bestow, that
sum upon her, went in vain. To this woman, that noble Philosopher Demosthenes
secretly repaired, praiyng her to give him leave. But she demaundyng of him,
ten thousand denarios (amountyng very nere to three hundred pound of our
money) astonished at the wantonness of the woman, and discoraged with the
greatness of the sum, returned back again, saying. I come not to buy
repentance to dear.

C. Fabritius and Aemilius Consuls of Rome, being promised that king Pyrrhus
for a sum of money should be slain (which was a notable enemy to the
Roman state) advertised Pyrrhus thereof by letters, and of other notable
things, dooen by the the same Fabritius.

The.xvj. Novel.
WHen Pyrrhus King of Epirus, inferred wars upon the Romans, and was come
into Italy: and there had prosperously fought, and achieued the victory of
two or three battles, whereby the Romans were brought to great distress,
and most part of Italy had revolted: one Timochares Ambraciensis, a friend
of King Pyrrhus, secretly repaired to C. Fabritius then Consat, and told him,
if he would give him a reward, he would poison the King, which he said, he
might easily bring to pass because his sons, at table waited upon King
Pyrrhus cup. Hereof Fabritius wrote to the Senate, requiryng their advise.
The Senate depeached Ambassadors to the King commaundyng them to say nothing
of Timochares, but to give the king warnyng, circumspectly to look well about
him, to prevent such treason, as by those that were nerest him might be
attempted. Thus much is written in the history of Valerius Antiates. But
Quadrigarius in the third book, writes that it was one Nicias, and not
Timochates, that went to Fabritius, and that those Ambassadors, were not sent
by the Senate, but by the Consuls, and that the king rendered praise and thanks
to the Romans, restoryng to them, all the prisoners, which he had taken. The
Consuls that time, were C. Fabritius and Aemilius. The tenor of which letters
then sent to king Pyrrhus, the said Cl. Quadrigarius affirms to be this. The
Roman Consuls send salutacions to king Pyrrhus. We for thine injuries,
displeasures and wrongs justly offended, for the valiaunte stomachs
remainyng in us, do study and endeavor like enemies, to continue wars upon
thee. But it seems good unto us, for the love we bear to our faith, and for
common exaumple, to wish thee well to do, whom by arms we be not able to
vanquishe. There came unto us one Nicias, thy familiar friend, to demand
reward of us, if secretly he did kill thee: which we utterly denied, and
required him for that fact, to look for no reward at our hands. Whereupon
we thought good, to give thee advertisement hereof, lest if any such thing
did chance, the Cities should not think, that we were privy to the fact.
For we delight not, to fight with gifts, rewards, and treason. Thou in the
mean time, except thou take heed, art like to die. Farewell. This was the
ancient order emonges the Romans, that never were pleased, by the cowardly
overthrow of other, to win fame and glory. And because I read an other
excellent history of the same Fabritius, I have thought good, to add the same
to this Novel. When peace was concluded, between the Romans and the Samnites:
the Ambassadors of the Samnites, repaired upon a time to this Fabritius, who
after they had remembered unto him, diverse and sundry things, frendie dooen in
their behalf, they offered unto him for reward, a great sum of money,
intreatyng him to receive the same. Which the Samnites did (as the report
was) because they saw, that he wanted many things, for the furniture of his
house, and maintenance of the same, which thought, not to be sufficiently
decent for his estate and calling. Which Fabricius perceiving with his bare
hands, he touched his ears and eyes, and then stroaked his face downewarde,
his noase, his mouth and throat, and the rest of his body, to the bottom of
his bealie, answeryng the Ambassadors in this wise.

That whiles he was able to rule and govern all those members, which he
touched, he was sure to lack nothing. Wherefore (quod he) these members,
which be profitable and necessary for my use, will not suffer me to receive
this money, whereof they know I have no need. Hereby reprehendyng the foolish
endeavor of these Samnites, in offryng to him a bribe, which he was never
accustomed to take for any cause, what soever he accomplished. Still showing
himself a man sincere and incorrupte

A schole master, traitorously rendryng the noble men's sons of Faleria, to
the hands of Camillus was well acquitted and rewarded, for his pains and
labor.

The.xvij. Novel.
Wars were addressed by the Romans, against the Falisques (a people of
Italy, the ruins of the chief city whereof, do yet appear six miles from
Viterba) and an army conscribed and sent thither, under the conducte of Furius
Camillus. The Falisques upon the approach of the Romans, were constrained to
retire within their city, thinkyng the same to be their most assured refuge.
And they to continue their siege, encamped a mile from the same, and determined
thoroughly to besiege the same, which in deed had like to have been of very
long continuance, except fortune had given to the Roman Captain, for his
tried and well approved valiaunce, victory in time which chanced after this
manner. It was a custom emo^ges the Falisques (observed also in these our
days) to have their children instructed by one schole master, and him also to
use for their guide, and companion in all games and pastymes. Emonges them
there was a Schole master, which taught noble men's sons. Who in the time
of peace, teaching those children, and vsyng for their exercise, to lead them
abroad in the fields, kept still that order, for all the wars before the
gates, sometime with short walks, sometime with longer for their disportes.
And continuyng variety of talk with those children, longer then he was wont
to do: at le^gthe he brought them to the Roman camp, even to the Lent of
Camillus, hopyng thereby (by like) to have been well welcomed, and liberally
rewarded, saying to Camillus, as detestable words as the fact was traitorous
and wicked, which was in effect. That he was come with that present unto him,
to yield those children into his hands, whose parents were the principal of
that city: And thereby knew for certainty, that the city would surrender.
Camillus seeing this fact, and hearing those words, said unto him. Thou art
not come (villane) to a people and captain, with this thy traitorous offer,
semblable to thy self. We have no alliau^ce with the Falisques, confirmed by
compacte, or human promise, but amity whereunto, nature does bind us, is
and shall be for evermore between us. War so well as peace, has his law and
right. Which we have learned to observe with no less Justice, then
constauncie. We make no wars against children, whom we spare, who^soeuer we
invade or take any cities: But against armed men we fight, yea, and against
such, as without offense, or prouocacion of our parts, assailed the Romans
ca^pe at the siege of the Veiens. Thou have vanquished them so much as lies
in thee, with a new kind of victory achieued by treason. But I will subdue
them by policy of the Romans, by virtue, endeavor, and arms even as I did
the Veiens. When he had spoken those words: He caused this traitorous schole
master, to be striped stark naked, and bindyng his hands behind him,
delivered him to the children, to carry back again, with rods in their
hands, to whippe him home to the city. When he was in this order returned,
the people of the city flocked together, to see this sight. Then the
magistrates assembled in counsel, upon this strange occasion, and where
before they were incensed, with merueilous wrath and fury, rather desirous of
utter overthrow, then peace: Now their minds were quite altered, and peace
universally demanded. The fidelity of the Romans, and justice of Camillus,
both in Forum and Court was celebrated, and by general assent, Ambassadors
were sent into the camp to Camillus, and from thence by Camillus suffera^ce,
to the Senate at Rome, of purpose to yield them selves to their government,
who being brought before the Senate, spoke these words.

We (fathers conscripte) vanquished by you and your captain, where at neither
God nor man ought to be offended, have yielded our selves to you, thinkyng that
we shall live more happy, and better contented under your gouernemente, then
by our own jaws and liberties, a thing that makes the victor more glorious,
and praise worthy, then any other. By the success of these wars, two
wholesome examples, be manifested to mankind. Ye do prefer faith in wars,
before certain victory, and wre induced by that faith, have of our own
accord, presented victory unto you. We be at your commandment: send
thither commissioners, to receive our weapons, our pledges, and our city,
which stands with the gates wide open. We hope well, that neither, ye shall
have occasion to be misco^tented with our fidelity, nor we offended with your
government and Empire. For which fact, great thanks were attributed to
Camillus, both by the Falisques and Romans.

Here appeared the face and true Image, of that great virtue Justice, wherewith
this noble man was truly affected. His noble nature was not able to abide, any
traitorous fact, done by unnatural citizens, toward their own country. No
ingratitude of his own country men, could withdraw his nature, from the
zeal and love he bare to his country. His condempnacion by unkind Apuleius
Saturninus the Tribune, for which he fled to Ardea, could not let or impeach
his magnanimity, from giving the Galls an overthrow when they had sacked
Rome, and sharply besieged the Capitole: who in his absence (created Dictator)
by gatheryng together such Romans as were fled, unawares set upon the
covetous Galls, as they were in controversy, for payment of a golden sum of
money, and thereby restored his country to liberty. Wherefore, worthily might
he be entitled, with the honorable name of a second Romulus. For as Romulus
was the first builder, and peopler of that city, so was Camillus, the
vindicator and deliverer of the same.

The History of Papyrius Praetextatus.

THe same history is written by Cato, in an oracion which he made to his
soldiers against Galba, conteinyng in effects as follows. The Senators of
Rome used before this time, to enter into the Senate house with their soonnes,
Praetextatis, that is, with long robes guarded about the skirtes with purple
silk. When the Senate debated of grave and weighty matters, they ever
differred the same, till the next day, forbiddyng that those causes, should
not be published, before they were thoroughly decreed. The mother of the young
gentleman Papyrius, which had been with his father in the Senate house, asked
of him, what the fathers had done in the Senate house that day. Papyrius
answered, that in any wise he ought not, to utter the secrets of the same. The
mother more desirous to know, then she was before, went about by fair means,
foul words, and correction, to understand the secrets of the Senate, and
the cause why the same were kept so sile^t. Wherefore she more earnestly
endeavored, to learn the same of her son. The young manne by compulsion of
his mother, took occasion to invent a pleasant and merry lie, in this wise.
Mother (quod he), the Senate does deliberate and consult, whether it be more
commodious, and profitable for the common wealth, that one manne should have
it was wives: or whether one wife, should have two husbands. When the old
Lady heard this she was abashed, and in fearful wise, goes to the other
Ladies and matrones of Rome, tellyng them, where about their husbands did
consulte. The next day the women flocked together, in great trains and in
lamentable wise, repaired to the Senate, besechyng the^ that one woman, might
rather be married to two husbands, then two wives to one man. The Senators
entryng into the Court, marueiled what toies were in the women's heads, to make
that demand. The young gentleman Papyrius stepped forth, declaryng how
importunate his mother was, to know whereupon they consulted the day before,
and therefore he devised that fained tale, which he had imagined, to pacify
her desire. The Senators hearing and perceiuyng, his good and honest
disposicio^, greatly commended and extolled, his fidelity and wit. How beit,
they made a law, that from that time forth, none of their sons, should come
into the house with their father, but only Papyrius. Who afterward received
the surname of Praetextatus, to honor and beautify his name, and notable
wisdom, in keeping secrets, and holdyng his peace, in the time of that
youthly age.

How Plutarche did beat his man, and of pretty talk touching signs of anger.

The.xix. Novel.
AVlus Gellius demaundyng of the Philosophier Taurus, whether a wiseman could
be angry: Taurus after he had disputed much of that affection, turned to
Gellius and said This is mine opinion of the angry man. But what the
Philosophier Plutarche judges thereof, I think it not much out of the way,
if I tell thee his mind. Plutarche had a bondeman, which was an unthrifty and
wicked verlet, but given to learning, and to disputacion of Philosophy, who^
upon a time he did beat, making him to put of his coat, and to be whipped,
for what offense I know not. He began to beat him. The fellow cried out,
that he had deserved no cause, why he ought to be so beaten. At length in
continuance of his beatyng, he gave over his criyng and complaints, and began
to utter earnest and serious words, saying. It was not Plutarche the
Philosopher, that did beat him, he said it was a shame for Plutarche to be
angry, and how he had heard him, many times dispute of that vice of anger, and
that he had written a goodly book thereof, with many such words. Why ( q
Plutarche) with gentle and quiet debatyng of the matter. Thou lubbor, do I
seine to be angry with thee? Do thou either by any countenance, by my
talk, by my color, or words, perceive that I am angry? Neither mine eyes be
fierce, nor my mouth troubled I cry not out a loud, I chaufe not in rage or
fume, I speak no unseemly words, whereof I take repentance, I tremble not.
At which be signs and tokens of anger. Which pretty notes of that unseemly
passion, ought to minister to all men, occasion to avoid that vice.

A pretty tale of Aesope, of the Lark.

The.xx. Novel.
AEsope of Phrygia is not unworthily demed a wise man. Forsomuche as he
admonishes and persuades, those things that be profitable: not severely or
imperiously as Philosophers do, but devising pretty and pleasant fables, he
indueth the minds of me^ with wholesome and provident instruction. As by this
fable of the birds neste, he pretily and aptly does premonishe, that the
hope and confidence of things, which man goes about to bring to pass, ought
to be fixed and trusted, to none other but to himself. A little bird (says
he) called the Lark, builds her neste in the Wheat field, and her birds
begin to fledge and feather, when the Wheat waxes ripe. By chance the same
Lark did make her nest in a piece of Wheat that was sonest ready to be reaped.
So that when the Wheat was yelowe, her little ones were not fledged. Therefore
fliyng abroad to seek meat, for her birds, she warned them, that if there
fortuned any news to be dooen or spoken, in her absence they should give
diligent heed thereunto, and to tell her when she returned. Within a while
after the Owner of the corn called the young man, his son, unto him (saying)
do thou see this Wheat now ripe, and ready to to be cut lackyng nothing,
but help to reap the same? Get thee therefore to morrow in the morning (so
sone as the day does break) unto my fre^des and neighbors, and pray them
to come and help me in with this Corn. And so departed. When the dame was
returned, the young Larkes in tremblyng and fearful wise, peping and chirping
about their mother, prayed her to make have to seek some other place. For the
owner of the Wheat had sent for his friends, to be there the next day by
times, to reap the same. Their dame badde them to be of good chere: for if the
owner (quod she) do refer it to his friends: I am sure the Wheat shall not
be cut down to morrow. Therefore we shall not need to fear. The next day
the dame flewe abroad again for food, and the owner waited at the hour
appoincted for his friends. The Son was up, whose beams shone hot, and
nothing was done, his fre^des came not. Then he said again to his son me
think soonne (quod he) our neighbonrs be slepers and tarry long. Go, call I
pray thee, our kinsfolk and cosins, that they may help us to morrow betimes,
which saying the young Larkes ones again a fraied told their dame when she
returned. The dame still persuaded them to be of good chere, and not to
fear. For kinsfolk in these days, be so slack to do good deeds (quod
she) and to help their own stock and kindred, that they be loath to take
pains, specially at so short and sudden warnyng: Nevertheless fair birds
(quod she) harken what shall be said again, and tell me. The next morning the
old Lark went for the again, for food and forage, and the kinsfolk and
Cosins came not, according to the owners request. At length the owner said to
his son. A dieu my friends and kinsmenne. To morrow in the morenyng, bring
hither two Sickles, the one for me, and the other for thy self. And we with
our own hands, will cut down this Wheat. The mother Lark, hearing her
young ones tell this tale at her return: Ye Marie my babes (quod she) now it
is time to be gone. For the thing whereof the owner has spoken so long, shall
now be dooen in deed, sith he purposes to do the same himself, and
trusts to none other. Whereupon the Lark took up her young ones, and went to
inhabit in some other place And the corn accordingly, was cut down by the
owner. This fable Aesope reports, premonishyng men to beware of light hope,
and vain trust, to be reposed in fre^des and kinsfolk. And the same Q.
Ennius in his Satyrs, very elegantly in trim verses has set out, whereof
the two last, worthy to be had in heart and memory, I have thought good to
remember.

Always fixed fast in breast,
in prompt and ready wise:
This Proverb old and true,
a sentence of the wise.
The thing do not expecte.
by friends for to achieue:
Which thou thy self can do,
thy self for to relieve.
A merry ieste, uttered by Hannibal, to king Antiochus.

The.xxj. Novel.
ANtiochus making great preparacion and furniture, to infer war upon the
Romans, decked his army with Silver and Golden ansignes and Pendentes,
wherein he had plenty of wagons, chariottes, and Elephantes with towers, his
band of horsemen glittered gloriously, with Golden bridles, trappers, barbes,
and such like. The king beholding, in glorious and reioysyng wise, his gaie
and beautiful army: looked toward Hannibal, and said.

How say thou Hannibal. Think thou that these things be not enough and
sufficient, to match with the Romans? Hanibal mocking and deluding, the
cowardnesse and weakness of his soldiers, cladde in those precious and
costly furnitures, said. All these things be enough, and enough again for
the Romans, although they were the most covetous men of the world. The king
understood Hannibal, that he had meant of the number of his soldiers, and of
their bravery. But he meant of the pray and spoite, which the Romans should
win and get.

The merneilous knowledge of a Lion, being acquainted with a man, called
Androdus.

The.xxij. Novel.
THere chanced to be certain plays and games at Rome, where were many
monstrous and cruel beasts. But emonges all those beasts, the hugeness and
cruel aspectes of the Lions, were had in greatest wonder, specially of one.
Which Lion was of an huge and great bigness, having a terrible voice, his
claws stretched for the, his bristelles and hear upright, beholding with his
fierce and dedly eyes, all the multitude sta^dyng by. There was brought in, to
fight with the Lion, emonges all the rest, one Androdus a Dacian borne, the
bondsman of a great personage, of the Consular order whom the Lion beholding a
far of, suddenly stood still. And afterward by little and little, in gentle
sort he came unto the man, as though he had known him: Waggyng his tail like
a Spaniell, fawnyng upon his master: and licked the hands and legs of the
poor fellow, which for fear was almost dead. This Androdus perceiuyng the
flateries of this fierce beast, recovered comfort, and earnestly viewed and
marked the Lion. Then they began to enter into mutual acquaintance, one
reioysyng at an others metyng. Upon which strange event, the people raised
great shoutes and acclamacio^s: whereupon Androdus was called before the
Emperor, and demanded the cause, why that most cruel beast did in that sort,
fawn and favor him above all other.

Androdus told a merueilous and strange history of the cause thereof,
saying. If it please your Majesty, when my Lord and Master, did by the
office of Proconsul govern Africa, I through his causeless stripes, and daily
whippings, was forced to run away. And when I had gotten pardon of the
lieutena^t of that country, to remain there, I withdrew my self in to the
deserts and void places. And lacking meat to ease the pain of hunger, I
determined by some means, to seek mine own death. It chanced about the
midde of the day, when the Son was fervent and hot, I entered into a Cave,
which was far from habitacion, very wide and large. Whereunto within a while
after this Lion resorted, having one of his feet bloody, and hurt. For pain
whereof, he vttred much moan and sorrow, bewailyng the grief, and anguishe of
the sore. When I saw the Lion, my heart began to quake for fear, but being
come in, as it were into his own habitacion (for so it should appear)
perceiuyng me to go about to hide my self a far of, he like a mild and
gentle beast came unto me, holdyng up his foot, reachyng the same to me, as
though he desired help, and relief at my hands. Where withal I plucked out
of his foot a stubbe, which stuck between the paws thereof, and taking a
little salve, which I had in my bosom, I thruste it into the bottom of the
wound, and diligently without any further fear, I dried the wound, and wiped
away the blood thereof. Wherewith the Lion being eased, restyng his foot in
my hands, he lay down to refreshe himself. From that day during the space
of three years, the Lion and I continued together, and lived with like fare.
The lattest and best morselles of those beasts, which he prayed, he did ever
bring me into the cave which meat because I had no fire, I roasted in the
heat of the Son, and did eat the same with good stomach. But when I began
to wax weary of that kind of meat, upon a time the Lion being abroad, I
forsook the cave, and traueilyng almost the space of three days, I was espied
and taken of the souldious, and brought home to my master out of Africa to
Rome: who immediately condemned me to be devoured of beasts. And now I
perceive that this Lion since I left his company is taken, and does
acquit that good turn and cure, which I showed him them. The people hearing
the discourse of this strange fact, made suite that the fellow might be
pardoned, and set at liberty: and the Lion by general voice was given unto
him, for reward. Afterward Androdus carried the Lion, abroad the City in a
little cord, and had much money given unto him, and the Lion was decked and
beautified with flowers. And every manne that met them, did use to say. This
is the Lion the friend of this man, and this is the man, the Physician of the
Lion.

A pretty disputacion of the Philosopher Phanorines, to persuade a woman, not
to put forth her child to Nursse, but to nourishe it her self with her own
Milk.

The.xxiij. Novel.
IT was told to the Philosopher Phauorinus, that the wife of one of his
Sectators and scholars, was brought a bed of a son: Let us go (quod
Phauorinus) to visit the childwife, and to gratulate the father, for the joy
of his soonne. When they were entered the house, after he had saluted the
goodman, according to the custom, he asked the wife how she did, and prayed
the Gods to send her good footyng, and then inquired of her travel, and
painful panges, when he understood that her travel was great, and her body
weak with watchyng, howbeeit somewhat comforted with sleep, which she had
taken, he determined to enter into further talk. I doubt not gossip ( q he)
but that you purpose to nourishe your son your self. The mother of the woman
hearing him say so, began to pray pardon, and said, that her daughter might
not both sustain pain in the birthe, and also trouble to nourishe it her
self. I pray thee mother, said Phauorinus, to suffer thy daughter to be the
hole and entire mother of her own son. What kind of half and vnperperfect
mothers be they, which so sone as they be delivered, do against nature by
and by, thrust the child a way from them? Can they nourishe with their own
blood, the thing which they see not, and will they not vouchsaufe, to bestow
their Milk upon that, which is now a living creature, criyng out before their
faces for the mothers help and duty? O thou unkind woman, dooest thou think
that Nature has given thee two breasts, for nothing else but to beautify and
adorn thy body, and not to give suck to thy children? In like sort many
prodigious and monstrous women, have dried up and extinguished, that most
sacred fountain of the body, the educatour of ma^kinde, not without peril of
their persons, as though the same were a disgracyng of their beauty and
comeliness. The like also some do attempt, by devises and subtle secrecies
to extrude their concepcions, that the swellyng of their body, might not
irrugate and wrinckle their faces, and that their painful labors and great
burdeins, do not make them look old in their youthly days. And like as it
is generally to be abborred, that man in his first beginnings, (when he is
fashioned, and inspired with life, and in the hands of the cunnyng and wise
woman daine Nature) should be killed and slain: eue^ so with not much less
detestacion it is to be had and co^pted, when he is perfect and borne, and the
child of thine own blood, to be deprived from his due sustenaunce. But it is
no matter (will some say) with whose Milk he be nourced, so he receive Milk
and live. The like may be said to that man, which is so dull, in perceiuyng
the providence of Nature, that what matter had it been in whose body, and with
whose blood, he himself had been formed and brought into light. Has not she
which now respireth, and with beauty waxes white and fake, the same bloodde
now in her breasts, which was before remainyng in her womb: Is not the
wisdom of Nature manifest in this thing, that after the cunnyng woorkeman the
bloodde, has framed in the inward parts, every body of man, straight way
when the time of birthe approaches, the same bloodde infudeth himself into the
upper parts, and is ready to nourishe the rudimentes of life and light,
offryng acquaintance and familier sustinance to the new borne? Wherefore in
vain is not that report and belief, that like as the force and Nature of the
generation seed, is able to shape the similitudes of the mind and body, even
so the qualities and properties of the Milk, do avail to like effect.
Which thing is not only marked in men, but also in brute beasts. For if
Kiddes be sockled up with Ewes Milk, and Lambs with Goats, the Wolle of
the one will grow more rough and hard, and the hear of the other more tender
and soft. In trees also and fruictes, there is for the most part, a greater
force and power, in the nature of the soil, and Water where these grow, either
for the pruning and planting then there is, if strange impes and seed be
grifted and sown there. And many times you see, that a fruictfull tree, carried
and set in an other place, decaseth, through the nature of the ground more
barren. What reason is this then, to corrupt the noble Nature of this borne
child, whose body and mind, is well begone with natural beginnings, and
to infecte the same with the degenerate food of strange Milk. Specially if
she to whom you shall put forth this child to give suck, be either a bond
and serulte woman, and (as commonly it chances) of a foreign and barbarous
nation, be she wicked, ill favored, whorishe, or dronken. For diverse times
without difference, children be put forth to such Nursses, whose honestitie
and conditions, in the time of the puttyng for the, be utterly unknown. Shall
we suffer therefore, this our infaunt to be corrupted, with pestiferous Milk?
Shall we abide a new nature and spirit, to be renewed in his mind and body,
derived from that which is most vile and wicked? Much like to the same,
which many times we see and wonder, how diverse children borne of chaste and
honest women, have bodies and qualities, far discrepant from their honest
parents. Wherefore very trimly and cunningly Maro following Homeres verses
does safe: speaking of the cruel nature of Achilles.

Sir Peleus that gentle kinght,
was not thy father sure,
Nor yet thy dame fair Thetis was,
whose grace the Gods did lure.
The raging Sea, and stony rocks,
did bring thee forth to light:
Thy nature is so bloody bent:
so fierce in cruel fight.
He did not herein reprehende the birthe of Achilles, but the nature of the
cruel and savage beast, that brought him up: for he added this of his own.

And the Hircan Tigres did give him suck. And truly the condition of the
Noursse, and nature of the Milk, disposes almost the greater part of the
childs condition, which (notwithstanding the fathers seed, and creacion of
the body and mind, within the mothers womb) does now in the begiunyng of
his nouriture, configurate and frame a new disposition in him. Moreover who
can say the contrary, but that such women as put their children from them,
deliueryng the^ to be nourced of other, do cut of, naie, rather do wipe a
way and extinguishe, that band and increase of mind and affection, that
does consociate and join in nature, the parents toward their children. For
when the child is put forth to an other place, and removed from the mothers
sight, the vigor and tenderness of her affection, is by little ant little
forgotten, and out of memory, and the derest care of her tender babe, grows
to utter silence. The sendyng away of the child to an other Nourice, is not
much inferior to the forgetfulness that chances, when death does take it
away. Again, the affection, the love, and familiarity of the child, is
prone to her that gives it suck. And so as it is enidently seen in them that
be put forth, the child takes no knowledge, or desire of the own mother,
that brought it forth. Therefore, when the elements and beginnings of
natural pletie and love, be ones abandoned and defaced, how soever such
children, in that sort brought up, shall seem to love the parents, yet for
the most part, it is no pure and natural affection, but rather a supposed
and Civil love. Thus this noble Philosopher, gives counsel to every good
mother, not to be ashamed or grieved, to bring up her child with her own
Milk, after her greatest pain past, whom before with her own bloudde, she
disdained not to feed in her body.

Of Sertorius a noble Roman captain.

The.xxiiij. Novel.
LIke as in a good Captain, chosen out by any Prince and Monarche, to serve
in his wars and exploites, manhood and valiance is to be desired and wished:
eue^ so in the same a politic mind, to forecast and preuente, as well the
saustie and good government of his own charge, as the anoiauuce of the enemy
is to be desired. Cicero in his oracion Prolege Manilia, affirms four
things, meet to be in a General or Lieutenaunte. That is to say. Scientia
rei militaris, virtus, authoritas, foelicitas, Knowledge of warfare, Manhood,
Authority, and good Fortune. Kuowledge and experience, in choice of his
soldiers, in trainyng the ignoraunte, in lodgyng the camp, in politic order
how to dispose the scoutes and watch, in making the approach, and defense of
the army lodged, with other necessary orders incident to the same. In
manhood, boldly to adventure, warely to retire, patiently to suffer
misfortune, hardly to lie, sparely to sare, stoutly to abide storms and
cold weather. In authority, wisely to govern, gently to speak, justly to
threaten, deservedly to punish, mercifully to forgive, liberally to divide,
and lovingly to be obeyed. And in felicity and good success: To honor God: To
be faithful to the Prince, to preuente the enemy, not to triumph before the
victory. To be constaunt in froward fortune, and coragious in extremity. Al
which and many other, are very meet and requisite in him, that shall be put in
trust, by his sovereign Lord or Lady, to adventure the painful charge of a
Deputy, General, Lieutenaunt, or Captain. Whereof, or in the chiefest of
the same this noble gentleman Sertorius a captain of the Roman City, in
time of Marius and Sylla: when the city of Rome were at civil discensio^, had
great skill and knowledge. For besides his experience in the wars (as
Plutarche sateth in his life) he was very abstinent from pleasures, and
continente in other disorders, arare thing in men of his calling. But
because I purpose not to stay, in the full discourse of his virtues, and
qualities, I mean but to touch in this Novel, so much as Aulus Gellius (in
whom I am now co^uersant) does of him make remembrance. Referring the studious
reader, desirous to know the state of his life and doings to the plentiful
recorders of such memorable and worthy personages: Plutarche de vitis
illustrium, and Appianus de civilly Romanoru^ bello. Which being Greek
aucthours, be very eloquently translated into the Latin, the one by
Gulielmus Xilander. 1561. and the other by Sigismundus Gelenius 1554. This
Sertorius was of a pregnaunte wit, and therewithal a noble captain, very
skillful in the use and gouernmente of an army. In distress and hard
adventures, he practiced for policy, to make lies to his soldiers, to prove
if they could prevail. He used cou^terfaicte letters, to imagine dreams, and
to confer false religions, to try if those things could serve his turn,
in comfortyng and encouraging his soldiers. Emonges all the factes of
Sertorius, this in suyng was very notable and famous. A white Stagge of
exceeding beauty, and lively swiftness, was given unto him by a Lusitanian:
He persuaded every man, that the same was delivered unto him by the Gods, and
how the Goddess Diana had inspired that beast, to admonish and teach, what
was meet and profitable. And when he went about, to cause his soldiers, to
adventure any hard and difficile exploit: he affirmed, that the Stagge, had
given him warnyng thereof, which they universally believed, and willingly
obeyed, as though the same, had been sent down from the gods in deed. The
same Stagge upon a time, when news came, that thene mie had made incursion,
into his camp, amassed with the haste and turmoile, ran away and hid him
self in a Marishe hard adioynyng. Afterward being sought for, he was
supposed to be dead. Within few days after, tidings was brought to
Sertorius that the Stagge was found. The messenger was commanded by him to
hold his peace, and threatened to be punished, if he did disclose it. The next
day, the same messenger was appoincted suddenly, to bring the Stagge into
the place, where he and his friends did co^sulte together. When they were
assembled he told the^ how the day after that he had lost his Stagge, he
dreamed, that he was come again, and according to his custom, told him what
was needful to be done. Then Sertorius making a sign, to have the order
fulfiilled, which he had given the day before, by and by the stagge brake
into the Chaumber. Wherewithal a great shoute was made, and an admiracion
raised of that chance. Which credulity of the barbarous cositries served
Sertorius turn, in his weighty affairs. A worthy matter also, is to be
remembered of him, that no soldier that ever served him, of those uncivil
countrees (that took his part) did ueuer reuolte or forsake him, although
those kind of people be most inconsta^t.

Of the books of Sybilla.

The.xxv. Novel.
IN ancient Chronicles, these things appear in memory, touching the books of
Sybilla. A strange and unknown old woman, repaired to the Roman king
Tarquinius Superbus, bearyng in her arms nine books, which she said were
divine Oracles, and offered them to be sold. Tarquinius demanded the price.
The woman asked a wonderful some. The king making semblaunce, as though the
old woman toted, began to laughe. Then she got fire in a chasing dishe, and
burned three books of the nine. She asked the king again, if he would have
the six for that price, whereat the king laughed in more ample sort, saying:
that the old woman no doubt did date in deed. By and by the burned other
three, humbly demasidyng the king the like question, if he would buy the rest
for that price. Wherevpo^ the king more earnestly gave heed to her request,
thinkyng the constant demaundes of the woman not to be in vain, brought the
three books that remained for no less price, then was required for the whole.
Therewithal the woman departed from Tarquinius, and was never seen after.
These books were kept in the capitole at Rome, whereunto the Romans resorted,
when they purposed to ask counsalle of the Gods. A good example for wisemen
to beware, how they despise or neglecte ancient books and monnmentes. Many the
like in this realm have been defaced, found in Religious houses, which no
doubt would have conduced great utility and profit both to the common
wealth and country, if they had been reserved and kept, which books by the
ignoraunte have been torn and raised, to the great grief of those that be
learned, and of them that aspire to learning and virtue.

I difference and contronersie betwenes Master and a scholar so subtle, that
the Judges could not give sentence.

The.xxvj. Novel.
Diverse things be written, which although they seem of little importance yet
they be witty and comfortable to recreate honest minds, and deserve to be
had in remembrance Emonges which Aulus Gellius (who reports ten of the former
Histories, selected out of his book De noctibus atticis) remembers this
pretty contrauersie. In Athenes there was a young man, called Euathlus, who
being desirous to be an Orator, and a pleadyng advocate, to the intent he might
postulate, according to the accustomed manner of Athenes in those dates:
accorded upon a price, with a renewned Orator named Protagoras, that he should
instruct him that art, for a price agreed upon between them, upon condition
that the Scholar should pay, the one half of the money before hand unto his
Master, and the rest at such time, as he should prove to be an Advocate, so
well instructed, that at the first matter, which he did plead, he should
obtain sentence on his side, and gain for his labor and industry. But if
sentence were pronounced against him, he should not be bound to pay the same.
Upon this conclusion, the Master taught him with great diligence, the
vttermoste of his knowledge in that art. The Scholar again learned and
retained his teaching, with great pro^ptitude and readiness of wit. When
Protagoras had taught him, the vttermoste of his knowledge: The scholar
Euathlus, to defraude him of the rest of his money, determined never to be
Advocate, whose craft Protagoras perceiuyng, cited him by write, to appear
before the Judge, to answer the rest of the bargain. When they were both
come in the Judges presence, Protagoras spoke to his scholar in this wise.
Euathlus, the bargain between us, thou can not chose but confess and
acknowledge, which in effect is this. It was agreed, that I should teach
thee, the art of pleadyng, and in the first matter which thou did
pronounce, and sentence given on thy part, thou should pay me the other
half of the money (for the first moitie I received before hand) and now to
avoid the satisfaction thereof (although thou know, that I have full well
deserved it) thou to defraude me of my duty, refusest to be an advocate. But
I will tell thee, this thy determinacion is but vain and frustrate: for I have
entangled thee in such nets, that thou canste not escape: but by one mean
or other, thou shalt be forced to pay me. For if the Judge do condemn
thee, then mangre thy head thou shall be constrained: and if contrary wise,
sentence be given on thy side, thou shalt be likewise bound to pay me, by
thy very covenant, sitheus thou art bound thereunto, when thou pleadest
first, and sentence given in thy behalf. Do now then what thou list, for in
fine thou shall be forced to pay me, in despite of thy teeth. All the
assistauntes held with Protagoras, affirming his suite to be very reasonable.
Notwithstanding Euathlus with a bold spirit, answered for himself in this
manner. Sir Protagoras it seems unto you, that I am convicted, but stay a
while, and give me leave to speak: and then you shall perceive in what whise,
I will co^founde your argument. Here you have brought your action against me,
whereof I trust upon my reasonable answer, before the Judges, to be
discharged. For if by this your pleadyng, by circumstaunces and art of an
Orator, which you have used in all your discourse: the matter shall fall so
out, as sentence be given on your side, then the bargain made between us, is
void and of none effect, because I losyng the profit of my first pleadyng,
wherein by our agreement, sentence should be given on my behalf, the same
bargain is not accomplished. For you should be paid the moitie of the money
behind, with that co^moditia, which I did gain by my first pleadyng: For
which cause, there is no reason, but I must be discharged of your demand.
After this debatyng of the matter, the Judges wated the arguments of both
parts, which seemed so doubtful unto them, that knowing not how to give
sentence, they suspended the process.

The same Aulus Gellius, recites an other like question, which he refers
to Pliny, as the first aucthor thereof. There was a law (says he) in a
certain city, that what soever he were, that committed any valiant fact of
arms, the thing that he demanded, what soeuert were, should be granted unto
him It chanced that a certain person did this worthy act, and required that
a man's wife (whom he dearly loved) should be given unto him: which wife by
force and virtue of the law, was accordingly delivered. But afterward the
man, from whom his wife was taken, did the like fact, and demanding his wife
to be redeliuered unto him again, said unto him that had her, if thou will
observe the law, thou must of force deliver unto me, my wife, but if thou do
not like the law, thou ought yet to render her unto me, as mine own. The
other answered him in like sort. If thou observe the law, this woman is mine,
for I have first won her, by the law: but if thou do not approve the law,
thou have no right to demand her, she now being mine.

Seleueus king of Asia, gave his wife to his own soonne in marriage, being his
mother in law: who so fervently did love her, that he was like to die. Which
by a discrete and wise muencion, was discovered to Seleucus by a Phisician.

The.xxvij. Novel.
ALthough the wise Philosopher Plutarche, elegantly and brieslie describes
this history, in the life of Demetrius: yet because Bandello aptly and more at
large does discourse the same, I thought good to apply my yenne to his style.
Who says that Seleucus king of Babylone, a man very victorious in battaill,
was emonges the successors of Alexander the great, the most happy and
fortunate: He had a son called by his fathers name Antiochus. After the
deceasse of his wife, his son increased, and gave great hope of valiaunce in
future time, to become a valiante gentleman, worthy of such a father. And
being arrived to.xxiiij. years of age: It chanced that his father fill in love
with a very fair young gentlewoman, descended a great parentage (called
Stratonica) whom he took to wife, and made her Queen, and by her had one
son. Antiochus seeing his mother in law, to be (besides her great beauty) a
courteous and gentle Lady, began to be very amourous of her, whose heart was so
set on fire (without apparante show) that incredible it is to express the
love that he bare her. And yet he thought that love to be unnatural, because
she was his fathers wife, and therefore durfte not discover it to any man. And
the more secret he kept it, the more the heat began to boil and consume
him. But because he saw that love had fixed so deep footyng, that he was not
well able to retire, he determined after long sorrow and great turmoile, to seek
some quiet haue^, to rest his weather beaten bark, that had been tossed with
the waves of pensife and sorrowful cogitacions. His father had many Kingdoms
and provinces innumerable under his Empire. At whose hands Antiochus craved
license, to visit some of them, for his disporte and recreacio^, of purpose to
prove, if he could avoid that unseasonable love, wherewith his heart was
surprised. But he was no sooner out of his fathers house, but his heart was
vexed with greater torments then before, being deprived from the sight of
fair Stratonica, whose presence did better content him, then all the
pleasures, and sportes of the world. Nevertheless, desirous to vanquishe his
indurate affections, he continued abroad for a certain time, during which
space, unable to quench the fire, he led a more desolate and troublesome
life, then he did before. In the end victorious love, took him prisoner, and
carried him home again to his fathers house. Who seeing the great love that his
father bare to his wife, and the joyful time that he spent with fair
Stratonica, tra^sported into many careful panges, many times he complained to
himself in this wise. Am I Antiochus the son of Seleucus? Am I he that my
father loves so well, honoreth so much, and estemeth better then all his
realms and dominions? Alas. If I be Antiochus in deed, the son of so loving
a father, where is the duetifull love, and bounden reverence, that I ought to
bear unto him? Is this the duty of a son toward his father? Ah wretch
and caitife that I am. Whether has gross affection, vain hope, and blind
love carried me? Can love be so blind? Shall I be so void of sense, that I
know not my mother in law, from an other woman, who loves me no less, and
entertaigneth me so well, as if she were mine own mother, that labored with
painful pangues, to bring me into light? Which being true, as it is most
true, why then do I love her, naie rather more then love her? Why do I seek
after her? What mean I to hope for her? Why do I precepitate my self so
fo^dlie, into the snares of blind and deceiptfull love and into the trappe of
deceiptfull hope? Can I not perceive that these desires, these unstaid
appetites, and unbridled affections, do proceed from that which is dishonest?
I se well enough that the way I take, leads me into great inconvenience.
And what reproach should I sustain, if this unreasonable love, were made
common to the world? Ought not I rather to suffer infamous death, then to see
my father deprived of such a wife, whom he so derely loves? I will give over
this unseemly love, and reuerting my mind to some other wight, I will
accomplish the duty of a good and loving son toward his father. Reasonyng
thus with himself, he determined wholly to give over his enterprise. And he
had no sooner purposed so to do, but suddenly the beauty of the Lady appeared,
as it were in a vision, before the face of his mind, and felt the flames to
grow so hot, that he upon his knees, craved a thousand pardons of the
loving God, for the abandoning of his gentle enterprise. And therewithal
contrary imaginacions began to rise, which so contended with mutual
resistaunce, that they forced him thus to say. Shall not I love this Lady,
because she is my fathers wife? Shall not I prosecute my suite, for all that
she is my mother in law? Ah coward, faintharted, and worthy to be crouned a
prince of folly, if therefore I should give over my former mind. Love
prescribes no such law to her suitors, as policy does to manne. Love
commands the brother to love the sister, love makes the daughter so love
the father, the brother his brothers wife, and many times the mother her son
in law: which being lawful to other, is it not lawful to me? If my father
being and old man, whose nature wareth cold, has not forgotten the laws of
love, in loving her whom I love: Shall I being a young man, subject to love,
and inflamed with his passions, be blamed for loving her? And as I were not
blame warthie, if I loved one that were not my fathers wife, so must I accuse
Fortune, for that she gave her not to wife to an other man, rather then to my
father, because I love her, and would have loved her, whose wife so ever she
had been. Whose beauty (to say ye troth is such) whose grace and
comeliness, so excellent, that she is worthy to be received, honored, and
worshipped of all the world, I think it then convenient for me, to pursue my
determinacio^, and to serve her above all other. Thus this miserable lover,
trauersyng in several minds, and deludyng his own fancy, changed his mind
a thousand times in an hour. In the end after infinite disputacions to
himself, he gave place to reason, considering the great disconnenience, that
would ensue his disordinate love. And yet not able to give it over: And
determinyng rather to die, then to yield to such wicked love, or to discover
the same to any manne. By little and little he consumed, as fletyng Snow
against the warm Son: wherewith he came to such feeble state, that he could
neither sleep nor eat, and was compelled to keep his bed, in such wise, that
with superfluous pain, he was brought to meruellous debilitie. Which his
father perceiuyng, that loved him very tenderite, conceived great grief and
sorrow. And sent for Erasistratus (which was a very excellent Physician, and
of great estimacion) who^ very instantly he prayed, diligently to look unto
his soonne, and to provide for him such remedy, as was conueniente for the
greatness of his disease. Erasistratus viewyng and beholding, all the parts
of the young gentlemannes body, and perceiuyng no sign of sickness, either in
his urine, or other accidente, whereby he could judge his body to be diseased:
after many discourses, gave judgment, that the same infirmity proceeded from
some passion of the mind, which shortly would cost him his life. Whereof he
advertised Seleucus. Who loving his son, after a fatherly manner, and
specially, because he was endued with virtue and good conditions, was
afflicted with unspeakable grief. The young ge^tleman, was a merueilous trumne
yongeman, so actife and valiant, as any that lived in his time, and
therewithal very beautiful and comely. Which made him to be beloved of
all men. His father was continually in his chamber, and the queen her self,
oftentimes visited him, and with her own hands, served him with meats and
drinks, which because I am no Phisteio^, I know not whether the fame did the
young man any pleasure, or whether it did him hurt or good. But I suppose, that
her sight was joyful unto him, as of her, in whom he had placed all his
comfort, all his hope, quietness, and delight. But beholding before his eyes
so many times, the beauty of her, who^ so greatly he desired to enjoy,
hearing her speak, that was the occasion of his death, and receiuyng service
of meats, and drinks at her hands, whom he loved better, then the balls of
his eyes: unto whom he durst not make any request or prayer, whether his
grief surmounted all other, and therefore continually pined and consumed, I
think if of reason to be believed. And who doubts, but that he felyng
himself, to be touched with those her delicate hands, and seeing her to sit
by him, and so many times for his sake, to fetch so many sighs, and with
such sweet words to bid him, bet of good there, and that if he wanted any
thing to tell her, and prayed him with pleasant words, to call for that he
lacked, and that for his sake she would gladly accomplish his desire, who
doubts I say, but he was marvelously tormented, with a thousand
cogitacions, now conceiuyng hope, and by and by despair, and still concludyng
with himself, rather to die, then to manifest his love? And if it be a grief to
all young men (be they never of so mean, and base condition) in their
youthlie time, to lose their life, what shall we think of Antiochus, that
being a yongman of fresh and flourishyng age, the son of a rich and mighty
king, that looked if he might escape after the death of his father to be heir
of al did willingly crave death, of that small disease. I am assured that his
sorrow was infinite. Antiochus then beaten, with pity, with love, with hope,
with desire, with fatherly reverence, and with a thousand other things (like
a ship tossed in the deep seas) by little and little, began to grow extremely
sick. Erasistratus that saw his body hole and sound, but his mind
greuouslie weakened, and the same vanquished with sundry passions. After he
had with himself considered, this strange case, he for co^clusio^ found out,
that the young man was sick through love, and for none other cause. Moreover he
thought that many times, wise and grave men through, Ire, hatred, disdain,
malinconie, and other affections, could easily feign and dissemble their
passions, but love if it be kept secret, does by the close keeping thereof
greater hurt, then if it be made manifest. And albeit that of Antiochus, he
could not learn the cause of his love yet after that imaginacion was entered
into his hedde: he purposed to find it out, by continual abode with him, and
by great diligence, to observe and mark all his actions: and above all to
take heed to the mutacion of his poulses, and whereupon, their beatyng did
alter. This deliberacion purposed, he sat down by the bed side, and took
Antiochus by the arm, and held him fast, where the poulses ordinarily do
beat. It chanced at that instant, that the queen Stratonica entered into the
chamber, whom, so sone as the young man saw, coming toward him, suddenly
the poulce which were weak and feeble, began to revive, through mutacion of
the blood. Erasistratus feelyng the renforcyng of the poulce, and to prove how
long it would continewe, moved not at the coming of the Queen but still held
his fingers, upon the beatyng of the poulces. So long as the Queen contiuned in
the chamber, the beatyng was quick and lively, but when she departed, it
ceased, and the wonted weakness of the poulces, returned. Not long after, the
queen came again into the chamber, who was no sooner espied by Antiochus, but
that his poulces, received vigor, and began to leap and so still continued.
When she departed. the force and vigor of the poulce departed also. The noble
Physician seeing this mutacion, and that still it chanced upon the presence of
the Queen: he thought that he had found out, the occasion of Antiochus
sickness. But he determined better to mark the same, the next day, to be
more assured. The morrow after Erasistratus, sat down again by the young
gentleman, and took him again by the arm, but his poulce made no mocio^ at
all. The king came to se his son, and yet for all that his poulses were
still. And behold the Queen, came no sooner in, but suddenly they reuined, and
yielded such lively mouyng, as if you would have said: yonder is she that
sets my heart on fire. Behold where she is, that is my life and death. Then
Erasistratus, was well assured and certain, that Antiochus was fervently
inflamed with his mother in law: but that shame constrained him to conceal,
the hot firebrandes that tormented him: and to keep them close and secret.
Certified of this opinion, before he would open the matter, he considered what
way were best, to give knowledge thereof to king Seleucus. And when he had well
debated of this matter, he devised this way. He knew that Seleucus loved his
wife beyond measure, and also that Antiochus was so dear unto him, as his own
life. Whereupon he thus said unto the king. Noble Seleucus, thy son is
affected with a grievous malady, and that (which is worse) I deem his
sickness to be incurable. At which words the sorrowful father, began to
utter pitiful lame^tacion, and bitterly to complain of Fortune. To whom the
Physician said. If it please yon (my lord) to understand the occasion of his
disease. This it is. The malady that affects, and languisheth your soonne,
is Love: and the love of such a woman, which except he enjoy, there is no
remedy, but death. Alas (quod the King, weepyng with bitter tears) and what
woman is she, but that I may procure her for him, which am king of all Asia,
and may with entreaty, money, gifts, or other policy whatsoever, make her
obediente, and willing to my soonnes request. Tell me only the name of the
woman, that I may provide for my soonnes health, yea though it cost me all my
goods and realm to, if other wise she can not be gotten. For if he die, what
shall I do with my kingdom? Whereunto Erasistratus answered. If it like your
grace, your son is in love with my wife, but because that love, seems unto
him disco^uenient, he dares not to manifest the same for shame, but rather
wishes to die, then to open his mind. Howbeit, I by certain evident signs,
do wei perceive it. When Seleucus heard these words, he said. O
Erasistratus, thou being so worthy a man, to whom few in goodness and
humility, be comparable, so dear and well-beloved of me, and bears the brute,
to be the very haven, and harborough of wisdom, will thou not save my son,
which is a young man, now upon the flower of his youth, and most worthy of
life: for whom the Empire of all Asia, is worthelie reserved? O Erasistratus,
the soonne of thy friend Seleucus, is thy king, who through love and silence,
is at the poineted death, thou see that for modesty, and honesty sake, at
this his last and doubtful passage, he had rather chose to die, then by
speaking to offend thee, and will thou not help him? This his silence, this
discrecion, that his reverence, which he shows ought to move thee to
compassion. Think my well-beloved Erasistratus that if he love ardently, that he
was forced to love. For undoubtedly, if he could not love, he would do the
best he could, not to love, yea, and all his endeavor to resist it. But who is
able to prescribe laws to Love? Love I know, not only forces men, but also
commands the immortal Gods, and when they be not able to resist him,
what can man's policy prevail? Wherefore, who knows not what pity mine
own dear Antiochus does deserve? Who being constrained, can none otherwise
do. But to be silent in love, is a most evident sign, of a noble and rare
virtue. Dispose thy mind therefore, to help my soonne. For I assure thee that
if thou do not love the life of Antiochus, Seleucus life must needs be
hated of thee. He can not be hurt, but I likewise must be hurted.

The wise Physician seeing that his advise, came to pass as he thought before,
and that Seleucus was so instant upon him, for the health of his son, the
better to prove his mind, and his intencion, spoke unto him in this wise. It
is a common saying, my most dradde sovereign Lord, that a man when he is
hole, ca^ give to him that is sick and weak, very good counsel. You
persuade me to give my well-beloved wife, to another man, and to forgo her, whom
I most fervently do love, and in lackyng her, my life also must fail. If
you do take from me my wife, you take with her my life. Doubtful it is my
lord, if Antiochus pour son were in love with the Queen Stratonica, your
graces wife, whether you would be so liberal unto him of her, as you would
that I should be of mine. I would it were the pleasure of the Gods
(suddenly answered Seleucus) that he were in love with my best beloved
Stratonica, I swear unto thee, by the reverence that I have always borne, to
the honorable memory, of my father Antiochus, and my graundfather Seleucus:
and I swear by all the sacred Gods, that frelie and forthwith, I would
render my wife into his hands (although she be the dearest beloved unto me) in
such wise, as all the world should know, what the duty of a good and
loving father, ought to be to such a sone, as my entirely beloved Antiochus:
who (if I be not deceived) is most worthy of all help and succor. Alas
this his great virtue, in concealing that notable passion, as an earnest
affection of love, is it not worthy to be consecrated, to eternal memory? Is
he not worthy of all help and comfort? Does he not deserve to be pitied,
and lamented of all the whole world? Truly he is worsse then a cruel enemy,
naie he is rather, more fierce and unnatural, then a savage beast, that at
such moderate behavior, as my son uses, will not take compassion. Many
other words he spoke, manifestly declaryng, that he for the health of his
soonne, would not only stick, to bestow his wife, but also willingly his
life, for his preseruacion. Wherefore the Physician thought it not good, any
longer to keep secret the thing: but took the king a side and said unto him
in this wise. The health of your soonne (my dear Lord and sovereign) is not
in my hands, but the same rests in you, and in your wife Stratonica, whom
(as I, by certain signs do manifestly know) he arde^tly does love. Your
grace now does know, from hencefor the what to do, if his life be dear unto
you. And tellyng the king, the manner of such love, he joyfully took his leave.
The king now doubted but of one thing, which was, how to persuade his son,
to take Stratonica to wife, and how to exhort his wife, to take his son to
husband. But it chanced for diverse causes, that easelie enough he persuaded
the^ both. And perchance, Stratonica made a good exchau^ge, by taking a young
man, to forsake him that was old. After Seleucus had made the accord between
his wife and his soonne, he caused all his army to assemble, which was very
great. To who^ he saed in this manner. My dear and loving souldious, which
sith the death of Alexander the great, have (with me) achieued a thousand
glorious enterprises: I think it meet and convenient, that ye be partakers
of that, which I purpose to bring to pass. Ye do know that under mine
Empire, I have.lxxij. kingdoms, and that I being an old man, am not able to
attend so great a charge: wherefore (loving companions) I purpose to deliver
and rid you from grief of idleness, and my self from trouble and toil,
reseruyng to me only so much as lies between the Sea, and the river
Euphrates. All the rest of my dominions, I give to my soonne Antiochus, upon
whom in marriage, I have bestowed my wife Stratonica, which thing ought to
content you, because my will and pleasure is such. And when he had told
them, the love and sickness of his son, and the discrete devise of the gentle
Phisician, in the presence of a his army, the marriage was celebrated, between
Stratonica and Antiochus: Afterward he crouned the^ both King and Queen of
Asia, and with royal pomp and triumph, the desired marriage was consummate.
The army hearing, and seeing these things, very highly commended, the
piety of the father toward his son. Antiochus then continued with his
well-beloved wife in joy and quietness, living together in great felicity.
This was not he, that for matters of Aegipte, did make wars with the Romans:
But he that only inferred wars upon the Galatians, which out of Europa
passed into Asia, but of which country he chased them, and overcame the^. Of
this Antiochus came Seleucus, which was father of Antiochus, surnamed the
great, that attempted very notable wars against the Romans, and not his
great graundfather, that married his mother in law. Finally this Seleucus (of
whom I recompte this history) by giuyng his wife to his son, did accomplish
a miraculous act, and worthy (in deed) of sempiternall remembrance, and
greatly to be commended therefore, who although he had achiued infinite
victories over his enemies: Yet there was none of them all so great, as the
victory of him self, and his passions. For certainly Seleucus did vanquishe
his own appetites, depriuyng himself of his wife, whom he loved and esteemed,
above all things in the world.

Of the strange and beastly nature of Timon of Athenes enemy to mankind,
with his death, burial, and Epitaphe.

The.xxviij. Novel.
ALL the beasts of the world, do apply themselfes to other beasts of
their kind Timon of Athenes only excepted, of whose strange nature,
Plutarche is astonished, in the life of Marcus Antonius, Plato and Aristophanes,
do report his merueilous nature, because he was a man but by shape only,
in qualities, he was the Capital enemy of mankind, which he confessed
frankly, utterly to abhor and hate. He dwelte alone, in a little cabane in
the fields, not far from Athenes: separated from all neighbors and
company, he never went to the city, or to any other habitable place, except
he were constrained. He could not abide any man's company and conversation:
he was never seen to go, to any man's house, ne yet would suffer them to come
to him. At the same time there was in Athenes, an other of like quality,
called Apemantus, of the very same nature, different from the natural kind
of man, and lodged likewise in the midst of the fields. On a day they
two being alone together at dinner. Apemantus said unto him: O Timon, what a
pleasant feast is this, and what a merry company are we, being no more but
thou and I. Naie (quod Timon) it would be a merry banquette in deed, if there
were none hers but my self. Wherein he showed, how like a beast (in deed) he
was. For he could not abide any other manne, being not able to suffer the
company of him, which was of like nature. And if by chance he happened to go
to Athenes, it was only to speak to Alcibiades, who then was an excellent
Captain there, whereat many did marvel: And therefore Apemantus demanded
of him, why he spoke to no man, but to Alcibiades. I speak to him some times,
said Timon, because I know that by his occasion, the Atheniens shall receive
great hurt and trouble. Which words many times, he told to Alcibiades
himself. He had a garden, adioynyng to his house in the fields, wherein was a
Fig tree, whereupon many desperate men ordinarily, did hang themselfes:
In place whereof, he purposed to set up a house, and therefore was forced to
cut it down, for which cause he went to Athenes, and in the Markette place,
he called the people about him, saying: that he had news to tell them. When
the people understood, that he was about to make a discourse unto them,
which was wont to speak to no man, they merueiled, and the citizens on
every part of the city, ran to hear him: to whom he said, that he
purposed to cut down his Fig tree, to build a house upon the place where
it stood. Wherefore (quod he) if there be any man emonges you all in this
company, that is disposed to hang himself, let him come betymes, before it be
cut down. Having thus bestowed his charity emonges the people, he returned
to his lodging, where he lived a certain time after, without alteracio^ of
nature. And because that nature chasiged not in his life time, he would not
suffer that death should alter, or vary the same. For like as he lived a
beastly and chorlishe life, even so he required to have his funeral, dooen
after that manner. By his last will he ordained himself to be interred upon the
sea shore, that the waves and surges might beat, and vex his dead carcas.
Yea, and that if it were possible, his desire was to be buried in the depth of
the Sea: causyng an Epitaphe to be made, wherein was discribed the qualities of
his brutishe life. Plutarche also reports an other to be made by Calimachus:
much like to that, which Timon made himself, whose own sounds to this
effect in English verse.

My wretched caitife days,
expired now and past:
My carren corpse intered here,
A plurality of husbands
is fast in ground:
In waltryng waves, of swellyng
Seas by surges cast,
My name if thou desire,
The Gods thee, do confound.
The marriage of a man and woman, he being the husband of.xx. wives: and she
the wife of xxii. husbands.

The.xxix. Novel.
MEn commonly do reprove the honor of widows, because they being twice or
thrice wedded, do marie again. And albeit by outward apparaunce, they which
so blame them, seem to have reason, yet no man ought to judge the secrecy
of the heart. Marriage is holy, and ought to be permitted, and therefore by any
means, not to be reproved: Although it can not be denied, but that the chaste
life is most perfect, notwithstanding, that perfection, in nothing does
diminishe the other. The widow mariyng again, does not offend God by
marriage, and to the world she commits the lest fault. And because many old
and ancient widows in these days, may not after three or four marriages,
be dismayed and terrified from that state: I will recite an history, avouched
by S. Hierome, in an Epistle Ad Gerontiam viduam de monogamia, whom for his
holiness and virtue, we ought to believe. It is also pretelie set forth, by
Pietro Messia de Seuiglia, an excellent aucthour, a gentleman of Spain, in
the.xxxiiii. Chapter of the first part of his work, called La Selua di
vary Lezzioni. Saint Hierome says, that in the time of Pope Damasus, he
saw and knew in Rome, one woman lawfully married to.xxij. men, and was the
widow of.xxii. husbands. There was also a man, which had had.xx. wives,
and was then the widower of the.xx. Both which being free, and of equal
state and condition, they made suit one to other: and that either of them
might prove, which should be the victor, in buriyng each other, they married
together, which marriage was in great admiracion emonges the Romans. Who
mused, which of them should die first, promisyng that at the funeral, they
would beautify the corpse, both with their presence, and also with tokens of
victory. It chanced (sore against her will I dare say) that the woman died
first. At the celebracion of whose burial: all the Roman husbands laid
their heads together, how they might exornate and garnishe the same. They
concluded, to go before the corpse, with Laurel garlandes upon their beads,
singyng verses of praise, for the obteinyng of such a victorious conqueste.
Now where the women went, I can not tell. For I find written, that populus
totius vrbis praecedebat feretrum, where populus, as I take it, signifies the
whole route of me^ and women. And yet I think, women's hearts would tell scorn
to go before. Therefore I think they came behind like mourners, bearyng
branches without leaves, their beads in their hands, praiyng for all
christen souls. But giuyng women leave, to mourn for such an overthrow, I
would wish all my friends that be widows (if in her conscience, she can find
in her heart) to follow the noble Roman matrone and widow called Annia, who
(when her friends and familiers, exhorted her to marie again, because she was
young and beautiful) answered that she would not. For, quod she, if it be my
fortune to have a good man, as I had before, I shall still be afraied, lest
death should take him away. But if it be my chance to match with an ill
manne, how can I be able quietly to bear that, having had so good a husband
before. Declaryng thereby, that being ones well matched, great heed ought to
be taken, how to chose the next, least in making a hasty choice, leisure for
repentance do follow.

How Melchisedeche a Jew by tellyng a pretty tale of three Rings, saved his
life.

The.xxx. Novel.
SAladine whose valiaunce was so great, that not only the same of a base
man, made him Souldan of Babilone, but also thereby he wa^ne diverse victories
over the Saracene Rings and Christianes, having through his manifold wars
and magnificent triumphs, expended all his treasure, and by reason of one
accident, which he had to do: lacking a great some of money, he knew not
where to have the same so ready, as he had occasion to employ it. Who called to
remembrance a rich Jew, called Melchisedech, that lent out money for
interest in Alexandria and thought he had to serve his turn when he would,
but he was so coueteous, that with his good will, he would not do it, and to
force him he was very loathe. Howbeit compelled by necessity, he cast his
wills about him, to find a means, how the Jew might serve his turn, and
found out a slight and way by a colorable force. And causyng him to be
called before him, interteignyng him familierly, he made him to sit down by
him, and said to him these words. Sir, I do learn by report of diverse
men, that you are very wise and well learned, in things touchyug God. For
which cause I would gladly know of you which of the three laws, you judge
to be most true. The Iewishe law, the Saracene law, or the Christian law?
The Jew which in deed was very wise, perceived well that Saladine went
about to intrappe him in words, to raise some quarrel against him, thought
that it was not good for him, to praise one of those laws more then an other,
that Saladine might take no advantage of him. Wherefore, to make a wise and
discrete answer, that he might not be taken, he sharpened his wits, and
suddenly there came into his remembrance this answer. My lord, the question
which you have proponed unto me is excellent, and to declare unto you that
which I know, I must tell you a tale, which if it shall please you to hear,
is this. I do remember (if I be not deceived) that many times I have heard
tell, how upon a time, there was a noble manne, which was very rich, and had
emo^ges his other treasure, a very beautiful ring, of great price and
estimacion: which for the valor and beauty, he was very desirous
perpetually, to leave unto his successors: who willed and ordained that the
same soonne, which should have that ring, by the gift of his father, after
his decease, should be taken and reputed for his heir, and should be
honored, and magnified of the rest, as the chiefest. He to whom the same ringe
was left, observed semblable order in his posterity, and did the like, that
his predecessor had done before him. In short time this ring succeeded from
hand to hand, to many successors. And last of all, it came to the hands of
one that had three goodly sons, virtuous and very obedient to their father.
Who for that cause loved them al indifferently and in equal manner, which
knowinge the order for the disposicion of that Ringe, curiouse to be best
esteemed and beloved, every of them, prayed their Father so well as they could
(which then was aged) that when he died he would give him the Ringe. The good
man which loved one no better then another, knew not which of them to chose,
to whom be might dispose it, and thought best, to promise the same to every
of them, to satisfy all three. And secretly he procured an excellent
Goldesmith to make two other, which were so like unto the first, that the
owner himself uneaths knew one from the other. And when he was upon his
death bed he secretly gave to every of his sons a Ring. Who after the
death of their father desirouse to enter the Inheritance and honor, one going
about to displace another, every of them to declare what title he had to enjoy
the same, brought forth his Ringe. And the Ringes were found so like, that
the true ringe could not be known. Therefore the process for the title
remained in doubt and yet continues till this day. And so I say unto you my
Lord of the three laws given by God the father to those three people whereof
you have made the question, every of those nations thinks to inioie the
inheritance of God, and to observe the true law and his commandments, but
which of them has the law, that remains in doubt like the question of the
Ringes. Saladine perceiuyng that Melchisedech knew right well how to avoid
the snare, which he had laid before his feet: Determined therefore to open
and disclose unto him his necessity, to prove if he would do him that
pleasur: And so he did tellinge him his intent and meaning, if he had not made
him that wise answer. The Jew liberally lent him the some of money that he
demanded: Which Saladine holy repaied unto him again, besides other very
great rewards that he gave him, vsinge him still for his friend, and
afterward maintained him next his person, in great and honorable state.

One celled Gugllelmo Borsiere with certain words well placed taunted the
couetouse life of Ermino Crimaldi.

The.xxxj. Novel.
Long since there was a gentle man at Genoua called M. Ermino Grimaldi, who
as all men judged, was the richest of possessions, and ready money, and therein
far excelled all other citizens which then were known in all Italy. And as
he did surpass all other Italians in substances and wealth, even so in avarice
and wretchedness he surmounted beyond measure the most couetouse and miserable
of the world. For he kept his purse so close that he did not only neglect
to do good to other, but also to himself, by sparinge in many things
necessary for his own person: he endured much hardness in meat and drink
because he would spend nothing contrary to the commen custom of the
Geneuois. Who be wont very nobly and honorablely to maintain themselves in
apparel and fare. For which cause his surname Grimaldi deservedly was given
unto him, and was called of every man nothing else but M. Ermino the
Couetouse. It chanced in those days that as he by spendinge nothing
multiplied his goods. There arrived at Genoua an honest gentleman and well
spoken, a Courtier of good interteigmente, named Guglielmo Borsiere (nothing
like the Courtiers in these days that to there great shame, for there corrupt
and rude manners would be called and reputed gentlemen, which in deed may be
counted asses, brought up and noseled rather in the filthy conditions of the
vilest men, then in courts). In those days Courtiers occupied themselfes, in
treatinge of peace and endinge of quarrels that bred strife and dissension
among gentlemen or in making of Marriages, amities, and attonementes, and
with merry words and pleasant, did recreate troubled minds, and exhilarated
with pastimes other Courtiers, with sharp reprehencions like fathers rebukinge
the lives of the wicked, and that for little gain or reward. Where the
Courtiers of our age do employ there time, in ill reports one of another and
do disseminate debate and strife, uttering a thousand unhappy and vile
words, yea and that (which is woorst of all) in common audience. There manner
is to reprove and check one another of there injuries, shames and mischiefs,
true and untrue, and with false and deceiuable flatteries and inventions to
commit against Gentlemen villanouse and ungracious factes. He is also the
proprest man and best beloved of some great men of ill conditions and of them
best rewarded that can use the vilest and most abominable talk, or can do
semblable deeds: which is a great shame and selaundre to the world in these
days, proof whereof is evident enough for that the virtues past, have
forsaken the present sort which live in the ordure and filth of all vices:
But to proceed in that which I have begone (although upon lust occasion I
have a little more digressed then I thought) I say that the foresaid Guglielmo
Borsiere was honored and visited of the gentelmen of Genoua, who making his
abode for a certain time in the City and hearing tell of the misery and
covetousness of M. Ermino had great desire to see him. M. Ermino hearing tell
that this Guglielmo Borsiere was an excellent man and having in him (although
a couetouse man) some spark of ge^tilite, he received him with friendly
words and good countenance, entering into communication with him of diverse
and sundry matters, and in talking brought him with certain other Citizens to
one of his houses which was very fair and new, where (after he had showed
him his house) he said unto him. Oh M. Guglielmo you that have seen and
heard many things can you show unto me any new devise never seen before,
that I may cause the same to be painted in my hall: To whom M. Guglielmo
(hearing his fond talk) answered. Sir I ca^ show you nothing but that
which has been known before except Nesinges or such like. But if it please
you sir I will gladly teach you one, which I think you never saw. M. Ermino
glad to here of that, said. I pray you sir tell me what it is, (not
thinckinge he would have made that answer). To whom master Guglielmo redely
said. Cause the figure of Liberality to be painted. At which answer master
Ermino was so suddenly ashamed that he was forced to change his mind in a
manner clean contrary to his accustomed use, and said. Master Guglielmo I
will cause the same to be painted in such wise, as neither you nor any man
else shall have occasion justly to obiecte the same against me. And from
that time forth (such was the force of that taunte) he was the most
liberal and bountiful Gentleman that dwelt in Genoua, and one that honored
strangers and Citizens more then ever any did in his time.

Master Alberto of Bologna by pleasant answer made a Gentlewoman to blushe,
which had thought to have put him out of countenance, in tellinge him that he
was in love with her.

The.xxxij. Novel.
NOt many years paste their was at Bologna a notable Phisician, renoumed
through out the whole world, called Master Alberto, who being old, almost.
lx. years of age, had such an excellent wit, that although natural heat
was expired in his body, yet he disdained not to conceive some amorouse flames
of love. Saying at a banquet a very fair gentlewoman a widow called (as some
say) Madonna Margherita de Ghisiheri, she pleased his fancy so well, that he
fixed her so fast in the siege of his remembrance, as if he had been a young
man of ripe and youthly years. In such wise as that night, he could take no
rest, if the day before, he had not seen the fair and beautiful face of
this fair gentlewoman. For which cause sometimes a foot, and sometimes on
horseback, as he thought best, he continually used to pass before her
lodginge, which was the cause that she and diverse other gentlewomen did mark
thoccasion of his often passinge to and fro that way. And many times they
lested and dalied amongst them selfs to see a man of such years and
experience to be in love, thinckinge that the displeasant passion of love,
could fallen no hold but in the fond minds of young people and no where
else. Wherefore Master Alberto daily passinge to and fro by the house of that
gentlewoman, it chanced upon holy day, that she sittinge with other dames
before her door, and saying Master Alberto a far of cominge toward them,
they all determined curteousely to receive him, and reverently to salute him,
and afterward merely to talk and sport of his love, which accordingly they
did. The gentlewomen risinge up they brought him into a Court, of air fresh
and pleasant, where they caused to be brought forth excellent wines and
comfites, and in the end with many cheerful nd pleasant words they asked
him how it was possible, he could be in love with that faier gentlewoman
specially since many fair and trim yongemen did love her. Master Alberto
perceiuinge himself touched and gesled at, very honestly answered with smilyng
countenance. Mastres No wise man what so ever he be ought to marvel why I am
in love, chiefly with you, because your beauty and woorthines does well
deserve the same. And although that naturally the forces which be incident to
exercises of Love, do find in old men, good will therefore is not in them
deprived, nor the judgment in knowledge, in that which ought to be beloved. But
because they have more knowledge then young men, therefore by nature they better
know the quality of Love. The hope that moves me an old man to love you, that
is so well beloved of young me^, is this: I have many times been conversant in
places where I have seen gentlewomen for there collation and pleasure after
dinner, oftentimes to eat lupines and lekes and albeit that in the leke, there
is nothing good, yet the hedde thereof is less hurtefull, and most pleasant to
the mouth, whereof generally (through a folish lust) ye hold the hedde in
your hand and chawe the leaves, which not only be cuel and naught, but also
be of an ill favored smell and favor. And what do I know (mistres) if in the
choice of your friends ye do the like? Which if ye do, no doubt it is I,
whom you have chosen, and have forsaken all other. This gentlewoman sometime
ashamed and blushing with the rest, said Master Alberto, you have full well
and curteousely paid us home, and answered our presumptuouse objection
Notwithstanding I do esteem and accept your amity and love as I ought to
regard the love of a wise and honest personage. And so (mine honesty and
honor saved) all that I have to do you pleasure assuredly is at your
commandment. Therewith all Master Alberto rose up, thanckinge the
gentlewoman, and with much sport and pleasant talk taking his leave of the
company departed. In this manner the gentlewoman giuinge over her scoffs and
tauntes, whereby she thought to put Master Alberto out of concept, was overcome
her self. Where of I (in the name of Panfilo Filostrato and Dioneo,) by way of
entreaty do beseech ye Ladies, Pampinea, Fia^merta, Philomena, and other
gentlewomen, to beware how ye do contriue your hollie day talk, by waste of
words issuing forth your delicate mouths, in carpinge gaudinge and iestinge
at young gentlemen, and specially old men, and Master Alberto of Bologna, that
for love like the grene stalks or graie he dres of lekes, do desire to sauer
your mouths and by honest recreacion and pleasure to gratefie your comely
personages, lest before the banquet be done and all the confites spente, ye
depart with blushinge cheeks with ouermuche weight of Goldesmithes woorks
hanginge down your heads not shaminge to look your mother in the face from
whence you came. I mean the earth: Where dame nature has formed you by comely
grace, and good behavior to be hold each man and to utter pleasant talk
intermixed with honesty and vextue.

Rinaldo of Esti being robbed, arrived at Castle Goglielmo and was succored
of a widow: and restored to his losses, retorninge saufe and sound home to
his own house.

The.xxxiij. Novel.
IN the time of Azzo Marquis of Ferrara their was a Merchant named Rinaldo of
Esti come to Bologna to do certain affairs. Which when he had dispatched,
in retournyng homewardes, it chanced as he departed out of Ferrara, and ridyng
toward Verona, he met certain men on horseback, which seemed to be
marchantes, but in very deed were arrant thieves, and men of ill life and
condition: with who^ he kept company, and with out suspicion what they were,
rode together familiarly talkyng. These good fellows seeing this merchant and
thinkyng that he had money about him, determined to rob him, when they saw
their advantage, and to the intent he should suspect nothing, they rode like
grave men of honest conversation, debatyng with him of honest things, and
faithful, showing themselfes so well as they could, to be lowly and gentle.
Upon which occasion, he thought himself most happy to have met with such
a company, because he and his servant rode together alone. And as they were
in debatyng of diverse matters (as chances in communicacion) they fill in
talk of prayers, that men do make unto God. And one of the thieves (for
they were three in number) said unto Rinaldo. And you gentleman, what prayer
be you accustomed to make, when you ride by the way? To whom Rinaldo answered.
To tell you the truth, I am a man very plain, and rude in those matters, and
I have a few prayers at my fingers ends: such as mine ancestors used
before me. And I let go current. ii.s. for. xxiiii.d. But nevertheless, I
have always used, when I ride by the way, to say in the morning, at my going
forth of my lodgyng, a Pater noster and an Aue Maria, for the soul of ye
father and mother of saint Julian: and afer that, I pray to God and saint
Julian, to send me good lodgyng the night following. And full often in my time I
have found, in traueilyng of Countries many great dangers, all which having
escaped, it has been my fortune always (when night approached) to chance upon
good and honest lodgyng: which makes me sted fastlie believe that saint
Julian (unto whose honor I say the same) has obtained this benefit of God
for me, and I thought that day wherein I neglected to say in the morning
that prayer, I could neither sauflie travel, ne yet at night obtain good
harborough. He that demanded the question, asked him. And have thou said them
this morning? Yea verelie answered Rinaldo. Then he which alredie knew, how
the matter would go, said to himself, thou shalt have enough to do anon, for
if thou have not said them this morning, it may so hap that thou shall lodge
full il this night. And afterward he said, I have likewise traueiled in my
days a great way: And yet I never said those prayers, but I have heard many
men greatly praise them. And yet I could never perceive, but that I have been
well lodged. And peradventure this night you shall prove, which of us two
shall have best lodging, you which have said them, or I which have not said
them. It is most true that I have accustomed, in steed of that prayer, to
say the verse Dirupisti, or the Antheme Intemerata, or the Deprofundis, which
are (as my graunde mother did teach and instruct me) of very great force
and virtue. And speaking thus of diverse things, always ridyng, expectyng the
place and time, to put their wicked intent in effect: It chanced that
approchyng nere to Castelll Guglielmo, when they had passed over a river, these
three thieves, late in the evening in a dark place, did set upon him and
robbed him, dismountyng him from his horse, and left him there in his shurte.
And as they were going away, they said unto him: Go and seek if thy saint
Iulia^, will help thee to good lodging this night, for our saint, will
help us to good. And passing through the River, they went their way. The
servant of Rinaldo, perceiving the thieves set upon his Master (like a
cowarde) helped him nothing at all, but tournyng his bridle, never left
gallopyng, until he came to castle Guglielmo: where because it was night, he
lodged himself in an Inn, whithout any further care for his master. Rinaldo
being still there in his shurte, barefooted and bare legged, in the great
Frost and Snow, not knowing what to do, and seeing night alredie approach,
quaking, and his teethe clacketyng in his head, began to look about him, if he
could see any place there, for him to resort for succor, that he might not die
for cold: but (seeing none at al, because alitle before, the wars had with
fire consumed all things) being sore afflicted for cold, he began to run
toward Castle Guglielmo, not knowing for all that, that his servant was fled
thither: thinkyng that if he might come in, God would send him some succor,
but dark night ouertoke him a good way of, before he culd come to the Castle,
almost by the space of a mile, by which means he arrived there very late,
the gates being shut up, and the bridges drawn, that he could not go in. By
reason whereof, he was very sorowefull and discomforted, lamentably, castyng
his eyes about, to epsy if it were possible, that at the lest he might shroude
himself free from the Snow: and by chance he saw a house, upon the walls of
the Castle, under which he determined to rest himself, till it was day, and
repairing thither, he fofide under the house a door (which was locked) under
which door, he gathered a little straw, that he found there about, and sat
down very heavy and pensife: making his complaint many times unto saint
Julian, saying: that the faith which he reposed in him, had now deceived him.
But saint Julian taking pity upon him, vithout any further delaie, prepared
him a good lodgyng. There dwelled in that Castle a woman, which was a widow,
so fair a person as might be seen, whom the Marquis Azzo loved as his life,
and kept her there for his own pleasure. And the same woman dwelt in that
house, under the porche whereof, Rinaldo was gone to rest himself. And the day
before, by chance the Marquis came thither, to disport himself with her that
night, and in her house had secretly caused a bathe to be made, and
commanded a great supper to be prepared: And all things being ready, and the
goodwife expectyng nothing else, but the commylig of the Marquis. It chanced
that one of his men called at the gates of the Castle, who brought such
news to the Marquis, that suddenly he must ride away. Wherefore he sent
word to the widow, that she should not attend his coming: who not a little
displeased with those news, not knowing what to do, determined to enter into
the Bathe, which was prepared for the Marquis, and when she had supped, to go
to bed. This bathe was hard by the door, where poor Rinaldo was approached.
The widow being in the bathe, bearyng the plaintes and tremblyng voice, made
by Rinaldo, thought it had been the noise of a Storke. Wherefore she called
her maid, and said unto her. Go up, and look over the walls, and see who is
at the door, and know what he would have. The maid, according to her
maistres commandment, the night being somewhat clear, saw Rinaldo sittyng
in his shurt bare legged, shaking for cold, as is before said: whereupon she
asked him, what he was. And Rinaldo, with his teethe shiueryng in his head,
could scarce well speak, or utter a word, and so briefly as he could, he
told her what he was, how and for what purpose he was come thither.
Afterward he piteously began to pray her (if she could) not to suffer him
that night, to sterue there for cold. The maid pitiyng his estate, returned
to her maistres, and told her what she saw: who like wise having compassion
upon him, remembering that she had the keye of the door (which sometimes
served the turn, when the Marquis was disposed secretly to come in) she said
to her maid: go open the door softly. For we have prepared a supper, and
here is no man to eat it. And also here is lodging sufficient to harbor him.
The maid greatly praisyng her maistres for her courtesy, went forth and
opened the door. And when he was let in, they perceived him, to be almost
frosen for cold, saying unto him: dispatche good fellow, go into the Bathe,
being yet hot. Which thing he right willingly did, not, lokyng that he
should be hidden again, and being recomforted, with the warmeth thereof, he
felt himself revived, from death to life. The good wife caused certain
apparel, of her late dead husband, to be searched out for him, and when he
had put them on, they were so mete, as though they had been made of purpose,
and waityng what it should please the good wife to command him, he began
humbly to thank God, and saint Julian, that he was delivered from that evil
night, contrary to his expectacion, and was brought to so good a lodgyng. After
this the faier widow, a little reposyng her self, caused a great fire to be
made, in one of her great chambers, into the which she came, and demanded
her maid, what manner of man he was. Whereto the maid answered, saying:
Maistres, now he is in good apparel, he is a very handsome manne, and seems
to be of good reputacion and honesty. Go thy ways (quod her maistres) and
call him in hither. Bid him come to the fire, and tell him that he shall
suppe with me, for perchance he has eat no meat to night. Rinaldo came into
the chamber, and seeing the widow, made to her great reverence: thankyng her
for her kindness showed unto him. When the widow had seen him, and heard him
speak, perceiuyng him to be such a one, as her maid reported: received him
in courteous wise, causyng him familierly to sit down before the fire. And
demanded what mishappe, brought him to that place. To whom Rinaldo rehearsed
the whole discourse. For she had heard, at the coming of Rinaldo his servant
to the Castle, a report of his robbery, which made her to believe him the
better: She told him also, that his man was come to the town, and how he
might easily find him the next morning. But after meat was served to the
table, Rinaldo and she washed together, and then satte down to supper. He was
a goodly personage, faier and pleasant to behold, young and of good
behavior, upon whom the woman many times did cast her eyes, and liked him
well. To be short, this lecherous lady, burning inwardly with amourous
desire, abused her self with him, in steed of the Marquis. But when the
morning began to show forth her light, the widow to the intent, no suspicion
might be had, gave him certain base and course apparel, and filled his purse
with money, praiyng him to keep it secret, and first told him, which way
he should go to seek his man, lettyng him out at the door, whereat he came
in. Who semyng as though he had traueiled, a great way that morning: When the
gates were opened, went into the castle, and found his servant. Wherefore
puttyng upon him, such apparel as was in his male, and being about to get
up, upon his man's horse, it came to pass, like as it had been a divine
miracle, that the three thieves, which had robbed him the night before, were
taken for doing of an other robbery, which they had committed a little while
after, and were brought to the Castle, and upon their confession, his horse,
apparel, and money were restored to him again, losing nothing but a pair of
garters. Wherefore Rinaldo thankyng God and S. Julian. mounted upon his horse
and returned hole and saufe, to his own house. And the next day, the three
thieves were conveyed forth, to bless the world with their heels.

Three young men having fondly consumed all that they had, became very
poor, whose nephewe (as he returned out of England into Italy, by the way)
fill into acquaintance with an Abbotte whom (upon further familiarity) he
knew to be the king of Englandes daughter, which took him to her husband.
Afterward she restored, his uncles to all their losses, and sent them home in
good state and reputacion.

The.xxxiiij. Novel.
THere was sometime in the city of Florence a knight, called sir Tebaldo, who
as some say, was of the house of Lamberti: and as other affirm, of Agolanti.
But leauyng the variaunce, of whether house he was, true it is, that he was in
that time, a notable, rich and wealthy knight, and had three sons. The
first called Lamberto, the second Tebaldo, and the third Agolante, all fair
and goodly children: and the eldest of them was, not.xviij. years of age. When
the said sir Tebaldo died, to them (as his lawful heirs) he left all his
lands and goods. Who seeing themselfes, to be very rich, in ready money and
possessions, continued their life without gonernement, at their own pleasures,
and without bridle or stay, they began to consume their goods. They kept a
great and francke house, and many Horses of great value, with Dogs and
Hawks, of sundry kinds, and continually kept open house, giuyng liberal
gifts, and obseruyng diverse gestes at Tilt and Torney, doing that thing, that
not only did appertain, and belong to gentlemenne, but also that, which was
incident to the trade and course of youth. They continued not long in this
order, but their substance left them by their father, was very much
consumed. And their revenues (not able to maintain their expenses) began to
decrease, whereupon they were feign, to morgage and sell their inheritance in
such wise, as in the end they grew to extreme poverty. And then penury did
open their eyes in like sort, as before richesse had closed them up. For which
cause Lamberto upon a day, did call his other two brethren unto him, and
told them of what honor their father was, to what value his richesse did
amounte, and now to what poverty they were come, through their disordinate
expenses, giuyng them counsel (so well as he could) that before misery did
grow any further upon them, by sellyng that which was left, they should go
their way. Which they did. And without leave taken of any man, or other
solempnitie, they departed from Florence, and tarried in no place, before they
were arrived in England. Where taking a little house, in the city of London,
they lived with little expenses, and began to lend out their money to usury,
and Fortune was so favorable unto them, by that trade, that in few years,
they had gained a very notable some of money, which made them one after an
other, to retire again to Florence with their substance, where they redeemed a
great part of their inheritance, and bought other land, and so gave
themselves to marriage: continewing nevertheless in England, their money at
interest. They sent thither to be their factour, a young manne their nephewe,
called Alexandro. And they three dwelling still at Florence, began again to
forget to what misery their inordinate expenses, had brought them before. And
albeit they were charged with household, yet they spente out of order, and
without respect. And were of great credit with every Marchaunte: whose
expenses, the money that Alexandro, many times did send home, did help to
supporte for certain years, which was lent out to diverse gentlemen, and
Barons of the country, upon their Castelles, Manours, and other revenues,
whereof was received an incredible profit. In the mean time, the three
brethren spent so largely, that they borrowed money of other, fixyng all their
hope from England. It chanced contrary to the opinion of al men, that wars
happened between the king of England, and one of his sons, which bredde
much division in that Country, some holdyng of one part, and some of an
other. By means whereof, all the manours and morgaged lands, were taken away
from Alexandro, having nothing whereupon any profit did rise. But daily
trustyng, that peace should be concluded, between the father and the son. And
that all things should be surrendered, as well the principal as the interest:
he determined not to depart the country. The three brethren which were at
Florrence, not limityng any order, to their disordinate expenses, grew daily
worsse and worsse. But in process of time, when all hope was past of their
recovery, they lost not only their credit: but the creditors desirous to be
paid, were feign to send the^ to prison. And because their inheritance was
not sufficient, to pay the whole debt, they remained in prison for the rest:
And their wives and children were dispersed, some into the country, and some
hither and thither, out of order, not knowing how to do, but to abide a poor
and miserable life for ever. Alexandro which of long time, tarried for a peace
in England: and seeing that it would not come to pass: and considering with
himself (that over and besides his vain abode, for recovery of his debtes)
that he was in danger of his life, he purposed to return into Italy. And as
he traueiled by the way alone, and departed from Bruges, by fortune he
perceived an Abbot, clothed in white, in like manner about to take his journey,
accompanied with many Monks, and a great train: having much carriage, and
diverse baggages before. After whom rode two old knights, the kinsmenne of
the king, with whom Alexandro entered acquaintance, by reason of former
knowledge, and was received into their company. Alexandro then ridyng with
the^ friendly, demanded what Monks they were that rode before, with so great
a train, and whether they went. To whom one of the knights answered: that he
which rode before, was a young gentle man their kinsman, which was newly
chosen Abbot, of one of the best Abbaies in England. And because he was very
young, and not lawful by the decrees, for such a dignity, they went with him
to Rome, to obtain of the holy father, a dispensacion for his age: and for a
co^firmacion of that dignity. But they willed him to disclose the same to no man. And so this new Abbot, riding sometimes before, and sometimes after, as
we see ordinarily that lords do, when they travel in the country: It
chanced that the Abbot, perceiuyng Alexandro ridyng besides him, which was a
fair young manne, honest, courteous, and familier, who at the first meting, did
so marvelously delight him, as any thing that ever he saw in his life, and
calling him unto him, he began familiarly to talk, and asked what he was,
from whence he came, and whether he went. To whom Alexandro declared liberally
all his state, and satisfied his demand, offryng unto him (although his power
was little) all the service he was able to do. The Abbote hearing his
courteous offer and comely talk, placed in good order, considering more
particulerlie, the state of his affairs, and waiyng with him self, that albeit
his train was small, yet nevertheless he seemed to be a gentleman, and then
pitiyng his mishappes, he recomforted him familiarly, and said unto him, that
he ought daily to live in good hope. For if he were an honest manne, God would
advance him again, not only to that place, from whence Fortune had thrown
him down, but also to greater estimacion, praiyng him that sithe^s he was
going into Thuscane whether he likewise went, that it would please him to
remain in his compaine. Alexandro thanked him humbly of his comfort, and said
unto him that he was ready to imploie himself, where it should please him to
command. The Abbot thus riding (into whose mind new thoughts entered, upon
the sight of Alexandro) It chanced after many days iourneis, they arrived at
a village, that was but meanly furnished with lodgyng. The Abbot desirous to
lodge there: Alexandro entreated him to light at the Inn of an host which
was familiarly known unto him, and caused a chamber to be made ready for
himself, in the worste place of the house. And the Marshall of the Abbottes
lodgings, being alredie come to the Town (which was a man very skillful
in those affairs) he lodged all the train in that village, one here, an other
there, so well as he could. And by that time the Abbot had supped, night was
far spente, and every man repaired to his bed. Alexandro demanded the
host, where he should lie? To whom the host made answer. Of a truth Master
Alexandro I know not: for you see that all my house is so full, that I and my
household, be feign to lie upon the benches: how beit I have certain
garrettes, hard adioynyng to my lord Abbottes chamber, where I may place you
very well, and I will cause my folks to bear thither a pallet, and there if
you please, you may lodge this night. To whom Alexandro said. How shall I go
through the Abbottes chamber, where for the streighte rome in the same not one
of his Monks is able to lie. But if I had known it before, the curteins had
been drawn: I would have caused his Monks to have lien in the garrette, and I
my self would have lodged where they do. Whereunto the host said, it is
dooen now, but (me think) you may if you list lie there so well, as in any
place of the house. The Abbot being a sleep, and the curteins drawn before
him, I will softly and without noise conueie a pallett thithere. Alexandro
perceiuyng that the same might be done, without any anoyaunce to the Abbot,
agreed, and conveyed himself so secretly as he could, through the chamber. The
Abbot which was not a sleep (but gave himself to think and imagine upon his
new desires) heard the words that were spoken, between the host and
Alexandro, and likewise understanding, where Alexandro lay, was very well
content in himself, and began to say. The Lord has sent me a time
favorable, to satisfy my desires: which if I do not now receive,
peradventure the like will never be offered again. Wherefore persuading with
himself, to take that present occasion, and supposing likewise, that every man
was a sleep, he called Alexa^dro so softly as he could, and willed him to come
and lie beside him: who after many excuses, when his clothes were of, came unto
him. The Abbot laiyng his arm over him, began to attempt such amorous toies,
as be accustomed between two lovers: whereof Alexandro merueiled much, and
doubted that the Abbotte being surprised with dishonest love, had called him to
his bed of purpose, to prove him. Which doubt the Abbot (either by
presumption, or some other act dooen by Alexandro) understanding: in
continentlie began to smile, and to put of his shurte which he ware, and
took Alexandros hand, and laid it over his stomach, saying unto him.
Alexandro, cast out of thy mind thy dishonest thought, and feel here the
thing, which I have secret. Alexandro laiyng his hand over the Abbottes
stomach, perceived that he had two breasts, round and hard, the skin
whereof was very fine and neshe, whereby he perceived, that he was a woman,
whom incontinently he embraced, and without looking for any other inuitacio^,
he would have kissed her that she said unto him Before thou approach any
nerer, mark what I shall say unto thee. I am a woman, and not a man, as thou
may perceive, but being departed a maid from my house, I am going to the
Pope, to pray him to place me in marriage. But when I first viewed thee, the
other day, whether it was through thy good fortune, or my mishappe, love
attached me in such wise, as never woman loved manne, as I do thee. And
therefore I do purpose, to take thee for my husband, before all others. But
if thou will not take me to wife, get thee hence, and return to thine own
bed. Alexandro although he knew her not, yet having regard unto the
company, and train that followed her, judged her to be some noble and rich
Lady. On the other part, he saw that she was a personage, right beautiful
and fair, therefore without any further consideracion, he answered. That for
somuche as her pleasure was such he was very well contented. She then sitting
up in her bed, having a little table (wherein the picture of Christ was
painted) endowed him with a ringe, doing the order of espousalles, and
afterward embracing one an other, to their great contentacion and pleasure,
they joyfully continued together that night. And after they had devised, and
concluded thorder and means, to accomplish their affairs, from that time
forth: Alexa^dro so sone as it was day rose, and went out of the chamber,
that way he came in, without knowledge to any man, where he lay that night.
Then right ioifull and glad, he proceeded in his journey, with the Abbotte and
his company, and within few days, arrived at Rome. And when they had
remained there a certain time: The Abbot taking with him, but the two
knights, and Alexandro, went to the Pope: where doing to him their due
reverence, the Abbot began to speak in this wise. Holy father (as your
holiness does better know then any other) every manne that purposes to
live an honest life, ought to avoid (so much as lies in him) all occasions
that may draw him to the contrary. Which to the intent I that am desirous, to
lead an honest life, may fully perform: am secretly fled, and arrived
here, in the habit, wherein you see, with a good portion of the king of
Englandes treasure, who is my father: that your holiness, may bestow me in
Marriage, for so much as my father, would give me to wife (which am a young
gentlewoman as you see) to the Scottishe king, a very rich and wealthy
Prince. And his old age was not so much, the occasion of my departure, as the
fear which I conceived (through the frailty of my youth, to be married unto
him) to commit a thing, that should be contrary to the law of God, and the
honor of the blood royal of my father. And in coming hitherwardes, being in
this deep deliberacion with my self, almighty God, who only knows
assuredly, what is needful and necessary for us all, did place before mine
eyes (through his gracious mercy, as I trust) him that he thinks meet to
be my husband, which is this young gentleman (poinetyng to Alexandro) whom
you see standing besides me. The honesty and worthiness of whom, is well able
to match with any great lady, how honorable so ever she be although
peradventure, the nobility of his bloudde is not so excellent as that, which
proceeds from the royal and princely stock. Him then have I chosen to be my
husband, him I will have and none other, whatsoever my father shall faie, or
any other to the contrary. Wherefore the principal occasion, that moved me to
come hither, is now dispatched. But I will acco^plishe and perform the rest of
my voyage, as well to visit the holy and reverent places [whereof this city is
full) and your holiness: as also, that the contracte of marriage (hitherto only
made in the presence of God, between Alexandro and me) shall be consummate
openly, in the presence of you, and consequently in the sight of all men
Wherefore I humbly beseech your fatherhode, to be agreeable unto that, which
it has pleased God and me to bring to pass, and that you would give us your
benediction, to the intent we may live together, in the honor of God, to the
perfection and end of our life. Alexandro greatly merueiled, when he
understood, that his wife was the daughter of the King of England, and was
rapte with an unspeakable joy. But much more merueiled the two knights,
which were so troubled and appalled, that if they had been in any place else,
saving in the presence of the Pope, they would have killed Alexandro, and
peradventure the Lady her self. Of the other part, the Pope was very much
astonned, both at the habit and apparel of the Lady, and also of her
choice. But knowing that the same could not be undone, he was content to
satisfy her request. And first of all, he comforted the two knights, whom
he knew to be moved at the matter, and reduced them in amity, with the Lady
and Alexandro: then he gave order, what was best to be done. And when the
Marriage day, by him appointed was come, he caused the Lady to issue forth,
clothed in royal vestures, before all the Cardinals, and many other great
personages, that were repaired to the great feast, of purpose by him
prepared. Which lady appeared, to be so fair and comely, that not without
deserte, she was praised and commended of all the assembly. In like manner
Alexandro gorgeously apparelled, both in outward apparaunce and conditions,
was not like one that had lent money to Usurie, but of a more princely grace,
and was greatly honored of those two knights, where the Pope solemnly
celebrated [again) the espousalles. And after that rich and roial marriage was
ended, he gave them leave to depart. It seemed good to Alexandro, and like wise
to the Lady, to go from Rome to Florence, in which city; the brute of that
accidente, was all ready noised, where being received of the citizens, with
great honor, the Lady delivered the three brethren out of prison, and having
first paid every man their debte, they with their wives, were repossessed in
their former inheritance. Then Alexandro and his wife, with the good will, and
joyful gratulacions of all men, departed from Florence, and taking with them
Agolante, one of their uncles, arrived at Paris, where they were honorably
interteigned of the French king. From thence the two knights went into
England, and so persuaded the king, that they recovered his good will toward
his daughter: and sendyng for his soonne in law, he received them both, with
great joy and triumph. And within a while after, he invested his said
soon, with the order of knighthode, and made him Earl of Cornouale, whose
wisdom proved so great, that he pacified the father, and the son whereof
insued, surpassyng profit and commodity for the whole realm, whereby he
gained and got the love, and good well of all the people. And Agolante his
uncle, fully recovered all debtes, due unto him in England. And the Earl when
he had made his uncle knighte, suffered him to return in rich estate to
Florence. The Earl afterward lived with his wife, in great prosperity, and
(as some do affirm) both by his own policy and valiaunce, and with the
aid of his father in Law, he recovered and overcame the realm of Scotland,
and was there crouned king.

Landolpho Ruffolo being impouerished, became a pirate, and taken by the
Geneuois, was in danger of drownyng, who saving himself upon a title coaferfull
of rich Jewels, was received at Corfu, and being cherished by a woman,
returned home very rich.

The.xxxv. Novel.
IT is supposed, that the sea coaste of Reggium (in Calabria) is the most
delectable part in all Italy, wherein (hard by Salerno) there is a country
by the sea side, which thinhabitantes do term, the coaste of Malsy, so full
of little Cities, gardens, fountains, rich men, and merchants as any other
people and country. Among which said cities, there was one called Rauello,
where in time paste (although in these days, there be very rich men) there
dwelt a notable man of substance, called Landolpho Ruffolo: who being not
contented with his richesse, but desirous to multiply them double, was in
hazard to lose himself, and all that he had. This manne (as all other
merchants be accustomed) after he had considered with himself, what to do,
bought a very great ship, and fraughted the same with sundry kinds of
marchaundize, of his own adventure, and made a voyage to the Isle of Cypri,
where he found (besides the commodities, which he brought) many other Ships
arrived there, laden with such like wares: by which occasion it happened,
that he was forced, not only to fell the same good cheap. but also was
constrained (if he would dispatche his goods) to give them almost for naught,
whereby he thought that he was utterly undone. And being greatly troubled for
that less, not knowing what to do, and seeing how in so little time, of a
rich man, he was come to beggars state, he thought either to die, or else by
piracie to recover his losses, to the intent he might not return, to the
place poor, from whence he was departed rich. And having found a copesman,
for his great barque: with the money thereof, and with other, which he
received for his merchandise, he bought a small pinnas, mete for the use of a
pirate, which he armed and furnished with all things, necessary for that
purpose. And determined to make himself rich, with the goods of other men,
and chiefly he meante, to set upon the Turks: whereunto Fortune was more
favorable, then to his former trade. And by chance, by the space of one year,
he robbed and took, so many Foistes and galleis of the Turks, that he had
recovered not only that, which he lost by marcha^dize, but also more then
twice so much as whereunto those losses did amounte. Wherefore, well punished
with the first sorrow of his losses, knowing his gains to multiply, that he
neded not to return the second time, he thought with himself, that the same
which he had gotten, was sufficient: and therefore determined prese^tlie, to
return to his own house with his gotten goods. And fearyng the hinderaunce
which he sustained in traffic of Marchau^dise, he purposed to imploie his
money, no longer that ways: but in that barque, wherewith he had gained the
same, with his ores he took his course homeward. And being upon the maine Sea,
in the night the wind rose at the Southeast, which was not only contrary to
his course but also caused such a tempest, that his small barque was not able
to endure the seas. Whereupon he took harborough in a Creke of the Sea, which
compassed a little Islande, there expectyng for better wind. Into which creke
within a while after, with much a do, for auoidyng of that tempest, arrived
two great Argoseis of Genoa, that were come from Constantinople. The Mariners
of which ships: when they saw the little barque, and had shut up the way,
that the same could not go out: understanding of whence he was, and knowing by
report, that he was very rich, determined (being ikenne naturally given to
spoil, and love of money) to take her. And setting a shore part of their
meune well armed, and furnished with crossebowes, they conveyed themselves, to
keep and defend, that none within the Pinnas (except he would be shot
through) was able to escape. Then retiryng into their skiftes, with help of
the Tide, they approached Landolpho his bark, which without any great
difficulty, in a small space, they took with all the company, not losyng so
much as one manne. And cariyng Landolpho aborde one of their cocks, and all
within board his little Pinnas, they soncke the same, and all the Mariners, and
kept Landolpho, sufferyng him not to have about him, any kind of armure, not
so much as an haberion. The next day the wind changed, and the ships
hoisted up sails toward Leuant, and all that day prosperously sailed on
their voyage. But upon the closyng of the night, a storm rose again, and
separated the two ships, one from an other. And by force of the wind, it
chanced, that the Ship wherein poor Landolpho was, struck with great
violence upon a sand, in the Islande of Cephalonia. And as one would throw a
glass against a wall, even so the ship opened, and fill in pieces: whereby
the sorrowful Mariners, that stood above (the seas being covered with gooddes,
coaffers, and planckes of the ship, that swa^me above water, which chances
many times, in such like accidents; the night being dark, and the billows
going high and ^^^^^^ble) such as were able to swim, began to take hold of
those things, which Fortune gave unto the^. Emonges who^ wretched Landolpho,
seeing death before his face (which he so greatly desired, and so many times
craved, the day before, rather then to return home in that poor estate) was
afraied, and taught hold of a board among the rest, trustyng it might
chance, that God would pardon him of drownyng, and send him some refuge for
his escape. And as he was horseback, and fletyng upon a plancke, so well as he
could [driuen here and there with the sea and winde] he held fast the fame,
till it was day light: which when he perceived, he looked about him, and
saw nothing but the clouds, the Seas and a coaffer, swimmyng above water,
which was driven so nere him, that it made him many times to fear, that it
would be his overthrow. And the nerer it came, the more he labored to put
it back [so well as he could] with his hand, although his force and power was
gone. But how so ever it chanced, a gale of wind blewe out of the skies, and
struck the coaffer against the board, whereupon Landolpho was, who by that
means driven back, was forced to give over the pla^ck and with a billowe, was
beaten under the water, and afterward remountyng a lofte again, he swamme
more through fear, then force. And seeing the board carried a far of from him,
fearyng lest he should not be able to fasten the same again, he drew toward
the coafer, which was nere enough unto him. And laiyng his breast upon the
cover thereof, he made it go [so right as he could] with his arms. And in
this manner driven by the sea, now here, now there, without eating [as having
not wherewithall] and drinkyng more then he would, he continued all that day,
and night following not knowing where he was, for he saw nothing but sea. The
next morning, either by the will of God, or through the winds force,
La^dolpho [whiche was then transformed into a Sponge] holdyng fast with both
his hands, the brimme of the coafer [like as we se the^ that fear to be
drouned, do take hold of the next thing that comes to hande] arrived at
the shore af the Isle of Corfu, where, by fortune a poor woman, was scowryng
her vessel with Sand and salt water, who seeing him draw nere, and
perceiving in him no form or fashion of a man, was afraied, and criyng out,
ran back. He not able to speak, and se but very little, could say nothing.
but as the Sea drove him nere the shore, the woman discried the likeness of a
coafer, and beholding the same more advisedly, saw at length his arms upon
the same, and therewithal his face, merueilyng with her self who it should be:
wherefore moved with compassion, she went into the sea a little way, which then
was calm, and catchyng him by the hear, The pluckte him and the coafer to
land. And with much a do unfolded his arms, that were about the coafer,
causyng her maid that was with her to carry the coafer upon her bed. And
she bare him to land (like a little child) which dooen, she put him into a
hot house, and with warm water, by frotting and rubbyng him, his natural
heat, and other his senses lost, began to come again, into their former
course. And when he saw time, she took him out, cherishing and comforting him,
with wines and brothes, and so well as she could, made him at length to recover
his force in such wise, that he knew where he was. Then the woman delivered
him his coafer, which she had saved, and had him to seek his adventure. And
thus this good wife delte with Landolpho. Who little esteemed the coafer, but yet
he considered, that it could not be of so small valor, but that it was able to
bear his charges, for certain days. But feelyng it light, he was clear
void of hope, to have any succor and relief thereof. Nevertheless (when the
good wife was out of the doors) he brake open the same, to see what was
within, where he found many precious Iewelles, some bound together, and some
lose, wherein he had pretty skill. And knowing the^ to be of great value
(giuyng thanks to God, which had not yet forsaken him) was wholly
recomforted. Howbeit, for so much as in a little space, he had been twice
cruelly distressed, and tormented by Fortune, fearyng the third time, he
thought that it was needful for him, to take heed, how to dispose his things
in sauftie, till he came home to his own house. Wherefore, having bestowed
those precious iewelles, in certain rags and cloutes, so well as he could:
he said to the goodwife, that he had no need of the coafer, but if she would
give him a bag, he would bestow the same upon her. Which the good wife
willingly did. And Landolpho giuyng her so great thanks as he could, for the
kindness, which he had found at her hands: took his leave, and imbarking
himself, he passed to Branditio, and from thence from place to place, till he
came to Tranj, where finding diverse of the City wherein he dwelte, that were
Drapers, he was apparelled of them (in a manner of Gods sake) to whom he told
the discourse of all his fortune, except the coafer, who le^t him a horse, and
sent diverse in his company, to bring him home to Rauello. And when he was in
sauftie arrived, he thanked God, that had brought him thither, where he
searched his bougette, with more leisure then he did at the first, and found
that he had many stones of so great valor, that selling them at price
reasonable, for less then they were worth, his substance did amount, to so
much more then it was, when he departed from his house. And when he had found
the means to dispatche, and sell his iewelles, he sent to Corfu a good piece of
money, to the woman that took him out of the sea, to recompense the kindness,
that he had found at her hands: and the like to them of Tranj, that had given
him apparel, the rest he took to himself, and would be no more a merchant,
but lived at home in honest estate, to the end of his life.

Andreuccio of Perugia, being come to Naples to buy horse, was in one night
surprised, with three merueious accide^tes. All which having escaped, with
with one Rubie he returned home to his house.

The.xxxvi. Novel.
THere was at Perugia ae young man, called Andreuccio di Pietro, a Horssecorser,
who understanding of a horse fair at Naples, did put five hundred Crounes in
his pursse, and never traueiling before from his own house, went thither with
certain other merchants: arriuyng at Naples, upon a Sondaie at night. The
next morning, according to the instructions given him by his hosse, he went to
the fair, where he viewed and saw many horse, whereof diverse did very well
like him, and demanded their prises: but with none he could agree of price.
And to show himself a right well able man, to pay for that he bought, many
times (like a dolle and fool, as he was) he drew out his pursse stuffed with
crounes, in the presence of them that passed to and fro. It chanced that a
young woman of Scicilia [whiche was very fair, but at every man's
commandment, and that for little hire) passed by as he was showing his pursse,
not marked or perceived by Andreuccio, who suddenly said to her self. What
is she in all this town, that should be like unto me, if al those crounes were
mine? And so passed forth. There was with this young peate, an old woman, a
Scicilian also: who so sone as she espied Andreuccio, forsook her companion,
and ran affectuouslie to embrace him Which the young woman perceiving [not
speaking a woorde] she gave good heed to that they said: Andreuccio tournyng
himself to the old woman, immediately knew her, and reioysed much, that he
had so happily met her: whom after great gratulacions, and many welcomes,
she promised to visit at his lodgyng, which done, she departed from
Andreuccio, and he returned to buy his horse, howbeit that morning, he bought
none at all. The young dame, which had first seen this pursse, and marked
the acquaintance between the old woman and him, to assaie by what means, she
might get that money, or at least, some part thereof, subtellie asked the
old woman, what manne that was, of whence, what he did there, and how he knew
her. To whom the old woman particularly recoumpted her whole acquaintance,
how she dwelt of long time in Scicilia with his father, and afterward at
Perugia. And likewise she told her, when he returned, and for what cause he
was come to Naples. This iollie wenche, wholly informed of Andreuccio his
parents, and of their names, made a plat and foundation, by subtle and
crafty means, how to obtain her purpose. And when she was come home to her
house, she sent the old woman about business for that day, because she might
not return to Andreuccio. She had dwelling with her a pretty girl, well
noseled and brought up, in doing of arrantes, whom about euenyng, she sent to
the lodgyng of Andreuccio to make inquiry for him: where by fortune she
chanced to find him standing alone, at his bostes door, who^ the girl did
ask, if he knew not an honest man of Perugia, called Andreuccio di Pietro,
that hosted there? Yes my girl (quod he) I am the same manne. Then she took
him a side, and said unto him. Sir, there is a gentle woman of this Town,
that would gladly speak with you, if it were your pleasure. Which when
Andreuccio heard, by and by he called to mind, and seemed to himself, that he
was a goodly yange manne of person, and that without doubt, the same woman
was in love with him, because in all Naples, he thought there was none so proper
a striplyng as himself. Whom incontinently he answered, that he would wait
upon her, demanding when he should come, and to what place. To whom she made
answer Even when it pleases your sir. For my maistresse atte^deth at home for
you. Andreuccio upon that, without any word spoken to his host, whether he
was gone: said to the wenche. Go thou before, and I will follow. And the
girl did conducte him, to her maistres house, which dwelt in a streate called
Malpertugio, a name showing the honesty of the streate, where she dwelte. But
he knowing and suspectyng nothing, thought the place to be right honest, that
he went unto, and the wife likewise honest and good, and boldly entered the
house, the wenche going before. And mou^ting by the staiers: This young
gristle, called her maistresse, saying unto her, that master Andreuccio was
come. Who ready at the upper step, seemed as though she attended for him.
This Lady was fine, and had a good face, well apparelled, and trimmed after
the best manner. Who seeing master Andreuccio at hand, descended two steps
of the staiers, with her arms open to embrace him, foldyng the same about his
neck, and paused a certain space, without speaking and word, as though
great love, and earnest affection, enforced her so to do. Then weeping, she
kissed his face, and with a voice half uttered, between howlyng and speaking,
she said unto him. O Andreuccio mine own dear heart, most hartelie well
come. Andreuccio merueilyng at those tender words, all amassed, answered.
Ge^tlewoman, and you also well found out. Afterward she took him by the hand
and conveyed him up into a parlour, and from thence (without further talk)
into a chamber, which was al perfumed with Roses, with flowers of Orenges, and
other sweet smelles: where he saw a bed well furnished, and diverse sorts of
apparel, placed upon presses (according to the manner of that country) and
many other fair and rich ornaments. By reason whereof Andreuccio, which was
but a freshewater Soldier, thought, that she had been a great Lady. And
they two sitting together upon a chest, at her beds feet: She began thus to
say unto him. Andreuccio, I am assured you do greatly wonder, at these
fair words, this courteous interteignement, and at the tears, which I let
fall. And no marvel, although you do not know me, and peradventure never
heard tell of me before. But I will declare unto you, a thing more strasige and
merueilous, then that is. And to tell you plain, I am your own sister, and I
say unto you, that since it has pleased my Lord God, to show me so much
grace and favor, that I do now se, one of my brethren before I die (although
I desire to see them al) I care not when he do call me, from this wretched
woride: I am so in spirit comforted and releued. And where it may chance,
that you never understood so much before this time, I will tell you the whole
discourse. So it is, that Pietro my father and yours, dwelte of long time
[wherof it is possible, that you have heard report] at Palermo, where through
the goodness, and friendly behauior of him, there be yet some remaining that
did bear him singular good will and friendship. But emonges other, which loved
him moffe my mother (which was a gentlewoman, and then a widow) without doubt
did love him best. In such wise, that she forgettyng the love of her father,
and of her brethren, and the love of her own honor and reputacion, they
dealed so together, that they begatte me, and am here as you see. Afterward,
when your father and mine, had occasion to depart from Palermo, he returned
to Perugia, leaving my mother behind, and me his young daughter, never after
that (so far as I know) caring either for my mother or me: whereof if he were
not my father, I would blame him very much, considering his ingratitude
toward my mother Albeit he ought to use toward me, so much affection and
fatherly love, as to his own daughter, being come of no kitchen maid, ne yet
of any basewoman: For my mother otherwise not knowing what he was, did commit
into his hands (moved of mere love) both her self, and all that she had. But
what? Things ill dooen, and so long time paste, are more easy to be
reprehended, then amended. Thus the matter went, he left me a little infant at
Palermo, where, when I was grown to years, my mother which was rich, gave me
to wife, to one of the house of Gergenti, a gentleman of great honesty and
reputacion, who for the love of my mother and me, returned to dwell at
Palermo, where greatly sauoryng the faccion of the Guelphi, he began to
practice a certain enterprise, with our king Charles, which being known to
King Federic, before the same enterprise could take effect, we were forced to
fly out of Scicilia. At what time I had thought, to have been the chiefest
Lady, that ever was in that Island: wherefore taking with us such few
things, as we were able to carry (few I may well call them, in respect of
the^ we possessed) and leauyng our houses and palaces, we came unto this
city. Where we found king Charles, so benign toward us, that he has
recompensed part of our losses, which we sustained in his service. For he
has given us possessions and houses, with good provision of household to my
husband, and your brother in law, as you now see and perceive. And in his
manner I do remain here, where (sweet brother) I thank God (and not you) that
at this present I see you: and therewithal she took him about the neck,
weeping tenderly, and then kissed his face again. Andreuccio hearing this tale
spoken in order, and digested from poinct to poinct with good utterance, whereof
no word stuck between her teeth, or was impeached by default of tongue: And
remembryng how it was true, that his father dwelte at Palermo, knowing also by
himself, the manner of young men, which in their youth, be prompt and
willing to love: and seeing her tender tears, her imbracynges and honest
kisses, thought all that she had spoken, to be most certain and true. And
after she had do on her tale, he answered in this wise. Madame, you may not
think unkindness, if I do marvel at this, for that in very deed, I have
no acquaintance of you, no more then if you had never been borne. But whether
my father has spoken of you, or of your mother at any time, truly I do not
now remember, but so much the more I do rejoice, that I have found a sister
here [as I trust] because I am here alone. And certainly I know none so
honorable, but you may seem agreeable unto him, so well as to me, which am but
a poor marchaunte: howbeit, I do beseech you to tell me, how you did know,
that I was in the city. To whom she answered. This morning a poor woman,
which oftentimes repaireth to my house, gave me knowledge thereof, because of
long time [as she told me) she did dwell with your father, at Palermo, and at
Perugia. And because I thought it more convenient and mete, to bid you home, to
mine own house, then to seek you in an other man's, I thought good to send
for you. After these words, she began in order, to inquire of the state of
his parents, calling them by their proper names: whereunto Andreuccio made
answer, that now he perceived, he had better cause to give credit unto her
words, then before. Their discourse and talk of things being long, and the
weather hot, she called for Greek wine and Comfittes, and made Andreuccio to
drink. Who after the banquette, destrous to depart to his lodgyng (for it
was about supper time) she by no means would suffer him, but making as though
she were angry, said unto him. Oh God, I see now most evidently, that you
do make little account of me, being your own sister, whom you never saw
before, and in her house: where unto you ought to resort, when so ever you come
to town. And will you now forsake the same, to suppe in an Inn? But of troth
you shall not chose, but take part of my supper. And although my husband be
not at home, (whereof I am right sorry) yet you shall know, that his wife is
able, to make you some good there. To whom Andreuccio, not knowing well what to
say else, made this answer. I do love you, as I ought to love a sister. But if
I go not to mine June, I know they will tarry for me all this night, before
they go to supper, to my great reproach and shame. Praised be God (quod she
then) I have servants to advertise your host, that you be here with me, to
the intent he shall not tarry for you. But pleases you sir, to do me this
great courtesy, that I may send for your companions hither, to bear you
company, that afterward, if you will needs depart, ye may go all
together. Andreuccio answered, that he would send for none of his company
that night: but for so much as she was so importunate, he himself was right
well content, to satisfy her request. Then she made, as though she had sent
to his Inn to give word, that they should not tarry for him. And after much
communication, supper was placed upon the table, served in with many devises,
and sundry delicates abundantly, and she with like sleightes continued the
supper, till it was dark night. And when they rose from the table, Andreuccio
made have to depart, but she would not suffer him, tellyng him that Naples was
a Town so straight of orders, that none might walk abroad in the night, and
specially strangers. And that like as she had sent word, how they should
not tarry for him at supper, even so she had done for his bed. All which
Andreuccio beleuyng, and taking pleasure, that he was with his sister (deceived
though he were of his false belief) was well contented to tarry. Their talk
and communicacion after supper was of purpose dilated and protracted, and one
part of the night being spent, she left Andreuccio in his chamber going to
bed, and a little boie to wait upon him to see that he lacked nothing, and
she with her women went into an other chamber. The time of the year was very
hot, wherefore Andreuccio being alone, striped himself, and laid his hose
and dublette, under his beds head, and desirous to go to the privy, he
asked the boie where it was, who poinctyng to the door, in a corner of the
chamber, said unto him. Go in there.,, Andreuccio saufly went in, and
chanced by Fortune to set his foot upon a board, which at both ends was
lose from the Ioiste, whereupon it lay, by reason whereof the board and he
tombled down into the Iakes: and God so loved him, that in the fall he
received no hurt, although it were of a good height, saving he was unbroined
and arraied, with the do^ge of the place, whereof the Iakes was full. Which
place (to the intent you may the better understand, what is said, and what
shall follow) even as it was I will describe unto you. There was in a little
straighte entry (as many times we see between two houses) certain bordes
laid upon two Ioistes, between the one house and the other. Upon which, was
placed the seat of the privy, one of which bordes was the same, that fill
down with Andreuccio, who now being in the bottom of the Iakes, sorrowful for
that sudden chance, cried out to the boie for help. But the boie so sone as
he heard, that he was fallen, went in to tell his maistres, who by and by ran
into his chamber, to seek for his clothes: and when she had found them, and in
the same his money, which Andreuccio like a fool, without mistrust, still
carried about him: she now possessed to thing, for which she had before laid
the snare, in fainyng her self to be of Palermo, and the daughter of one of
Perugia. And caryng no longer for him, she straight way shut fast the
privy door, whereat he went forth when he fell. Andreuccio seeing that the
boie would not answer, began to cry out a loud, but all was in vain:
wherefore suspecting the cause, and beginning somewhat to late, to understand
the deceipte, he leapte over a little wall, which closed that place from the
sight of the streate. And when he was in the open streate, he went to the
door of the house, which he knew well enough, making a noise, rapping hard
and long at the door, but it was in vain. For which cause, he began to
complain and lament, like unto one, that manisfestly saw his misfortune,
saying. Alas, in how little time have I lost five hundred crounes, and a sister.
And after many other words, he began again to bounse at the door, and to
cry out. He rapped so long, and cried so loud, that he waked many of the
neighbors there aboutes, who^ not able to suffer that noise, rose out of their
beds, and emo^ges others, one of the maids of the house (faining her self to
be slepie) looked out at the window and said in great rage. What noise is
beneath? Oh said Andreuccio, do ye not know me? I am Andreuccio, the brother
of madame Floredelice. Thou haste drunk to much me thinks ( q she maid) go
sleep, and come again to morrow. I know none called Andreuccio, nor yet do
understand what thou meanest by those foolish words, get thee hence good
man, and let us sleep I pray thee. Why quod Andreuccio, dooest thou not
hear me, what I say? Thou know me well enough, if thou will, but if the
Scicilian kindred, be so sone forgotten: Give me my clothes, which I have
left behind me, and I will go hence with all my heart. Whereat the maid
laughed, and said. I think the man is in a dream, and with that she turned
her self and shut fast the window. Andreuccio now sure and certain of his
losses, attached with incredible sorrow, converted his anger into rage,
thought to recover by anoiaunce, that which he could not get with fair
words. Wherefore taking up a big stone, he began again with greater
blows, to beat at the door, Which when many of the neighbors (that before
were waked out of their sleep and risen) did hear, thinkyng that it was some
troublesome man, that fained those words, to anoye the good wife of the house,
and all they likewise troubled with the noise: lookyng out of their windows,
began to rate him with one voice (like a sort of Curres of one streate,
which do baule and bark at a strange Dog that passes by) saying. This
is to much shame and villainy, to come to the houses of honest women, at this
time of the night, and to speak such fond words. Wherefore (good man)
get thee hence for Gods sake, and let us sleep. If thou have any thing to
do with the good wife, come again to morrow, and disquiet us no more to
night. With which words, as poor Andreuccio was somewhat appeased, one that
was within the house, a Russian (that kept the good wife) whom Andreuccio never
saw, nor heard before: looked out of the window, and with a big and
horrible voice, demanded, who was beneath? Whereat Andreuccio liftyng up his
head, saw one, that so far as he could perceive, seemed to be a large
rubber, with a black bearde, and a stern visage, lokyng as though he were
newly risen from bed, full of sleep, gaping and rubbing his eyes. Whom
Andreuccio answered in scarfull wise, saying. I am the good wifes brother of
the house. But the Russian interrupting his answer, speaking more fiercely
then at the first, said. I know not who thou art, but if I come down, I
will so codgell and bombaste thee, that thou shall not be able, to stir thy
self, like an ass and dronken beast as thou art, which all this night, will
not suffer us to sleep. And with these words, tourning himself about, he
shut the window. Diverse of the neighbors which knew better, the conditions
of that terrible Russian) speaking fair to Andreuccio, said unto him. For
Gods sake good man, depart hence in time, and suffer not thy self to be
slain: get thee hence (quod an other) and say not but thou had warning.
Where Andreuccio appalled, with the Russians words and sight, moved likewise
by the counsale of the neighbors, that spoke to him as he thought, in
charitable wise, took his way to return to his Inn, the sorowfullest man
that ever lived, and in greatest despair, for loss of his money. Turning that
way, wherein he was guided by a little girl, the day before, and anoyed with
the stenche, that he felt about him: desirous to go to the sea side to wash
him, he declined so much of the left hand, taking the way up to the streat
called La Ruga Catellana, and as he was marching up the highest part of the
City, by chance he saw two men before him, with a lantern light, in one
of their hands, coming toward him, for auoidyng of who^ (because he feared
that it was the watch, or some other ill desposed persons) he hid himself in
an old house hard by. But they (as of purpose) went to the very same place.
Where one of them dischargyng himself, of certain instruments of iron, which
he bare upon his back, both of them did view, and surueie those yrons,
debatyng of diverse things touching the same, and as they were talkyng
togethers, one of them said: what means this? I smell the foulest stenche,
that ever I felt in all my life. And when he had said so, he lifted up the
Lantern, and espied miserable Andreuccio, couchyng behind the wall, and
being afraied, asked who it was, Andreuccio held his peace. But they
approchyng nere him with their light, demanded what he made there, so filthely
arraied. To whom Andreuccio rehearsed, the whole adventure as it chanced. Who
considering the cause of that misfortune, said one to an other: this no doubt
was done, in the house of Scarabone Butta Fuoco: and tournyng toward
Androuccio, one of them said unto him. Good manne, although thou have lost
thy money, yet thou have great cause to praise God: that it was thy chance to
fall, and not to enter again into the house. For if thou had not fallen,
assure thy self, that when thou had been a sleep, thy throat had been
cut, and so with thy money, should have lost thy life. But what avails
it now, to weep and lamente. For thou shaite so sone, pluck the stars out of
the elemente, as ever recover one penie of thy loss. And without doubt he will
kill thee, if he understand, that thou make any words thereof. When they had
said so, and had given him that admonicion, they comforted him in this wise.
Good fellow, we do lament thy state. And therefore, if thou will join thy
self with us, about an enterprise, which we have in hand: we warraunte thee,
thou shalt get a great deal more, then thou have lost. Andreuccio like one
in extreme despair, was content. The date before was buried, one Messer
Philippo Minutulo, an Archebishoppe of Naples, in rich pontificalles and
ornaments, with a Rubie upon his finger, that was worth five hundredth
Ducattes of gold, whom they purposed to rob and dispoile, telling Andreuccio
the whole order of their intent: who more coueitous, then well advised, went
with them. And going toward the great church: Andreuccio his persume, began
so sent very strong, whereupon one of them said. Is it not possible to
devise away, that this shitten beast, may wash himself in some place, that
he stincke no more thus filthelie? Yes, quod the other. There is a pit here
hard by, over which there hangs a pulley, and a great bucket, where we
may presently wash him. When they were come to the pit, they found the
rope, hangyng still upon the pulley, but the bucket was taken away: wherefore
they thought best, to tie him to the rope, and to let him down the pit,
to wash himself. And that when he was washed, he should wagge the rope, and
they would hoiste him up again. Which they did. But it chanced, that whiles
he was thus clensyng himself in the pit: The watch of the city (because
they swette, and the night was very hot) being dry and thirsty, came to the
pit to drink. The other two, perceiuyng the watch at hand, left
Andreuccio in the pit, and ran away. The watch, which was come thither
to drink, perceived not, those two that were fled. And Andreuccio being
still in the bottom, when he had cleansed himself, began to wagge the rope.
The watch sittyng down by the pittes side, cast of their clokes, and laid
down their halbardes, and other weapons, and began to draw up the rope,
thinkyng that the bucket full of water, was tiede to the same. When Andreuccio
was haled up, to the brincke of the pit, he forsook the rope, and cast
himself with one his hands, upon the side of the same. When the watch saw
that, they for fear ran away, so fast as they could, without speaking any
word. Whereof Andreuccio did marvel very much. And if he had not taken good
hold, he had fallen again down to the bottom, to his great hurt, and
peradventure, not without peril of his life. Notwithstanding, being out of the
pit, and findyng halberdes, and other weapons there, which he knew well,
his fellows brought not with them: he then began much more to wonder. But
between fear, and ignorance of that which happened, complainyng himself of
his hard Fortune, without touching of any thing, he determined to go from
thence, and went he could not tell whether. But as he was departing from that
place, he met his fellows, retiryng back to draw him up. And when they
perceived him, alredie haled out of the pit, they were wonderfully abashed,
and asked who drew him out. Andreuccio made answer, that he could not tell,
rehearsyng to them in order, what had chanced, and of the things he found
without. They understanding the matter, laughed, and told him again the cause,
wherefore they ran away, and what they were that drew him up. And without
further talk (being then about midnight) they repaired to the great church.
Into the which they easily entered. And went to the Tomb, which was of
Marble, very huge and weighty: The cover whereof being very great, with
their crows of iron, and other tools, they lifted it up so far, that one
man was able to enter, which done, one asked an other, who should go in? Not
I quod one, and not I (quod the other) No, nor I quod Andreuccio. The Other two
hearing Andreuccio say so, stepped unto him. saying. Will thou not go in? By
the faith we owe to God: if thou go not in, we will so beat thee, with one
of these iron bars, that thou shalt never stir again, out of this place.
Andreuccio being made their common ridyng fool: greatly fearyng, when he
heard them say so, went in. And when he was in the grave, he said unto
himself. These good fellows do make me go in, because they would deceive me.
For when I have given them all, that is here, and I ready to come out, they
mean to run away, to save them selfs, and to leave me behind, without any
part thereof. Wherefore he purposed first, to take his own portion to himself.
And remembryng the Ring of great valor, whereof they told him so sone as he
was in the grave, he pulled it of from the Archbishops finger, and put it
upon his own. And afterward taking the Cross, the Miter, and the Gloves,
dispoiling him even to his shurt, he gave them all, saying. That there was
nothing else. But they pressyng upon him, that there was a Ring behind, willed
him thoroughly to make search for it: howbeit he still answered that he could
not fiude it. And because he would make the^ tarry a little longer, he fained as
though he had made a further search. The other so subtle and malicious as he,
badde him to seek still and when they saw time, they took away the proppes,
that stayed up the To^be, and ran away, leauyng poor Andreuccio fast shut
in the Grave. Which when Andreuccio perceived, what chanced to him then, each
man may consider. Then he assaied sometimes with his shulders, sometime with
his hedde, to remove the cover, but all was in vain. Wherefore even for very
sorrow, he fill in a sownde, upon the dead body of the Bishop. And if a man
had seen them both at that instaunt, it could not well have been discerned,
whether was the dead corpse, the Archebishoppe dedde, or poor Andreuccio diyng.
But after he was come to hymsef, he began piteously to complain, seeing he
was arrived, to one of these two ends, either in the Tomb to die for hunger,
and with the stenche of the dedde body, putrifiyng with worms, if no man
came to open it: or else to be hanged as a Thief, if he were found within. And
as he was in these consideracions, tormented with sorrow: he heard a noise in
the church of diverse men, who as he thought, came to do the like fact,
that he and his fellows had done before, wherewith his fear began much more
to augment. But after they had opened the grave, and stayed it up, it came in
question emo^ges them, who should go in. And when they had contended a good
space about the same. A Priest that was in the company said. Why are ye
afraied? Do ye think, that he will eat you? The dedde never eat men: I
will go in my self. And when he had said so, he laid him down upon his
breaste, at the drink of the grave, and thrustyng his feet in before, he
went down. Andreuccio seeing that, erected himself upright and caught the
Priest by one of the legs, making as though he would have drawn him in:
which when the Priest perceived, he cried out a loud, speeding himself out,
so fast as he could. Wherewithal the rest dismayed, almost out of their
wits, leauyng the grave open, took their legs and ran, as though a
hundred thousand deuelles, had been at their tails: which seeing Andreuccio
(more joyful then he looked for) lepte out of the grave, and ran as fast as
he could out of the Church, at the place where he came in. At what time day
light began to appear, and he with the ryng on his finger wandered he wist not
whether, till he came to the sea side, and at length recovered his Inn, where
he found his company and his host all that night, taking great care for
him. To whom recomptyng that which chanced, his host gave him advise
incontinently, to get him out of Naples, which presently he did: and
returned to Perugia, having bestowed, his. v. C. crounes upon a Ryng, which
he thought to have employed upon horses: For which cause he made that journey.

The Earl of Angiers being falsely accused, was banished out of France, and
left his two soonnes in sundry places in England, and retournyng (unknown)
by Scotland, found them in great authority, afterward he repaired in the
habit of a servant, to the French kings army. And being known to be
innocent, was again advanced to his first estate.

The.xxxvii. Novel.
THe Roman Empire being transferred from the French men, unto the Almanes:
there rose a great discencion between both the nations, and in the end a
cruel and continual war. For which cause, as well for the defense of his
kingdom, as to offede his enemies, the French king, and one of his soonnes
with all the power of their own realm, and of their friends and allies,
assembled a great host of men, to encountre with their enemies: and before
they proceeded, because they would not leave their realm, with out a governor,
knowing Gualtieri, Earl of Angiers to be a gentle and sage knight, and their
most trusty friend, and that he was a man most expert in the art of
warfare, semyng unto the^ (notwithstanding) more apt to pleasure, then pain,
left him Lieutenaunt general in their place, for the government of the whole
kingdom of France: and proceeded in their enterprise. The Earl then began with
great knowledge, and by good order, to execute his office committed unto him,
dooyng nothing without the consent of the Queen, and her fair daughter in
law, although they were left to be under his custody and government, yet
never tholesse, he honored them as his maistresses and superiors. This Earl
Gualtieri was a beautiful personage, about the age of forty years, so
familier and well condicioned, as any gentleman could be and besides that, he
was the most excellent and trimmest knight, that was known in those days,
and one most comely in his apparel. It chanced that the king and his soon,
being at the wars aforesaied, the wife of the Earl died in the mean while,
leauyng him only two little young children, a soonne and a daughter, which
he had by her. He then frequentyng the court, of the aforesaied Ladies,
talkyng many times with them, about the affairs of the realm: the wife of
the kings son, fixed her eyes upon him, and with great affection (for his
person and virtues) fervently embraced him with secret love. And knowing
herself to be young and fresh, and him to be without a wife, thought
(suddenly) to bring to pass, that which she desired, and thinkyng that
nothing could let the same, but only shame to discover it, she purposed
utterly to abandone the same. And upon a day being a lone, she sent one to
seek the Earl, as though she would have communicated with him of other
matters. The Earl whose mind was far different, from the Ladies,
incontinently came unto her: who being set down together upon a bed (which
she desired) alone in a chamber, he asked her twice, upon what occasion she
sent for him: and she having nothing to sat unto him, pressed in the end, and
rapte with love, waxed very shamfast and almost weeping, and quakyng for
fear, with fainte words, began to say as follows. My derely beloved and
loving friend, and Lord, you may easelie know (being a wise manne as you
be) the frailty of men and women: and by diverse consideracions, the
weakness to be more in the one, then in the other. Wherefore (before a just
judge) one fault of diverse qualities, ought not of reason to receive one like
punishemente. Moreover, who is he that will say, that a poor man or woman,
which gets their living, with the labor of their body, ought not more to
be reprehended, if they become amourous, and subject to their lusts, then the
rich Lady, which takes no care for her living, or wants any thing that
she desires. Truly I believe there is none such, that will say so: for
which reason I suppose, that the things before said, ought to serve the
greatest part of the excuse, to the advantage of her that does possess the^:
If it happen that she give her self fully, to the conductio^s of love: and the
superplusage of her said excuse, ought to consist, in that she has chosen her
a sage and virtuous friend, if she that loves, has done so in deed. Which
two things, as they should be (I suppose) are in me, and many other also:
which ought to induce me to love, accordynglie as my youth requires, and the
great space, that is between my husband and me. It behooves now then, that
they should advance themselfes in your presence, for the defense of my burning
love: and if the same do reign in you, which have power in the wise, then I
beseech you to give me counsel and aid, in the thing which I shall
demand. True it is, that for the long absence of my husband (not able to
resist the pricks of the flesh, and the force of love) which be of such
great effect, that they have many times past, and yet daily do va^quishe and
overcome, not only feeble and weak women, but also the strongest men. I living
in ease and idleness, as you see, and forced to follow the pleasures of love,
and to become amourous: and as I do know well, that such things (if they
were known) should not be reputes honest. Nevertheless, the same being kept
secret, I think shall not be much dishonest. Notwithstanding dame Love is so
favorable unto me, that not only she has given me true judgment, in choice
of a friend but has reueiled unto me, that it is you, which is worthy to be
beloved, of such a lady as I am. For if I be not greatly deceived, I do
make account, that you be the fairest personage, the semeliest, the most
courteous, and wisest gentleman, in all the Realm of France. And as I may
say, by reason of his absence, that I am without a husband, so may you
affirm, that you be without a wife: wherefore I beseech you, for ye love that
I bear unto you, that you will not deny me your love and friendship, and that
you will have pity upon my young years, which doubtless do consume for you, as
Ice against the fiery flames. At which word the tears ran down in such
abundance, that where she thought to make further supplicacion and prayers, she
had no more power to speak. But holdyng down her head, like one that was
overcome, she threw her self down into the Earls lap, who like a faithful
knighte, began to blame (with sharp rebukes) her fond and foolish love:
pushyng her from him, as she was about to clepe him about the neck, and swore
great oaths, that rather he would be drawn in four pieces, then consent to
such a thing, to be done by him, or any other, against the honor of his lord
and master. Which words the Lady hearing, suddenly forgatte her love, and
in great rage, said unto him. Shall I then be frustrate, thou arrant
villain, in this wise of my desired joy? But since thou go about, to
seek my destruction: I will cause thee to be put to death, or else to be
banished the world. When she had said so, by and by she caught her self, by
the hear of the head, and almost tare it of clean, and then laid hands
upon her garments, rentyng the same in pieces, and afterward cried out
aloude. Help, help: The Earl of Angiers will rauishe me by force. The Earl
seeing that (and far more doubtyng of the envy, and malice of the Court,
then his own conscience, for any committed fact, fearyng also, that more
credit would be given, to the wickedness of the Lady, then to his
innocence) conveyed himself from that place, and so sone as he could, he went
out of the palace, and fled home to his own house, where without any further
advise, he placed his children on horseback, and so well as he could carried
them to Callice. At the brute and noise of the Lady, many people assembled.
Who seeing and hearing, thoccasion of her cry, not only believed her words,
but also affirmed, that the pompouse state of the Earl, was used by him to
bring to pass, the effect of his desire. Then they ran to the houses of the
Earl, in great fury, to arreste his person: but not findyng him there, they
first sacked his houses, and afterward ouerthrewe them to the ground. The
news hereof [so wicked as might be deuised] arrived at the King and Dolphins
Camp, whereat they were so troubled and offended, that they condemned the
Earl, and all his progeny, to perpetual exile: promisyng great gifts and
rewards, to them that would present them quick or dead. The Earl being
offended in his conscience, for that he was fled, innocente of the fact,
made himself culpable thereof, and arrived at Callice with his children,
dissemblyng what he was, and suddenly passed over into England, and in poor
apparel, traueiled up to London. And before he entered the city, he gave his
children diverse admonicions, but specially of two things. First, that they
should bear patiently the poverty, whereunto Fortune [without their offence]
had brought them. Afterward, that wisely they should take heed, at no time
to manifest, and declare to any man, from whence they came, and whose children
they were, as they loved the price of their own lives. The soonne was named
Jews, almost of the age of ix. years, and the daughter called Viole^ta, was
about the age of.vij. both which children, as their age could suffer them,
did well observe their fathers lesson, as afterward it did right well appear.
And because that this might the better be brought to pass, it seemed good unto
him, to alter their names, namyng the soonne Perotto, and the daughter
Gianetta. And when they were arrived at London, in manner of beggars: they
craved their almose, and being by Fortune for that purpose, one morning at a
church door, it came to pass that a great lady, which was one of the
Marshalles of Englandes wives, in going out of the Church, saw the Earl and
his two little children, beggyng their almose, of whom she demanded, what
country man he was, and whether those children were his own, or not. To whom
the Earl answered, that he was a Picarde, and by reason of a wicked fact,
dooen by his eldest soonne (that was an unhappy boie) he was forced to depart
his country, with those his two children. The Lady which was pitiful,
fixed her eyes upon the girl, who pleased her very much, because she was
beautiful, gentill, and pleasant, saying. Good man, if thou be content to
leave unto me, this thy little daughter, which has a good face, I will
willingly take her, and if she become a duetifull maiden, when she is
mariageable, I will marie her in honest wise. This demand greatly pleased
the Earl, who redely answered, that he was contented, and with tears
trickeling down his eyes he delivered, and commended his pretty daughter unto
her. And when he had thus well bestowed her he determined to tarry no longer
there, but in beggyng his almose, traueiled through the country, with his
soonne Perotto, and went into Wales, not without great labor and pain, as
one never accustomed to traueile on foot. Where dwelte one other of the king
of Englandes Marshalles, that was of great authority, and kept a noble
house: To whose court the Earl and his son, oftentimes repaired, to practice
and beg their living: where one of the Marshalles sons, and other
gentlemennes children, doing certain childishe sportes and pastymes, as to
run and leap, Perotto began to entermedle himself emonges them [who in those
games did so excellently well, as none was his better] which thing diverse
times the Marshall perceiving, and well pleased with the order of the child,
asked of whence he was. It was told him, that he was a poor man's soonne,
which many times came thither, to beg his almose. The Marshall desiryng the
child, the Earl, which prayed unto God for nothing else, liberally gave him
unto him, although it grieved him, to depart from him. The Earl then having
bestowed his son and his daughter, determined no longer to tarry in England,
but so well as he could, he passed over into Irelande, and when he was arrived
at Stanford, he placed himself, in the service of a man of arms, belonging to
an Earl of that country, doing all things that did belong unto a serving man,
or page: and not known to any man, he continued there a long time, with great
pain and toil. Violenta named Gianetta, that dwelte with the Lady at London,
grew so in years, in beauty, in personage, and in such grace and favor of
her lord and Lady, and of all the rest of the house, and so well beloved of
all them that knew her, that it was marvelous to see All men that saw her
manners and countenance, judged her to be worthy of great honor and
possessions, by reason whereof, the Lady that received her of her father, not
knowing what she was, but by his report, purposed to marry her honorably,
according to her worthiness. But God the rewarder of all men's deserts,
knowing her to be a noble woman, and to bear (without cause) the penance of
an other man's offense, disposed her otherwise, and to the intent, that this
noble gentlewoman, might not come into the hands, of a man of ill condition,
it must be supposed, that that which came to pass, was by Gods own will
and pleasure, suffered to be dooen. The gentlewoman, with whom Gianetta dwelt,
had but one only son by her husband, which both she and the father, loved
very dearly: as well because he was a soonne, as also that in virtue and good
merits, he greatly excelled. For he surpassed all other in good conditions,
valiaunce, goodness, and beauty of personage, being about six years elder
then Gianetta: who seeing the maiden, to be both fair and comely, became so
far in love with her, that he esteemed her above all things of the world.
And because he thought her to be of base parentage, he durst not demand her,
of his father and mother to wife. But fearyng that he should lose their favor:
he kept his love secret, whereby he was worse tormented, then if it had
been openly known. And thereby it chanced, through Loves malice, he fill sore
sick: For whose preseruacion, were many Phisians sent for, and they markyng
in him, all signs and tokens of sickness, and not knowing the disease: were
altogether doubtful of his health: whereof the father and mother took so
great sorrow and grief, as was possible, and many times with pitiful prayers,
they damaunded of him, the occasion of his disease. To whom he gave for
answer, nothing else but heavy sighs, and that he was like to consume, and
die for weakness. It chanced upon a day, there was brought unto him a
Physician, that was very young, but in his science profoundly learned, and
as he was holdyng him by the poulces, Gianetta (who for his mothers sake,
attended him very carefully) entered upon occasion into the chamber, where he
lay sick, and so sone as the young gentleman perceived her, and that she
spoke never a word, or made any sign, or demonstracion toward him, he felt
in his heart, to arise his most amourous defire, wherefore his poulces began
to beat, above their common custom, which thing the Physician immediately
perceived and merualled, sta^dyng still to se how long that fit would
continue. Gianetta was no sooner gone out of the chamber, but the beatyng of the
poulces ceased: wherefore the Physician thought, that he had found out some
part of the gentlemannes disease, and a little while after, seming to take
occasion to speak to Gianetta, holdyng him still by the arms, he caused her
to be called in, and she incontinently came: but she was no sooner come, but the
poulces began to beat again: and when she departed, the beatyng ceased.
Whereupon the Physician was thoroughly persuaded, that he understood the effect
of his sickness, and therewithal rose up, and taking the father and mother
aside, said unto them. The health of your son, does not consist in the
help of Phisicions, but remains in the hands of Gianetta your maid, as I
have perceived by most manifest signs, whom the young man fervently does
love. And yet (so far as I perceive) the maiden does not know it: you
therefore understand now what to do, if you love his life. The gentleman and
his wife hearing this, was somewhat satisfied: for so much as remedy might
be found, to save his life, athough it grieved them greatly, if the thing
whereof they doubted, should come to pass, which was the marriage between
Gianetta, and their soonne. The Physician departed, and they repaired to their
sick soonne: the mother saying unto him in this wise. My soonne, I would never
have thought, that thou would have kept secret from me, any part of thy
desire: specially, seeing that without the same, thou dooest remain in danger
of death. For thou art, or ought to be assured, that there is nothing that
may be gotten, for thy conte^tacion, what so ever it had been, but it should
have been provided for thee, in as ample manner as for my self. But since thou
haste thus done, it chau^ceth that our Lord God, has showed more mercy upon
thee, then thou hasle done upon thy self. And to the end thou shall not die of
this disease, he has declared unto me, the cause of the same: which is none
other, but the great love, that thou bear to a young maid, wherso ever she
be. And in deed thou ought not to be ashamed, to manifest thy love,
because it is meet and requisite for thine age. For if I wist thou could
not love, I would the less esteem thee. Now then, my good son, be not
afraied, franckly to discover all thine affection. Drive away the fury and
thought, which thou have taken, whereof this sickness comes: And comfort thy
self. Being assured, that thou shall desire nothing at my hands, that may be
done for thy contentacion, but it shall be accomplished of me, that loves
thee better, then mine own life: and therefore expel from thee this shame and
fear. And spare not to tell me, if I be able to do any thing, in that which
thou love. And if thou perceive, that I be not careful to bring it to
pass, repute me for the cruellest mother, that ever bare child. The young
gentleman hearing these words of his mother, was first ashamed, but after
thinkyng with himself, that none was so well able to pleasure him as she
(driuyng away all shame) said to her in this wise. Madame, there is none
other thing that has made me, to keep my love secret, but that, which I see
in many people, who after they be grown to years of discrecion, do never
remember that they have been young. But for so much, as herein I do see your
Ladyship discrete and wise, I will not only affirm that to be true, which
you have perceived in me, but also I will confess what it is, upon such
condition, that the effect thereof shall follow your promise, so far as lies
in you, whereby you shall be able to recover my life. Whereunto the mother
trusting to much in that, which she ought not to have accomplished, for
certain consideracions, which afterward came into her mind: Answered him
liberally, that he might boldly discover all his desire, and that forthwith she
would bring the same to pass. Madame (said the young man then) the great
beauty, and commendable qualities of your maiden Gianetta, whom as yet, not
only I have no power to entreat, to take pity upon me, but also I have made
no wight in the world, privy of this my love. The not disclosyng and secrecy
whereof, has brought me in case as you see: And if so be the thing, which you
have promised, do not by one mean or other come to pass, assure your self,
that my life is but short. The lady knowing, that it was more time to
comfort, then to reprehende, said unto him smilyng. Alas my soonne, were you
sick for this? Be of good chere, and when you are whole, let me alone. The
young gentleman being put in good hope, showed in little time tokens and signs,
of great amendeme^t. Whereof the mother was meruellous glad, disposyng her self
to prove, how she might observe that, which she had promised. And one day,
calling Gianetta unto her, demanded in gentle wise, by way of merry talk, if
she had not gotten her a lover. Gianetta with face all blushyng, answered.
Madame, I have no need thereof, and much more unseemly, for so poor a
damsel as I am, to meditate or think upon lovers, which am banished, from
my friends and kinsfolk: remainyng in service as I do. To whom the Lady
said. If you have none, we will bestow one upon you, which shall content
your mind, and make your life more delectable and pleasant. For it is null
mete, that so fair a maid as you be, should continue without a a lover.
Whereunto Gianetta answered. Madame, waiyng with my self, that you have taken
me from my poor father, and brought me up as your daughter: It becomes me to
do that, which pleases you. Notwithstanding, I intend never to make any
complainte to you, for lack of such a one (both for virtue and honesty
sake) but if it please you, to give me a husband, I purpose to love him, and
none other. For my progenitors have left me none other inheritance, but
honesty, which I mean to keep, so long as my life indureth. These words
to the Lady, seemed contrary to that, which she desired to know, to atchieue
her promise made to her soonne, although (like a wise Lady) to her self, she
greatly praised the damoset, and said unto her. But Gianetta, what if my Lord
the King, (which is a young Prince, and you a fair maiden) would take
pleasure in your love, would you refuse him? Whereunto the maid suddenly
answered. The King may well force me, but by consent, he shall never obtain
any thing, except it be honest. The Lady conceiuyng the courage, and
stoutnesse of the maiden in good part, said no more unto her: but thinkyng to
put the matter in proof, she told her son, that when he was whole, she
would put them both in a chamber that he might have his pleasure upon her.
For she thought it dishonest, to entreat her maid for her son because it
was the office of a Roffiana. The young man was nothing contented therewith,
whereby he suddenly waxed worsse and worsse: which the Lady perceiuyng,
opened her whole intent to Gianetta: but findyng her more constaunt, the ever
she was before; she told her husband, all that she had dooen, who agreed
(although against their wills) to give her to be his wife, thinking it better
(their son living) to have a wife vnagreable to his estate, then to suffer
him to die for her sake. Which after great consultacio^, they concluded,
where of Gianetta was merueilously well pleased, and with devout heart gave
thanks to God, for that he had not forgotten her. And yet for all that, she
would never name her self otherwise, then the daughter of a Picarde. The young
son waxed whole inco^tinently, and was married, the best contented man a live,
and began to dispose himself, lovingly to lead his life with her. Perotto,
which did remain in Wales with the other Marshall of the king of England,
semblably increased, and was well-beloved of his master, and was a very comely
and valiant personage, that the like of him, was not to be found in all the
Islande, in such wise that at Torneis, Iustes, and other factes of arms,
there was none in all the Country, comparable unto him: wherefore by the name
Perotto the Picarde, he was known and renowned. And like as God had not
forgotten his sister, even so he showed his merciful remembrance of him. For
a certain plague and mortality, happened in that Country, which consumed
the one haulfe of the people there: besides that the most part of them that
lived, were fled for fear into their countries, whereby the whole province,
seemed to be abandoned and desolate. Of which plague, the Marshall his
master, his wife, and his son, and many other brothers, neuewes, and
kinsfolk died, of who^ remained no more, but his only daughter, which was
mariageable, and some of his servants, together with Perotto, whom (after the
plague was somewhat ceased) the young gentlewoman took for her husband, through
the counsel and consent, of certain of the country people that were alive,
because he was a valiant and honest personage, and of all that inheritance,
which her father left, she made him Lord. Alitle while after, the king of
England understood, that the Marshall was dedde, and knowing the valor and
stoutnesse of Perotto the Picarde, he made him Marshall, in steed of him that
was dedde. In this sort in short time, it chanced to the two innocent
children of the Earl of Angiers, which were left by him as lost and quite
forlorn. It was then the.xviij. year, since the Earl fled from Paris,
having in miserable sort suffered many adventures. Who seeing himself to begin
to ware old, was desirous (being yet in Ireland) to know (if he could) what
was become of his children. Wherefore, perceiuyng that he was wholly altered from
his wanted form, and feelyng himself more lusty (through the long exercise
and labor, which he had sustained in service) then he was in the idle time of
his youth, he departed from his master (very poor and in ill apparel) with
whom he had continued in service a long time, and came into England to that
place, where he had left Perotto, and found him to be Marshall of the
country, and saw that he was in health, lusty, and a comely personage,
which reioysed him merueilously, but he would not make himself be known to
him, till he had seen, what was become of his daughter Gianetta: wherefore
taking his journey, he rested in no place, till he came to London. And there
secretly inquiryng of the lady, with whom he had left his daughter, and of her
state, he learned, that his daughter was her soonnes wife, whereof he took
excedyng great pleasure. And from that time forth, he compted his adversities
past, as nothing, since he had found his children living, and in such great
honor. And desirous to see her (began like a poor manne) to harbor himself,
hard by her house, whereupon a certain day, being seen of Giachetto Lamyens,
for that was the name of the husband of Gianetta: having pity upon him
because he saw him poor and old, commanded one of his servants, to have
him into the house: and to give him meat for Gods sake, which the servant
willingly did accomplish. Gianetta had many children by Giachetto, of which
the eldest was but eight years old: and they were the fairest, and best
favored children in the world who when they saw the Earl eat meat, they
all came about him, and began to make much of him, as though by natures
instruction, they had known him to be their Grandfather. And he knowing his
nephews, began to show them tokens of love and kindness. By reason whereof,
the children would not go from him, although their governor did call them
away. Wherefore the mother knowing the same, came out of a chamber unto the
place, where the Earl was, and threatened to bear them, if they would not do
as their master had them. The children began to cry, and said, that they
would tarry by that good manne: that loved them better, then their master did,
whereat the Lady and the Earl began to laugh. The Earl not as a father, but
like a poor man rose up to do honor to his daughter, because she was a
noble woman. Conceiuyng merueilous joy in his mind to see her: but she knew
him not at all, neither at that instant, nor after, because he was so
wonderfully transformed: and changed from that form, he was wont to be of:
Like one that was old, and graie hedded, having a bearde, lean and weather
beaten, resemblyng rather a common person, then an Earl. And the Lady seeing
that, the children would not depart from him, but still cried when they were
fetched away, willed the master, to let them alone. The children remainyng
in this sort, with the honest poor manne, the father of Giacchetto, came in
the mean time, and understood this of their master. Wherefore, he that cared
not for Gianetta, said. Let them alone with a mischief, to keep company
with beggars, of who^ they came. For of the mothers side, they be but
verlettes children, and therefore it is no marvel, though they love their
company. The Earl hearing those words, was very sorrowful, notwithstanding
(holdyng down his hedde) he suffered that injury, as well as he had done
many other. Giacchetto which knew the mirth and joy, that the children made
to the poor man (although he was offended with those words) nevertheless,
made as much of the poor Earl, as he did before. And when he saw him to
weep, he commanded that if he honest poor man, would dwell there to do some
service, he should be retained. Who answered, that he would carry there with a
good will, but he said that he could do nothing else, but keep horse,
whereunto he was accustomed, all the days of his life. To whom a horse was
appoincted to keep, and daily when he had dressed his horse, he gave himself
to play with the children. Whiles that Fortune thus dealt (according to the
manner above said) with the Earl of Angiers and his children, it chanced that
the French king (after many truces made with the Almaignes) died: and in his
place was crouned his son: whose wife she was, that caused the Earl to be
banished. When the last truce with the Almaignes was expired the wars began
to grow more sharp, for whose aid the king of England sent unto him (as to
his new kinsman) a great number of people, under the gouernemente of Perotto
his Marshall, and of Giacchetto Lamyens, soonne of his other Marshall, with
whom the poor Earl went: and not known of any man, remained a great while
in the Camp, as a servant, where notwithstanding, like a valiant man, with
his advise and deeds, he accomplished notable things (more then he was
required). It chanced that in the time of the wars, the French Queen was
very sore sick, and perceiuyng her self at the poincte of death, repented her
of all her sins, and was confessed devoutly, to the Archbishop of Roane, who
of all men, was reputed an holy, and virtuous manne: and among all her other
sins, she told him of the great wrong, done by her to the earl of Angiers:
and was not only contented, to reveal the same to him alone, but also
rehearsed the whole matter, before many other personages of great honor:
desiryng them that they would work so with the king, that if the Earl were
yet living, or any of his children: they might be restored, to their state
again. Not long after the Queen departed: and was honorably buried. Which
confession reported to the King (after certain sorrowful sighs, for the
injuries dooen to the valiaunte man) he made Proclamacion, throughout all the
Camp, and in many other places, that who so ever could bring forth the Earl
of Angiers, or any of his children, should for every of them, receive a great
reward, because he was innocent of that matter, for which he was exiled, by
the only confession of the Queen: and that he intended, to exalte him to his
former estate, and more higher then ever he was. Which thing the Earl hearing
(being in the habit of a servant) knowing it to be true, by and by he went
to Giacchetto, and prayed him to repair to Perotto, that they might come
together, because he would manifest unto them, the thing which the king sent
to seek for. And when they were all three assembled together in a chamber: the
Earl said to Perotto, that now he thought to let him understand, what he
was, saying these words. Perotto, Giacchetto whom thou see here, has
espoused thy sister, and never had yet any Dowry. And because she may not be
destitute of her Dowry, I purpose that he, and none other, shall have the
reward, which the king has promised to be so great. Thou shalt manifest thy
self Perotto, to be the soonne of the Earl of Angiers, and Violenta the wife
of Giacchetto, to be thy sister, and me to be the Earl of Angiers thy father.
Perotto hearing this, and steadfastly beholding him, began to know him: and
weeping, threw himself down at his feet: and afterward imbracyng him,
said. My dear father, you are right hartly welcome. Giacchetto hearing first
what the Earl had said, and after seeing what Perotto did, he was incontinently
surprised, with so great marvel, and joy, that he knew not what to do:
notwithstanding, giuyng credit to his words, as being ashamed of the
opprobrious talk, which he had used toward the Earl, as to a servant,
weping, fell down at his feet: and humbly asked pardon, for all his rash
behauiours toward him: which was courteously granted unto him by the Earl,
who took him up. And after every of them, had a while debated of their
Fortune, and had well bewailed the same, and reioysed one with an other:
Perotto and Giacchetto would have newly apparrelled the Earl, but he in any
wise would not suffer them. And being desirous ye Giacchetto, might have
assurance of the reward promised, he would that he should, first present him
to the king, after that sort, in the habit of a servant as he was, that he
might make him the more ashamed. The^ Giacchetto with the Earl (and Perotto
after) came before the king: and offered to present the Earl and his children,
if it should please him to reward him, according to the Proclamacion. The king
incontinently caused to be brought forth a reward, of merueilous value, as
Giacchetto thought, and commanded him forth with, to present the Earl and his
children, according to his promise. Giacchetto then turned about: and placed
before him, the Earl his servant, and Perotto, saying. Sir, behold the father
and the son, the daughter which is my wife, is not here. But by Gods help
you shall see her shortly. The king hearing this, beheld the Earl: and albeit
he was so greatly changed, from his former favor, after he had well viewed
him a while, he knew him, and with tears standing in his eyes, he caused the
Earl to rise up, that kneeled before him, kissyng and imbrasyng him, and very
graciously received Perotto: and commanded forthwith, that the Earl should
be restored to apparel, servants, horses, and furniture, according to his
state and degee: which incontinently was done: and moreover the king greatly
honored Giacchetto, and forthwith desired to know, all their Fortunes passed.
And when Giacchetto had taken the great reward, for bringyng forth the Earl
and his children, the Earl said unto him. Take these royal rewards of the
King, my sovereign Lord: and remember to tell thy father, that thy children,
his nephews and mine, be no beggars borne, of their mothers side. Giacchetto
took the reward, and caused his wife and his mother in Law, to come to Paris,
likewise thither came the wife of Perotto, where, with great joy and
triumph, they tarried a certain space with the Earl, to whom the king had
rendered all his gooddes: and had placed him in greater authority, then ever
he was before. Then every of them took their leave, and returned home to
their own houses: and from that time forth the said Earl, to the end of his
life, lived in Paris, in greater honor and authority, then ever he did
before.

Giletta a Phisicians daughter of Narbon^^, healed the French King of a
Fistula, for reward whereof she demanded Beltramo Count of Rossiglione to
husband. The Count being married against his will, for despite fled to
Florence and loved an other. Giletta his wife, by policy found means to lie
with her husband, in place of his lover, and was begotten with child of two
soonnes: which known to her husband, he received her again, and afterward
she lived in great honor and felicity.

The.xxxviij. Novel.
IN France there was a ge^tleman called Isnardo, the Count of Rossiglione,
who because he was sickly and diseased, kept always in his house a Phisicio^,
named master Gerardo of Narbona. This Count had one only son called
Beltramo, a very young child, pleasant and fair. With who^ there was
nourished and brought up, many other children of his age, emonges whom one of
the daughters of the said Physician, named Giletta, who fervently fill in
love with Beltramo, more then was meet for a maiden of her age. This Beltramo
when his father was dedde, and left under the royal custody of the king, was
sent to Paris, for whose departure, the maiden was very pensife. Alitle while
after, her father being likewise dedde, she was desirous to go to Paris, only
to see the young Count, if for that purpose she could get any good occasion.
But being diligently looked unto by her kinsfolk (because she was rich and
fatherless) she could see no conueniente way, for her intended journey: and
being now mariageable, the love she bare to the Count, was never out of her
remembrance, and refused many husbands, with whom her kinsfolk would have
placed her, without making the^ privy, to the occasion of her refusal. Now it
chanced that she burned more in love with Beltramo, the^ ever she did before,
because she heard tell, that he was grown to the state of a goodly young
gentlemanne. She heard by report, that the French King, had a swellyng upon
his breast, which by reason of ill cure, was grown to a Fistula, and did
put him to meruellous pain and grief, and that there was no Physician to be
found (although many were proved) that could heal it, but rather did impair
the grief, and made it worsse and worsse. Wherefore the king, like one that was
in despair, would take no more counsel or help. Whereof the young maiden was
wonderful glad, and thought to have by this means, not only a lawful
occasion to go to Paris: but if the disease were such (as she supposed)
easily to bring to pass, that she might have the Count Beltramo to her
husband. Whereupon with such knowledge, as she had learned at her fathers
hands before time, she made a powder of certain herbs, which she thought
meet for that disease, and rode to Paris. And the first thing she went about,
when she came thither, was to see the Count Beltramo. And then she repaired to
the king, praiyng his grace, to vouchsaufe to show her his disease. The king
perceiuyng her, to be a fair young maiden and a comely, would not hide it,
but opened the same unto her. So sone as she saw it, she put him in
comfort, that she was able to heal him, saying. Sire, if it shall please your
grace, I trust in God, without any pain or grief unto your highness, within
eighte days I will make you whole, of this disease. The king hearing her say
so, began to mock her, saying. How is it possible for thee, being a young woman
to do that, which the best renoumed Phisicions in the world can not? He
thanked her, for her good will, and made her a direct answer, that he was
determined no more, to follow the counsel of any Physician. Whereunto the
maiden answered: Sire, you despise my knowledge, because I am young, and a
woman, but I assure you, that I do not minister Physic by profession, but by
the aid and help of God: and with the cunnyng of master Gerardo of Narbona,
who was my father, and a Phisicio^ of great fame, so long as he lived. The
king hearing those words, said to himself. This woman peradventure, is sent
unto me of God, and therefore, why should I disdain to prove her cu^nyng?
Since she promises to heal me within a little space, without any offense or
grief unto me. And being determined to prove her, he said. Damsel, if thou
do not heal me, but make me to break my determinacion, what will thou
shall follow thereof? Sire said the maiden: Let me be kept in what guarde and
keeping you list: and if I do not heal you within these eight days, let me
be burnte: but if I do heal your grace, what recompense shall I have then?
To who^ the king answered. Because thou art a maiden, and unmarried, if thou
heal me, according to thy promise, I will bestow thee upon some gentleman,
that shall be of right good worship and estimacio^. To whom she answered: Sire I
am very well content, that you bestow me in marriage: But I will have such a
husband, as I my self shall demand: without presumpcion to any of your
children, or other of your bloudde. Which request, the king incontinently
granted. The young maiden began to minister her Physic, and in short space,
before her appoincted time, she had thoroughly cured the king. And when the king
perceived himself whole, said unto her. Thou have well deserved a husband (
Giletta) even such a one as thy self shall chose. I have then my Lord (quod
she) deserved the County Beltramo of Rossiglione, whom I have loved from my
youth. The king was very loathe to grant him unto her: But because he had
made a promis, which he was loathe to break, he caused him to be called
forth, and said unto him: Sir Count, because you are a gentleman of great
honor, our pleasure is, that you return home to your own house, to order
your estate, according to your degree: and that you take with you a Damsel,
which I have appoincted to be your wife. To whom the Count gave his humble
thanks, and demanded what she was? It is she q the king) that with her
medecines, has healed me. The Count knew her well, and had alredie seen her,
although she was fair, yet knowing her not to be of a stock, conuenable to
his nobility, disdainfully said unto the king, Will you then (sir) give me, a
Physician to wife? It is not the pleasure of God, that ever I should in that
wise bestow my self. To whom the king said: Will thou then, that we should
break our faith, which we to recover health, have given to the damsel,
who for a reward thereof, asked thee to husband? Sire (quod Beltramo) you may
take from me all that I have, and give my person to whom you please, because I
am your subject: but I assure you, I shall never be contented with that
marriage. Well, you shall have her (said the King) for the maiden is fair and
wise, and loves you most entirely: thinkyng verelie you shall lead a more
joyful life with her, then with a lady of a greater house. The count
therwithal held his peace: and the king made great preparacion for the
marriage. And when the appoincted day was come, the Count in the presence of
the king (although it were against his will) married the maiden, who loved him
better then her own self. Which dooen the Count determinyng before, what he
would do, prayed license to return to his country, to consummat the
marriage. And when he was on horseback, he went not thither, but took his
journey into Thuscane, where understanding that the Florentines, and Senois
were at wars, be determined to take the Florentines part, and was willingly
received, and honorable interteigned and made captain of a certain number
of men, continuyng in their service a long time. This new married gentlewoman,
scarce contented with that, and hopyng by her well doing, to cause him to
return into his country, went to Rossiglione, where she was received of all
his subjects, for their Lady. And perceiuyng that through the Countes
absence, all things were spoiled and out of order: she like a sage lady, with
great diligence and care, disposed all things in order again, whereof the
subjects reioysed very much, bearyng to her their hearty love and affection,
greatly blamyng the Count, because he could not content himself with her.
This notable gentlewoman, having restored all the country again, sent word
thereof to the Count her husband, by two Knights of the country, which
she sent to signify unto him, that if it were for her sake, that he had
abandoned his country, he should send her word thereof, and she to do him
pleasure would depart from thence. To whom he chorlishlie said. Let her do
what she list. For I do purpose to dwell with her, when she shall have this
ryng (meaning a ryng which he wore) upon her finger, and a soonne in her arms,
be gotten by me. He greatly loved that ryng, and kept it very carefully, and
never took it of from his finger, for a certain virtue that he knew it had.
The knights hearing the hard condition, of two things impossible: and seeing
that by the^ he could not be removed from his determinacion, they returned
again to the lady, telling her his answer: who very sorrowful, after she
had a good while bethought her self, purposed to find means, to attain to
those two things, to the intent, that thereby she might recover her husband.
And having advised with her self what to do, she assembled the noblest and
chiefest of her country, declaring unto them in lamentable wise, what she had
alredie dooen, to win the love of the Count, she wyngthem also what followed
thereof. And in the end said unto them, that she was loathe the Count for her
sake, should dwell in perpetual exile: therefore she determined, to spend the
rest of her time in pilgrimages and devotion, for preseruacion of her soul,
praiyng them to take the charge, and gouernemente of the country, and that
they would let the Count understand, that she had forsaken his house. And
was removed far from thence: with purpose never to return to Rossiglione
again. Many tears were shed by the people, as she was speaking these words
and diverse supplicacio^s were made unto him to alter his opinion, but al in
vain. Wherefore commending them all unto God, she took her way, with her
maid, and one of her kinsemen, in the habit of a pilgrim, well furnished
with silver, and precious Iewelles: tellyng no man whither she went, and never
rested, till she came to Florence: where arriuyng by Fortune, at a poor
widows house, she contented her self, with the state of a poor pilgrim,
desirous to here news of her lord, whom by fortune she saw the next day,
passing by the house (where she lay) on horseback with his company. And
although she knew him well enough, yet she demanded of the good wife of the
house what he was: who answered that he was a strange gentleman, called the
Count Beltramo of Rossiglione, a courteous knighte, and well-beloved in the
City, and that he was merueilously in love with a neighbor of hers, that was a
gentlewoman, very poor and of small substance, nevertheless of right honest
life and report, and by reason of her poverty, was yet unmarried, and dwelte
with her mother, that was a wise and honest Lady. The Countess well notyng
these words, and by little and little, debatyng every particular point thereof,
comprehendyng the effect of those news, concluded what to do, and when she
had well understood, which was the house, and the name of the Lady, and of
her daughter, that was beloved of the Count: upon a day repaired to the house
secretly, in the habit of a pilgrim, where finding the mother and daughter,
in poor estate emonges their family, after she had saluted them, told the
mother, that she had to say unto her. The gentlewoman risyng up, courteously
interteigned her, and being entered alone into a chamber, they satte down, and
the Countess began to say unto her in this wise. Madame, me think that ye be
one, upon whom Fortune does frown, so well as upon me: but if you please, you
may both comfort me, and your self. The lady answered, that there was
nothing in the world, whereof she was more desirous, then of honest comfort.
The Countess procedyng in her talk, said unto her. I have need now of your
fidelity and trust, whereupon if I do stay, and you deceive me, you shall
both undo me, and your self. Tell me then what it is hardly (said the
gentlewoman) if it be your pleasure: for you shall never be deceived of me.
Then the Countess began to recite, her whole estate of Love: tellyng her
what she was, and what had chanced ^^ that present day, in such perfect
order that the gentlewoman beleuyng her words, because she had partly heard
report thereof before, began to have compassion upon her, and after that the
Countess had rehearsed, all the whole circumstance, she continued her purpose,
saying. Now you have heard emonges other my troubles, what two things they
be, which behooves me to have, if I do recover my husband, which I know
none can help me to obtain, but only you: If it be true that I hear, which
is, that the Count my husband, is far in love with your daughter. To who^
the gentlewoman said. Madame, if the Count love my daughter, I know not,
albeit the likelihoode is great: but what am I able to do, in that which you
desire. Madame, answered the Countess, I will tell you: but first I will
declare what I mean to do for you, if my determinacio^ be brought to effect, I
see your faier daughter of good age, ready to marie, but as I understand ye
cause, why she is unmarried, is the lack of substance to bestow upon her.
Wherefore I purpose, for recompense of the pleasure, which you shall do for
me, to give so much ready money to marie her honorably, as you shall think
sufficient. The Countess offer was very well liked of the lady, because she
was but poor: yet having a noble heart, she said unto her Madame, tell me
wherein I may do you service: and if it be a thing honest, I will gladly
perform it, and ye same being brought to pass, do as it shall please you. Then
said the countess, I think it requisite, that by some one whom you trust,
that you give knowledge to the Count my husband, that your daughter is, and
shall be at his commandment. And to the intent she may be well assured, that
he loves her in deed above any other, that she prays him to send her a
ring that he wears upon his finger, which ring she heard tell, he loved
very derely. And when he se^deth the ryng, you shall give it unto me, and
afterward send him word, that your daughter is ready, to accomplish his
pleasure, and then you shall cause him secretly to come hither, and place me by
him (in steed of your daughter) peradventure God will give me the grace, that
I may be with child, and so having this ryng on my finger, and the child in
mine arms, begotten by him I shall recover him, and by your means continue
with him, as a wife ought to do with her husband. This thing seemed difficulte
unto the Ge^tlewoman: fearyng that there would follow, reproach unto her
daughter. Notwithstanding, considering what an honest part it were, to be a
mean, that the good Lady should recover her husband, and that she should do
it for a good purpose, having affiaunce in her honest affection, not only
promised the Countess, to bring this to pass: but in few days with great
subtlety, following the order wherein she was instructed, she had gotten the
ryng, although it was with the Countes ill will, and took order that the
Countess, instead of her daughter did lie with him. And at the first meetyng,
so affectuously desired by the Count: God so disposed the matter that the
Countess was begotten with child, of two goodly sons, and her delivery
chanced at the due time. Whereupon the gentlewoman, not only contented the
Countess at that time, with the company of her husband, but at many other
times so secretly, that it was never known: the Count not thinkyng that he
had lien with his wife, but with her whom he loved. To whom at his vprisyng in
the morning, he used many courteous and amiable words, and gave diverse fair
and precious Iewelles, which the Countess kept most carefully: and when
she perceived her self with child, she determined no more to trouble the
gentlewoman, but said unto her. Madame, thanks be to God and you, I have the
thing that I desire, and even so it is time, to recompense your desert, that
afterward I may depart. The gentlewoman said unto her, that if she had
done any pleasure agreeable to her mind she was right glad thereof, which she
did, not for hope of reward: but because it apperteined to her by well doing,
so to do. Whereunto the Countess said, your saying pleases me well, and
likewise for my part, I do not purpose to give unto you, the thing you shall
demand of me in reward, but for consideracion of your well doing, which
ductie forces me so to do. The gentlewoman then constrained with necessity,
demanded of her with great bashefulnesse, and hundred pounds, to marie her
daughter. The Countess perceiuyng the shamefastness of the gentlewoman, and
hearing her courteous demand, gave her.v. C. pounds, and so many fair and
costly Jewels, which almost amounted to like valor. For which the
gentlewoman more then contented, gave most hearty thanks to the Countess,
who departed from the gentlewoman, and returned to her lodging. The
gentlewoman to take occasion from the Count, of any farther repair, or
sendyng to her house, took her daughter with her, and went into the country
to her friends. The Count Beltramo, within few days after, being revoked
home to his own house by his subjects, (hearing that the Countess was
departed from thence) returned. The Countess knowing, that her housband was
gone from Florence, and returned into his country, was very glad, and
contented, and she continewed in Florence, till the time of her child bed was
come, and was brought a bed of two soones, which were very like unto their
father, and caused the^ carefully to be noursed, and brought up, and when she
saw time, she took her journey (unknown to any manne) and arrived at
Monpellier, and restyng her self there for certain days, hearing news of the
Count, and where he was, and that upon the day of all Saints, he purposed
to make a great feast, and assembly of ladies and knights, in her pilgrims
weed she went thither. And knowing that they were all assembled, at the
palace of the Count, ready to sit down at the table, she passed through
the people, without change of apparel, with her two sons in her arms. And
when she was come up into the hall, even to the place where the Count was,
falling down prostrate at his feet, weeping said unto him: My Lord, I am thy
poor unfortunate wife, who, to the intent thou might return and dwell in
thine own house, have been a great while beggyng about the world. Therefore I
now beseech thee, for the honor of God, that thou will observe the conditions,
which the two knights (that I sent unto thee) did command me to do: for
behold, here in mine arms, not only one soonne begotten by thee, but
twain, and likewise thy King. It is now time then (if thou keep promis) that
I should be received as thy wife. The Count hearing this, was greatly
astonned, and knew the King, and the children also, they were so like him.
But tell me ( q he) how is this come to pass? The Countess to the great
admiracio^ of the Count, and of all those that were in presence, rehearsed
unto them in order all that, which had been done, and the whole discourse
thereof. For which cause the Count knowing the things she had spoken, to be
true (and perceiuyng her constaunt mind, and good wit, and the two faier
young boys: to keep his promise made, and to please his subjects, and the
Ladies that made suit unto him, to accept her, from that time forth, as his
lawful wife, and to honor her) abiected his obstinate rigor: causyng her to
rise up, and embraced and kissed her, acknowledgyng her again for his lawful
wife. And after he had apparelled her, according to her estate, to the great
pleasure and contentacion, of those that were there, and of all his other
friends, not only that day, but many others, he kept great chere, and from
that time forth, he loved and honored her, as his dear spouse and wife.

Tancredi Prince of Salerne, caused his daughters lover to be slain, and sent
his heart unto her, in a cup of gold: which afterward, she put into
poisoned water, and drinkyng thereof, died.

The.xxxix. Novel.
TAncredi Prince of Salerne, was a courteous Lord, and of a gentle nature: had
he not in his age, imbrued his hands, with his own proper blood. It chanced
that this prince in all his life time, had but one only daughter: but he had
been more happy, if she had never been borne. That daughter he loved so well,
as a father could love his child: and for the tender love he bare her, he was
not able to suffer her, to be out of his sight. And could not find in his
heart to marie her, although she had many years passed the time, that she was
marriage able: notwithstanding, in the end he gave her to wife, to one of the
soonnes of the Duke of Capua, with whom she continued no long time, but was a
widow, and then returned unto her fathers house again. This Lady was very
fair and comely of body and face, as any creature could be, young, lusty,
and more wise, peradventure, then a woman ought to be. And thus dwelling with
her loving father, she lived like a noble Lady, in great pleasure. And seeing
that her father, for the love he bare unto her had no mind or care, to marie
her again, and also she thinking it skarce honest to require him thereunto,
devised with her self secretly (if it were possible) to retain some valiant
man to be her lover. And seeing many gentlemen and others, frequentyng her
fathers court (as we commonly see, in the Courts of Princes) and markyng the
behavior and order of many (emonges all) there was a young man, one of her
fathers servants, that liked her well, whose name was Guiscardo, of very
base birthe (but in virtue and honest conditions, more noble then the rest)
and many times when she saw him, she wonderfully delited in him, always
praisyng his doings above all others. The young manne, not having good
consideracion of himself, perceiuyng her feruente affeccion: so fixed his mind
that he disposed the same upon nothing else, but to love her. One loving an
other secretly in this sort, and the lady very studious to find occasion,
that she might talk with him, unwillyng to commit the secrecy of hre love, to
any manne: she imagined with her self a new devise, to give him knowledge
thereof. And wrote a letter, signifiyng unto him, what he should do the next
day, and how he might use himself, to come to talk with her, and then
puttyng the letter into the Cane of a read, she gave it unto Guiscardo, in
sportyng wise and said. Thou shall this night, make a pair of Bellows for
thy servant, wherewith she may kindle the fire. Guiscardo took it, and
thought that she did not give it unto him, without some special purpose,
whereupon he went to his chamber, and loking upon the Cane, perceived it to be
hollow, and openyng it, found the letter within, which she had written. And
when he had well perused it, understanding the tenor and effect thereof, he
thought himself the happiest manne in the world, and began to put himself in
readiness, to mete with his Lady, by such ways and means, as she had to him
appoincted. There was in a corner of the princes palace a Cave, long time
before made, under the side of a hille, which Cave received light by a
certain vente, made by force within the said mountain, and because the same
was not frequented and used, it was over grown with busshes and thorns. Into
which Cave was a discente, by a secret pair of staiers, that was in one
ofthe lowest chambers of the pallaice, wherein the lady lay, which was out
of all men's mind, because it was not occupied, many a day before and shut
up, with a very strong door. But Love (in the eyes whereof, nothing is so
secret, but it will come to knowledge) had brought the same again, into the
remembrance of the amourous Lady. The openyng of which door (that no man
might know it) many days did trouble her wits: afterward when she had found
the way, she went down a lone into the Cave, and viewyng the vente, whereunto
she had given order for Guiscardo to come, she told him of what height it was
from the ground. For the execucion whereof, Guiscardo prepared a rope with
knottes and degrees, to go up and down, and puttyng upon him a leather coat,
to keep him from the thorns and bushes, went douns the next night at the said
vent, unknown of any man: and fastenyng one of the ends of the rope, to the
stock of a tree, that grew at the mouth of the ve^t he slipte down into the
Cave, and tarried there for the Lady, who next day fainyng her self to sleep
after diner, sent her maids out of her chamber, and locked herself within a
lone: and then opened the door, and went down into the Cave, where findyng
Guiscardo they merueilously reioysed one with an other. And from thence went up
together into her chamber: where they remained togethers, the most part of
that day, to their great contentacion. And having given good order, for the
affairs of their Love, and the secret use thereof, Guiscardo returned into
the Cave, and the lady locked the door, and came out emonges her maids. The
next night after, Guiscardo issued out of the vent upon the rope, wherewith he
descended, and conveyed himself into his chamber. And having learned the way,
he resorted thither many times after. But Fortune envious of that pleasure, so
long and great, with dolorous success, turned the joy of those two lovers,
into heavy and sorrowful end. The Prince accustomed sometimes, to resort
alone into his daughters chamber, and there for a while to tarry and talk with
her, and so to depart. Who upon a day after diner, when the Lady (whose name
was Gismonda) was in the garden withal her maidens, repaired unknown or seen
of any man into her chamber. But being loathe to trouble his daughter of her
pleasure, and findyng the windows of her chamber shut, and the curtens of
the bed drawn, he satte down upon a stool at the beds feet, and leanyng
his hedde to the bed, the Curteine drawn over him (as he had been hidden of
purpose) he fell a sleep. And the King being thus a sleep, Gismonda that (in
evil time) the same day had appoincted Guiscardo to come, left her maidens in
the Gardein, and entered very softly into her chamber, lockyng fast the door
after her. And not knowing any manne to be there, she opened the door of the
Cave to Guiscardo, who was ready to wait for her coming. Then they cast the^
selves upon the bed, as they were wont to do, and thus solacing themselfes,
and passing the time together, it chanced that the Prince awaked who heard and
saw, what Guiscardo and his daughter did. Whereof being very sorrowful, he
would upon the first sight have cried out: but that he thought it better,
for that time to hold his peace, and still to keep himself secret, to the
intent that he might more privily, and with less shame, accomplish that,
which he purposed to do. The two lovers continued togethers a great time,
as they were wont to do, without any knowledge of the Prince his being there,
and when they saw time, they went down from the bed: and Guiscardo
retournyng to the Cave, she went forth of her chamber, fro whence Tancredi (as
old as he was) conveyed himself into the Gardein, out at a window of the
same, unseen, and not perceived of any man. Who like a pensife manne, and
careful even unto death, repaired to his own chamber, and the next night,
about one of the clock, he caused Guiscardo to be apprehended, by an order
that he had prescribed, at his coming forth of the Cave, even clothed as he
was, with his leather coat: and by two men was secretly conveyed to the
Prince. Who so sone as he saw him, said unto him with tears, standing in his
eyes. Guiscardo, my benevolence and goodness toward thee, have not merited
this outrage and shame, that thou haste committed this day, in mine own
house, which I saw with mine own eyes. To whom Guiscardo gave no other
answer, but that Love was of greater force, then either the Prince, or
himself. Then the Prince commanded him to be kept, in a chamber adioinyng. The
next day the King ( Gismonda being ignoraunte hereof) reuolued in his mind,
diverse and sundry matters, and after diner as he was accustomed, he went into
his daughters chamber, and caused her to be called unto him, and shutting the
Chamber door, in lamentable wise, said unto her.

Gismonda, I had so much affiance and trust, in thy virtue and honesty, that
it could never have entered into my mind (although it had been told me) if I
had not seen it with mine own proper eyes, but that thou had not only in
deed, but also in thought, abandoned the company of all men, except it had
been thy husband: whereof I shall be right pensife and sorrowful so long as this
little remnaunte of life (that mine old age does preserve) indureth in me. And
since thou could not contain thy self, from such dishonest love, I would it
had pleased God, that thou had taken a man, equal to thine estate. But
emonges so many that do frequent my court, thou have chosen this young manne
Guiscardo, whose birthe is very vile and base, and brought up (as it were for
Gods sake) from a child, to this present day, in our court. For which
consideracion, I am very sore disquieted, not knowing how to take this at thy
hands. For with him (who^ I have caused to be taken this night, in going out
of the cave, and now kept as prisoner) I have alredie concluded, what to do.
But with thee what I shall do, God knows. Of the one side, the love that I
still bear thee, more then any father ever bare to his daughter, does draw
me, on the other side, a just displeasure and indignacion, taken for thy
great folly, does move me. The one mocion would that I should pardon thee,
the other forces me against my nature, to be cruel unto thee.
Notwithstanding, before I do make any certain resolucion, I desire to hear,
what thou can say for thy self. When he had spoken those words, he kissed
her face, weeping very bitterly like a child, that had been beaten. Gismonda
hearing her father, and knowing that not only her secret love was discovered,
but also her lover Guiscardo to be in prison, conceived an inestimable sorrow,
uttering the same many times, without cries and schreches, according to the
manner of women, how beit, her great courage surpassed her weakness, and did
set a bold face on the matter, with marvelous sloutnesse determinyng, before
she made any suit for her self, no longer to live, seeing that her friend
Guiscardo was alredie dead. Wherefore, not like a sorrowful woman, or one
taken in any fault, but as a desperate person, with a dry and stout
countenance, not troubled or vexed, she said thus to her father. I do not
purpose dear father, to stand in denial, nor yet by humble suit to make
request. For the one will nothing avail me, and the other is to none effect.
Moreover I do not intend by any means, to beseech your clemency and love
toward me, to be beneuolent and bountiful, but co^fessyng the truth, I
will first with true reasons and arguments, defend mine houour, and
afterward prosecute in virtuous wise, by effects, the stoutnesse of my
courage. True it is, that I have loved, and do love Guiscardo, and will love
him so long as I live, which shall be but a little time. And if so be that a
woman may love a man, after death, I will not cease to love him. But woma^ly
frailty and weakness, has not so much induced me hereunto, as the little
care you have had, to bestow me in marriage, and the great virtues, that
daiely I have seen in Guiscardo. You ought dear father to know, that your
self is of flesh, and of flesh you have engendered me your daughter, and not
of Stone or Iron. In likewise you ought, and must remember (although now you
be arrived to old years) what young folks be, and of what great power, the
law of youth is. And although you were (during the force of your youthlie
days) trained and exercised in factes of arms, yet now you ought to know,
what great puissaunce rests in the idle and delicate life, as well in the
aged, as emonges young people. I am then as you be, begotten of flesh, and my
years so few, that I am yet but young, and thereby full of lust and delight.
Whereunto the knowledge, which I have had alredie in marriage, forces me to
acco^plishe that desire: and to the same be added merueilous forces, against
which it is impossible for me to resist, but rather to follow that, whereunto
they draw me. I am become amourous, like a young woman and like a woman as I am,
and certainly I would have employed my whole force that way, so far as I
could not to commit any shame to you, or to my self in that, whereunto my
natural offense has forced me. To which thing, pitiful Love, and gentle
Fortune have found out, and showed a way secret enough, whereby without
knowledge of any man, I am come to the effect of my desires; which thing I
will no deny (who so ever told you of it, or by what means so ever you are
come to the knowledge thereof) and I have not taken Guiscardo, to be my lover by
chance, as many women have done, but I have chosen him by long advise and
deliberacion, above all others, and have brought him into me in this wise,
inioiyng with our wise continuance of long time, the accomplishment of my
desire, whereof me think (although I have not offended but by Love) that you
do purpose to prosecute rather the vulgar opinion, then the truth, purposyng
in this wise most bitterly to co^ptroll me, saying, that you had not had such
an occasion of anger, if I had chosen one that had been a gentleman. Wherein
you do not consider, that the fault is not mine, but rather to be ascribed to
Fortune who ought to be blamed, because many times she exalts the unworthy,
and treads under foot, those that be most worthy: but now let us leave of
further talk of this matter, and consider the beginning hereof. First of all
you see, that of one mass of flesh, we have all received flesh, and that
one Creator, has created every living creature, with force and puissance
equally, and with equal virtue: which virtue was the first occasion that made
the difference, and distinccion of us all, that were borne, and be borne
equal, and they that obtained the greatest part of virtue, and did the works
of her, were called noble, the rest continuyng unnoble. And albeit contrary
use, afterward obscured this Law: yet therefore, she is not removed ne
abandoned from Nature, or good manners. In like wise, he that by virtue
performs all his doings, does manifestly show himself to be noble. And
he that does otherwise term him, does commit the fault, and not he that
is so called. Behold all your gentlemen, and examine well their virtue, their
conditions, and manner of doings. On the other part, behold the qualities and
conditions of Guiscardo, then if you please to give judgment without
affeccion, you shall say that he is right noble: and that all your gentlemen
be villains, in respect of him. The virtues and excellency of whom, I
believe can not be placed in any other wight, as in him, as well by your own
report as by the choice of mine own eyes. Who ever praised man in such wise,
and with such ample commendacions praise worthy, wherein an honest man ought
to be praised, as you have done him? And truly not without cause. For if mine
eyes be not deceived, you never gave him any praise, but that I have known
more in him, then your words were able to express. Notwithstanding, if I
have been deceived herein, it was you, by whom I have been deceived: will you
then say that I couple my self, with a man of base condition? Truly you
can not well say so. But if you will say, perchance with a poor man, I
confess it. And verily it is to your shame, that you have not vouchesaufed to
place in high estate, a man so honest, being your own servant.
Nevertheless, poverty does not deprive any part of nobility, but riches
has. Many kings and great Princes, have been poor in old time, and many
plough men and shepherdes in times paste, have been aduau^ced to rich estate.
And the last doubt which troubles you, is, that you be doubtful, what to
do with me: cast boldly out of your mind that doubt, and if you do
intend in thextremitie of your age, to use that, which in your youth you
never did, I purpose to become cruel also. Use your cruelty against me, for
the aduoidyng whereof, I have not determined to make any supplicacion to you, as
guilty of this fault if faults may be rehearsed. Assuryng you, that if you
do not unto me, that which you have dooen, or will do to Guiscardo, mine
own hands shall do it. Wherefore go to, and let fall your tears with
women, and if you purpose to be cruel, kill him and let me also drink of
the same Cup, if you think we have deserved it. The king hearing the stout
words of his daughter: thought not that she would have done in deed, as her
words pretended, and as she said she would do. Wherefore departing from
her, and not willing to use any manner of cruelty toward her, he thought by
the destruction and slaughter of Guiscardo, to cool her burning love. And
therefore commanded two of his servants (that had Guiscardo in keeping)
without any noise, to strangle him the next night, and afterward pluckyng his
heart out of his body, to bring it unto him: who did as they were commanded.
And the next day, the king caused a faier Cup of gold, to be brought unto
him, wherein he laid the heart of Guiscardo, which he sent (by one of his
familer servants) unto his daughter: and commanded him, when he presented
the same unto her to say these words. Thy father has sent thee this
present, to comfort thy self with the thing, which thou do chiefly love,
as thou have comforted him of that, which he loved most. Gismonda not amoued
from her cruel determinacio^, caused to be brought unto her (after her father
was gone) venomous herbs and roots, which she distilled together, and made
water thereof, to drink suddenly, if that came to pass, which she doubted.
And when the kings servant, was come unto her, and had delivered his
present, he said as he was commanded Gismonda took the cup with a stout
countenance, and coueryng it, so sone as she saw the heart, and understood
the words, she thought verily, that it was the heart of Guiscardo, wherefore
beholding the servant, she said unto him: Truly it behooves that such a
heart as this is, should be intombed in no worsse grave, then in gold, which
my father has most wisely done. Afterward liftyng the cup to her mouth,
she kissed it saying, I have in all things, even unto this time, being the
last end of my life, always found the tender love of my father toward me;
but now I know it to be greater, then ever I did before. And therefore in my
behalf, you shall render unto him, the last thanks that ever I shall give
him, for so great a present. After those words, tourning her self toward
the cup, which she held fast, beholding the heart, she said thus. Oh
sweet harborough of my pleasures, cursed be the cruelty of him, that has
caused me at this time to look upon thee, with the eyes of my face: it was
pleasure enoughe, to see thee every hour, emonges people of knowledge and
understanding. Thou have finished thy course, and by that end, which Fortune
vouchsaufed to give thee thou art dispatched, and arrived to the end,
whereunto all men have recourse: thou have forsaked the miseries, and traueiles
of this world, and have had by the enemy himself, such a sepulture as thy
worthiness deserves. There needs nothing else to accomplish thy funeralle,
but only the tears of her, whom thou did heartily love, all the days of
thy life. For having whereof, our Lord did put into the head, of my
unmerciful father, to send thee unto me, and truly I will bestow some
tears upon thee: although I was determined to die, without sheadyng any tears
at all, stoutly, not fearful of any thing. And when I have powered them out
for thee, I will cause my soul, which thou have heretofore so carefully kept,
to be joined with thine. For, in what company can I travel, more contented,
or in better saufgarde in places unknown, then with thy soul? Truly I am
well assured, that it is yet here within: that has respect to the place,
as well of his own pleasures, as of mine, being assured (as she who is
certain, that yet he loves me) that he attenddeth for my soul: of whom she
is so greatly beloved. When she had thus said, she began to let fall (as
though there had been a fountain in her hedde) so many tears, that it was a
miracle to behold her, ofte^tymes kissyng the dedde heart. Her maidens that
stood about her, understood not what heart that was, nor whereunto these
words did tend: but being moved with compassion, they all wept: pitifully
demanding (although in vain) the occasion of her sorrowful plaintes: and
comforted her so well as they could. Who after she had powered for the
sufficient tears, lifted up her hedde: and when she had wiped hereyes, she
said. Oh loving heart, all my duty is fulfilled toward thee, having now
nothing to do, but only to yield forth my ghost, to acco^panie thine. And
this said, she caused the glass of water, which she had made the day
before, to be brought unto her: and poured it out into the cup where the
heart lay, all bained with a multitude of tears: which she puttyng to her
mouth, without fear, drunk up all. And that dooen, went into her bed, with
the Cup in her hand, tossyng her body, as decently as she could upon the
same, holdyng the heart of her dedde friend, so nere as she could, unto her
own heart. Her maidens seeing this (although they knew not what water it was,
that she drank) sent word to the king, who fearyng that which happened,
incontinently went down into his daughters chamber: where he arrived even at
that instaunte, that she had cast her self upon the bed, and being come to
late to succor her, with sweet words be began (seeing her in those pangues, to
weep bitterly. To whom his dougther said: Father, keep in those undesired
tears, and bestow them not upon me, for I desire them not; who ever saw
manne besides you, to bewail the wilfulness of his own fact. Howbeeit, if
there do yet rest in you, any spark of that love, which you have always
borne toward me: grant me this last request, that although you were not
contented, that I should live secretly and covertly with Guiscardo, yet at
lest, cause our bodies to be openly buried togethers, where it pleases you to
bestow them. The anguishe and sorrow, would not suffer the prince to answer
one word for weping. And then the Lady perceiuyng her end approach, cleped
and strained the dead heart, hard to her stomach, saying. Farewell sweet heart
in God for I am going to him. And there withal she closed her eyes, and lost
her senses, departing out of this dolorous life. In this manner sorowfullie
ended the love of Gismonda and Guiscardo, as you have heard, whom the Prince
after he had wept his fill, and taken to late repentance for his cruelty:
caused honorably to be buried, and intombed both in one grave, not without
great sorrow of all the people of Salerne.

Mahomet one of the Turkishe Emperors, executes curssed cruelty upon a Greek
maiden, who^ he took prisoner, at the winning of Constantinople.

The.xl. Novel.
IF you do ever make any proof or trial, to know of what trampe the
arrows of Love be, and what fruicte they bring to them, that do use and
practice the same: I am assured you shall be touched with some pity, when ye
understand the beastly cruelty of an Infidel lover, toward his Lady. He
of whom I will declare the history, is Mahomet, not the false Prophet, but
the great graundfather of Solima^ Ottoman Emperor of the Turks, which
reigned at that time. He it is, that to the shame and eternal infamy, of all
Christian Princes of his time, did win Constantinople, and took away the
East Empire form Constantine, a Christian Emperor, the year of our Lord.
1453. Mahomet then having obtained so great victory at Constantinople:
emonges the spoil of that rich city, there was found a Greek maiden, of
such rare and excellent beauty, that she allured the eyes of every wight, to
wonder and behold the same, as a thing miraculous, whose name was Hirenee, of
the age of sixtene or seuentene years. Whom a Captain to gratify his Lord,
did present: a Jewel (as he thought) most acceptable to him, above all
things of the world. The Emperor Mahomet, young and wanton beyond measure,
after he had cast his eye upon the maiden, and had graven her beauty in his
heart, gave a straight charge, that she should be kept for him, hopyng after
the tumulte of the war was ended, to bestow convenient time upon her. The
retract sounded, and the affairs of the Empire, reduced to sure estate,
remembering himself of the beauty of Hyrenee, which had made a breach and
entry into his heart, commanded that she should be brought forth unto him,
and having viewed her at his pleasure, he felt himself so surprised with that
new flame, that he conceived none other delight, but to play and dally with
her, in such sort, that his spirits being in Loves full possession, Love
dealt with him so cruelly, that he could take no rest day nor night. Who
yielded himself such a pray, to his darlyng Hyrenee, that he felt none other
contentacion in his mind, but that which he received of her. And this amorous
passion endured, the space of three continual years, taking such vigor and
increase by little and little, that he began to forgette that, which apperteined
to the ornamente and honor of his Empire, leauyng the whole administracio^ of
public causes to his Baschats, he himself being so necligent, that he reposed
in them, all matters concerning the state of the Empire. During this disorder,
the vulgar people began secretly to grudge, as well for the confusion and
disorder of the Empire, as for the ill government of the same (and specially,
because the Baschats corrupted with avarice, employed themselfes to their
particular profit, and to inriche themselfes, with the spoil of the people.)
The Ianissaries on the other side, a warlike people, and brought up in
continual exercise of arms, began with open voice to detracte and slander
their Lord, commonly complainyng, how he consumed his life, like an
effeminate person, without inferryng or doing any profit to the Empire. To be
short, the matter came to such desolacion, that it might rather have been
called a sedicion, then a murmr: and yet there was none so hardy, as durst
attempt, to declare the same to the Emperor, knowing him to be of nature so
terrible, cruel, and rigorous, that with a word, he would put him to death,
that went about to withdraw him from his desire. Therwithall he was so dronke
with the beauty of the Greek, that the least matter, wherewith they might give
occasion, to withdraw him from his necligent life, was enough to drive him
into a rage and fury. This poor Emperor was so bewitched, that not only he
consumed, days and nights with her, but he burned with continual Ialousie,
whose beauty was so lively painted, in the inward parts of his heart and
mind, that he remained thus overwhelmed in beastly pleasure, every man in
particular, and all in general, conspired against him, with one determinate
mind, to yield no more obedience unto him in time to come, and purposed to
chose some Emperor, that were more marciall and warlike, through whose succor
and counsel, they might not only conserve the things gotten, but also
amplify the bounds, and limits of their Empire. Mustapha which was brought
up with the Emperor, a gentle personage, frank of talk, and so nere to his
majesty, that he might go into his chamber, although the Greek was present:
when he perceived conueniente time, such as he desired to have, repaired to
the Emperor upon a day, who likyng well his devises, walked with him alone in
his Gardein, to whom after he had made great reverence, according to their
custom, he said unto him.

My sovereign lord and master, if I might speak freely, without servile
fear, which staieth me, or if the terror of your displeasure might not
abashe me, I would willingly declare unto your majesty, that which
concerns not only your security and saufgarde, but (which is more) the
sauftie of your whole Empire. Who^ Mahomet answered with merry countenance,
saying. Cast a way such cold fear as staieth thee, and speak hardely thy
mind. Show me what it is that touches me. I doubt, and it shall please your
majesty, lest I shall seem over presumptuous, and rash unto you, if I do
discover the secrets of my heart, but our ancient educacion, the duty of my
conscience, with the experience, that you have always had of my fidelity,
have so much forced me, that being no longer able to rule my self (I am
constrained, by what virtuous prouocacion, I know not) to manifest things
unto you, that both time and necessity, will make you to think them good and
necessary: Although (it may so be) that now your eyes be so bound up, in
the veil of your disordinate affection, that you can not digest, or take the
same in good part. The life (my lord) which you have led, since the
taking of Constantinople, and the excessive pleasures, wherein you have
plu^dged your self these three years, is an occasion, that not only your
soldiers, and the rest of your popular people, but the most faithful lords
of your Empire, do murmr, conspire, and conjure against you. And pardon me
(my Lord) if I speak so irreverently, in things touching your preseruacion.
For there is no man, but does very much merueile, of this great and new
alteracio^ that appears in you, which does so abase you, and makes you to
degenerate, from your ancient generositie and valiaunce. Your own self has
given over your self, to be a spoil and pray to a simple woman: that you
wholly depend upon her flattries and allurementes: reason or counsel ca^
take no place in your passionate and afflicted heart. But I humbly beseech
your Majesty, to enter a little into your self, and make a survey of your
life, that you have sedde these three years past. The glory of your
ancestors and predecessors, acquired and won by sheadyng of so much
bloudde, kept by so great prudence, conserved by so happy counsel, have
they no representacion, or show before your face? The remembrance of their
memorable victories, does it not touch the depthe of your conscience? The
magnanimite and valiaunce, whereby they be immortalized, and their fame
registered through the whole world, is it extinguished in you? Their Trophies
and monume^tes graven, and advanced in all the corners of the earth, be they
thrown down and defaced, from the siege of your remembrance? But where is
now, the ardent desire, which boiled in you from your infancy, to make Italy
tributarie unto you, and to cause your self to be crouned at Rome, Emperor
as well of Thorient, as of the Occident? This is not the way to amplify, and
enlarge your Empire, but rather to restrain and diminishe the same. This is not
ye mean to preserve it, but to disposse it and make it less. If Ottoman the
first tronke or stock, of your gentle family and kindred, had thus given
himself to be corrupted in idleness, you had not now inherited, the noble
kingdom of Greece, nor governed the countries of Galatia and Bithinia, and many
other provinces, which enuironne the great sea. Semblably his soonne Orcan
(a lively Image of his father and a follower of his valiant factes) had not
triumphed over Licaonia, Phrigia, Caria, nor dilated the bounds of his Empire,
to Hellesponte. What shall I speak of Amurates, the successor of Orcan, who
was the first that invaded Europa, conquered Thracia, Syria, Rasia, and
Bulgaria? And Bajazet likewise, did not he cut of the hedde of the great
Tamburlain, which called him self the scourge of GOD, and brought into the
field four hundred thousand Scithians a horseback, and six hundred
thousand footmen? Shall I shall pass over with silence, the virtuous
exploites of your grandfather Mahomet, who conquered Macedonia, and made the
Countries, to feel the edge of his sword, even to the sea Ionicum, lettyng
pass many wonderful expedicions and iourneis, by him made against the
Lidians and Cliecians? But now I can not revive the memory of your father
Amurate, but to my great sorrow and grief, who by the space of.xl. years, made
the Sea and earth to tremble and quake, and with the fury of his strong hand,
used such cruel reuengement over the Greeks, that the memory of the wounds
do remain at this present, even to the Mountains of Thomao and Pindus, he
subiugated the Phocians: made tributarie Athenes, Beotia, Aetolia, Caramania,
and all the barbarous nations, from Morea, to the straictes of Corinthe. What
need I here to bring in the cruel battle that he had against the Emperor
Sigismonde, and Philippe Duke of Burgundy, wherein he ouerthrewe the whole
force of the Christians, took the Emperor prisoner, and the Duke of Burgundy
also, whom he sent to Adrianopolis? Or to remember other fierce armies which
he sent into Hungary, whereof your majesty is a faithful witness, your
self being still there in your own person. Judge then my Lord what
diligence, and intolerable travel, he used in his manifold glorious
enterprises, and famous victories. Do you think, that if he had been idle in
his pallaice, emo^ges the ladies, you had inherited your Empire, or had now
been lord of so many excellent Provinces: which he is not sufficient to rule,
that can not provide to confirm, and establishe the same. There be many of
your subjects and vassalles at this day, which do obey and honor your
Majesty (more for fear, then good love they bear you) that would rebel
against you, if Fortune would turn her back. The Christians of long time (as
you know) have sworn your ruin and distruccion. Moreover they say that
their high bishop, the Pope of Rome, has conuocated all his prelates to unite,
and reconcile the Princes and Monarchs of Christendom together, to over run
you, and to take the scepter out of your hands, and to dispoile you of your
Empire. But what know we, whither they will join their force, with the power
of the Persian Sophi, your capital enemy, or with the Souldan of Aegipte,
your aunciente adversary: which if they come to pass (as God forbid) your
Empire will be consumed. Gather your wits then together, from hence forth my
lord and call again Reason, which so many years, you have banished from you.
Awake out of the deep sleep, which has sieled up your eyes. Imitate and follow
the trade of your au^cestors, which ever loved better one day of honor, then
an hundred living years, of shame and reproach. Attend to the government of
your Empire. Leave of this effeminate life, Receive again the smell of your
generositie and virtue. And if you can not at one time, cut of and remove,
all that amourous heat, which undermines so your heart, moderate the same by
little and little, and give some hope to your people, which think you to be
utterly lost, and desperate of recovery. Or if so be the Greek do delight
you so much, who shall let you to carry her with you in all your iourneis and
expedicions? Why, can not you together, both inioye her beauty, and use the
practice of arms? Me think that your pleasure shall be greater, after you have
won some victory, and subdued some country, to inioye her in your arms,
then to remain in a house, with eternal infamy, and continual grudgyng of
your subjects. But prove I pray you, to separate your self certain days from
her, and you shall certainly judge, how far greater the pleasures be so
differred, then those, that be daily used. Yet one thing more, and it please
your majesty, there rests to be declared, which is, that all the victories
of your progenitors, or the conquestes, which your self has made be to
small purpose, if you do not keep them and increase them, the keeping of a
thing gotten, being of no less glory and praise, then the conquest. Be now
then a conqueror of your self, humbly besechyng your Majesty, that if I have
spoken any thing, disagreable to your mind, according to your wonted
clemency, to pardon the same, and to impute the fault to my bounden duty,
and the care that I have of your honor and sauftie. Mahomet after he had heard
the long discourse of his Slave, stood as still as a block, and fixyng his
eyes upon the ground, with sudden change of color, declared by outward
signs, the agitacions and unquietness of his mind in such wise, that the
poor slave Mustapha, seeing in him those alteracio^s, was in doubt of his
life: whose words so pricked the Emperors heart, that he knew not what to
do, or whereupon to be resolved, and seeiyng his conscience troubled, with a
furieus battaill: knowing evidently that Mustapha had spoken the truth, and
that he uttered the same, like a trusty servant to his master. But on the
other side, the beauty of the Greek, was still before his eyes, and the mind
he had to abandon her, gave him such alarm, that he seemed at that instaunte,
as though his heart had been torn out of his belly. And thus moved with
diverse tempests, without other thought, having his eyes inflamed, with great
rage and fury, he said unto him. Although thou have spoken irreverently
enough, yet our educacion together and the fidelity that I have proved in
thee, in time past shall be thy pardon for this time. To the purpose. Before the
Son does compass the Zodiacque, I will let it be known to thee and to
other, what puissaunce and power, I have over my self, or whether I am able to
bridle mine affection or not. Take order in the mean time that all my noble
men, the Baschats, and the principal of my men of war, be assembled
together to morrow, in the mids of the great halle of my palace. This
determinacion finished, the Emperor went into the Greek, and reioysyng himself,
all that day and might with her: he made more of her then ever he did before.
And the more to flatter her, he dined with her, and commanded that after
diner, she should adorn her self, with the most precious Iewelles, and deck
her with more sumptuous apparel, then ever she did wear before. Whereunto the
poor wenche obeyed, not knowing that it was her Funeral apparel. On the
other side, Mustapha uncertain of the Emperors mind, at the hour appoincted,
caused all the nobility to be assembled in the hall, every of them
merueilyng, what moved the Emperor so to do, since he had so long time
shut up himself, without showing his person abroad. Being thus assembled,
and every manne talkyng diversely of this matter, according as their affection
served: behold, the Emperor entered into the palace, leadyng the Greek by the
hand, who being adorned, otherwise then she was wont to be, was accompanied
and garnished with beauty, so rare and excellent, that she resembled rather
an heavenly Goddess, then a human creature. The Turk came into the hall,
after that the lords had made their reverence, according to their wonted
manner, holdyng still the faier Greek by the left hand, he stood still in the
midst of the holle: then lokyng furiously round about him, he said unto
them So far as I understand, all ye do mutine and grudge, because I (being
vanquished with Love) can not separate, and withdraw my self day nor night,
from the presence of this Greek. But I do know none of you all so
continente, and chaste in Love, that if he had in his possession, a thing so
rare and precious, so amiable, and beauty so excellent, but before he could
forgette her, and give her over, he would three times be well advised. What say
ye to the matter? Every of you shall have free liberty, secretly to tell me
your mind. But they rapt with an incredible admiracion, to see so faier a
thing, said that he had with great reason, passed his time with her.
Whereunto the barbarous cruel Prince answered. Well, now then I will make you
to understand, that there is no earthly thing that can bind up, or captiuate
my senses so much, but that from hence forth I will follow mine anncestours,
having the glory and valiaunce of the Ottomans, so fixed in my breast, that
nothing else but death, is able to blot it out of my remembrance. Those words
finished, incontinently with one of his hands, he catched the Greek by the
hear of the head, and with his other hand, he drew out his falchion from
his side, and foldyng his hands about the golden locks of her hear, at one
blow he struck of her bed, to the great terror of them all. When he had so
dooen, he said unto them: Now ye know, whether your Emperor is able to
repress, and bridle his affections, or not. Within a while after, meaning to
discharge the rest of his cholere, he addressed a Camp of four score, or an
hundred thousand men: with whom percyng Boussine, he besieged Belgrade, where
Fortune was so contrary unto him, that he was put to flight, and lost there a
notable battle against the Christians, under the conducte of Ihon Huniades,
surnamed le Blanc, who was father of the worthy and glorious king Mathie
Coruin.

A Lady falsely accused of adultery, was condemyned to be devoured of Lions:
the manner of her delivery, and how (her innocence being known) her accuser
felt the pains for her prepared.

The.xlj. Novel.
IN the country of Aquitane, there was sometime a lord, whose lands and
lorshippes lay between Limosine and Poictou, and for the antiquity of his
house was renowned, both for bloodde and wealth, emonges the chief of all the
Country. Being allied in kindred with the best, and had full access and
favor, as well in the houses of the ancient Dukes of Guienne, and Countes of
Poictou, as in the royal Courts of the French Kings. This Lord (whom
Bindello the aucthour of this history, affirms to be Signor de la Rocca
Soarda, but the translator and augmentator of the same in French, called
Francois de Belle Forest, leaves out his name, for good respect as he
allegeth) kept a great Court and liberal householde, and singularly
delighted (after the manner of the French nobility) in huntyng, specially in
hawkyng. His house also was had in greater admiracion (the rudeness and
ignorance of that time was such) because he had gotten beasts of strange
Countries, chiefly Lions, wherein he had great pleasure, as well for the
rareness of that beast in France, as for a certain generositie, that he
knew to be in the same, which resembled the magnanimity and courage of
noble men, whose minds and spirits, do not esteem things that be vain,
and cannot be affraied in doing of things, whereunto honor is offered for
reward. This Lord married a Lady, the daughter of one his neighbors, a woman
worthy for such a husband: whose beauty was such, as there was none
comparable unto her: which the more increased, for that she was endued with
perfect virtue, and furnished with so good behavior, that right good minds
and wits should be occupied, naie, rather put to their shifts to decide,
whether gift were greatest, either the exquisite workmanship of her excellyng
beauty, or whether Nature had employed all her cunnyng, to frame a body to
appear before men miraculous, or else her honest port, her good grace,
courtesy, and grave mildness, accompanied with virtue, not vulgar or common
to many me^, which made his lady to shine, like the glistering Planet of
Mars, emonges other the wanderyng stars. In such wise as the very savage
and brute, were formed with splendent fame, to praise her to be such a woman,
whose equal they never knew, to be in all their Country, who made the house
of her husband glorious, and him a contented manne, to behold such a Star
to lie by his side, which suffised to illustrate, and beautify a whole
country, by her only presence, and to nobilitate a race, although the bloodde
of ancestors did fail, for the accomplishement of their perfection. Such is
the great force of Virtue, which not only did advance her, above them that
do her imbrase, but rather did co^straine the envious, to have her in
admiracion. But these admiratours, and praisers of Virtue, do not use such
endeavor for the merits, which they attribute to the thing, rather they
imploie their only industry, to gather some profit of her, and then
(followyng the nature of the dog) do return to their vomit, and bestow
their venime, hidden in their Serpents breaste. As it came to pass, and was
euidente in a certain manne, that was Steward of this noble man's house
(truly a very happy house, as well for the honest love, between the Lord
and the Lady, as for the virtue and cleme^cie, wherewith both the one and the
other, were accompanied) who in the beginning, as honesty and duty did
require, was a lover of good manners, and commendable demeanor of his Lady and
maistresse, afterward (forgettyng the fidelity, which he did owe unto his
Lord, the nobility of his predecessors, and the peril of his own life)
began to love her, and serve her in heart, and to wish for the fairest thing,
which outwardly did appear to be in her, where he ought not so much, as
with the look of his eye, to give any atteinte of likelihode, for the
reverence of him, which was the right honor, and just possessor of the same.
This master fool then, not measuryng his forces, and less followyng the
instincte of Reason, became so amourous of his Madame, that continually he
imagined by what means, he might give her to understand the pains and
languores, wherein he lived for the love of her. But (alas) these devises
vanished, like a little dispersed cloud, at the risyng of the Son. For
thinkyng upon the virtue of his maistresse, his desires were sooner removed from
his heart, then he was able to impresse them in the seat of his judgment,
thereby to take any certain assurance. Notwithstanding, his hedde ceased not
to build Castelles in the air, and made a promise to himself to inioye her,
whom he worshipped in his heart. For he took such pains, by his humble
service, that in the end he acquired, some part of his Ladies good grace, and
favor. And for that he durst not be so bold, to manifest unto her, the
vehemency of his grief, he was contented a long time, to show a counterfaicte
joy, which raised unto him a lively spring of sorrows and displeasures, that
did ordinarily frette and boil his mind so much: that the force of his
weeping for vain hope, was able to suffocate the remnant of life, that rested
in his tormented heart, which caused certain, little brooks of tears to
stream done, assailyng the myndeof this foolish Lover. This faier and chaste
Lady was so resolved, in the love of her husband, that she took no regard
to the countenaunces, and foolish fashions of this master Lover. Who seeing
his mishappe to grow worsse and worsse, and from thence forth no remedy, that
whether by rejoice, well hopyng of better luck, or for sudden and miserable
death, he determined to prove Fortune: and to see if the water of his hope,
could find any passage, steadfastly determinyng, that if he were throwe^ down
hedlong into the botto^, of Refusal, and co^te^pned for his service, not to
retire again, but rather further to plondge, for the acceleratyng of the ruin
of himself, and his desires. For he thought it impossible, that his heart could
endure more intolerable heat, of that invisible fire, then it had felt
alredie, if he found no means for the smoke, to have some vent and issue. For
which consideracion, clean besides himself, bewitched with foolish Love,
like a beast thoroughly transformed into a thing, that had no sense of a
reasonable manne (such as they be accustomably, that be enrolled in the
muster books of Venus son) was purposed to open to the Lady (when occasion
served) both the evil, and also the grief that he sustained, in bearyng toward
her, so great and extreme affection. Behold here, one of the effects of
humane folly: this was the first act of the Tragedy, wherein Love makes
this brainlesse manne to play, the first and principal part upon the Stage.
This poor gentleman (otherwise a good servant, and careful for the profit
and honor of his master) is now so void of himself, and blind in
understanding, that he makes no conscience to assail her (to defraude her of
her greatest virtue) the simple name of whom, ought to have made him tremble
for fear, and to blushe for shame, rather then for her beauty sake, and
natural courtesy, to dispoile her of her honesty, and to attempt a thing
uncertain to win, and also more dangerous to practice. Now, whiles he
lived, in the attempt of his hoped occasion, it chanced that the Lady
(thinkyng no malice at all) began to behold the Steward, with a better eye
and look more familier, then any of the gentlemen, and domestical servants
of the house, as well for the painted honesty of this Galant, as to see him so
prompte and ready to obeie her. And therefore upon a day, as she walked in the
Gallerie, she called him unto her and very familierly communicated unto him,
certain affairs, touching the profit of the house. He that marched not, but
upon one foot, and burned with Love, and whose heart leapte for joy, and
daunced for gladness, thought that he had now obtained, the top of his
felicity, and the whole effect of his desire: suddenly he cast away, the
despair of his former conceiptes, obiectyng himself to the danger, wherein he
was like to be overwhelmed, if the Lady accepted not his request, with good
digestion. In the end, recoueryng force, he discoursed in his mind this
wicked opinion, wherewith folishe and wilful fleshely lovers, do blason and
displaie, the honor and chastity of Ladies, when they make their vaunte, that
there is no woman, be she never so chaste, continente, or honest, but in the
end yeldeth, if she be thoroughly pursued. O, the woerdes and opinion of a
beast, rather then of a man knowing virtue. Is the number of chaste women so
diminished, that their renown at this day, is like a Boat in the mids of
some tempestious sea, whereunto, the mariners do repair to save themselfes?
It is the only virtue of Lays, which does constrain them, to vomit
forth their poison, when they see themselfes deceived, of their fond and
uncomely demaundes. A man shall never hear those words proceed, but from the
mouths of the most lascivious, which delight in nothing else, but to corrupt
the good names of Ladies, afterward to make them their laughyng stocks.
Return we then to our purpose, this valiant souldior of Love, willing to
give the first onset, upon his sweet enemy, began to wax pale, and to
tremble, like the Reed, blown with the wind, and knows not in what part,
or by what means, to bestow the first strokes of his assault. At length with
foltring tongue, and tremblyng voice, he speaks to his Lady, in this wise.
Alas madame, how happy were the course of our transitory life, if the common
passions, received no increase of their trouble, by new and diverse accidents,
which seem to take root in us, for the very great diminucion of that
liberty, that every manne does study so much to co^serue. But truly that
study is vain, and the pain thereof unprofitably bestowed. For such a man
inforceth himself, to live free from passion, which in the mids of his
inforcemente, feels him self to be violently constarined, and sees the
taking away of his liberty, to be a certain impeachemente, which thereunto
he would give. Alack, I have proved that mischief, and am yet in the greatest
excess, and pangues of my disease. I feel (alas) a diversity of anguishes,
and a Sea of troubles, which tormente my mind and yet, I dare not discover
the occasion, seeing that the thing, which is the cause of my grief, to be of
such desert, that my service past, and all that is to come, is not able to
give the proof, if one special grace and favor, do not enlarge, the little
power that is in me, to counteruaile the greatenesse, and perfection of that
cause, which thus does variat and alter, both my thoughts and passions.
Pardon me (madame) if I do speak obscurely, for the confusion of my mind,
makes my words correspondent, to the quality of the same. Notwithstanding, I
will not keep silente from you, that which I do suffer, and much less
dissemble, what passion I endure, being assured, as well for your virtue and
gentleness, that you (moved with compassion) will succor me, so much as shall
lie in you, for preseruacion of the life of him, that is the best and most
obedient servant emo^ges them all, that do you humble service. The Lady
which never thought of the wickedness, which this insensate man began to
imagine: answered him very courteously. I am sorry truly for your mishappe, and
do merueile, what should be the effect of that passion, which as you say,
you feel with such dimunicion of that, which is perfect, and accomplished in
you. For I do see no cause that ought to move you to so strange infirmity,
whereof you told me, wherewith I had alredie found fault, although you had said
nothing. I would to GOD I knew, which way to help you, as well my lord my
husbands sake, who I am sure does bear you good will, as for the honesty,
which hitherto I have known to be in you, which as I think all men resemblyng
you, for virtue and good conditions, do deserve that account and
consideracion. He that thought her alredie to be taken in his nets, seeing so
fair a way open and clear, to disclose that, which he had kept covert so
long time, in the depth of his heart, answered. Ah madame, are ye ignorant of
the forces of Love, and how much his assaults, can debilitate the liuelihode
of the bodies and spirits of men? Know ye not that he is blind and naked,
not caryng whether he goes, manifestyng himself there, where occasion is
offered? Alas madame, if you have not pity upon me, and do not regard that,
which I do suffer for the love of you, I know not how I am able to avoid
Death, which will approach so sone to cut of, and abridge my years, as I
shall understand a refusal of that, which the extreme Love, that I bear you,
madame, forcethe me to require: whche is to receive a new service, of your
aunciente and faithful seruiture: who inflamed by the bright beams of your
divine face, knows not now, how to change the affeccion, and much less to
receive help, but of that place, where he received the prick. Excuse (madame
I beseech you) my rashenesse, and pardon my folly, accusyng rather, either
your celestial beauty, or else that tiraunt Love, who has wounded me so
luckelie, that I esteem mine evil, fortunate, and my wound happy: sith by
his mean, my thoughts and cogitacions, do only tend to do you service,
and to love you in mine heart, which is the Phoenix of the faireste and most
courteous ladies, within al our Province. Alas, that excellency, which thus
makes me your seruasit shall one day be my ruin, if by your good grace
(speaking it with weeping tears) you do not favor him, which lives not, but
to obeie you, and which lesing your good grace, will attempt to deprive
himself of life, which being deprived through your cruelty, will go to
complain himself of his bold attempt, and also of your rigor emonges the
ghostes, and shadows of the^ that be alredie dedde, for like occasions. The
chaste Lady was so rapt of wits, for the straungenes of the case, and for
the grief which she conceived, to see the unshamefast hardiness of the
varlette, that she could not tell how to make him answer: But in the end
breakyng silence, and fetchyng a great sighe, from the bottom of hec heart,
her face slained with a fresh Uermilion rudde, which beautified her color, by
reason of disdain, conceived against this impudent Orator, she answered him
very severely. O God, who would have thought, that from a heart nobly brought
up, and derived from an honorable race, a villainy so great, could have taken
root, and spryng up with such detestable fruicte? What master Steward? Have
ye forgotten the duty of a servant, toward his lord and master? Have ye
forgotten I say, the duty of a virtuous gentleman, well nourished and
trained up, toward such and so great a Lady as I am: Ah These and Traitor
that thou art. Is this the venime, which thou kepest so covert and secret,
under the sweetness of thy counterfaicte virtue? A vaunte varlette, a vaunte:
Go utter thy stuff, to them that be like thy self, whose honor and honeslie
is so far spent, as thy loialtie is light and vain. For if I hear thee
speak any more of these follies, be assured that I will mortify that ragyng
flame, which burns thy light beleuyng heart, and will make thee feel by
effect, what manner of death that is, wherein thou reposeste the rest of thy
travel. As this deceued Orator, was framyng his excuse, and about to
moderate, the just wrath of his Lady, displeased upon good occasion, she not
able to abide any more talk, said further.

And what signs of dishonestie, haste thou seen in me, that move thee, to
persuade a thing so wicked, and uncomely for mine estate, yea and so
prejudicial, to me, to my friends, and the house of thy master, my lord and
spouse? I can not tell what it is that lets me, from causyng thee to be
cast for the among the Lions (cruel and capital enemies of adultery,
emonges the^ selfs) sith thy pretense is, by violatyng my chastity, to
dishonor the house, whereunto thou owe no less, then all the aduauncemente
thou haste: from the taste whereof, thou haste abandoned Virtue, the best thing
wherewith thou were affected. Avoid now therefore, let me hear no more of
this, upon pain of thy life, otherwise thou shall feel the reward of thy
teinerite, and understand the bitterness of the little pleasure, which I have
conceived of thy follies. So the good lady held her peace, reseruyng in her
heart, that which should be her help in time and place: howbeit she said
nothing hereof unto her husband, as well for raisyng offense or slander, as
for prouokyng her husband against him, which sustained the punishment
himself, sith that this refuse, did more straungely pinche him, more nere at
the heart, then ever the Egle of Caucasus whereof the Poets have talked so
much) did tier the mawe of the subtle these Prometheus. And yet the unhappy
steward not contentented, with the mischief committed against the honor of his
master, seeing yt it was but lost time, to continue his pursuit, and that his
gain would be no less then death, if she according to her promised threats,
did thereof advertise her husband, being a cholerique manne, and light of
belefe, and because the said Steward, for such an enterprise had received a
simple recompense, although correspondent to his desert, premeditated worsse
mischiefs, more noisome then the first. He was in doubt, whether it were
better for him, to tarry or to depart, sith two things in a manner, were
intolerable for him to suffer. For he could not forsake the house, where from
his cradle, he had been finely brought up, the Lord whereof made much of
him, as of his own person. On the other side, he knew that so long as the
Lady was alive, he could have no manner of joy or contentacion. For that
cause, converting extreme love (which once he bare to the Lady) into cruel
hatred, unseemly for a brutall beast, and into an insaciable desire of
revenge: he determined to address so strong an ambushe, trained with such
subteltie, that she was not able to escape, without danger of her life and
honor, whereof she declared her self to be so careful. Alas, what blindness is
that, which captiuateth the wits and spirit of him, that feeds himself of
nothing else, but upon the rage of fantastical despite, and upon the fury of
despair. Do we not se, that after Reason gives place to desired revenge of
wrong thought to be received, man dispoyleth himself of that, which
apperteineth to the kind of man, to put on the fierce nature, of the most
brute and cruel beasts, to run hedlong without reason, toward the place
where the disordinate appetite of affections, does conducte him? Whereof I
will not aduouche any other example, but of this Traitor, who passionated not
with Love, but rather with rage and fury, cease not to epsy all the actions,
and behavior of his Lady, to the intent he might bring to end, his devised
treason against her, that thought (perchance) no more of his folies, but
honestly to pass the time, with her dear and well beloved husband. Truly,
if this Lady had been of the disposicion of some women, (that care not to
moleste their husbands, for the first Fly that buzzeth before their eyes,
conceiuyng a friuelous and sudden opinion of their chastity, not so much
asiailed, or to sharply defended, chauntyng glorious Hympnes, and high
praises of their victory) certainly she had not tombled her self into the
danger, whereunto afterward she fill. Not for that I will blame them, that
do reveal to their husbands the assaults, which they receive of
importunate suitors, that do assaie to deflower their Chastity. Yet I will say
that Mosdestie in the same (as in every other human actio^) is greatly to be
required, since that such a one, by thinkyng to extolle her honor and
honesty, and to make proof of her chastity, renders the same suspicious, and
gives occasion of talk to the people, that is more apt and ready to slander
and infamy, then by good report to praise them, which by virtue do deserve
comme^dacion, bringyng the life and fame of her husband, to such extremity,
that it had been better virtuously to have resisted, the force of Love, and
the flatteryng suit of such Lovers, then to manifest that which might have
been kept secret, without prejudice of either parts. And truly that woman
deserves greater glory, which of her self defends her honesty, and
quenches the flames lively kindled in the hearts of other, with the coldness
of continency, by that means vanquishing two, then she does, which
manifesting the vice of an other, discloseth as it were, a certain apparaunce
of her frailty, and the little reason wherewith she is indewed, to vanquishe
him, that confesses to be her servant, and whose will depends at her
commandment. And when the whole matter shall be rightly judged, she that
reuealeth the imperfeccio^ of a Suter, shows her opinion and mind, to be
more pliant to yield to his request, then indewed with reason to abandon
pleasure, and to reiecte the insolency of the same, sith that Reasons force,
does easily vanquishe the light affeccions of the sensual party, which ones
engraven in their fantasy, do make the senses of those women, so inconstant,
as they persuade themselfes to be puissaunt and mighty, that all things be,
and rest at their will and pleasure.

Retournyng now then to our former discourse, the Steward so labored with
might and maine, till he had found means to be revenged, of the received
refusal, with such subtlety and Deuelishe inuencion, as was possible for
manne to devise, which was this. Among the servants of this great lord,
there was one no less young of wit and understanding, then of age. And
albeit that he was faier and comely, yet so simple and foolish, as he had
much a do, to tell the number of six. This fool by reason of his folly, and
simplicity was the only sport and passetyme, of the Lord and Lady. The
Lady many times took pleasure, to talk with this master fool, to bring him
into a choler and chaufe, thereby to provoke laughter. And therefore all the
household, used to call him in mockery, My Ladies darelyng. In whom the Lord
took singular pleasure and delight, estemyng him so well, as any of the other
servants. The malicious Steward, seeing the familiarity of the Lady with the
fool (like one that had alredie catched his pray, within his snares) began
also to make much of that young Cockescome, in such wise as he had brought
him, into such fools paradise, that he might make him do and say, what he
list. Who seeing him so diligent to his desire, one day took him a side, and
after he had whittled him well, he said unto him. Dicke, I can tell thee a
knacke, that thou shall make my Lady laugh well, but thou must say nothing,
till she do perceive it. The poor Idiot glad to please his maistres, was
desirous to know what it was, and promised to do what so ever he would bid
him. Thou most (said the Steward) in the euenyng before she go into her
chamber, hide thy self under her bed, and tarry there till it be an hour or
two before day, and then I will tell thee what thou must do. This platte
devised, the fool the same euenyng, executed the devise of his Deuelishe
counsailour, who seeing his desire to take effect, went to an old gentleman,
that was of great honesty and virtue, for which he was of all men so well
known, that they esteemed his word, so true as the Gospel. To that gentleman
this crafty villain, full of poison and malice, wholly bente to mischief,
told and reported the fact, not as it was in deed, but to the great
prejudice, and dishonor of the Lady, giuyng him to understand, how much she
had forgotten her self, that without the fear of God, reverence of her
husband, and respect of her own honesty, she had filthely given her self
over to him, which was called her Dareling. The good gentleman hearing this
strange case, was astonned like one that had been stricken, with a flashe of
lightenyng, then drawing nere to the Accuser, he answered. It is, possible that
such wickedness, can lie hidden in the breast of our madame? I swear unto
thee by God, that if any other had told it me besides you, I would not have
believed it, and truly yet I am in doubt thereof. No, no, said this wicked
blasphemer, I will make you see that, which you can not believe: And having
lessoned his fool, in his wonted folly, the next day, he took the
gentleman thither, who seeing, the Ladies minion, going out of her chamber
(which many times lay severally from her husband) could not refrain
weepyng, lamentyng the ill fortune of his Lord, who thinkyng that he had had
an honest wife, was abused with an impudente and unshamefast whore. Then he
began to frame a long Oracion, against the incontinencie of women, moved
rather through the good will, he bare to his master, then to the truth of the
matter, which indiscreetly he spoke, against the order of women kind. So
ignoraunte was he of the treason, and endeavor of the Steward, who demanded
of him, what was to be dooen in that matter. What said the old gentleman?
Such wickedness ought not to be unpunished. My Lord must be advertised
hereof, that the house may be purged of such a plague and infeccion, that he
may evidently understand the hypocrisy of her, that so long time has kept
close her incontinencie, under the veil of fained chastity. But the righteous
God, made openly to appear before men's eyes, the secret sins of the
wicked, to the intent greater slanders should not increase. The Steward very
joyful, that he had gotten so honest a man, to be a witness of his
accusacio^, approved his advice, for that it agreed well with his intent. So
they wood together went to the Lord, with countenance sad and heavy,
correspondente to their mind, and specially the Traitor, whose sense was so
confounded with gladness, that thinkyng to begin his tale, his words so
stuck in his mouth, as he was not able to utter a word. Whereat the Lord
was wonderfully abashed merueilyng what that tinudice did mean, till he had
heard the unfaithful Steward, tell his tale, who said to him in this manner.
My Lord, I am sorry, that it is my lot, to declare unto you a matter hitherto
unknown and not marked or taken heed of by any manne, which will so much
offend you, as any pleasure that ever till this day, did please and content
you. And God knows what grief it is to me (in your presence) to be an accuser
of a person in the world, which I have esteemed next unto you, above any
other creature that lives. But being in the place I am, I might (by good
desert) be accused of treason and felony, if concealyng such a detestable
crime, I should leave the same of fidelity to an other, less desirous to do
you service then I am. Who believes there is no second person, that desires
better to acquit the goodness and preferme^t, which I have received of your
Lordship, then I do. This it is my Lord. My Lady, misprisyng her duty to
your lordshippe, and the honor of the house whereof she came, has not
disdained to receive into her chamber at inconvenient time, the fool that is
called her Darelyng, and in the place, into which none but your honor, ought
to have peaceable entry: whereof this gentleman present (whom you know to be
without comparison) shall be witness. Touching my self, the faith and trust,
which always I have used in all your affairs, and the little affection,
which I have to things contrary to virtue, shall give true testimony, of
that which I have said. The lord bearyng these pitiful news, which perced
his heart more deep, then any two edged sword, at the first was so asto^ned,
that he could not tell what to say or do, saving the ardente fury of
Cholere, made him distill a certain Melancholique humor into his eyes, which
received the superfluous vapors of his brain. At length breaking that sorthe,
which troubled him within, and grindyng his teethe for fury, with stuttering
and uncertain voice, fetching sighs between, said. O GOD what news be these
that I hear? Is it possible, that the fairest and chastest Lady that lives,
has in this wise defaced her honor: and so wickedly blemished my reputacion?
Alas if it so be, that she has in this wise disparaged her self, no trust is
to be reposed in any other, what soever she be. Ah God under what Planet was I
borne, that after so long pleasure received with my beloved fere, and
companion, I should by her sele a displeasure, an hundred times worsse then
death? Is there no remedy but that my house must receive, and see an
enterprise to vilanous, by her only mean, which ought rather to have been
the ornament and beauty of the same? Then he chaused up and down the chamber,
without speaking any more words, with his eyes rollyng in his hedde, making
strange countenaunces, which did well express the grief, that vexed and
tormented his mind. In the end half pacified, he turned his face toward the
Accuser, saying. My friend if this be true, which thou have told me, I swear
by GOD, that I will make her feel the smart, of such grievous punishment, as
shall be spoken of for ever. But if my wife be slaundred, and accused
wrongfully, assure thy self that I will be revenged upon thee. I know the
virtue of this gentleman very well (having had good proof thereof) and of
thy fidelity I am nothing at all in doubt. But alas, the love that I bear
unto my wife, and her former virtue, which makes me to love and esteem her so
much, does thoroughly pearce my heart, and much ado I have to live, hearing
this report: which does deface and blotte, all the honesty and virtue, that
ever remained in me. And that was it my Lord (answered the Traitor) which
did deceive you. For the show of that painted virtue, did so delude you, that
you be almost bewitched from understanding the wrong, so manifestly
perpetrated against you, and all your house. Now to the end, that you think not
the accusacion to be false, I trust (if it please you to assist me) to let you
see the thing, whereof we have given you intelligence. I will do (said the
Lord) what you will have me, although it be to my great grief and sorrow. To
morrow morning then (answered the Traitor) one hour before day, I will let
you see, the varlet going out of her chamber with so great joy, as I do
conceive heaviness and grief, for the simple remembrance of so great
wickedness. When they were agreed hereupon, this knave most detestable,
weauing the toil, wherein he himself was caught, went to suborne the personage
of his fool, whole made and instructed in his trumperie: leaving the poor
lord with a hamer workyng in his hedde, that he was like to run out of his
wits. So great is the furious force of the poison of Ialosie, which ones
having dispersed the venime over the heart and intrailes of men, the wiseste
sort have lost the due discrecion of their wits. In the morning about the
hour, that the amourous fool (ignoraunte wherefore he went in) should issue
out of his maistresse chamber, the Steward ravished with inexplicable joy and
gladness, like to the pleasure of him, that had attained the sum of his
desires, called his Lord, to see that heavy and dolorous sight. The good
gentleman, perceiuyng the report to be true, and thinking that she had used the
fool to be her bedfelow, was like to have died for sorrow, or else to have
torn in pieces that unhappy sotte, innocente of the evil suspected by the
Lord, who durst not so much as think to do such a wicked fact. In the
end giuyng place to reason, he caused the poor fool to be apprehended, and
put in the bottom of a dongeon, and beyo^de measure was offended with his
wife, for that he thought the simplicity of ye imprisoned wretch, had not the
face to demand the question, and therefore did verily believe that it was she,
yt had induced him to do the deed, to satisfy her unbridled and filthy
lust, and therefore caused her to be shut up, within a dark and stinckyng
prison, not meaning to see her, or to hear her speak for her justification,
ne yet would suffer that any man, should take upon him to stand in her
defense, to bring witness of her innocence. For said he (replete with wrath
and anger) I do better believe that, which I have seen, and known by mine
own presence, then your words, vain reasons, and complaints of no good
ground and effect as founden upon her, that has to much forgotten herself
and her duty toward me. Moreover vanquished with the Cholere (not without
cause truly) of a husband that thought himself by her only means deceived
and betrayed, sent word to the poor captive, that she should then provide
for her souls health, sith he was determined the very same day to make her
play a Tragedy, more cruel then that was pleasant, which she had alredie
done with her beloved, in extrudyng her to be devoured of his Lions, which
were the ministers for the execution of the Justice ordained against her, as
though she had been the most lascivious, and detestable woman, that ever the
earth brought forth. The faser and innocente Lady, knowing the humor and
cholere of her housband, and likewise seeing (contrary to right order of all
Judgment) that she could not be heard or suffered to make answer, passed
through the rigorous law of him, yt thought her to be an Adulteress. And could
not tell what to do but to lament her ill fortune, gushing forth tears in
such abundaunce, that the most part of her attire, were wett and bedewed with
the same, then fortestyng her self in the hope of the merciful hand of
almighty God the father of all consolacion, who never forgets them, which
with entire faith do call upon him, and appeal to the succor of the holy
and precious name of his son Jesus Christ our savior, she with compunction
of heart, and sincere devotion, suith joined hands and knees upon the graund,
addressyng her eyes to the heavens, prayed in this wise.

Alas my God, I do know and confess, that the multitude of my synues, do
surpass the sea sands, and am not ignorant, that this unhappy time is
chanced unto me, for the punishemente of my forepassed offenses.
Notwithstanding (Lord) according to thy great goodness, have no respect
unto my demerites and wickedness (whereof my life is full) but rather extend
thy favor and mercy, upon thy poor creature, whose innocence thou (which
art the searcher of men's hearts) do well understand and know, I do not
desire prolongacion of my miserable life, only may it please thee (O God) for
thy goodness and instice sake, to save mine honor, and to grant, that my
husband may se with what integrity, I have always honored the holy band
of Marriage, by thee ordained, to the intent he may live from henceforthe quiet
of this inspicion conceived of me, and that my parents may not sustein the
blot of ignominy, which will make them blushe, when they shall bear report
of my life past. She being in these contemplacions and holy prayers, preparyng
her self to receive death, her husband caused her to be conveyed into the Park
of Lio^s, which being strange and terrible at the first sight, did
merueillously affraie her, but remembryng how innocente she was, puttyng her
hope in God, she went thither with such constauncie and courage, as if she
had been led to some joyous banquet, and the people which never heard tell
before, of such a kind of death was assembled in great multitude, tariyng to
see the end of that execucion, and talkyng diversely of that sudden
Judgment, prayed all with one voice, for the preseruacion of their lady, of
whose chastity they were alredie right well assured. Now as they attended for
the time of execucion, the Lady was placed in the mid of the Park, not
without tears and sighs of the Assistauntes, who murmured at the remembrance
of the horror, of a sight so furious. The innocent Lady kneeled down upon her
knees, and both by gesture and merry countenance, showed how joyfully she
went to suffer that, which she had never deserved: Then reco^mending her soul
to God, for whose salvation she steadfastly hoped, she pronounced this prayer, a
loud. O my Lord God, which did ones deliver Daniel, from a danger like
to this, whereunto the false accusacio^ of the wicked, have wrongfully cast me
hedlong: And did discharge Susanna, from the slander of the perverse and
adulterous Judges, pleases thee pitifully to behold, thy poor creature.
Pardon O Lord, forgive I humbly beseech thee, the simplicity of my dear
husband, who deals thus with me, rather through the circumuencion of
deceiptfull cauillyng slaunderers, then by his own malice and cruelty.
Receive O my GOD and merciful father, Receive my soul between thy besse
hands, which thou have redeemed by the bloodde sheddyng of thy soonne Jesus,
upon the Tree of the Cross. As she had ended these words, she saw the Lions
come for the rampyng, and bristleyng up their hear, stretchyng forth their
paws with roaryng voice, cruelly lookyng round about them: Of whom the Lady
thought to be the present pray. But the goodness of God, who is a just Judge,
and suffers his own elect to be proved to the extremity, of purpose to make
their glory the greater, and the ruin of the wicked more apparaunt,
manifested there an evident miracle. For the Lions (being cruel of nature, and
that time hungry and gredie of pray) in lieu of tearyng the Lady in pieces,
to gorge their ravening paunche, they fill to lickyng and fawnyng upon her,
making so much of her, as if they had familiarly been nourished with her own
breasts. A thing no less pleasant to the Lady then meruellous to al ye
people standing round about who seeing a chance so miraculous cried out,
incontinently for the delivery of the Lady, and for vengeance to be taken of
him, which so wickedly had protruded her into that danger: which for her
virtue, ought to be extolled and praised of the whole world. When the noble
man was certified of this strange adventure, he caused his Steward to be
apprehended and imprisoned, whose conscience forced such remorse, yet not
knowing the end of the tragedy, condemned himself by his countenance.
During his imprisonmente the deposicio^ of the beloved fool was taken, who
said, that by the suggestion of the malicious Steward, many times (ignorant to
the Lady) he conveyed himself into her chamber, not knowing whereunto, the
intent of him that caused him so to do did extend. The other gentleman made
excuse (although he was blame worthy) that he was deceived by the same false
practice, that the Lord himself was. The Steward openly confessed the
treason, which he had devised against the Lady, and the whole occasion
thereof, and thinckyng to be revenged of the refusal of love, by her denied,
he framed this slander, to make her lose her life. Which the Lord hearing
could not abide, that his death should any longer be respected, but without
other form of Law, he was thruste out to the Lions, and was out of hand
seized upon, and torn in pieces by those beasts, which by Gods just
judgment, did abstain from the good Lady, for the punishment of the
detestable sin of this varlette. In the mean time the chaste and innocente
Lady, being brought before her husband, after he had kissed and imbrased
her, with humble reverence she said unto him. My Lord, I render my humble
thanks to God, for that through his holy grace, and inscrutable Justice, he
has let you to understand, two diverse affeccions, in two several persons
of this world, which you love so well. In one, the treason so pernicious,
which provoked you, to soil and imbrue your hands (not without cause till
this day proved contrary) in the bloodde of your faithful and dear beloved
wise. In the other, a will and mind so good to obey you, and to persist in
continuacion of that effect, which makes her generally to be praised, and
worthy of your earnest love, for so much as she is your very affectionat
spouse. Notwithstanding, justly may I make my complaint of you, for that
withon excuse for my discharge, or hearing any thing that might serve for my
purgacion, you condemned her, for whose honor and defense you ought, to have
employed both gooddes and life. But God shall be judge between your little
discrecion, and my righteousness, between mine obedience, and your cruelty,
wherewith you have abused the nobility, of the race whereof I came. The
husband hearing this wise and just complaint, on the one side transported with
joy, leapt and reioysed, to see his dear companion in liberty, and declared
to be innocent, on the other part he blushed for shame, that he had so
lightly, and without better proof and trial condemned her, whom God by his
grace, had preserved from the Lions throats, and durst not lift up his
hedde, by reason his heart freated, at the remembrance of his light credit
and fury imoderate. Finally imbrasyng his wife, and kissyng her louyngly
said unto her. Madame, and dear beloved wife, I can not deny, but foolishely
I have attempted, to blemishe the honor of her, that whilome made me to shine
and glister, amongst the best and chief of all this country, but he that
does well mark and behold, the galle and disdain of a husband loving his
wife, and then understanding her little care and great forgetfulness which she
has, both of his honor, and glory of his comfort, will easily excuse and
pardon my fault, which I will not by any means color and cloak, but rather
crave pardon at your hands, assuryng you, that I will amend and requite the
same, so well and in such wise as you and yours, shall have no cause but to
be content and satisfied. It suffiseth me sir (quod she) that my giltlesse
offense is known unto you, and that I have recovered place in your favorable
acceptacion: For I do account mine adversity well employed, sith thereby
you and your friends may glory, of the severe Justice ministered against
malefacters, and I rejoice in resistau^ce of the assaults of love, and of
death to guarde and keep my chastity pure and inviolable. And may serve for
example to every honorable Lady, being assailed with such strong and mighty
adversaries, to keep themselfes honest. For the croune is not due but to her,
that shall lawfully combat to the end. After this the Lord by persuasion of
his wife, commanded that the fool should be avoided the house that his
presence might neither grieve or torment her ne yet might remove the memory of
a thing, that never was thought or dooen. And not without cause: for the Lord,
which reclinde his ear, to every triflyng report, and credited the words
of every whistlyng pikethanke, had much a do to escape from dooyng things,
unworthy his estate and calling. Of so great force, truly is the venime of
such Serpents, that seasyng it self by little and little, upon the heart of him
disposed to receive it, in fury makes it to be in effect, like the nature of
poison and drogues corrupt: whereof men ought to be no less, but rather
more dilligent and careful then of meats, emonges persons whom they suspecte
and fear, since that malidies and infeccio^s of mind, be far more
dangerous, then outward passions, which torment the body. Whereunto if the
said noble manne was not hedefull, he felt the damage for penance of his
inconsideracion. Howbeit as ioynges, both good and ill emonges men, be not
still durable and perpetual: Certain days after, he began to solace
himself with his wife, and rode an huntyng abroad, visited his neighbors, and
at home made great feasts and bankettes, whereunto his kindred and friends
were invited, to co^gratulate this new alliance, indeuouryng thereby to
satisfy the fault committed, and the better to gratify and pleasure his
wife, to make her know how much he esteemed and regarded her then before: he
caused the success of this present history, to be engraven with great
industry, and merueilous cunnyng in Marble, which he placed over the gate of
the first entry into his Castle, as well to immortalizate the great chastity
of his fair and virtuous wife, as to set forth a Mirror and example to
every household servant, and to all other what soever they be, to beware how
they attempt any thing against the honor of Ladies. For many times it
chances, that he which diggeth a ditche, and sets up a Gallows, is the
first that does fall, or is stretched thereupon. As you may se by this
present discourse, which sets before your eyes, what end the fond love of
them ordinarily have, which without reason, not measuryng their own
ability, do suffer themselfes to be guided and led into their sensual
lusts and appetites: For ill success fails not in a beginning, the ground
whereof abhorryng reason, is planted and laid upon the sandy foundation of
pleasure, which is shaken and overthrown, by the least wind and tempest,
that Fortune can bluster against such buildyng.

Didaco and Violenta Didaco a Spaniarde, is in love with a poor maiden of
Valencia, and secretly marieth her, afterward lothyng his first marriage,
because she was of base parentage he marieth an other of noble birthe. His
first wife, by secret messenger prays his company, whose request he
accomplisheth. Being a bed, she and her maid kills him. She throws him
into the streate: she in desperate wise confesses the fact before the
Magistrates, and is put to death.

The.xlii. Novel.
THere is no man but does know, that Valencia is at this day, the chief
and only Rampar of Spain, the true seat of Faith, Justice, and Humanity.
And emo^ges all the rare and excellent-ornamentes, that city is well furnished
with so trim Ladies, and courteous gentlewomen, as they know how to bait and
feed young men, with foolish daliaunce, and idle passetyme. So that if there
be any beetle hedde or gross person, the better to allure and provoke him to
those follies, they tell him by a common Proverb, that he must go to
Valencia. In this city there was in old time, as it is at this day a very
ancient stock and family, called Ventimiglia, out of which be descended a
great number of rich and honorable knights. Emonges whom, not long time
pass there was one, named Didaco, very famous and renowned, to be the most
liberal and familer gentleman of the city, who (for want of better
business) walked up and down the city, and so consumed his youth, in
triu^phes maskes, and other expenses, common and apt for such pilgrims,
addressing his love indifferently to all women, without greater affection to
one, then to an other and continued that order, till upon an holy day, he
espied a young maid of small years, but of very exquisite beauty: which
maiden suddenly castyng her eye upon him, so pierced the knight Didaco with her
look, that from that time forth, she entered more nere his heart, then any
other. And after he had well marked her dwelling place, he many times passed and
repassed before the door, to epsy if he might, get some look or other
favor of her, that began alredie to govern the bridle of his thoughts, and
if it chanced that the gentlemanne beheld her, she showed herself courteous
and amiable, endued with grace so good, that he never departed ill contented
out of that streate. The gentleman continuyng certain time in those vanities,
was destrous to know a far of what she was, of what lineage and of what
vocacion. And after he had curiously serched out all her original, he
understood by diverse report, that she was a Goldsmithes daughter, whose
father was dedde certain years before, having no more but her another alive,
and two brethren, both of their fathers occupacion. Notwithstanding, of life
she was chaste and honest, defamed with none, although she was pursued of
many. Her outward beauty did not so much set her forth, as her grace and
order of talk, who although brought up in a citizens house, yet no lady or
gentlewoman in the City, was comparable to her in virtue and behavior. For
from her tender years, she was not only given to her nedle, a meet exercise
for maids of her degree, but also was trained up to write and read, wherein
she took so great pleasure, that ordinarily she carried a book in her hand,
which she never gave over, till she had gathered some fruicte thereof. This
knight having received that first impression, of the valor and virtue of
Violenta (for that was her name) was further in love then before, and that
which added more oil to the match, was the continual looks, wherewith she
knew how to delight him: and with them she was so liberal, that so often as he
passed through the streate, she shot them forth so cruelly, that his poor
heart (felyng it self so tormented) could not endure that new onset. By reason
whereof, thinkyng to quench the fire, that by little and little consumed him, he
would attempt her chastity, with gifts, letters, and messengers, which he
continued the space of half a year or more. Whereunto Violenta, giuyng no
place, in the end he was constreined to assail her with his own presence: and
one day findying her alone at the door, after he had made a very humble
reverence unto her, he said. Maistresse Violenta, considering your order and
the cold regard, that you have to my letters and messages, I do remember the
subtlety, that is attributed to the Serpente, who with his tail stops his
ears, because he will not hear the words, which has power to constrain
him, to do against his will, which has made me to leave to write unto you, and
to desire specially to speak unto you, that mine affectuous accentes, my
sorrowful words, and feruente sighs might certefie you better then Paper: the
rest of my passion, beleuyng verily, that if the heavy sound of my grievous
complaints, may come to your ears, they will make you to understand, a
part of that good and evil, which I feel continually in my heart, although
the love which I bear you, be such, that I can not give such lively
experience outwardly, being but little in comparison of them, which may be
seen within. And pronouncyng those words, there followed so many tears,
sobbes, and sighs, that they gave sufficient testimony, that his tongue was
the true and faithful messenger of his heart. Whereof Violenta somewhat
ashamed, with a constaunte grace said unto him, Senior Didaco: if you do yet
remember your life past, and mine honesty (which peradventure you have
thought either rude or cruel) I doubt not, that you have any cause to
marvel of my presumpcion, and to attribute that to vice, which is familier
with virtue. For although that you have solicited me to love you, by an
infinite number of letters and messages, yet it is so, that followyng the
nature of maids of my degree. I have neither allowed them, nor yet condemned
the^, as where unto accordingly, I have made none answer: not for despite or
contempt, but to let you know more certainly, that by favoring your
enterprises, I should increase your grief, which can receive none end by the
way you prete^de. For although that I have made the first proof upon my self,
and therefore of reason I ought to lamente them, which be in semblable pain,
yet I will not let slip the bridle in such wise to my passion, that mine
honesty shall remain in an other man's power, and (so it may be) at the
mercy and courtesy of them, who not knowing how dear it is to me, shall think
they have made a pretty conquest. And that I may have no cause to repent to
late, I have stopped mine ears for fear, that I be not a rested and stayed,
with the violence of your charms, a thing as you say, proper to Serpents.
But I have fortefied my heart, and armed my self in such wise within, that if
God continue that grace in me, which hitherto he has done, I hope not to be
surprised. Although that I must needs confess (to my shame) that I have
received merueilous assaults of love, not only for the common renown of your
virtues, and through the courtesy and gentleness daiely imparted to me by your
letters, but specially by your presence, which has yielded unto me experience
and assurance of that, which all the letters of the world could not do, nor
all other messages were not able to conceive. And to the end that I may not
be utterly ingrate, and that you do not depart from me, altogether
miscontent, I do promis you now that from henceforthe, you shall inioye the
first place of my heart, whereunto an other shall never enter: if so be you
can be content with honest amity, wherein you shall find me in time to come
so liberal, in all that, which honesty shall permit, that I am content to
forgo the name of a presumptuous or cruel Damsel, for your sake. But if you
mean to abuse me, or hope for any thing of me, contrary to mine honor, you be
merueilously deceived. Wherefore if you think your worthiness to great, ta
carry away a recompense so small, you shall do very well both for me and
your self, in forgettyng that is past, to cut of all hope in time to come.
And she thinkyng to prolonge a further discourse, the mother of Violenta
(which still stood at the window, all the time that Senior Didaco, was with
her daughter, came down to the door) interruptyng their talk, said to
Didaco. Sir, I suppose you take great pleasure, in the folly of my daughter,
because you carry and abide here, rather to contriue your time, then for any
other contentacion you can receive. For she is so evil taught, and of such
rude behavior, that her demeanor will rather trouble you, then give you cause
of delight. Maistresse said Didaco, although in the beginning, I purposed not
to tarry so long, yet when I entered in more familier acquaintance, and had
well experienced her good graces, I confess that I have stayed here, longer
then I thought. And were he never so great a lord, that lives at this day,
I dare avouch that he might think his time well bestowed, in hearing such
sober and honest talk, wherewith I think my self so well satisfied and
instructed, that all the days of my life I will witness, that virtue,
courtesy, and sober behavior is to be found, as well in mean degrees and
houses, and in them that be right noble, emonges which mean families,
although she be one (it may so be) that one more illustre and noble, cannot be
more excellent, and accomplished with better manners, then she: which is now
well manifested to me, in this little discourse. And after certain other common
talk, Didaco took his leave, and went home to his house, where he lived
fourtene or fiftene months without any rest, assaiyng by all means to
mortify his desires, but it avails not: For although he was rich, a trim
courtiar, and an eloquent gentleman, and had opportunity to speak unto her
many times, and she gentle enough to hear him, and to understand his errantes,
and was assured by friends, that she for her part was also in love, yet he was
not able by humane art and policy, to convert her to his mind.
Wherewithal he was long time molested, and at length pressed with grief and
anoiaunce, he was advised to send six hundred Ducates to the mother, for a
Relief to the marriage of her daughter, promising besides, that he would assign
her an honest dowry, when she found a man, worthy to be her husband: upon
condition that she would yield to him some comfort, to ease his affection. But
she which could not be wo^ne with love, was not able to be recovered with
money: and was offender that Senior Didaco had forgotten himself so much, as
to think to gain that for money, which with so great pain, tears and
sighs, had been denied him. And to make him understand, that she was
offended, she sent word by him, that brought her the money, that he should
go, and prove hereafter to deceive them, that measured their honor with the
price of profit, and not to set trappes to deceive other, that would buy
nothing contrary to virtue. And after Didaco was advertised of her mind, and
perceived that he lost time in all his enterprises, and was able no longer to
sustain his extreme pain and sorrow, which daily augmented, and when he had
debated in his mind all the success of his love, he resolved in the end upon
that, which he thought most profitable for the quiet of his mind, which
was to marie her. And although she was of no such house, and yet less endowed
with substance, as he deserved. Yet her beauty and virtue, and other gifts
of grace, wherewith she was enriched, made her worthy of a great Lord. And
resolved upon this, he repaired to Violenta, to whom he said. Maistresse
Violenta, if the true Touchestone, to know them that be perfect lovers
(emonges other) is marriage, certainly you have gotten a husband of me, if it
please you to accept me for such a one, whom in time you shall make to
understand, the difference between gooddes and virtue, and between honesty
and richesse. Violenta then ravished with joy, and incredible contentacion,
somewhat abashed, said unto him. Senior Didaco. I know not whether you
pretend by words, to prove my constancy, or else to bring me into fools
paradise: but of one thing I can assure you, that although I acknowledge myself
inferior to you in merits, gooddes and virtue, yet if that come to pass
which you promis. I will not give place to you in love, trustyng if God send
us life together, you shall well understand one day, that you would not
exchange my persons for a great Lady, what so ever she be. For confirmacion
whereof, Didaco plucked from his finger an Emeralde of great value, which
(when he had kissed her) he gave unto her in the way of marriage, praiyng her
that she would not disclose it for a certain time, until he himself, had made
all his fre^des privy unto it. Notwithstanding, he willed her to impart the
same to her two brethren, and to her mother, and he would get some priest
of the Country, to solempnize the Marriage within their house: which was dooen
in a chamber, about four of the clock in morning, being only present the
mother, the brethren, the priest, and a sernuaunt of the house, brought up
there from her youth, and his own man, without making any other preparacion
or cost, requisite for such a matter. In this sort they spent the day in
great joy and mirthe (which they can conceive, that be of base birthe, and
exalted to some high degree of honor) till night was come, and then every man
withdrewe themselfes, leauyng the bride and her husband to the mercy of Love,
and order of the night. Who being alone received equal joy, and like
contentacion, which they feel that being pressed with ardent and grievous
thirst, do in the end afterward with lively joy, and all kind of liberty,
quench that cruel discommodite and continued in those pleasures till morning,
that day began to appear, to whom Violenta said. My honorable Lord and dear
husband, sith that you be now in possession of that, which you have so
greatly desired, I humbly beseech you, to consider for the time to come, how
and what wise, your pleasure is that I shall use my self. For if God grant me
the grace, to be so discrete in pleasyng you, as I shall be ready and desirous to
obey you, in all that you shall command me, there was never gentle man's
servant, that did more willingly please his master, then I hope to do you.
Whereunto Didaco answered. My sweet and well-beloved wife. Let us leave this
humbleness and service for this time, to them which delight in those things.
For I promis you of my faith, that I have you in no less reverence and
estimacion, then if you had come of the greateste house in Cathalongne: as I
will make you understand some other time, at more leisure. But till I have
given order, to certain of mine affairs, I pray you to keep our Marriage
secret, and be not offended, if many times I do resort home to mine own
house, although there shall no day pass (by my will) but at night I will
keep you company. In the mean time, to buie you necessaries, I will send
you a thousand, or twelve hundred Ducates, to imploie not upon apparel, or
other things requisite to your degree (for I will provide the same my self at
an other time) but upon small trifles, such as be apt and convenient for
household. And so departed Senior Didaco from his wives house: who did so
louyngly interteigne him, that by the space of a year, there was no day,
wherein he was content, without the view and sight of his wife. And upon his
often resort to their house the neighbors began to suspect, that he kept the
maiden, and rebuked her mother and brethren, but specially Violenta, for
sufferyng Didaco to use their house in such secret wise. And above all, they
lamented the ill hap of Violenta, who being so well brought up, till she was
twenty years of age, and a maiden of such beauty, that there was none in all
the city of Valencia, but greatly did esteem her, to be of singular honesty
and reputacion. Notwithstanding, degeneratyng from her accustomed virtue, they
judged her to be light of behavior, given to lascivious love. And albeit that
very many times, such checkes and tauntes were objected, and that she
understood that murmur and talk, yet she made small account of them, knowing
that her conscience by any means, was not charged with such reproach: hoping
therewithal that one day, she would make them to give over that false
opinion, when her Marriage should be published and known. But certain times
feelyng her self touched, and her honesty appaired, could not contain, but
when she saw time with her husband, she prayed him very earnestly, to have
her home to his own house, to avoid slander, and defamacion of neighbors.
But sir Didaco knew so well how to use his wife by delays and promises, that
she agreed unto him in all things, and had rather displease the whole world
together, then offend him alone. Being now, so attached with the love of the
knighte, that she cared for nothing else, but to please and content him in all
things, whereunto she saw him disposed, and like as in the beginning she was
hard, and very slack in love, now she became so seruent and earnest, in her
affections that she received no pleasure, but in the sight of Didaco, or in
that which might content and please him best. Which the knight did easily
perceive and seeing himself in full possession of her heart, began by little and
little to wax cold, and to be grieved at that which before he compted dear and
precious, perswadyng himself, that he should do wrong to his reputacion, if
that Marriage unworthy of his estate, were discovered and known in the city:
And to provide for the same, he more seldom times repaired, to visit his wife
Violenta: yea and when so ever he resorted to her, it was more to satisfy his
carnal pleasure, then for any love he bare her. And thus forgettyng both God,
and his own consience, he freque^ted other companies in diverse places, to
win the good will of some other gentlewoman. In the end by sundry suits,
dissimulacions, and hipocrisies, he so behaved himself, that he recovered the
good will of the daughter of Senior Ramyrio Vigliaracuta, one of the chiefest
knights, and of most ancient house of Valencia. And (as we have declared
before) because he was rich and wealthy, and issued of a noble race, her
parents did easily agree to the Marriage. And the father having assigned an
honorable dowry to his daughter. The Nuptials were celebrated publicly, with
great pomp and solempnitie, to the great contentacion of all men. The
Marriage done and ended, sir Didaco and his new wife, continued at the house of
his father in law, where he lived a certain time, in such pleasure and
delectacio^ as they do, that be newly married. Whereof the mother and brethren
of Violenta being advertised, conceived like sorrow, as accustomablie they
do, that see the honor of them that be issued of their own bloodde unjustly
and without cause to be dispoiled. And these poor miserable creatures, not
knowing to whom to make their complainte, lived in strange perplexity,
because they knew not the Priest, which did solempnise their Marriage. On the
other side, they had no sufficient proof of the same. And albeit they were
able to verify in some poinctes, the first Marriage of Didaco; yet they burste
not prosecute the law, against two of the greateste Lords of their City.
And knowing the stout harie of Violenta, they thought to conceal the same
from her for a time, but it was in vain. For not long after she was certified
thereof, not only by the next neighbors, but by the common brute of the
city, which reported that in te^ne years space, there was not seen in
Valencia, a Marriage more honorable or royal, nor better frequented with a
noble company of gentlemen and Ladies: then the same was of the young knight
Didaco, with the daughter of Senior Ramyrio. Wherwithall Violenta vexed beyond
measure pressed with ire and surie, withdrewe her self into her chamber alone,
and there began to scratche and tear her face and hear, like one that was
mad, and out of her wits, saying. Alas, alas, what pain and trouble, what
unmeasurable torments suffers now my poor afflicted mind, without comfort
or consolacion of any creature living? What dure and cruel penance do I
sustain, for none offense at all? Ah fortune, fortune the enemy of my
felicite and bliss, thou haste so deprived me of all remedy, that I dare not
so much, as to make any manne know or understand my mishappe that the same
might be revenged, which being dooen would render such contentacion to my
mind, that I should depart out of this world the best contented and
satisfied maiden that ever died. Alas, that the gods did not grant me the
benefit, that I might have come of noble kind, to the intent I might have
caused that traitorous ruffien, to feel the grievous pain and bitter
torments, which my poor heart susteineth. Ah wretched caitife that I am,
aba^doned and forlorn of all good fortune: now I do see that with the eyes of
my mind, which with those of my body daseled and deceived, I could not see
or perceive. Ah cruel enemy of all pity, do thou not know, and feel in
thy mind, the heavy and sorrowful sound of my bitter plaintes? Understandest
not thou my voice, that cries vengeance upon thee for thy misdeede? Can not
thy cruelty in nothing be diminished, seeing me dismembered with the terror of
a thousand furious martirdomes. Ah ingrate wretch is this now the reward of
my love, of my faithful service, and mine obedience? And as she thus bitterly
tormented her self, her mother and brethren, and her maid, which was brought
up with her from her tender years, went up to the chamber to Violenta, where
they found her then so deformed with rage and fury, that almost she was out
of their knowledge. And when they went about to reduce her, by all means
possible, from those furious panges: and saw that it nothing auailed, they left
her in the keeping of the old maiden, who^ she loved above any other. And after
the maiden had uttered unto her particularly many reasons, for the appeasyng of
her grief, she told her that if she would be quiet a little while, she would
go and speak to the knight Didaco, and make him to understand his fault. And
would with discret order so deal with him, that he should come home to her
house, and therefore she prayed her to arm her self against this wickedness,
and to dissemble the matter for a time, that hereafter she might use upon him
just revenge. No, no Ianique, answered Violenta, the offense is very small and
light, where counsel is received: and albeit that I cannot chose, but
confess thy counsel to be very meet, yet there wants in me, a mind to
follow it: that if I did feel any part in me, disposed to obey the same. I
would even before thy face, separate that mind from my wretched body: For I
am so resolved in the malice and hatred of Didaco, that he can not satisfy me
without life alone. And I believe the Gods did cause me to be borne, with mine
own hands, to execute vengeance of their wrath, and the loss of mine
honor. Wherefore Ianique if from my youth thou did ever love me, show now
the same to me by effect, in a matter whereunto thy help is most necessary:
for I am so outraged in my mischief, that I do envy ye miserablest creatures
of the world, remainyng no more in me to continue my life in wailyng, and
continual sighs, but the title of a vile and abominable whore. Thou art a
stranger, and live here a beastly life, joined with continual labor. I
have twelve hundred crounes, with certain Iewelles, which that false traitor
gave me, which be predestined by the heavens, for none other purpose, but
to pay them their hire, which shall do the vengeance upon his disloyal
person. I do put the same money now into thy hands, if thou will help me
to make sacrifice, with the body of poor Didaco: But if thou dooest deny me
thy help, I will execute the same alone, and in case he do not die, as I do
intend he shall be murdered as I may. For the first time that I shall see him
with mine eyes, come of it what will, his life shall be dispatched with these
two trembling hands, which thou see. Ianique seeing her maistresse in these
terms, and knowing her stout nature, endued with a manly and invincible
stomach, after she had debated many things in her mind, she determined
wholly to impose her self for her maistres in that she was able to do. Moved
partly with pity to see her maistresse, dishonored with a defamed marriage, and
partly provoked with covetousness, to gain so great a sum of money,
which her maistresse did offer, if she would condiscende to her enterprise
(thinking after the fact committed, to flee into some other country). And
when she was thoroughly resolved upon the same, she embraced Violenta, and said
unto her Maistresse, if you will be ruled by me, and give over the vehemence
of your wrath and displeasure, I have found a way for you, to be revenged
upon Didaco, who has so wickedly deceived you. And albeeit the same can not be
done secretly, but in the end it must be known: yet I doubt not, but the
cause declared before the Judges, and they understanding the wrong he has
done you, they will have compassion upon your misery: who know right well
that always you have been known an esteemed, for a very honest and virtuous
maiden. And to the end that you be informed how this matter may be brought
to pass, first you must learn to dissemble your grief openly, and to feign
your self in any wise, not to be offended with the new Marriage of the knight.
Then you shall write unto him a letter, with your own hand, lestyng him
thereby to understand the pain that you suffer, for the great love you bear
him, and then ye shall humbly beseech him, sometimes to come and visit you.
And sith that froward fortune, will not sufixe you to be his wife, yet that
it would please him, to use you as his lover, that you may possess the
second place of his love, sith by reason of his new wife, you can not inioye
the first. Thus that deceiuour shall be begiled, by thinkyng to have you at his
commandment, as he was wont to do. And being come hither, to lie with you,
we will handle him in such wise as I have invented, that in one night he
shall lose his life, his wife, and her whom he thincketh to have for his lover.
For when he is a bed with you, and fallen into his first sleep, we will
send him into an other place, where in a more sounder sleep, he shall
euerlastynglie continue. Violenta all this time, which fed her blooddie and
cruel heart with none other repasie, but with rage and disdain. began to be
appeased, and found the counsel of Ianique so good that she wholly purposed
to follow the same. And to begin her enterprise, she prayed Ianique for a time
to withdraw her self, until she had written her letter, by the tenor whereof
she should understand with what audacitie she would prosecute the rest. And
being alone in her chamber, taking peune and paper she wrote to Didaco, with
fained heart, as follows.

Senior Didaco I am persuaded, that if you will vouchesafe to read, and pervse
the contents of these my sorrowful letters, you shall be moved with some
compassion and pity, by beholding the true Image of my miserable life,
pourtraied and painted in the same, which through your disloyalty and breach
of promise, is consumed and spente with so many tears, sighs, torments, and
griefs, that diverse times I marvel how Nature can so long supporte, and
defend the violente assaults of so cruel a martyrdom, and that she has not
many times torn my feeble spirit, out of this cruel and mortal prison: which
makes me to think and believe, by continuyng life, that death himself has
conspired my misery, and is the companion of my affliction: considering that
by no torment, she is able to make division, between my soul and body. Alas
how many ten hundred thousand times in a day, have I called for Death, and
yet I can not make her, to recline her ears unto my cries. Alas how many times
am I vanquished, with the sharp torments of sorrow, ready to take my leave,
and last farewell of you, being arrived to the extreme pangues of death.
Behold Didaco mine ordinary delices, behold my pleasures, behold all my
pastime. But yet, this is but little in respect of that, which chances in
the night. For if it happen that my poor eyes do fall a sleep, weary with
incessaunte drawyng forth of welsprynges of tears, slombryng dreams cease
not then, to vere and afflicte my mind, with the cruellest torments that are
possible to be devised, representing unto me by their ugly and horrible
visions, the joy and contentacion of her, which inioyeth my place: whereby
the greatest joy, which I conceive, is not inferior to cruel death. Thus my
life maintained with continuacion of sorrows and griefs, is persecuted in
most miserable wise. Now (as you know) I daily pass my sorrow, under
painful silence, thinkyng that your old promises, confirmed with so many
oaths, and the assured proof, which you still have had of my faith and
constauncie, would have brought you to some order, but now seeing with mine
eyes, the hard metal of your heart, and the cruelty of my fate, which
wholly has subdued me to your obedience, for respect of mine honor: I am
forced to complain of him that beats me, and thereby dispoileth me, both of
mine honor and life, not vouchsaufyng only so much as ones to come unto me.
And uncertain to whom I may make recourse, or where in fined redress, I
appeal unto you, to the end that seeing in what lean and ugly state I am, your
cruelty may altogether be satisfied, which beholding a sight so pitiful,
wherein the figure of my torment is lively expressed, it may be moved to some
compassion. Come hither then thou cruel man, come hither I say, to visit
her, who^ with some sign of humanite, thou may stay, or at least wise,
mollify and appease the vengeance, which she prepares for thee. And if ever
sparks of pity did warm thy frosen heart. Arm thy self with a greater
cruelty, then ever thou was wont to do, and come hither to make her sobbe her
last and extreme sighs, who^ thou have wretchedly deceived. For in doing
otherwise, thou may peradventure to late, bewail my death, and thy beastly
cruelty. And thinking to make a conclusion of her letter, the tears made her
words to die in her mouth, and would not suffer her to write any more:
wherefore she closed and sealed the same, and then calling Ianique unto her, she
said.

Hold gentle Ianique, carry these letters unto him, and if thou can so well
play thy part, as I have done mine, I hope we shall have shortly at our
commandment, him that is the occasion of this my painful life, more grievous
unto me then thousand deaths together. Ianique having the letter, departed
with diligence, and went to the house of the father in law of Didaco, where
quietly she waited, till she might speak with some of the house, which was
within a while after: For one of the servants of Didaco, whom she knew right
well, went about certain his masters business, and meetyng Ianique, was
abashed. Of who^ she demanded, if the Lord Didaco were within, and said that
she would feign speak with him: but if it were possible, she would talk with
him secretly. Whereof Didaco advertised, came forth to her into the streate,
to whom smilyngly (having made to him a fained reverence) she said. Senior
Didaco, I can neither write nor read, but I dare lay my life, there is suit
made unto you by these letters, which Madame Violenta has sent unto you. And
in deed to sale the truth, there is great injury dooen unto her of your
part, not in respect of your new Marriage. (For I never thought that
Violenta was a wife meet for you, considering the difference of your estates)
but because you will not vouchsauf to come unto her, seming that you make no
more account of her, and specially for that you provide no marriage for her in
some other place. And assure your self she is so far in love with you, that
she is ready to die, as she goes, in such wise that making her complainte
unto me this day, weeping, she says unto me. Well, for so much then as I can
not have him to be my husband, I would to God he would mainteigne me for his
friend, and certain times in the week, to come to see me, specially in the
night, lest he should be espied of the neighbors. And certainly if you would
follow her mind herein, you shall do very well. For the case stands thus,
you may make your a vaunte, that you be provided of so saire a wife, and with
so beautiful a friend, as any ge^tleman in Valentia. And then Ianique
delivered him the letter, which he received and read, and having well
considered the tenor of the same, he was incontinently surprised with a sudden
passion. For hatred and pity, love and disdain (as with in a Cloud be
contained hot and cold, with many contrary winds) began to combat
together, and to vex his heart with contrary minds, then, pawsyng upon
answer, he said unto her. Ianique my dear friend, racommende me to the good
grace and favor of thy maistresse, and say unto her, that for this time I
will make her no answer, but to morrow at four of the clock in the morning,
I will be at her house, and keep her company all the day and night, and then
I will tell her all that I have dooen, since I departed last from her,
trustyng she shall have no cause to be offended with me. And then Ianique
taking her leave, returned toward Violenta, tellyng her what she had done. To
whom Violenta answered. Ianique, is thou have made a good beginning to our
enterprise, I likewise for my part, have not slepts. For I have devised, that
we must provide for a strong roape, which we will fasten to the heddes
hedde, and when he shall be a sleep, I will cast the other end of the rope to
thee, over thwarte the bed, that thou majesty pluck the same with all thy
might, and before thou beginnest to pull, I will with a knife cut his
throat, wherefore thou must provide two great knives, whatsoever they cost,
but I pray thee let me alone with doing of the fact, that I may dispatch him
of his life, which alone did make the first assault, to the breach of mine
honor. Ianique knew so well how to provide for all that was requisite, for
the execution of their enterprise, as there rested nothing but opportunity, to
sort their cruel purpose to effect. The knight six Didaco, at the hour
appointed, told his new wife, that he must go into the country, to take
order for the state of his land: and that he could not return, till the next
day in the morning. Which she by and by believed. And the better to cover his
fact, he caused two horse to dee made ready, and rode for the when the clock
struck. iiij. And when he had riden through a certain streate, he said to his
manne (which was went to serve his turn in love matters) carry my horse to
such a man out in the Country, and tarry there all this day, and to morrow
Morning, come seek me in such a place, when I am gone from the house of
Violenta. In the mean time set my horse in some Inn. For in any wise I will
have no man know, that I do lie there, which dooen the master and the
servant, went two several ways. The knight being come to the house of
Violenta, he found Ianique tariyng for him, with good devotion, to use him
according to his desert, and conveyed him to the chamber of Violenta, and then
she returned about her business. The knighte kissed Violenta and badde her
good morrow, askyng her how she did. Whom Violenta answered. Sir Didaco you
bid me good morrow in words, but in deed you go to prepare for me, a
heavy and sorrowful life. I believe that your mind bears witness, of the
state of my welfare. For you have brought me to such extremity, that you see
right well, how nothing else but my voice, declares me too be a woman, and
therewithal so feeble a creature, as I still crave and call for death, or for
pity, although both of the one and of the other, I am not heard at all. And yet
think not Didaco, that I am so far out of my wits to believe, that the
cause of my writing the letter was for hope, that (you remembryng my bitter
pains, and your own heinous crime) I could ever move you to pity. For I am
persuaded, that you will never cease to exhauste and suck the bloodde, honor,
and life of them that credit your trumperies, and deceiptes, as now by
experience, I know by my self, with such deadly sorrow, that I still attend
and look for the sorrowful end of my life. Didaco seeing he thus afflicted,
fearyng that her cholere would further inflame, began to cull her, and to
take her now into his arms, tellyng her, that is Marriage with the daughter of
Vigliaracuta, was concluded more by force, then his own will and mind,
because they pretended to have a gift, of all the land and gooddes he had in
succession, after his father was dedde, which if they did obtain by law, he
should be a beggar, all the days of his life, and that the same was dooen, to
provide for the quiet state of them both, and nowithstanding he had married an
other wife, yet he purposes to love none but her, and meante in time to poison
his wife, and to spend the rest of his life with her. And thus sewyng to
remedy his former fault, by surmised reports, chaunting upon the cords of
his pleasant tongue, he thought with Courtlike allurementes, to appease her,
which had her wits to well sharpened, to be twice taken in one trappe,
howbeit for fear of driuyng him away, and to lose the mean to accomplish
that, which she intended, she said unto him, with forced smilyng.

Sir Didaco, although you have so ill used me in time paste, that I have no
great cause to believe your present words, yet the love that I bear you, is
so rooted in my heart, that the fault must be very great, which should
remous the same: in consideracio^ whereof, I will constrain my self to believe,
that your words be true, upon condition that you will swear, and promis to
lie with me here, ones or twice in a week. For me think that if I might at
times inioye your presence, I did remain in some part of your grace and
favor, and should live the best contented woman a live. Whereunto he
willingly agreed, with a great number of other like protestacious, prompte and
ready in them, which mean deceit. But if the poor miserable woman, had
perced the same in the depthe of her heart, and had credited all that he spoke,
no doubt, he would have changed his mind. Thus either parts spente the
day, in cold and dissembled flatteries, till dark night, with his
accustomed silence, did deliver them the mean, to exercise their cruel
enterprise. So sone as supper was dooen, Didaco and Violenta walked up and
down together, talkyng of certain common matters, till the knight (pressed
with sleep) commanded his bed to be made ready. It neded not thento inquire
with what diligence Violenta and Ianique, obeyed that request: in whom only
as they thought, co^sisted the hap, or mishappe of their enterprise. To whom
because Violenta might show her self more affectionat, went first to bed,
and so sone as they were laid, Ianique brewe the curteines, and took awais.
Didaco his sword, and making as though she had a thing to do under the
bed, she fastened the rope, and taked up the fire, which was in the chimney,
cariyng a stool to the beds side, and lays upon these ame two great
kechin knifes, which done she put out the candle, and fainyng to go out of
the chamber, she shut the door, and went in again. And then the poor
unfortunate knight, thinking that he was alone in the chamber with Violenta,
began to clepe and kiss her, where unto she made no refusal, but desirous to
renew his old private toles, she peased him, of all love that he bare unto
her, to keep troce for two or three hours, for that the night was long
enough, to satisfy his desires, affirmyng that it was impossible for her to
wake because five or six days before, by reason of her griefs, she had not
slept at all, notwithstanding she said, that after her sixty sleep, she
would willingly obey him. Whereunto the gentleman was easily persuaded as well
because he had elsewhere sufficiently staunched his thurst, as also for that he
was loath to displease her. And fainyng her self to sleep, she turned her face,
to the other side, and in that wise continued, till the poor ge^tleman was
fallen into his sound sleep. Then Ianique softly conveyed the rope over his
body, and gave it to Violenta, and after she had placed it, according to her
mind, and as they together had devised before, she delivered the end to
Ianique, who being at the beds side satte down upon the ground, and seidyng
the rope about her arms, hoisted her two feet against the bed, to pull
with greater force, when need required. Not long after, Violenta took up one
of the great knifes, and liftyng herself up softly, the proved with her hand,
to seek a place most meet for her, to stabbe a hole into her enemies flesh.
And inchaunted with wrath, rage, and fury, like an other Meden, thruste the
poincte of the knife with such force into his throat that she perced it
through, and the poor unhappy man thinkyng to resist the same, and to give
some repulse, against that adverse and heavy fortune, was appalled, who
feelyng a new charge given upon him again, specially being intricated with a
roape, was not able to stir hand nor foot, and through the excessive
violence of the pain, his speech and power to cry, was taken away: In such
sort that after he had received ten or twelve mortal wounds, one after an
other, his poor martired soul departed, from his sorrowful body. Violenta
having ended her determined enterprise, commanded Ianique to light the candle,
and approchyng nere the knights face, she saw by and by that he was without
life. Then not able to satisfy, her bloody heart, ne yet to quench her
furious rage, which boiled in her stomach, she with the poincte of the knife
tare out the eyes from his hedde, criyng out upon them with hideous voice, as
if they had been alive. Ah traitorous eyes, the messengers of a mind most
villainous, that ever seiorned within the body of man: come out of your
shameless siege for ever. For the spring of your fained tears, is now
exhausted and dried up. Then she played the Bocher, upon those insensible
members, continuyng still her rage, and cruelly seized upon the tongue, which
with her blooddie hands, she haled out of his mouth, and beholding the same
with a murderous eye, as she was cuttyng it of, said. Oh abominable and
perjured tongue, how many lies, did thou frame in the same, before thou
could with the canon shot of this poisoned member, make breach into my
virginity. Whereof now being deprived by thy means: I frankly accelerate my
self to death, whereunto thou presently haste opened the way. And when she had
separated this little member from the rest of the body (insactable of
cruelty) with the knife ripped a violente hole into his stomach, and
launching her cruel hands upon his heart, she tare it from the place, and
gashyng the same with many blows, she said. Ah vile heart, harder then the
Diamont whose Andeuile forged the unfortunate trappes of my cruel destenies:
Oh that I could have discovered, thy cogitacions in time past, as I do now
thy material substance, that I might have preserved me, from thine
abominable treason, and detestable infidelity. Then fleashyng her self upon
the dedde body, as a hungry Lion upon his pray, she left no part of him
unwounded. And when she had mangled his body all over, with an infinite number
of gashes, she cried out. O infected Carrion, whilom an organ and instrument,
of the most unfaithful and traitorous mind, that ever was under the coape of
heaven. Now thou art paid with desert, worthy of thy merits. Then she said
to Ianique (which with great terror, had all this while viewed all her
doings) Ianique, I feel my self now so eased of my pain, that come death
when he will, he shall find me strong and lusty, to endure his furious
assault, which of long time I have proved, besides assured hope to bring
this enterprise to pass. Help me then to train this corpse, out of my fathers
house, wherein I was first defloured, then I will tell thee what thou shalt
do. For like as mine honesty is stained, and published abroad, even so will
I the revenge to be manifest, and that his body shall be exponed, to the view
of all men. Whose request Ianique obeyed, she and Violenta took the body, and
threw it out at one of the chamber windows, down upon the pauemente of the
streate, with all the parts which she had cut of. That done she said to
Ianique. Take this casket with all the money within the same, and ship thy
self at the next Port thou shall come to, and get thee over into Africa, to
save thy life so spedely as thou canste, and never come into these parts
again, nor to any other where thou art known. Which Ianique purposed to do,
although Violenta had not counseled her thereunto. And ready to depart, she
gave a sorrowful farewell to her maistres, and betook her self to her good
fortune: and from that time forth, no man could tell whether she went, for
all the pursuit made after her. So sone as day appeared, the first that passed
by the streat espied the dedde body, which by reason of the noise and brute
made throughout the town, provoked many people to come and see it. But no man
knew what he was, being disfigured, as well by reason of the eyes torn out of
his hedde, as for other parts mutilated and deformed. And about.viij. of the
clock in the morning, there was such a multitude of people assembled, that it
was in manner impossible, to come nere it. The most part thought, that some
Thieves in the night, had committed that murder. Which opinion seemed to be
true, because he was in his shurte. Other some were of contrary opinion. And
Violenta which was at the window, hearing their sundry opinions, came down,
and with a bold courage and voice, that every man might hear, said. Sirs,
you do contend upon a thing whereof (if I were demanded the question, of the
magistrates of this city) I am able to render assured testimony. And without
great difficulty this murder can not be discovered, by any other but by me.
Which words the people did sone believe, thinkyng that diverse gentlemen
ielous of Violenta, had made a fraie. For she had now lost her ancient
rerutacion, by means of Didaco: who (as the fame and common report was
bruted) did keep her. When she had spoken those words, the Judges were
incontine^tly advertised as well of the number, as of that which Violenta had
said, and went thither with certain Sergeauntes and Officers, where they
found Violenta, more stonte, then any of the standers by: and inquired of her
immediately, how that murder came to pass, but she without fear or
appallement, made this answer. Ye that you see here dead, is the lord
Didaco. And because it apperteineth to many, to understand the troth of his
death (as his father in Law, his wife, and other kinsmen) I would in their
presence, if it please you to cause them to be called hither, declare that I
know.The magistrates amassed to se, so great a lord to cruelly slain,
committed her to ward till after diner, and commanded that all the before named
should be somoned to appear. Who assembled in the palace, with such a number
of people as the Judges could skante have place, Violenta in the presence of
them all, with out any rage or passion, first of all recompsed unto the^ the
chaste love between Didaco and her, which he continued the space of fowertene
or fiftene months, without receiuyng any fruicte or comoditie thereof. Within
a while after (he being vanguished with leave) married her secretly at her house,
and solemnized the neptialles by a Priest unknown: declaryng moreover, how
they had lived a year together in household, without any occasion of offense,
on her part given unto him. Then she rehearsed before them, his second marriage,
with the daughter of such a man, being there present, addying for
conclusion, that sith he had made her to lose her honesty, she had sought
means to make him to lose his life. Which she executed, with the help of
Ianique her maid: who by her advise being loathe to live any longer, had
drouned her self. And after she had declared the true state of the matter,
passed between them, she said for conclusion, that all that she had rehearsed,
was not to incite or move the^ to pity or compassion, thereby to prolonge her
life, whereof she judged her self unworthy, for if you (qoud she) do suffer me
to escape your hands, thinkyng to save my body, you shall be the cause and
whole ruin of my soul, for with these mine own hands, which you see before
you, I will desperately cut of the threde of my life. And with those words
she held her peace: whereat the people amassed, and moved with pity, let fall
the luke warm tears, from their dolorouse eyes and lamented the misfortune of
that poor creature: imputyng the fault upon the dedde knighte, which under
color of marriage had deceived her. The magistrates determinyng further, to
deliberate upon the whole matter, caused the dedde body to be buried, and
committed Violenta again to Ward, taking away from her, knives and other
weapons, wherewith they thought she might hurt her self. And used such
diligent search and inquiry, that the Priest which married them, was found
oat, and the servant of Didaco, that was present at the marriage of Violenta,
being examined, deposed how by his masters commandment, he carried his horse
into the country, and how he commanded him, to come to him again the next
morning, to the house of Violenta. And all things were so well throught to
light, as nothing wanted for further inuestigacion of the truth, but only the
confession of him that was dedde. And Violenta by the common opinion of the
Judges, was condepned to be behedded: not only for that she had presumed, to
punish the knights tromperie and offense, but for her excessive cruelty done
upon the dedde body. Thus unfortunate Violenta ended her life, her mother and
brethren being acquitted. And was executed in the presence of the Duke of
Calabria, the soon of king Federic of Aragon: which was that time the Viceroy
there, and afterward died at Torry in France: who incontinently after caused
this history to be registered. with other things worthy of remembrance,
chanced in his time at Valencia. Bandell does write, that the maid Ianique
was put to death with her maistres but Paludanus a Spaniard, a live at that
time, writes an excellent history in Latin, wherein he certainly declares,
that she was never apprehended, which opinion (as most probable) I have
followed.

Wantones and pleasant life being guides of insolency, does bring a
miserable end to a faier Lady of Thurin, whom a noble man aduannced to high
estate: as appears by this history, wherein he executes great cruelty upon
his said Lady, taken in adultery.

The.xliij. Novel.
THE ancient and general custom of the gentlemen, and gentlewomen of
Piedmonte, was daiely to abandon famous cities and murmures of common wealths
for to withdraw themselfes to their Castles in the country, and other places
of pleasure, of purpose to begile the troublesome turmoiles of life, with
greateste rest and contentacion, which troubles and griefs, they do feel,
that intermedle with business of common wealth, which was with great care
observed, before the wars had preposterated the order of ancient
government, that much a do you should have had, to find a gentleman idle in
a city. Who rather did resort to their country houses with their families,
which were so well governed and furnished, that you should have departed so
well satisfied and instructed, from a simple gentle man's house as you should
have dooen from a great City, were it never so well ruled, by some wife and
prudent Senator. But since the world began to wax old, it is come again
to very infancy, in such sort that greatest number of Cities, are not
peopled in these days, but with a many of idle gentlemen, that make their
resiance and abode there, not to profit, but to continewe their delicate life,
and they do corrupt not only themselfes, but (which is worste) they infecte
them that keep them company, which I will discourse somewhat more at large,
for so much as the gentlewoman, of whom I will describe the history, was
brought up all the time of her youth, in one of the finest and most delicate
Cities of Piedmonte, And feelyng as yet some spark of her former bringing up,
she could not be reformed (being in the country with her husband) but that in
the end she fill into great reproach and shame, as you shall understand by
the content of this history.

In the time that Madame Margaret of Austriche, daughter of Maximilian the
Emperor, went in progress into Sauoie, toward her husband: there was a
great Lord, a valiaunte and courteous gentleman, in a certain Country of
Piedmonte, whose name I will not disclose, as well for the reverence of
hisneresse kin, which do yet live, as for the immoderatee ruell
punishemente, that he devised toward his wife, when he took her in the
fault. This great Lord, although he had goodly revenues, and Castelles in
Piedmonte, yet for the most part of his time, he followed the Court, by
commandment of the Duke, that interteined him next his own person, vsyng
commonly his advise in all his greatest affairs. This lord at that time,
married a maide^ in Thurin of mean beauty, for his pleasure, not estemyng the
place from whence she came. And because he was well nere fifty years of age
when he married her, she attired her self with such modesty, that she was
more like a widow then a married woman: and knew so well how to use her
husband, the space of a year or two, that he thought himself the happiest
manne a live, that he had found so loving a wife. This woman being served, and
reuere^ced with great honor, waxed werie of to much rest and quiet, and
began to be inamoured of a Gentlemanne her neighbor, whom in a little time she
knew so well to use by looks, and other wanton toies, that he did easily
perceive it, notwithstanding for the honor of her husband, he would not some
to know it, but a far of. Now this warm love by little and little,
afterward began to grow hot, for the young woman weary of such long
delaie, not able to content her self with looks, upon a day findyng this
young gentleman in conueniente place, as he was walkyng hard by her house,
began to reason with him of terms and matters of love, tellyng him that he
lived to solitary, in respect of his young years, and how she had always been
brought up in Towns, and places of great company, and resort, in such
wise that now being in the Country, she could not easily digeste the
incommoditie of being a lone, specially for the continual absence of her
husband, who scarce three months in a year, remained at home in his own
house. And so falling from one matter to an other, love pricked them so sore,
that in fine they opened a way to that that troubled them so much, and
specially the woman: who forgettyng her honor, which ordinarily does
accompany great Ladies, privily she told him the love, that she had borne
him of long time, which notwithstanding she had dissembled, waityng when he
should have given the first onsette, for that gentlemenne ought rather to
demand, then to be required of Ladies. This gentleman understanding (by half
a word) her disease, told her that although his love was extreme,
nevertheless, demyng himself unworthy of so high degree, he still concealed
his grief, which because he thought it could not come to pass, fear forced
him to keep it secret. But sith it pleased her so much to abasse her self,
and was disposed to do him so much honor, to accept him for her servant,
he would imploie his endeavor, to recompense that with humility and humble
service, which Fortune had denied him in other things. And having framed this
foundation to their love, for this time they used no other contentacion one of
an other, but only devise. But they so provided for their affairs to come,
that they neded not to use longer oracion. For being neighbors, and the
husband many times absent, the high way was open, to bring their enterprises
to desired effect. Which they full well acquieted, and yet unable wisely to
master and govern their passions, or to moderate them selves by good
discrecion, the servants of the house (by reason of the frequented
communicacion of the gentleman, with the ge^tlewoman) began to suspecte them,
and to conceive simster opinion of their maistresse, although none of them
durst speak of it, or make other semblaunce of knowledge. Love holdyng in full
possession, the hearts of these two lovers, blinded them so much, that
leauyng the bridle, to large for their honor: they used themselves privily and
apertly, at all times one with an other, without any respect. And when upon a
time, the Lord returned home to his own house (from a certain voyage,
wherein he had been in the Dukes service) he found his wife to be more fine and
gorgeous, then she was wo^t to be, which in the beginning did wonderfully
astonne him. And perceiuyng her sometimes, to utter wanton words, and to
apply her mind upon other things, when he spoke unto her, he began
diligently to observe her countenance and order, and being a man brought up
in courtly trade, and of good experience, he easily was persuaded, that there
was some ele under the stone, and to come to the truth of the matter, he made
a better countenance, then he was wont to do, which she knew full well how
to requite and recompense. And living in this simulacion, either of them
attempted to begile the other, that the simplest and lest crafty of the^ both,
could not be discovered. The young gentleman, neighbor of the Lord, grieved
beyond measure, for that he was come home, passed and repassed many times,
before his Castle gate, thinkyng to get some look of his Ladies eye: but by
any means she could not for fear of her husband, who was not so foolish,
that after he saw him go before his gate so many times, without some
occasion, but that he easily judged, there was a secret amity between the^.
Certain days after, the gentleman of insinuate himself into the lords
favor, and to have access to his house sent him a very excellent Tercelet
of a Faucon, and at other times, he presented him with Ueneson, and vmbles of
Dear, which he had killed in hu^tyng. But the Lord (which well knew that
flattery many times, served the torn of diverse men, to begile foolish
husbands of their fair wives) that he might not seem ungrateful, sent him
also certain strange things. And these courtesies continued so long, that the
lord, desirous to lay abaite, sent to pray him to come to diner: to which
request the other accorded liberally, for the devotion he had to the saint of
the Castle. And when the Table was taken up, they went together to walk
abroad in the fildes. And the more fre^dly to welcome him, he prayed his wife,
to go with them, whereunto she made no great denial. And when they had
debated of many things, the Lord said unto him. Neighbor and friend, I am
an old manne and Melancholy, as you know, wherefore I had need from
henceforthe to reioise my self. I pray you heartily therefore, to come hither
many times, to take part of our diner, and such fare as God does send. And
use the things of my house, as they were your own. Which the other
gratefully accepted, humbly praiyng that his Lordship would command him and
that he had, when it were his pleasure, and to use him as his very humble and
obedient servant. This Pantere laid, the young gentleman ordinarily came ones
a day, to visit the Lord and his wife. So long this order continued, that
the Lord (upon a day, fainyng himself to be sick) commanded that no man
should come into his chamber, because all the night before he was il at ease,
and could take no rest. Whereof the gentleman was incontinently advertised, by
an old woman, hired of purpose for a common messanger, of whom a none we
purpose to make mencio^. Being come to the Castle, he demanded how the Lord
did, and whether be might go se him, to whom answer was made, that he could
not, for that he was fallen into a slomber. Madame now was in the gardein
alone, coming up and down for her pleasure, and was advertised that the
gentleman was come. Who being brought into the gardeine, and certified of the
Lords indisposicion, began to renew his old daliaunce with the Lady, and to
kiss her many times, eftsons puttyng his hand into her bosom, and vsyng
other pretty preparatifes of love, which oughts not to be permitted, but only
to the husband. In the mean time, while they two had been there a good
space, the husband slept not, but was departed out of his chamber, the space
of two hours and more, and was gone up to the higheste place of all his
Castle, where at a very little window, he might diserie all that was done,
within the compass of his house. And there seeing all their courteous offers and
proffers, he waited but when the gentleman, should have endeavored him self to
proceed further, that he might have discharged his mortal malice upon them
both. But they fearing that their long abode in the gardeine, might engender
some displeasure, returned into the Castle, with purpose in time to content
their desires, so sone as opportunity served. The Lord notyng all the
demeanor between them, returned to his chamber, and went again to his
bed, fainyng to be sick, as he did all the day before. Supper time come, the
Lady went to know his pleasure, whether he would sup in his chamber, or in
the hall, he answered (with a disguised cherefull face) that he began to feel
himself well, and that he had slepte quietly, since Diner, and was determined
to suppe beneth, sendyng that night for the genmanne, to bear him company at
supper: and could so well dissemble his just anger, that neither his wife, nor
the gentleman perceived it by any means. And so the Lord with his Lady still
continewed, the space of fiftene days, or three wekes, making so much of her,
(as though it had been the first month that he married her) in such forte,
that when the poor miserable womanne, thought to have gotten victory over her
husband and friend, it was the hour that Fortune did weaue the toil and
net to intrappe her. The Lord which no longer could abide this mischief,
driven into an extreme cholers, seeing he that he could find no means to take
them (himself being at home) deliberated either sone to die, or to provide for
ye matter: and the better to execute his determinacion, he counterfaited a
letter from the Duke of Sauoie, and bare it secretly to the Post himself alone,
and commanded him next day to bring it to his Castle, whereby he fained that
the Duke had sent the same unto him. Which matter the Post did handle so
well, that he brought the letter when he was at supper, with Botes on his
legs all durtie and raied, as though he were newly lighted from his horse.
And the better to maintain his wife in her error, after he had read the
letter, he gave it to her to read: which contained no other thing, but that
the Duke commanded him, presently with all diligence, himself and his train
to come unto him, to be dispatched upon. Embassage into France. That dooen he
said unto her. Wife, you see how I am constrained to depart with speed (to my
great grief) Bid my men therefore to be ready in the morning, that they
may, go before, and wait for me at Thurin, where my Lord the Duke is at
this present. I myself will depart from hence to morrow at night after
supper, and will ride in Post in the fresh of the night. And the better to
deceive this poor unhappy woman, he went into his Closette, and took his
caskette, wherein was the most part of his treasure, and deliueryng the same
unto her, said, that fearyng left he should tarry long in France, he would
leave the same with her to help her in necessity. And after all his train
was gone, he caused one of the yeomen of his chamber, to tarry behind, whose
fidelity he had at other times proved. And all that day he ceased not to
cherishe, and make much of his wife. But the poor soul did not foresee, that
they were the flatteries of the Crocodile, which reioyseth when he sees one
deceived. When he had supped, he made a particular remembrance to his wife how
the affairs of his house should be disposed in his absence. And then took
his leave, giuyng her a Judas kiss. The Lord uneaths had ridden two or three
miles, but that his wife had sent the old woman, to carry word to her lover,
of the departure of her husband, and that he might saufly come and lie with
her in the Castle, for that all the servants were ridden forth with their
master, saving one yeoman and her two maids, which do never use to lie in
her chamber. Upon this glad news, the gentleman thought no scorn to appear
upon that warnyng, and the old woman knew the way so well, as she brought
him straighte into the Ladies chamber, whom Love inuegled in such wise, as
they lay together in the bed, where the Lord was wont to lie. And the old
woman lay in an other bed in that chamber, and shut the doze within. But
while these two poor passionate lovers, thought they had attained the top of
all felicity, and had inioyed with full sail, the favors of the little God
Cupide, Fortune desirous to depart them, for the last mess of the feast,
prepared so bitter Comfettes, that it cost them both their lives, with such
a cruel death, that if they which make profession of semblable things, do
take example thereat, wives will get them better names, and husbands shall be
less deceived. The Lord that night, made no longer tracte of time, but
lighted from his horse, at the keeper of one of his Castles houses, whom he
knew to be faithful. To whom in the presence of the yeoman of his chamber,
he discoursed the love between the ge^tleman and his wife, and commanded him
with all speed to arm him, and with a case of Pistolettes to follow him, whom
he obeyed. And being come to the Castle gate, he said to the keeper of his
Castle. Knock at the gate and feign thy self to be alone, and say that I
passing by thy house, did leave a remembrance with thee, to carry to my Lady.
And because it is a matter of importance, and requires haste, thou were
compelled to bring in this night. Knockyng at the gate somewhat softely (for
fear left they which were in the chambers should hear) a yoman rose which
lay in the Court, knowing the voice of the keeper (because he was one, whom
his Lord and master did greatly favor) opened the gate, and the first thing
they did; they lighted a Torche and went up all three to the Lords chamber,
not sufferyng any manne to carry news to the Lady, of their approach. Being
come to the chamber door, the keeper knocked, which immediately the old woman
heard, and without openyng the door, asked who was there. It is (quod the
keeper) that have brought a letter to my Lady, from my Lord my master, who
ridyng this night in Post to Thurin, passed by my house, and very earnestly
charged me, by no means to fail but to fail but to deliver it this night.
The Lady advertised hereof (that would never have thought that her own manne,
whom she took to be simple, and void of guile, would have framed a platte
for such treason, said to the old woman. Receive the letter at the door,
but in any wise let him not come in, and I will accomplish the contents. The
old woman, which thought only but to receive the letter between the door,
was astoned when the keeper, who (giuyng her a blow with his foot upon the
stomach) threw her backewarde, where she lay more then a quarter of an
hour, without speking or moving. And then they three entryng the chaumber in
great rage, with their Pistolettes in their hands, found the two miserable
lovers stark naked, who seeing themselfes surprised in that state, were so sore
a shamed as Eve and Adam were, when their sin was manifested before God. And
not knowing what to do, reposed their refuge in waimentyng and tears, but at
the very same instaunt, they bound the arms and legs together, of the
poor gentleman with the chollers of there horfse, which they brought with
them of purpose. And then the Lord commanded that the two maids, which
were in the Castle, and the rest of the servants, should be called to
assiste them, to take example of that fair fight. And all the mean people
being gathered in this sort together, the Lord tournyng him self unto his
wife, said unto her. Come hither thou unshamefast, vile, and detestable
whore, like as thou have had a heart so traitorous and unfaithful, to bring
this infamous Ruffian, in the night into my Castle, not only to rob and
dispoile me of mine honor, which I prefer and esteem more then life: but
also (which is more to be abhorred) to infringe and break for ever, the holy
and precious band of Marriage, wherewithal we be united and knitte together.
Even so I will even forthwith, that with these thine own hands, with which
thou gave me the first testimomonie of thy faith, that he presently shall be
hanged and strangled in the presence of all men, not knowing how to devise,
any other greater punishemente, to satisfy thine offense, then to force thee
to murder him, whom thou haste preferred before thy reputacion, above mine
honor, and esteemed more then thine own life. And having pronounced this
fatal Judgment, he sent one to seek for a great nail of a Carts, which he
caused to be fastened to the beam of the chamber, and a ladder to be
fetched, and then made her to tie a Collar of the order belongyng to Thieves and
male-factours, about the necks of her sorrowful lover. And because she alone
was not able to do that grievous and weighty charge, he ordained that like as
the old woman, had been a faithful minister of his wives love, so she should
put her hand in performyng, the vttermoste of that work. And so these two
wretched women, were by that means forced to such extremity, that with their
own hands, they strangled the unfortunate Gentleman: with whose death the
Lord not yet satisfied, caused the bed, the clothes, and other furnitures
(whereupon they had taken their pleasures past) to be burned. He commanded the
other vtensiles of the chamber to be taken away, not suffryng so much straw,
as would serve to couche of two Dogs, to be left unconsumed. Then he said
to his wife. Thou wicked woman, emonges all other most wicked. For so much as
thou have had no respect, to that honorable state, where unto Fortune has
advanced thee, being made by my means, of a simple damsel, a great Lady,
and because thou haste preferred, the lascivious acquaintance of one of my
subjects, above the chaste love, that thou ought to have borne to me: my
determinacion is, that from henceforthe thou shall keep continual company
with him, to the vttermoste day of thy life: because his putrified carcass
has given occasion, to ends thy wretched body. And then he caused all the
windows and doors to be mured, and closed up in such wise, that it was
impossible for her to go out, leauyng only a little hole open, to give her
bread and water: appoinctyng his Steward to the charge thereof. And so this
poor miserable woman, remained in the mercy of that obscure and darcke
prison, without any other company, then the dead body of her lover. And when
she had continued a certain time in that stinckyng Dongeon, without air or
comfort, overcome with sorrow and extreme pain, she yielded her soul to GOD.

The love of Alerane of Saxone, and of Adelasia the Daugther of the Emperor
Otho the third of that name. Their flight and departure into Italy, and how
they were known again, and what noble houses of Italy descended of their
race.

The.xliiij. Novel.
THe ancient Histories of Princes (as well under ye name of King, as of ye
title of Duke, which in time past did govern ye Country of Saxone) do
report that Otho the second of that name, which was the first Emperor that
lawfullye reigned (after the Empire ceased in the stock of Charles the great)
had of his wife Matilde daughter of the King of Saxone, one son, which
succeeded him in yt Imperial crown, called Otho the third, who for his
virtuous education and gentle disposition, acquired of all men the surname of
The love of the World. The same Emperor was courteous and merciful, and never
(to any man's knowledge) gave occasion of grief to any person, he did good to
every man, and hurt no man: likewise he thought, that that kingdom was well
gotten, and gotten was better kept, if the King, Prince or Ruler thereof did
study and seek means to be beloved, rather than feared, since love ingendreth
in it self a desire of obedience in the people. And contrariwise, that Prince
which by tyranny makes himself to be feared, lives not one hour at rest,
having his conscience tormented indifferently, both with suspicion and fear,
thinking still that a thousand swords be hanging over his head, to kill and
destroy him. Otho then under his name of Emperor, covered his clemency with a
certain sweet gravity and Princely behavior. Who notwithstanding declared
an outward show of his courtesy, to make sweet the egrenesse of
displeasure, which they feel and taste that be subject to the obeysaunce of
some new Monarchy. Man being of his own nature so loving of himself, that an
immoderate liberty seems unto him sweeter, more just and indurable, than
auctorities rightly ordained, the establishment whereof, seems to represent
the only government of that first King, which from his high throne, gives
being and moving to all things. That good Emperor then knowing very well the
malice of men, who although he was a good man of war, hardy of his hands,
and desirous of glory, yet moderated so well the happy success of his
enterprises, that his grace and gentleness principally appeared, when he had
the vpperhande, for that he cherished and well used those whom he had subdued
under his obedience, his force and felicity was declared when he corrected and
chastised rebels, and obstinate persons, which wilfully would prove the great
force of a Princes arm justly displeased, and to others what favor a King
could use toward them, whom he knew to be loyal and faithful: giving
cause of repentance, to them which at other times had done him displeasure. And
to say the truth, he might be placed in the rank, of the most happy Princes
that ever were, if the private affairs of his own house had so happyly
succeeded, as the renown which he wanne in the science of warfare, and in the
administration of the common wealth. But nothing being stable in the life of
man: This Emperor had in him, that thing, that diminished the glory of his
wisdom, and (resembling an Octauius Augustus) the unhappy success of his
own house, did somewhat obscure the fame of his noble factes, and those
insolent doings served unto him as a counterpoyse to prosperous Fortune, which
may be easily perceived, by the progress and continuation of this History.
This good Prince had one daughter, in whom Nature had distributed her gifts,
in such wise, that she alone might have vaunted her self to attain ye
perfection of all them, which ever had any thing, worthy of admiration, were it
in the singularity of beauty, favor, and courtesy, or in her disposition
and good bringing up. The name of this fair Princess was Adelafia. And when
this Lady was very young, one of the children of the Duke of Saxone, came to
the Emperors service, whose kinsman he was. This young Prince, besides that he
was one of the fairest and comlyest gentlemen of Allemaigne, had therewithal,
together with knowledge of arms, a passing skill in good scieures, which
mitigated in him the ferocitie bath of his warlike knowledge, and of the nature
of his Country. His name was Alerane, who seeing himself the youngest of his
house, and his inheritance very small, endeavored to conciliate every man's
favor and good will, to remove his own fortune, and to bring himself, in
estimation with the Emperor, where in all things he employed so well his
endeavor, that through his worthiness he wanne comendation and report, to be
the most valiant and stoutest gentleman, in all the Emperors court, which
praise did greatly commend the tenderness of his young years, and was
therewithal so sober, and of so gentle spirit, that although he excelled his
companio^s in all things, yet he avoided cause of offense (showing himself
familiar amongs all the Courtyers.) Every man (which is a great matter) rather
praised him and loved him, and he thought himself most happy, yt by any means
could fashion himself to imitate the virtue, ye made Aleranes name so
renowned. And that which made him fuller of admiracion, and brought him in
favor with his Lord and Master was, that upon a day the Emperor being in an
assemble in the mids of a laund, and in a desert place, it chanced that a
Bear, issuing out of her cave, was assailed of hunters: the fierce beast,
avoiding ye toils and flying the pursuit of the dogs, came with great
vehemency and speed, from a mountain, and was upon the Emperor ^or he was
ware, separated from his company and without his sword. But Alerane by good
fortune was at hand, who more careful for the safety of his Prince, than for
his own life, encountered with ye Bear, and killed him, in the presence of the
Emperor, and many other. All which beholding (to their great astonishment) the
dexterity and hardiness of Alerane at those small years: (for then he was
not above the age of.xvij.) the Emperor imbrasing him, did highly comende him,
telling them that were by, that his life was saved chiefly by Gods assistaunce,
and next by the prowess of Alerane. The news hereof was so bruted abroad,
that there was no talk but of the valiaunce and stoutnesse of this young man of
war, which caused fair Adelasia, (moved by natural instigation, and with
the opinion and report of the virtue toward in that young Prince) to feel a
certain thing (I can not tell what) in her mind, which inflamed her senses
and heart. And she had no sooner cast her eyes upon Alerane, but Love, which had
prepared the ambushe, so pierced her delicate breast, that he took full
possession of her: in such wise that the Princess was so strangely in love
with the young Prince, that she never found pleasure and contentation, but in
that, which was done or said by her lover, whom she accounted the chief of
all the men of his time. In this burning heat, she felt the passions of love
so vehement, and his pricks so sharp, that she could not euaporate, ye
clouds which darkened her spirits and continually tormented her mind. And
albeit that the little occasion, which she saw, for their coming together in
time to come, did dissuade her, from pursuing the thing which she most desired:
yet the tirant Love showed himself very extreme in that diversity of
thoughts, and variety of troubles which vexed the spirit of the Princess:
For she could not so well dissemble, that which honor and age commanded her
to keep secret, but that Alerane which was (as we have already fayde) well
expert and subtle, perceived the inward disease of Adelasia. Moreover there
was between them a natural conformity and likelyhode of conditions, which
made them to agree in equal desires, to feed of like meats, their passionate
minds were martired with equal sorrow and pain, departed as well in the one,
as in the other. For Alerane by taking careful heed to the looks which the
Princess continually did stealingly cast upon him, saw the often and sudden
chaunges of color, wherein sometimes appeared joy, which by and by did end,
with infinite number of sighs, and with a countenance agreeable to that, which
the heart kept secret and covert, whereby he assured himself unfeignedly to be
beloved, which caused him to do no less, (for satisfaction of such like merit
and desert, done by Adelasia) but to bear unto her like affection, forcing her
by all diligence and service, to continue still that good will toward him,
yelding himself as a pray, to the self same love. Who ruling thaffections of
the Princess, (as brave and pleasant as she was) made her sorrowful and
pensife, and altered her in such wise, that she thought the company wherein
she was, did impeach her joy, which she judged to conceive like pleasure that
she did, when at liberty and alone, she reuolued her troubles, and fansted her
contentation in her mind. Alerane on the other side slept not, but as though
he had received the first wound by the hands of the blind little archer
Cupide, ceased not to think of her, whose Image ordinaryly appeared before his
eyes, as engraven more lively in his mind than any form may be insculped upon
metal or marble. And yet neither the one nor the other, durst discover the
least passion of a great number, which oppressed their besieged hearts, and
which suffered not to live in any rest this fair couple of loyal lovers, that
durst not manifest their love. The eyes alone did thoffice of the hands and
tongue, as trusty secretaries, and faithful messangers of the effects of the
mind. That which kindled she fler most, was their frequent talk together,
which was but of common matters, without utterance of that which ye heart knew
well enough, and whereof the eyes gave true testimony. A passion truly almost
intolerable for a young Princess, as well because she never had experience of
like sorrow, as for her tender age: and yet more for a natural abashme^t and
shame, which with the veil of honor does serve, or ought to serve, for a
bridle, to every Lady covetous of fame, or like to be the ornament or beauty of
her race. Adelasia then floting in the tempestuous seas of her appetites,
guided by a master, which delights in the shipwreck of them he carries,
vanquished with an immoderate rage of love, tormented with grief unspeakable,
offended with her own desires, being alone in her chamber, began to complain
her sorrows, and said: Ah, what passion is this that is unknown unto me,
that ingendreth an oblivion of that which was wont to delight and content me?
From whence comes this new alteration, and desire unaccustomed, that
solitary being alone, is the rest and argument of my troubles? What diversities
and alterations be these that in this sort do poyse and weygh my thought? Ah
Adelasia, what happy misery do thou find in this free prison, where
pleasure has no place, till the Enemies have dysquieted the life, with a
Million of paynfull and dangerous trauayles? What is this to say, but that
against the nature of maidens of my years, I will not, or can not be quiet day
nor night, but to take my repaste and feeding upon cares and thoughts? Alack,
I thought then to finishe my sorrows and griefs, when (being alone) I began
to frame the plot of my torments and pains, with so many forms and devises in
my fancy, as I do make wishes and requests upon the thing I love and esteem
above all, upon which all mine affections do depend and take their beginning.
What is this to say, but that my maids do offend me, when with discrete words
they go about to divert me from my follies and pleasant noysom thoughts?
Wherefore should not I take in good part, yt care which they have of my health,
and the pain which they take to remember me of my torment? Alas, they know not
wherein consists the force of mine evil, and much less is it in their power
to remedy the same. Even so I would have none other plaster, but him that
has given me the wound, nor none other meat, but the hunger that dries me
up, I crave none other comfort but the fire which burns me continually, the
force whereof pearceth the suck and marie within my bones. Ah: Alerane,
Alerane, the flower and mirror of all prowess and beauty. It is thou alone ye
live in me, of whom my mind conceyueth his hope, and the heart his
nourishment. Alas: that thy worthiness should be the overthrow of mine honor,
and thy perfection the imperfection of my life. Ah Love, Love, how diversely
thou dealest with me. For seeing mine Alerane, I am attached with heat in the
mids of ice that is full cold. In thinking of him I do both rest and
travail continually. Now I flee from him, and sodaynely again, I desire him.
In hearing him speak, the sugar and honey, that distilleth from his mouth, is
the contentme^t of my mind, till such time as his words appear to be
different from my desire. For then ah Lord: my rest is converted into extreme
travail, the honey into gall, and wormwood more bitter, than bytternesse it
self, the hope of my mind is become despair so horrible, that the same only
will breed unto me, (if God have not pity upon me) short occasion of my
death. After these words, she rested a long time without speaking a word,
with her arms a cross and her eyes eleuate on high, which ran down like a
river of tears, and seemed to be so ravished, that a man would have judged her
rather a thing without life, than a creature sensible, and laboring for life,
til, recovering her spirits again, as coming from an Ecstasy and sound, she
began her plaintes again in this sort. What? must such a Princess as I am,
abase my self to love her own subject, yea and her kinnesman, and specially
not knowing yet how his mind is disposed? Shall I be so unshamefast, and void
of reason, to surrendre my self to any other but to him, whom God and my
fortune has promised to be my espouse? Rather death shall cut of the threde of
my years, than I will contaminate my chastity, or that any other enjoy the
flower of my virginity, than he to whom I shall be tied in marriage. Ah: I say
and promise much, but there is a tormenter in my mind which deals so
rigorously with my reason, that I cannot tell where upon well to determine. I
dare not think (which also I ought not to do) that Alerane is so folish to
despise the love of one, that is the chiefest of the daughters of the greatest
Monarchs of the world, and much less, that he should forget himself, in such
wise, to forsake me, having once enjoyed ye best and dearest thing that is in
me, and whereof I mean to make him, the only and peaceable possessor. Truly
the virtue, ge^tlenesse, and good nuriture of Alerane, do not promise such
treason in him, and that great beauty of his, cannot tell how to hide such
rigor that he will refuse one, that is one of the most deformed and ill favored
creatures, and which loves him with such sincerity, that where she shall
lose the means to enjoy him, there shall feel, even forthwith, the miserable
end of her sorrowful days. And then again she held her peace, tossed and
turmoiled with diverse thoughts fleting between hope and fear, by and by, she
purposed to deface from her heart, the memory of Love, which already had taken
to fast footing, and would not be separated from the thing, which heaven
himself seemed to have prepared, for the perfection and glory of his triumph.
Love then constrained her, to resolve upon her last determination. Then
continuing her talk, sighing without ceasing, she said. Chance what may to the
uttermost, I can but wander like a Uagabonde and figitiue with mine own
Alerane (if he will show me so much pleasure to accept me for his own) For
sure I am, the Emperor will never abide the marriage, which I have promised: and
sooner will I die, than another shall possess that, which Alerane alone
deserves: having a long time vowed and dedicated the same unto him. And
afterward let them report what they lift of the bold and folish enterprises
of Adelasia, when my heart is contented and desire satisfied, and Alerane
enioieth her, that loves him, more than her self. Love verily is not liable to
ye fancy of the parents, nor yet to ye will, even of them that subiugate
themselves to his laws. And besides yt I shall not be alone amongst princesses,
that have forsaken parents and countries, to follow their love into strange
Regions. Fair Helena the Greek, did not she abandon Menelaus her husband and
the rych city of Sparta, to follow the fair Trojan Alexander sailing to
Troie? Phedria and Ariadne, despised the delicates of Creta, left their Father
a very old man, to go with the Cecropian Theseus None forced Medea the wise
furious Lady (but Love) to depart the Isle of Colchos, her own native country,
with the Argonaute Jason. O good God, who can resist the force of Love, to
whom so many kings, so many Monarchs, so many wise men of all ages, have
done their homage? Surely the same is the only cause that compels me (in
making my self bold) to forget my duty toward my parents, and specially mine
honor, which I shall leave, to be reasoned upon, by the ignorant people, that
considers nothing, but that which is exteriourly offered to the view of the
sight. Ah: how much I deceive my self, and make a reckning of much without
mine host. And what know I if Alerane (although he do love me) will lose the
good grace of the Emperor, and forsake his goods, and (so it may be) to
hazard his life, to take so pore and miserable a woman as I am?
Notwithstanding I will prove fortune, death is the worst that can chance,
which I accelerate, rather than my desire shall lose his effect. Thus the fair
and wise Princess concluded her unhappy state. And all this time, her best
friend Alerane, remained in great affliction, beyond measure, and felt such a
fear as cannot be expressed with words, only true lovers know the force,
altogether like to that whereof the young Prince had experience, and durst not
discover his evil to her, that was able to give him her allegiance, much less
to disclose it to any dear friend of his, into whose secrecy he was wont to
commit the most part of his cares, which was the cause that made him feel his
heart to burn, like a little fire in the mids of a clear river, and saw
himself self overwhelmed within the waters, hotter than those that be
intermixed with sulphur, and do euaporat and send forth ardent smokes in an
AEthna hill or Vesuue mountain. The Princess impacient to endure so long,
could no longer keep secret the flames hydden within her, without telling and
uttering them to some, whom her mind liked best, and there to render them
where she thought they took their essense and being, casting away all shame and
fear, which accustomably does associat Ladies of her estate and age. One day
she took secretly aside, one that was her Gouernesse, named Radegonde, a
Gentlewoman, so virtuous, wise and sober, as any other that was in the
Emperoures court, who for her approved manners, and chaste life, had the
charge, of the bringing up and nourishing of Adelasia, from her Infancy. To
this Gentlewoman then the amorous Princess deliberated to communicate her
secrets, and to let her understand her passion, that she might find some
remedy. And for that purpose they two retired alone within a closet, the pore
lover trembling like a leaf (at the blast of the weasterne wind, when the
sun began to spread his beams) syghing so strangely, as if her body and
soul would have departed, said thus. The trust which daily I have had in that
natural goodness, which appears in you, my mother and well-beloved Lady,
joined with discretion and fidelity, wherewith all your acts and affairs be
reco^mended, do presently assure me, and make me bold, in this my trouble, to
participate unto you my secrets, which be of greater importance without
comparison, than any that ever I told you, persuading my self that the thing
which I shall tell you, whatsoever it be (be it good or ill) you will accept
it in such wise, as your wisdom requires, and to keep it so close, as the
secret of such a Lady as I am, does deserve. And that I may not hold you
long in doubt what it is, know ye, that of late the valor, prowess, beauty,
and courtesy of senior Alerane of Saxon, has found such place in my heart,
that (in despite of my self,) I am so in love with him, that my life is not
dear unto me but for his sake, my heart takes no pleasure, but in his glory
and virtue, having chosen him so virtuous a Prince, for my friend, and one day
(by Gods sufferaunce) for my laweful spouse and husband. I have assayed a
thousand means, and so many ways, to cast him of, and to blot him out of my
mind: But alas unhappy caytife, Fortune is so froward, and so unmercifully to
my endeavor, that the more I labor and go about to extinguish in me, the
memory of his name and commendable virtues, so much the more I do enlarge and
augnient them, the flames of which love do take such increase, that I do little
or nothing esteem my life, without the enjoying the effect of my desire, and
the taste of such licor, which nourishing my hope in pleasure, may quench the
fire that does consume me. Otherwise I see no means possible, but that I am
constrained, either to lose my good wits (whereof already I felt some
alienation) or to end my days with extreme anguishe, and insupportable hearts
sorrow. Alas, I know well that I shall lose my time, if I attempt to pray the
Emperor my father, to give me Alerane to my husband, sith he does already
practice a marriage between the King of Hungary and me. And also that Alerane
(although he be a Prince of so noble blood, and so honorable house, as the
Saxon is yet is to base to be son in law to an Emperor. In these my
distresses, it is of you alone, of whom I look for aid I counsel, being
certain of your prudence and good judgment: and therefore I pray you to have
pity upon me and have remorse upon this immoderate passion, that does torment
me beyond measure. Radegonde, hearing Adelasia disclose this talk, whereof she
would never have thought, was so confounded and astoned, that of long time she
could not speak a word, holding her head down, reuoluing thousand diverse
matters in her mind, knew not well what to answer the Princess. Finally
gathering her spirits unto her, she answered her with tears, in her eyes
saying. Alas, Madame what is that you say: Is it possible that the wisest,
vertuons, and most courtcots Princess of Europa, could suffer her self in
this sort (through her only advise) to be transported to her own affections
and sensual appetites? Is it well done that you seeing in me, a discretion and
modesty, do not imitate the purity thereof? be these the godly admonicions
which heretofore I have given you, that you will so lightly defile your fathers
house with the blot of infamy, and your self with eternal reproach? Would you
Madame, that upon the end of my years I should begin to betray my Lord the
Emperor, who has committed to my hands the most precious jewel of his
house? Shall I be so unconstant in mine old days to become an unshamefast
minister of your fond and folish Love? a thing which I never did in the ardent
time of my youth. Alas, Madame, forget I beseech you, this folishe order, cast
under your feet this determination wickedly begone, such, as to the blemishing
of the honorable brightness of your fame, may cause the ruin of us al. Follow
ye counsel of your dear nourice Radegond, who loves you better than her own
soul. Quench these noisome and parching flames which have kindled, and thrown
forth their sparks into your chaste and tender heart. Take heed I beseech you,
that a vain hope do not deceive you, and a folish desire abuse you. Alas:
think that it is the part of a sage and prudent mind, to refrain the first
motions of every passion, and to resist the rage that rises in our wills, and
the same very often by succession of time, brings to it self to late and
noisome repentance. This your thought proceeds not of Love: for he that
thinks to sustain himself with venim sugared with that drogue, in the end he
sees himself so desperately impoysoned, that only death is the remedy for such
disease. A Lover truly may be called the slave, of a tirant most violent,
cruel, and bloody, that may be found, whose yoke once put on, can not be put
of, but with paynefull sorrow and unspeakable displeasure. Do you not know
Madame, that Love and folly be two passions so like one another, that they
engendre like effects in the minds of those that do possess them: in such
wise as the affection of the pacient can not be concealed? Alas, what shall
become of you and him that you love so well, if the Emperor do know and
perecyue your light and folish determinations. Show Madame for Gods sake, what
you be. Let the ripe fruits of your prudence, so long time tilled, appear
abroad to the world. Expel from you this unruled love, which if you suffer
frankly to enter into your heart, assure your self he will take such holdfast of
ye place, that when you think to extrude the enemy out, it is he that will
drive away that small portion of force and reason that rests in you. And then
all the comfort of your miseries, will be the lamentation of your losses, and
repentance for that, which cannot be, by any means recovered. Adelasia burning
in Love and fretting with anger, not able to abide contrary reply to her
mind, began to look furiously upon the Lady, that gave her such wholesome
admonition, to whom she said with more than womanly stoutnesse, these words.
And what are you good gentlewoman, that dare so hardely prescribe laws to Love
that is not subject or tied unto the fantasy of men? Who has given you
commission to take the matter so hot, against that I have determined to do,
say you what you can? No, no, I love Alerane, and will love him, whatsoever
come of it. And since I can have none other help at your hands, or mete
counsel for mine ease and comfort: Assure your self, that I will do mine
endeavor to find it in my self. And likewise to provide so well as I can for
mine affairs, that eschewing the alliance which the Emperor prepares, I
will live at hearts ease with hun, whom (in vain) you go about to put out of
my remembrance. And if so be I chance to sail of my purpose, I have a
medicine for my calamities, which is death, the last refuge of al my miseries.
Which will be right pleasant unto me, ending my life, in the contemplation and
memory of the sincere and perfect Love, that I bear to mine Alerane.
Radegonde no less abashed, than surprised with fear, hearing the resolution
of the princess, could not at the first make any answer, but to make her
recourse to tears, the most familiar weapons that women have. Then seeing by
the countenances of Adelasia, that the passion had set in foot to deep, for
any body to attempt to pluck out the roots, from that time forth, she wiped
her eyes, nor without evident demonstration (for all that) of her great grief
conceived, with infinite sighs, turning her face to the Lady, she said to her
with pleasaunter countenance than before. Madame, sith your missehap is such,
that without Alerane, you cannot be quiet or pacified in mind, appease your
playntes, wipe away your tears, show your contenaunce joyful, and setting
aside all care, put on good courage, and repose in me all your anguish and
trouble. For I do promise you, and swear by the faith that I do owe you,
Madame, come whatsoever thing shall unto me, I will devise in practicing your
rest to begin mine own sorrow. And then you shall se how much I am your friend,
and that the words which I have spoken do not proceed else where, but from the
desire that I have to do you service, seking al ways possible your
advancement. Adelasia at these last words felt such a motion in her mind,
that much a do she had for the exceeding great joy and pleasure she conceived,
to stay her soul from leaping forth of that corporal prison (like the spirit
of that Roman Lady which once left the body, to descend into the Elisien
feldes, to use the perfection of her joy with the blessed souls there, when
she saw her son return safe and sound from the battle of Thrasimene
besides the lake of Peruse, where the Consul Flaminius was overcome by
Haniball) but in the end, the hope to have that which Radegonde had promised,
made her to receive heart again, and to clepe her counseler, saying. God
forbid dear mother, that the thing you do for me, should rebound to your
mishap, or discontentation, since the affection which you have, consists in
the only pity and conservation of a pore afflicted maiden. And your desire
tends to the deliverance of the most passionate Princess, that ever was
borne of mother. And believe that Fortune will be so favorable, that what
mischief so ever should chance, you remaining without pain, I shall be she
that alone shall bear the penance. Wherefore once again I beseech you, (said
she embracing Radegonde) to bring that to pass, whereof you give such an
assured hope. Care not you Madame said Radegonde, I trust within a while to
make you prove the effect of my promise. And will cause you to speak unto him
whom you desire so much. Only be merry, and forget these strange fashions, in
tormenting your self so much before your maids, to the intent that, which
hitherto has been kept secret, may not be reveled to your great shame and
hinderance, and to the utter ruin and overthrow of me. During all this time
Alerane lived in despair, and hardy cowardnesse, for although he saw the
amorous gestes of Adelasia, yet he durst fire no certain judgment of his own
satisfaction, although his heart told him, that he was her only favored
friend, and promised him that, which almost he feared to think, which was to
have her one day for friend, if the name of spouse were refused. Thus
tormented with joy and displeasure, wandering between doubt, and assurance of
that he hoped. The self same day that Adelasia practiced with Radegonde for the
obtaining of her joy, and secret ministry of her Love, he entered alone into a
garden, into which the Princess chamber had prospecte, and after he had walked
there a good space in an Alley, viewing diligently the order of the fruitful
trees of so diverse sorts, as there be variety of colors, with in a fair
meade, during the vedure of the spring time, and of so good and sauorous taste
as the heart of man could wyshe: He repaired under a Laurel tree, so well
spredde and adorned with leaves, about which tree you might hane seen an
infinite number of Myrtle trees, of smell odoriferous and sweet, of Oringe
trees laden with unripe fruit, of pliable Mastickes and tender Tameriskes. And
there he fetched his walks along the thick and grene herbs, beholding the
variety of flowers, which decked and beautified the place, with their lively
and natural colors. He then ravished in this contemplation, remembering her
which was the pleasure and torment of his mind, in sighing wise began to say.
O that the heavens be not propitious and favorable to my endeavors. Since that
in the mids of my iolities, I feel a new pleasant displeasure, which does
adnihilate all other solace, but that which I receive through the Image
painted in my heart, of that divine beauty, which is more variated in
perfection of pleasures, than this paradise and delicious place, in variety of
enamell and paynting, although that nature and art of man, have workemanly
travailed, to declare and set forth their knowledge and diligence. Ah: Adelasia
the fairest Lady of all fair, and most excellent Princess of the earth: Is
it not possible for me to feed my self so well of the view and contemplation
of thy heavenly and Angelical face, as I do of the sight of these fair and
sundry colored flowers? May it not be brought to pass, that I may smell,
that sweet breath which respireth through thy delicate mouth, being none
other thing, than Baulme, Musk, and Aumbre, yea and that which is more
precious, which for the raritie and valor has no name even as I do smell the
Roses. Pincks and Uiolets hanging over my head, franckly offering themselves
into my hands? Ah: infortunat Alerane, there is no flower that ought to be so
handeled, nor savor, the sweetness whereof ought not to be sented without
desert, merited before. Ah: Love, Love that thou have fixed my mind upon so
high things. Alas I fear an offense so dangerous, which in the end will
breed my death. And yet I can not wythdrawe my heart, from that smoke of Love,
although I would force my self to expel it from me. Alas I have read of him
so many times and have heard talk of his force, that I am afraid to board him,
and yet fear, I shall not escape his gulf. Alas I know well it is he, of
whom is engendered a little mirth and laughing, after which does follow, a
thousand tears, and weapings, which for a pleasure that passes away so sone
as a whirle wind, does give us over to great repentance, the sorrow whereof
endures a long time, and sometimes, his bitterness accompanies us even to
the grave. The pacients that be taynted with that amorous fever, although
continually they dye, yet they can not wholly see and perceive for all that, the
defaut and lack of their life, albeit they do wish and desire it still. But
alas what missehap is this that I do see the poison, that causes my mischief,
and do know the way to remedy the same, and yet nevertheless I can not, or
will not recover the help. Did ever man hear a thing so strange, that a sick
man seking help, and finding recovery, should yet reiecte it? Saying so, he
wept and syghed so piteously, as a little child threated by his mother the
nourice. Then roming up and down upon ye grass, he seemed rather to be a man
straught and bound with chains, than like one that had his wits and
understanding. Afterward being come again to himself, he returned to his
first talk, saying: But what? am I more wise, more constant and perfect, than
so many Emperors, Kings, Princes, and great Lords, who notwithstanding their
force, wisdom, or richesse, have been tributarie to love? The tamer and
subduer of monsters and Tirants, Hercules, (vanquished by the snares of love)
did not he handle the distaffe in stead of his mighty mace? The strong and
invincible Achilles, was not he sacrificed to the shadow of Hector, under the
color of love, to celebrate holy marriage with Polixena, daughter to King
Priamus? The great Dictator Julius Caesar, the conqueror of so many people,
Armies, Captains and Kings, was overcome with the beauty and good grace of
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt. Augustus his successor attired like a woman, by a
yeoman of his chamber, did he not take away Liuia from him that had first
married her? And that common enemy of man, and of all courtesy, Claudius Nero,
appeased yet some of his fury, for the love of his Lady? What strange things
did the learned wise and virtuous Monarch Marcus Aurelius endure of his
well-beloved Faustine? And that great captain Marcus Antonius the very terror of
the Roman people, and the fear of strange and barbarous nations, did homage
to the child Cupido for the beauty of Queen Cleopatra, which afterward was
the cause of his whole overthrow. But what mean I to allege and remember the
number of lovers, being so infinite as they be? Wherefore have ye Poets in time
past feigned in their learned and divine books the loves, of Jupiter, Appollo,
and Mars, but that every man may know, the force of Love to be so puissant
that the Gods themselves have felt his force to be invincible and inevitable?
Ah: if sometimes a gentleman be excused for abassing himself to Love a woman
of base birth and blood, why should I be accused or reprehended for loning the
daughter of the chiefest Prince of Europe? Is it for the greatness of her
house and antiquity of her race? Why, that is al one between us two, and took
his original of the place, whereof at this day, my Father is the chief and
principal. And admit that Adelasia be the daughter of an Emperor: Ah, Love
has no regard to persons, houses, or riches, rather is he of greater
commendation, whose enterpryses are most famous, and haute gestes extend
their flight far of. Now rests then to devise means how to make her
understand my pain. For I am assured that she loves me, saving that her
honor and young years do let her, to make it appear more manifest. But it
is my propre duty to make request for the same, considering her merits, and my
small deserts in respect of her perfections. Ah: Alerane, thou must unloose
that tongue which so long time, has been tied up, through to much folish and
fearful shame. Set aside the fear of peril, whatsoever it be, for thou can
not employ thy self more gloriously than upon the pursuit of such a treasure,
that seems to be reserved for the fame of thy mind so highly placed, which
can not attain greater perfections, except the heavens do frame in their
impressions a second Adelasia (of whom I think dame nature her self has
broken the moulde) who can not shake of Alerane from the chiefest place, in
whom he has laid the foundation of his joy that he hops to find in love.
During these complaynts, Radegonde, that saw him ravished in that ecstasy,
coniecturing the occasion of his being alone, caused him to be called by a
Page: who hearing that, was surprised with a new fear intermixed with a secret
pleasure, knowing very well, that she being the gouernesse of his Lady,
understood ye greatest priuities of her heart, hoping also that she brought him
gladsome news, and setting a good chere upon his face all mated and confused
for troubles past, he repaired to the Lady the messanger, who was no less
ashamed, for the tale that she must tell, than he was afeard and dombe, by
sight of her, whom he thought to bring, the arreste and determination, either
of joy or displeasure. After courtesy and welcoms made between them, the Lady
preambled a certain short discourse touching the matter, to do the Saxon
prince to understand, the good will and hearty love of Adelasia toward him,
praying him that the same might not be discovered, sith the honor of his Lady
did consist in the secrecy thereof, assuring him, that he was so in favor with
the Princess, as any true and faithful lover could desire to be for his
conte^tation. I leave to your consideration, in what sudden joy Alerane was,
hearing such gladsome news which he looked not for, and thought he was notable
to render sufficient thanks to the messanger, and much less to extolle the
beauty and courtesy of his Lady, who without any of his merits done before,
(as he thought) had him in so good remembrance. Beseeching moreover Redegonde,
that she would in his name do humble commendations to his Lady, and therewyth
to confirm her in the assurance of his perfect good will, and immutable desire,
everlastingly at her commandment, only praying her, that he might say unto
Adelasia, three words in secret, that she might perceive his heart, and see the
affection, wherewith he desired to obey her all the days of his life. The
messanger assured him of all that he required, and instructed him what he had
to do, for the accomplishment of that he looked for, which was, that the next
day at night, she would cause him to come into her Warderobe, which was
adjoining to the Chamber of his Lady, to the end that when her maids were
abroad, he might repair to the place where he might easly visit his
maystresse, and say unto her what he thought good. The compact thus made, the
Lady returned to the Princess, that waited with good devotion for the news
of her beloved. And hearing the report of Radegonde, she was not contented that
she should make repeticion of the same, twice or thrice, but a million of times
and even till night, that she slepte upon that thought, with the greatest rest,
that she had received in a long time before. The morrow at the hour that
Alerane should come, Adelasia fayning her self to be ill at ease, caused her
maids to go to bed, making her alone to tarry with her: that was the
messanger of her love, who a little while after, went to seek Alerane, which
was a building of Castles in the air, fantasying a thousand devises in his
mind: what might befall of that enterprise he went about: notwithstanding he
was so blinded in folly, that without measuring the fault which he committed,
he thought upon nothing but upon the present pleasure, which seemed to him so
great that the chamber wherein he was, was not sufficient to comprehend the
glory of his good hour. But the Princess on the other part, felt a
marvelous trouble in her mind, and almost repented, that she had so hardely
made Alerane to come into a place indecent for her honor, and at a time so
inconvenient. Howebeit seeing that the stone was thrown, she purposed not to
pretermitte the occasion, which being balde can not easily be gotten again,
if she be once let slip. And whiles she travailed in these meditations and
discoursed upon that she had to do, Radegonde came in leading Alerane by the
hand, whom she presented to the Princess, saying to her with a very good
grace. Madame, I deliver you this prisoner, whom even now I found here,
between your chamber and that wherein your maids do lie: now consider what you
have to do. Alerane in the mean time, was fallen down upon his knees before
his saint, wholly bente to contemplate, her excellent beauty and good grace,
which made him as dumb as an Image. She likewise beholding him that made her
thus to err in her honesty, forced through shame and love, could not for
bear to behold him (the power of her mind wholly transferred into her eyes,
that then yielded contentation of her heart which she so long time desired. In
the end Alerane taking the hands of Adelasia, many times did kiss them, then
receiving courage, he brake of that long silence and began to say thus. I
never thought (Madame) that the sight of a thing so long desired, had been of
such effect, yt it would have ranished both the mind and body, of their propre
duties and natural actions, if now I had not proved it, in beholding, the
divinity of your beauty most excellent. And truly Madame Radegonde did
rightly term this place here, my prison, considering that of long time I have
partly lost this my liberty, of the which I feel now an entire alienatio^. Of
one thing sure I am, that being your prisoner, as I am in deed, I may make my
vaunt and boaste, that I am lodged in the fairest and pleasauntest prison, that
a man can wish and desire. For which cause Madame, be well advised, how you
do use and entreat your captive and slave, that humbly makes peticion unto
you, to have pity upon his weakness, which he will accept a grace
unspeakable, if of your accustomed goodness, it may please you to receive him
for yours, for that from henceforth, he voweth and consecrateth his life,
goods, and honor, to your commandment and service. And saying so, his
stomach panted with continual sighs, and from his eyes distilled a river of
tears, the better to express and declare the secret force, that made him to
utter these words. Which was the cause that Adelasia embracing him very
lovingly, said unto him. I know not (Lord Alerane) what prison that is, where
the prisoner is in better case, than the prison of whom he terms himself to
be the slave, considering that I feel in me such a loss of my self, that I
can not tell whether to go and withdraw me, but even to him that craves the
same fredome, whereof I my self do make request. Alas my right well-beloved
Alerane, into what extremity am I brought, the very great love that I bear
you, forces me to forget my duty, and the lihneage whereof I come, yea and
mine honor, which is more to be esteemed tha^ all the rest. But I repose in you
such affiance, that you will not deceive, so simple a Lady as I am, utterly
void of guile and deceyt. Who, if you be tormented, lives not without grief
and sorrow, altogether like unto yours. If you do sigh, I am wholly spent and
consumed in tears. Do you desire reffe? Alas: I wish and crave the same unto
us both, that be now sundred and divided, which ca^ not be aquired, except they
be united that were before wholly separated. Radegonde interrupting their
talk, smylingly said. And how can this separation be united, where the
parties them selves do live in that disjunction? You say true Madam, said
Alerane, for, the perfection of unity, consists in the conioyning of that
which is separated. Wherefore (Madame said he to Adelasia) I humbly beseech you,
as well for your comfort as my rest, not to suffer this division to be so long,
since the outward bond shall combine the same so inwardely, that very death
shall not be able hereafter to deface or deminishe the same. If I may assure my
self said she of your fidelity, it so may come to pass, that I would give
you a very great liberty, but hearing tell so many times of the inconstancy and
fickle trust of men, I will be contented with my first fault, without adding
any further aggrauation, to fasten and bind that, which specially I esteem in
my self. Alas Madame said Alerane, do you think, that the prouf of my
fidelity may receive greater perfection, by enjoying the pleasures of that I
hope for, than it does already? No no Madame, therefore assure your self of my
heart and steadfastness. For sooner shall my body fail, than default in me to
serve and honor you, if not according to the worthiness of your estate, yet by
all means, so far as my power shall extend. And can you find in your heart to
conceive, that your Alerane would play ye traitor with her, for whose service
he fears not to adventure a thousand lives if god had given him so many?
Adelasia besprent al with tears, was in an ecstasy or trau^ce. Which Alerane
perceuing and saw that Radegonde was gone into the warderobe, to suffer them
to talk their fill: he began to take possession of her mouth, redoubling kiss
upon kiss, sometimes washed with tears, sometime dried up, with frequent use
thereof, leaving neither eye nor cheke vnkissed: and seeing the patience of his
Lady, he seized upon her white, hard, and round breasts, whose pappes with
sighs moved and removed, yelding a certain desire for Alerane to pass
further. Which Adelasia perceiving, dissembling a sweet anger and such a chafe
as did rather accende the flames of the amorous Prince, than with moist licor
extinguish the same, and making him to give over his enterprise she fiercely
said unto him. How now (Sir Alerane) how dare you thus malapertly abuse this
my secret friendship, in suffering you to come so frankly into my chamber.
Think not that although I have used you this familiarly, that I can be able to
suffer you, to attempt any further. For (if God be favorable to conserve me in
my right wits) never man shall have that advantage, to gather the flower of
my virginity, but he with whom I shall be joined in marriage. Otherwise I shall
be unworthy, both of my honorable state, and also of that man whatsoever he be,
worthy of estimation and preferment. So I think to Madame, answered Alerane.
For if it would please you to do me that honor, to receive me for your
faithful and loyal espouse, I swear unto you by him that sees and hears al
things, that never any other shall be maystresse of Aleranes heart, but the
fair princess Adelasia. She that asked no better thing, after much talk
between them, in the end condescended, that Alerane should give his faith to
marry her, and to convey her out of the court, till the Emperor were
appeased for their fault committed. Thus had the Saxon Prince, the full
possession of his desires, and carried away the pray so long time sought for.
Radegonde was she, that received the oaths of their espousalles, and
capitulated the articles of their secret marriage. And after the determination
made of their flying away, and a day thereunto appointed, the two Lovers entered
the camp, to make proof by combat of their hardiness, and assaye of their
travail in time to come, wherein they thought for ever to persevere and
continue. Being a bed then together, they did consu^mate, the band that
straightly does bind the hearts of lovers together, intiring the union
divided, which before they thought imperfect and could not be accomplished but
by inward affections of the mind. And God knows how this new married couple
used their mutual contentation: But sure it is, that they continued together
until the morning had uncovered from the night her darkness, even to ye point of
day, that Alerane was somoned by Radegonde to depart, who to conclude his
former joy, very lovingly kissed his new wife and said unto her. Madame, the
felicity that I feel now, by enjoying that which unites me so nerely unto
you, which is indissoluble and never hereafter to be broken, seems so great
that no peril whatsoever does happen, can make me forget the least part of my
joy. So it is that seeing the state of our present affairs, and fearing the
danger that may chance, I will for this time take my leave of you, and go
about to put the same in order, that no negligence may flacke your joy and
desired pleasure. Ah: sir (said she) that my heart forethinketh both the best
and worste of our intended enterprise. But to the intent we may prove our
fortune, by whose conduction we must pass, I do submit my self, to the
wisdom of your mind, and to the good success that hitherto has acco^pained
al your endeavors. And then they kissed and embraced again, drinking up one
another tears, which distilled from them in such abundance. Thus Alerane
departed from his Ladies chamber, and went home to his own house, where he
sold all his goods at small price, making men to understand, that he would
employ the money otherwise, in things whereof he hoped to recover greater gain.
With that money he bought precious stones, and pretty Jewels, that he might not
be burdened with carriage of to much gold, or other money, and the^ he put his
males and bougets in readiness to go with his wife in the habit and apparel
of pilgrims, fair and softely a foot, that they might not be discovered.
Which was done in the night. The Princess faining her self to be sick, made
her maids to withdraw themselves into their chamber, and then she went in to
the garden where Alerane first made his plaintes, as you have heard before: in
which place her husband tarried for her. God knows whether they renewed their
pastime begone the day of their marriage, but fearing to be taken, they began
to play the comedy, the acts whereof were very long and the scrolle of their
miseries to prolixe to carry, before they came to the Catastrope and end of
their Comicall action. For leaving their sumptuous and rich apparel, they
clothed themselves with Pilgrims attire, taking the Skallop shell and staff,
like to them that make their Pilgrimage to S. James in Gallisia. The Princess
took the personage of a young Wench, ruffing her hear which she had in time
pass so carefully kempt, curled, and trimmed with gold and jewels of
inestimable value, wherein consists the chiefest grace touching the beauty and
ornament of the woman. Who is able to deny, but that this natural humor and
passion, borne so sone as we, which they call Love, is not a certain essence
and being, the force and vigor whereof, is not able to abide comparison. Is it
no small matter, that by the only instinction of Loves force, the daughter of
so great a Prince, as the Emperor of the Romans was, should wander like a
vagabonde in dissembled apparel, and poorly clothed, to experiment and prove
the long travail of journeys, the intemperature of the air, the hazard to
meet with so many thieves and murderers, which lay in wait in all places for
pore passengers, and moreover, to feel the bitterness of travail, never
tasted before, the rage of hunger, the intolerable alteration of thirst, the
heat of hot summer, the coldenesse of winters ye, subject to raines, and
stormy blasts: does it not plainly demonstrate that Love has either a greater
perfection, than other passions, or else that they which feel that alteration,
be out of the number of reasonable men, endued with the brightness of that
noble quality? This fair Lady recovering the fields with her husband, with
determination to take their flight into Italy, was more ioyefull, fresh, and
lustye, than when she lived at ease amongs the delicates and pleasures, that
she tasted in her fathers court. See how fortune and love were contented to be
blind, closing up the eyes of them, that follow their trace, and subdue
themselves to their edictes, and unstable disposition. And truly this rage of
Love was ye only mean to dulcorate and make sweet the bitter galle of grief
which those two lovers felt, defatigated almost with tedious travail judging
their weariness a pastime and pleasure, being guided by that inconstant
captain, which makes dolts and foles wise men, emboldeneth the weak hearted
and cowardes, fortifieth the seeble, and to be short, vntieth the pursses and
bags of covetous Carles, and miserable Misers. Now whiles our fair
pilgrims, without any vowed devotion, were abroad at their pleasures (being
weary with the way, they had trauayled all night) the morrow after their
departure, all the Emperoures house was in a great hurlye burlye and stir,
for the absence of Adelasia. The waiting maids cried out, and raged without
measure, with such shrichinges, that the Emperor moved with pytie, although
his grief and anger was great, yet he caused every place there aboutes to be
searched, and sought, but all that labor was in vain. In the end,
perceiving the absence of Alerane, suspected that it was be, which had stolen
away his fair Daughter, and brought him into such a passion and frenzy, that
he was like to run out of his wits and transgress the bounds of Reason.
Ah traitor said the good Prince. Is this the guerdon of good turns, bestowed
upon thee, and of the honor thou have received in my company? Do not think to
escape scot free thus without the rigorous justice of a father, deserved by
disobedience, and of a Prince, against whom his subject has committed
villainy. Ye God give me life, I will take such order, that the posterity shall
take example by that just vengeance which I hope to take of thee (arrant
thief, and despoyler of my honor and consolation.) And thou unkind daughter
shall smartely feel the wrong done to thy kind, and well-beloved father, who
thinks to provide for thee, more honorably than thy disloyalty and
incontinencie, so far as I see, do merit and deserve, since that without my
leave, and thy vocation, thou have gotten thee a husband worthy of thy folly,
with whom I hope to make thee understand thy fault, and my displeasure which I
receive through thy shameful act, so reproachful, specially in her, which is
the daughter of such a father as I am, and descends of the most royal race
in all Europe. Many other things the Emperor said, in great rage and fury. And
in the end commanded, that one should go into Saxon, to know if Alerane had
conveyed his stolen daughter thither: but he could bring no news at al from
thence. He assayed then if he could learn any tidings of them by other means,
causing by sound of Trumpet to be cried in all the Towns confining that if any
person could bring him word, or do him to understand certain and sure
news of those two fugitives, he would give them that, wherewith they should be
contented all the days of their life. But he wanne so much by this third
search, as he did by ye first two. Which thing the Majesty of God, seemed to
permit and suffer as well for the happy success that chanced afterward, as
for the punishing of the rash enterprise of two Lovers, which lived not very
long in prosperity and joy, but that they felt the hand of God, who sometime
suffers the faithful to fall, to make him acknowledge his imbecillitye, to
the end he may confess, that al health, sustenance, rest, and comfort, is to
be attended and looked for at the hands of God. When Alerane and his Lady were
gone out of a city within the Emperors land called Hispourg, being come into
certain wild and desert places, they fell into the lapse of certain thieves
which stripped Alerane into his shirt, and had done as much to ye poor
Princess, if certain Merchants, had not come between, which caused the
thieves to return. Alerane was succored with some clothes to cover his body,
and releued with a little sum of money, which being spent, those two Kings
children were constrained to beg, and ask for gods sake relief to sustain
their unfortunate life. Which distress was so difficulte for Alerane to
digest, that he was like (standing upon his feet) to die for sorrow and
want, not so much for the adversity whereunto he was brought through his own
fault, as for the pity that he had upon his dear beloved Lady, whom he saw
in so lamentable state, and knew that she might attain to her ancient
dignity and honor again, if she listed to prefer reward or prise before his
life, for which she spared not the very last drop of her blood. She knowing
the dolor and anguish that her husband endured, comforted him very wisely with
joyful countenance, saying. How now dear husband, think you that fortune is or
ought to be still favorable to Princes and great Lords? Do you not know that
great hulkes and ships do souer perish and drown in maine seas and rivers
amiddes the raging waves and surges, than in narrow floods and brokes, where
the water is still and calm? Do you not see great trees, whose tops do
rise alofte, above the high hills and stepe mountains, sooner shaken and
tossed with blustering windy blastes, than those that be planted, in fertile
dales and low valleys? Have you forgotten so many histories, by you perused
and read with so great delight, when you were in the Emperors court? Do not
they describe the change of Monarchs, the ruin of houses, the destruction of
one Realm acquitted, by the establishing and raygne of another? What Prince,
Monarche, or Captain was ever so happy, that has not felt some grief and
misfortune? Alas sweet heart, think that God does chastise us with his rods
of tribulation, to make us to know him: but in the mean time, he keeps for
us a better fortune that we look not for. Moreover he never forsakes them
which with a good heart, do go unto him, having their affiance in his great
goodness and infinite mercy. Alerane hearing the wise talk of his wife, could
not forbear weeping, and sighing answered her in this manner. Ah Lady, in
beauty and wisdom incomparable, it is not my fortune that causes my mind to
wander and stray from the siege of constancy, knowing well the qualities and
number of Fortunes snares, and how ielous she is of human joy and felicity.
I am not ignorant that she lays her ambushes, and does beset the endeavors,
sooner of personages that be noble and of high parentage, than of those whose
hearts be base and unable, and their victories not able to attain to any jot
of honor and fame. But (good God) said he (embracing his dear beloved
spouse) it is for you Maame, that I endure tormente, having made you to abandon
the pomp of your estate, and bereued from you a King to be your husband,
causing you thus to feel an horrible and new kind of punnishment, hunger and
famine (I mean) in the mids of these deserts and wild places, and
therewithal have joined you in company with an unfortunate companion, who for
comfort and solace, ministers tears and sighs. O God most high and
puissant, how profounde and dark are thy judgments, and how righteous is thy
justice. I acknowledge mine offense to be the cause of thine anger, and
original of our trespass, and that this pain chances to us for our sins,
which have so wickedly betrayed, the best Prince of the world, and forsaken
the company of him, at whose bountiful hands, I have received, better
intertaynment and greater honor, than I deserved. Ah Emperor Otho, that thou
art so well revenged now, with cowardly fraud and deceit committed, against
thee by Alerane of Saxone, taking away her from thee, which was the staff and
future stay of thy reverend age. And as he was perseuering in this talk,
Adelasia (seeing him in that contemplation) plucked him by the arm saying. Sir
it is time to consider our own affairs, we have trauayled I cannot tell how
far without rest, me think (our fortune being no better) yt we ought to
remain in some place attending for the grace and mercy of God, who (I hope)
will not fosake us. They were then in Liguria in the deserts, between Ast and
Sauonne, a country in ye time well peopled, and furnished with huge and dark
forests, garnished with many trees, great and high. By the advice then of
Adelasia, ye Saxon Prince forced by necessity (the maystresse of all arts)
retiered into those forestes where he practiced ye occupation of a Collier, and
some said, that nature taught him, the order how to cut his woodde, to make
ready his pittes, and to know the season and time when his coals were burned
enough. Great pains he sustained about his business, and went himself to
sell his coals, which he bare upon his shoulders, to the next market Towns,
till he had gained so much as bought him an ass, where with he daily travailed
to utter his coals, and other devises which need had forced him to learn. In
this time Adelasia was delivered of a goodly child, whom they named William.
And afterward, by succession of time, she bare vj. sons more. For they
dwelt almost.xviij. or.xx. years in that pore and miserable life, and had
dressed up a little lodging within a cave, that was fair and broad, wherein
very trimly and well they had bestowed themselves. When the eldest of their
sons was grown to the stature of a pretty stripling, the father sent him
sometime to Sauonne, and sometime to Ast, to sell their little merchandise, for
relief of their household. But the boy, whose blood could not conceal and
hide ye nobility of his birth, having one day sold certain burdens and
loades of wood and coal: bought with that money a fair young hawk, which he
carried unto his father. The good man gently rebuked his son, and said, that
such game belonged not to men of their degree, and that they had much a do to
live, without employing their money upon such trifles, Long time after,
William being arrived to the age of xvi. years, went to Sauonne, to sell
certain ware by his fathers commandment, and with the money he bought a very
sayre sword, which when his father fawe with tears in his eyes, he went aside
and said to himself. Ah unfortunate ladde, that thy hard luck, should do thee
this great wrong: truly neither the poverty of thy parents, nor the place of
thy bringing up, can deface in thee, the secret shyning brightness, of thine
Ancestors virtue, nor the prediction of thy courage and manhood in tune to
come, if God give thee grace to advance thee, to the service of some noble
prince. Notwithstanding for that time he ceased not sharply to rebuke and
threaten his son, in such wise that the young man having a heart greater than
his force, determined secretly to depart from his parents. Now fortune
chanced so well and apt for his purpose, that then and at the very same time,
the Hongarians were entered Italy to spoil and rob the country, against whom
the Emperor marched with great expedition, with an huge and goodly army, of
purpose to force them to leave his land in peace. William having knowledge
hereof, proceeded toward the Emperors camp, where he showed in deed great
hope (being of so small years) of his future valiance, and prowess, by ye
deeds of arms that he did, during that war. Which ended and the enemy put to
flight, the Emperor went into Prouance, to put in order his affairs in his
realm of Arles, which then was subject to the Empire. Afterward he retired
into Italy with deliberation to seiorne at Sauonne, for a certain time, which
dyspleased William nothing at all, because he should remain hard by his
Parents, who were very careful for his well doing, utterly ignorant where he
was become. And notwithstanding, a hope (what I know not) made them expect of
their son, some good fortune in time to come, who was now grown great and of
goodly perfection, one of the most valiant soldiers, that were in the wages
and service of his Majesty. Which very bravely he declared in a combat, that
he fought man to man with an Almaine souldior that was hardy, big made, and
feared of all men, whom nevertheless he overcame in the presence of the
Emperor his graundfather. Who, I know not by what natural inclamation, daily
fixed his eye upon that young Champion, and began to bear him more good will
than any other in his court, which was an occasion, that an ancient
Gentleman, serving in the Princes court, ftedfastly beholding the face,
behavior and countenance of William, seemed to see a picture of the Emperor
when he was of his age, which was more exactly viewed by diverse other, that
were brought up in their youth with Otho. Whereof being advertised, he caused
the young man to be called forth, of whom he demanded the names of his
Parents, and the place where he was borne. William that was no less courteous,
humble and well manered, than wise, valiant and hardy, kneled before the Emperor
with a stout countenance, resembling the nobility of his Ancestors:
answered. Most sacred and renowned Emperor, I have nothing whereof to render
thanks to fortune, but for the honor, that your majesty has done unto me,
to receive me into your noble service. For the fortune and condition of my
parents, be so base, that I blushe for shame to declare them unto you.
Howebeit being your humble servant, and having received favor of your
Majesty, not commonly employed, your commandment to tell you what I am, I
will accomplish as well for my bounden duty, wherewith I am tied to your majesty,
as to sastisfie that which it pleases you to command me. Be it known
therefore unto your Majesty, that I am the son of two poor Almaines, who
flying their own country, withdrew themselves into the deserts of Sauonne,
where (to beguile their hard fortune) they make coals, and sell them, to
sustain and relieve their miserable life: In which exercise I spent al my
childehode, although it were to my great sorrow. For my heart thought (Sir)
that a state so vile, was unworthy of my coragious mind, which daily aspired
to greater things, and leaving my father and mother, I am come to your
service, to learn chiualry and use of arms, and (mine obedience saved to your
majesty) to find a way to illustrate the base and obscure education, wherein
my parents have brought me up. The Emperor seeing the courteous behavior of the
young man, by this wise answer, remembering the similitude of his face, which
almost resembled them both, suspected that he was the son of Alerane and of
his daughter Adelasia, who for fear to be known, made themselves Citizens of
those deserts, albeit that William had told him other names, and not the
proper appellations of his father and mother. For which cause his heart began
to trobbe, and felt a desire to see his daughter, and to cherish her with like
affection, as though he had never conceived offense and displeasure. He caused
then to be called unto him a gentleman, the nere kinsman of Alerane, to whom he
said with merry countenance and joyful there. You do know as I think, the
wrong and displeasure that your cousin Alerane has done me, by the rape and
robbery, committed upon the person of my daughter: you are not ignorant also
of the reproach wherewith he has defiled al your house, committed a felony so
abominable in my court, and against mine own person, which am his sovereign
Lord. Notwithstanding since it is the force of Love, that made me forget him
til this time, rather than desire of displeasure, I am very desirous to see
him, and to accept him for my son in law, and good kinsman, very willing to
advance him to that estate in my house, which his degree and blood do
deserve. I tell you not this without special purpose. For this young soldier,
which this day so valiantly and with such dexterity vanquished his adversary,
by the consent of al men, which have known me from my youth, does represent so
well my figure and lineaments of face, which I had when I was of his age, that
I am persuaded, and do steadfastly believe, that he is my Neuew, the son of
your cousin Alerane and my daughter Adelasia. And therefore I will have you to
go with this young man, into the place where he shall bring you, and to see
them that be his parents, because I purpose to do them good, if they be other,
than those whom I take them. But if they be those two that I so greatly desire
to see, do me so much pleasure as I may satisfy my heart with that
contentation, swearing unto you by the crown of my Empire, that I will do no
worse to them, nor otherwise use them, than mine own proper person. The
gentleman hearing the loving and gentle terms of the Emperor, said unto him.
Ah Sir I render humble thanks unto your Majesty, for the pity that you have,
upon our dishonored race and ligneage of Saxone, dedecorated and blemished
through Aleranes trespass against you. I pray to God to recompense it (we
being unable) and to give you the joy that you desire, and to me the grace that
I may do some agreeable service both in this and in all other things. I am
ready (Sir) not only to go seek my cousin, (if it be he that you think it
is) to carry unto him those beneficial news which your Majesty has promised
by word, but rather to render him into your hands, that you may take
reuengement upon him for the injury that he has done to the whole Empire. No
no said the Emperor, the desired time of reuengement is past, and my malice
against Alerane has vomited his gal. If in time past I have thrifted to pursue
the ruin and overthrow of those two offenders, now I go about to foresee
and seek their advancement and quiet, considering the long penance they have
taken for their fault, and the fruit that I see before mine eyes, which is
such that it may by the smell and fragrant odor thereof, supporte the
weakness and debilitie of my old years, and constrains me (by ye virtue
thereof) to have pity upon his parents, which (through their own overthrow)
have almost utterly consumed me. Those words ended the good Prince gave
evident testimony of desire to see his only daughter, by the lively color that
rose in his face, and by certain tears running down along his heard, yt
began to ware graye. Then he caused William to come before him, and commanded
him to condude the gentleman, to that part of the forest, where his father
dwelled. Whereunto the young man readily and with all his heart obeyed. Thus the
Lord Gunfort (for so was Aleranes cousin called) accompanied with his little
cousin, and many other gentlemen, went toward the place, where the Colliar
Princes remained. And when they were near the craggie cave, the lodging of
Alerane: the whole company lighted of their horse, and espied him busy about
the lading of his coals to send to Ast. For the arrival of the Emperor to
Sauonne, stayed Alerane from going thither himself, by reason his conscience
still grudged, for his fault committed against him. Alerane seeing this goodly
company, was abashed, as though horns had suddenly grown out of his head, and
yet the sight of his son richely furnished, and in the company of Gunfort his
cousin, did more astonne him. For he suspected incontinently that he was
dyscouered, and that the Emperor had sent for him, to be revenged of ye fault
so long time committed. And as he had imagined diverse things upon his hard
fortune, wtin his fansy: His son came to embrace him upon his knees, and to
kiss his hands, with an honest and humble reverence, saying to Gunfort. Sir,
this is he of whom I told the Emperor, and of him I took my being: This is my
father. All this while the good father embraced his son very hard, and
weeping for extreme joy, said unto him. Alas my son, if thy coming be so
happy unto me as it is joyful, if thy news be good and prosperous, which thou
bring: thou do revive thy father half dead, and from lamentable
despair, thou do replenish and fill him with such hope, that one day shall
be the stay of his age, and the recovery of his greatest losses. The son not
able to abide the discourse of his parents affairs, could not comprehend any
thing at the pitiful meting: but stood still so astonned, as though he had been
fallen from the clouds. Now during this time, that the father and the son
thus welcomed one another: Gunfort took head to all the countenance and
gestures of Alerane. There was no part of ye Colliers body that he forgot to
view: and yet remembering the voice of his cousin, and seeing a wound that he
had in his face, was sure that it was he. And then with his arms stretched
forth he came to clepe. Alerane about the neck, whom he made to look red with his warm tears, saying. Ah: Alerane, the present torment now, but in
time past, ye pleasant rest, of our race. What Eclipse has so long obseured
the shyning sun of thy valiant prowess? Why have thou co^cealed so long
time, thy place of retire from him, which desired so much thine aduau^cement?
Have thou ye heart to see the tears of thy cousin Gunfort running down from
his eyes upon thy neck, and his arms embracing thee with such love and
amity, that he cannot receive the like, except he be something moved by thee,
in seeing thy loving entertaynement? Will thou deny that, which I know, by a
certain instincte and natural agreement, which is, that thou art Alerane the
son of the duke of Saxone, and so renowned through out al Germany? Do thou
pretend (through thine own misfortune so rooted in thy heart by living in
these wilderness) to deprive thy son of the honor, which the heavens and his
good fortune have prepared for him? Ah cruel and pitilesse father, to suffer
thy progeny to be buried in the tomb of oblivion, with eternal reproach. O
unkind kinsman toward thy kindred, of whom thou make so small account, that
wilt not vouchsafe to speak to thy cousin Gunfort, that is come hither for thy
comfort, and the aduau^cement of thy family. Alerane sore ashamed, as well for
the remembrance of his ancient fault, as to see himself in so pore estate
before the Emperors gallants, answered Gunfort, saying. My Lord and cousin, I
beseech you to believe, that want of desire to make my complaynt unto you, and
lack of courtesy to entertayne you, have not made me to forget my duty
toward you, being as well my nere kinsman, as such a one to whom I have done
wrong and very great injury, by offending ye Emperor. But you do know of what
puissance the pricks of conscience be, and with what worm she gnaweth the
heart of them, which feel themselves culpable of crime. I am (as you said)
the present missehap of our house, for the opinion that the Emperor has
conceived of my folly, and shall be the rest (if you will do me so much
pleasure to rid me of this miserable life) both of you and of the mind of a
father justly displeased against his daughter, and the quiet of a Prince
offended with his subject. For I swear unto you by my faith, that I never so
much desired life, as I now do covet death, for that I am assured, that I
being dead, my pore companion and well-beloved wife, shall live at her ease,
enjoying the presence and good grace of her father. What mean you so to say,
answered Gunfort. The Emperor is so well pleased and appeased, that he has
sworn unto me to receive you as his son in law, and my Lady your wife as
his dear beloved daughter, whom I pray you to cause to come before us, or to
signify unto us where she is, that I may do reverence unto her as to my
Princess and sovereign Lady. William was all amassed, and almost besides
himself, hearing this discourse, and thought he was either in a dream or else
inchaunted, till that Alerane called his wife by her proper name, who was so
appalled to hear the word of Adelasia, that her heart was suddenly attached
with terror and fear, when she saw so great a company about her husband. And
then her son came to do his duty, not as to his mother only, but as to ye
daughter of an Emperor, and the wife of a Prince of Saxone. She again
embraced and kyssed him, although she was surprised with fear and shame, and
so moved with that sudden sight, that she had much a do to keep her self
from faynting and falling down between the arms of her son, and thought
that she had passed the place where Gunfort was, who going toward her, after
his reverence and duty done, made her understand the charge he had, and the
good will of the Emperor, which determined to receive her again with so good
order and entertainment as might be devised. Which earneste words made them to
resolve upon the prouse of fortune, and to credit the promises that Gunfort
made them in the Emperors behalf. Thus they forsook the cave, their coats and
fornaces, to reenter their former delights and pleasures. That night they
lodged at a village not far from the forest; where they carried certain
days, to make apparel for these strange Princes, and so well as they could
to adorn and furnish Adelasia, (who being of the age almost of.xxxiiij.
or.xxxv. years, yet manifested some part of the perfection of that divine
beauty, and modest gravity, which once made her marvelous and singular above
all them that lived in her days.) In the time that this ioly company had
furnished and prepared themselves in readiness, Gunfort sent a gentleman of
that troop, toward the Emperor, to advertise him of the success of his
journey. Whereof he was exceeding joyful, and attended for the coming of his
children, with purpose to entertayne them in loving and honorable wise. When al
things were in readynesse and the train of Adelasia in good order, according
to the worthyuesse of the house whereof the came, they rode toward Sauonne,
which journey seemed to them but a sport, for the pleasure mixed with compassion
that each man conceived, in the discourse ye Alerane made upon his misfortunes
and chances, as well in his iourneys, as of his abode and continuance in the
deserts. Which William calling to remembrance, praised God, and yielded him
thanks, for that it had pleased him to inspire into his mind, ye forsaking of
his parents, considering that the same only fault, was the cause of their
restitution, and of his advancement and glory, being the son of such a
father, and the neuewe of so great a Monarche. The fame of whose name made al
men quake and tremble, and who then had commanded all the troop of the
gentlemen of his court, to go and seek the forlorn lovers, so long time lost
and unknown. To be short, their entry into Sauonne, was so royal and
triumphant, as if the Emperor himself would have received the honor of such
estate, and pomp. Which he commanded, to be done as well for the joy that he
had recovered ye thing, which he accounted lost, as to declare and acknowledge
to every wight, that virtue can not make her self better known: than at that
time, when the actions and deeds of great personages be semblable in raritie
and excellence, to their nobility. For a Prince is of greater dignity and
admiration, than he commonly shows himself, which can never enter into the
head of the popular sort, that deemeth the affections of other, according to
their own rude and beastely fancies. As the Greek Poet Euripides in his
tragedy of Medea, does say.

Ill luck and chance thou must of force endure,
Fortunes fickle stay needs thou must sustain
To grudge thereat it booteth not at all.
Before it come the witty wise be sure:
By wisdoms lore, and counsel not in vain:
To shun and eke avoid. The whirling ball,
Of fortunes threats, the sage may well rebou^d
By good foresight, before it light on ground.
The Emperor then having forgotten, or wisely dissembling that which he
could not amend, met his daughter and son in law, at the Palace gate, with
so pleasant cheer and joyful countenance, as the like long time before he did
not use. Where Alerane and Adelasia being light of from their horse, came to
kiss his hands (and both upon their knees) began to frame an oration, for
excuse of their fault, and to pray pardon of his Majesty. The good Prince
ravished with joy, and satisfied with repentance, stopped their mouths with
sweet kisses and hard embracinges. O happy ill time (said he) and sorrowful
joy, which now brings to me a pleasure more great, than ever was my heavy
displeasure. From whence comes this my pleasant joy? O well devised flight,
by the which I gain that (by preserving my loss once made and committed)
which I never had: if I may so say, considering the ornament of my house, and
quietness of my life. And saying so, he kissed and embraced his little.
Neuewes, and was loathe that Adelasia should make rehearsal of other talk but of
mirth and pleasure. For (said he) it suffices me that I have ouerpassed and
spent the greatest part of my life in heaviness, utterly unwilling now to
renew old sores and wounds. Thus the marriage begone unknown and against the
Emperors will, was consummate and celebrated with great pomp and magniffcence,
by his own commandment, in the City of Sauonne, where he made Sir William
Knight, with his own hand. Many goodly factes at the Tourney and Tilt were
done and achieved, whereat William almost every day bare away the prise and
victory, to the great pleasure of his father and contentation of his
graundfather, who then made him Marquis of Monferrat. To the second son of
Alerane he gave the Marquisat of Sauonne, with all the appurtenances and
jurisdictions adjoining, of whom be descended the Marqueses of Caretto. The
third he made Marquis of Saluce, the race of whom is to this day of good fame
and nobility. Of the fourth son sprange out the original of the house of
Cera. The fifth was Marquis of Incise, whose name and progeny lives to this
day. The sixth son did govern Pouzon. The seventh was established Senior of
Bosco, under the name and title of Marquis. And Alerane was made and
constituted, ouerseer of the goods and dominions of his children, and the
Emperors Lieutenaunt of his possessions which he had in Liguria. Thus the
Emperor by moderating his passion, vanquished himself, and gave example to
the posterity, to pursue ye offense before it do take root: but when the
thing can not be corrected, to use modesty and mercy which makes kings to
live in peace, and their Empire in assurance. Having taken order with all his
affairs in Italy, he took leave of his daughter and children, and retired
into Almaigne. And Alerane lived honorable amo^gs his people, was beloved of
his father in law, and in good reputation and fame, arrived to old years,
still remembering that adversity ought not to bring us to despair, nor
prosperity, to insolency or ill behavior, and contempt of things that seem
small and base, since there is nothing under the heavens that is stable and
sure. For he that of late was great and made all men to stoop before him, is
become altogether such a one as though he had never been, and the pore humble
man advanced to that estate, from whence the first did fall and was deposed,
making laws sometimes for him, under whom he lived a subject. And behold of
what force, the providence of God is, and what poyse his balance does contain,
and how blame worthy they be that refer the effects of that divine counsel
to the inconstant and mutable reuolucion of fortune, that is blind and
uncertain.

The Duchess of Sauoie
The Duchess of Sauoie, being the King of Englandes sister, was in the Duke
her husbands absence, unjustly accused of adultery: by a noble man, his
Lieutena^t. And should have been put to death, if by the prowess and valiant
to combat of Don John di Mendozza, (a Gentleman of Spain) she had not been
delivered. With a discourse of marvelous accidents, touching the same, to the
singular praise and commendation, of chaste and honest Ladies.

The.xlv. Novel.
Love commonly is counted the greatest passion, amongs all the most grievous,
that ordinarily, do assault ye spirits of men, which after it has once taken
hold of any gentle subject, follows ye nature of the corrupt humor, of
those that have a fever, which taking his beginning at the heart, disperseth
it self incureably, through all the other sensible parts of the body: whereof
this present history gives us amply to understand, being no less
marvelous, than true. Those that have read the ancient histories and
Chronicles of Spain, have seen in diverse places the occasion of the cruel
ennimitie, which raygned by the space of.xl. years, between the houses of
Mendozza and Tolledo, families not only right noble and ancient, but also most
abundant in riches, subjects and seigniories of all the whole realm. It
happened one day that their armies being ready to join in battle, the Lord
John of Mendozza chief of his army, a man much commended by all histories, had a
widow to his sister, a very devout Lady, who after she understood the heavy
news of that battle, falling down upon he knees, prayed God incessauntly,
that it would please him to reconcile the two families together, and to make
an end of so many mischiefs. And as she understood that they were in the
chiefest of the conflict, and that there is were a great number slain on both
parts, she made a vow to God, that if her brother returned victorious from ye
enterprise, she would make a voyage to Rome on foot. The overthrow fell after
much bloudshead, upon them of Tolledo. Mendozza brought away the victory,
with the less loss of his people. Whereof Isabell advertised, declared unto
her brother, the vow that she had made. Which seemed very strange unto him,
specially how she durst enterprise so long a voyage on foot, and thought to
turn her purpose, howbeit, she was so importunate upon him, that in the end
he gave her leave, with charge that she should go well accompanied, and by
small iourneyes, for respect of her health. The Lady Isabell being departed
from Spain, having trauersed the mountains Pirtenees, passed by France, went
over the Alps, and came to Thurin, where the Duke of Sauoye had then for wife,
a sister of the King of England, who was bruted to be the fairest creature of
the weast parts of the world. For this canse, the Lady Isabell desired
greatly, in passing by, to see her, to know whether truth did answer the
great renown of her beauty. Wherein she had Fortune so favorable, that entering
into Thurin, she found the Duchess upon her Coche, going abroad to take the
air of the fields. Which the Lady Isabell understanding, stayed to behold
her, being by fortune at that present at the door of her Coche. And then with
great admiration, considering the wonderful beauty of that princess, judging
her the chiefest of beauty of al those that she had ever seen, she spoke
somewhat loud in the Spanish tongue, to those of her company, in this manner.
If God would have permitted, that my brother and this Princess might have
married together, every man might well have said, that there had been met the
most excellent couple, for perpectio^ of beauty, that were to be found in all
Europa. And her words in deed were true. For the Lord Mendozza was even one
of the fairest Knights, that in his time was to be found in all Spain. The
Duchess who understood the Spanish tongue very well, passing forth, beheld all
that company. And fayning not to understand those words, thought that she
surely was some great Lady. Wherefore when she was a little past her, she said
to one of her Pages. Mark whether that Lady and her company go to their
lodging, and say unto her, that I desire her, (at my return) to come and see
me at my castle, which the Page did. So the Duchess walking a long the river
of Poo, mused upon the words spoken by ye Spanish Lady, which made her not long
to tarry there, but took the way back again to her Castle, where being
arrived, she found the Lady Isabell, who at the Duchess request, attended her
with her company. And after dutiful reverence, the Duchess with like
gratulacion, received her very curteouslye, taking her a part, and demanding
her, of what province of Spain she was, of what house, and what Fortune had
brought her into that place. And then the Lady Isabell made her to understand,
from the beginning, the occasion of her long voyage, and of what house she was.
The Duchess understanding her nobility, excused her self, for that she had
not done her that honor which she deserved, imputing the fault upon the
ignorance that she had of her estate. And after diverse other courteous
communication, the Duchess would needs know whereunto the words tended that
she had spoken of her, and of the beauty of her brother. The Spanish Lady
somewhat abashed, said unto her. Madame, if I had known so much of your
skill in our tongue, as now I do, I would have been well advised, before I
had so exalted the beauty of my brother, whose praise had been more commendable
in the mouth of some other. Yet thus much I dare affirm, (without affection
be it spoken,) as they that know him can report, that he is one of the
comliest gentlemen that Spain has bred these.xx. years. But of that which I
have spoken touching your beauty, if I have offended, much a do shall I have
to get the same pardoned, because I cannot repent me, nor say otherwise,
except I should speak contrary to truth. And that durst I enterprise to be
verified by your self, if it were possible that Nature for one quarter of one
hour only, had transported into some other, that which with right great
wonder she shows now in you. Whereunto the Duchess to the end she would seem
to excuse her praise, answered with a little shame fastness, which beautified
much her lively color, saying: Madame if you continue in these terms, you will
constrain me to think, that by changing of place, you have also changed your
judgment. For I am one of the least to be commended for beauty of all this
land, or else, I will believe, that you, have the beauty and valor of my Lord
your brother so printed in your mind, that all that, which presenseth it self
unto you, having any appearance of beauty, you measure by the perfection of his.
And at that instant the Lady Isabell, who thought that the Duchess had taken
in evil part, the comparison that she had made of her and her brother,
somewhat in choler and heat therewythal, said unto her. Madame, you shall
pardon me if I have so much forgotten my self, to presume to compare your
beauty to his. Whereof if he be to be commended, yet I may well be blamed,
being his sister, to publish the same in an unknown place. But yet I am well
assured, that when you shall speak, even with his enemies, that yet besides his
beauty, they will well assure him to be one of the gentlest and best
condicioned gentlemen that lives. The Duchess seeing her in these alterations,
and so affected to the praise of her brother, took great pleasure therein, and
willingly would have desired that she should have passed further, were it not
for fear to offend her, and to put her in a choler. And to the intent to turn
her from that matter, she commanded the table to be covered for supper, where
she caused her to be served honorably, of all the most delicate and exquisite
meats that were possible to be gotten. Supper done, and the tables uncovered,
after they had a little talked together, and that it was time to withdraw
themselves, the Duchess more to honor her, would that she should lodge in her
own chamber with her, where the Pilgrim (wearied with the way) took very
good rest. But the Duchess pricked with the strange talk of the Lady Isabell,
having a hammer working in her head, could not sleep. And had so well the
beauty of the unknown Knight graued in the bottom of her heart, that
thinking to close her eyes, she thought that he flewe continually before her
like a certain fancy or shadow. In sort, that to know further what he was,
she would gladly have made greater inquiry. Then suddenly after a little shame
and fear intremingled with a certain womanhode long observed by her, and
therwithall ye fidelity which she bare to the Duke her husband, presenting it
self before her, she buried altogether her first counsel which died and took
end, even so soue almost as it was borne. And so tossed with an infinite
number of diverse thoughts, passed the night, until the day beginning to
lighten ye world with his burning lamp, constrained her to rise. And then the
Lady Isabell, ready to depart, went to take leave of the Duchess, who
willingly would have wished that she had never seen her, for the new flame
that she felt at her heart. Nevertheless, dissembling her evil, not able to
hold her any longer, made her to promise by oath, that at her return form her
voyage, she would repasse by Thurin, and after she had made her a very liberal
offer of her goods, taking her leave, she left her to the tuicion of God.
Certain days after the departing of the spanish Lady, the Duchess thinking
to quench this new fire, the same began further to flame, and the more that
hope failed her, the more did desire increase in her. And after an infinite
number of sundry cogitations, Love got the victory. And she resolved with her
self in the end, whatsoever might come thereof, to comunicate her cause to one
of her beloved damsels called Emilia, and to have her advise, in whom she
wonted to repose her trust in all her secret affairs, and causing her to be
called for secretly, she said unto her. Emilia, I believe that if thou have
taken any good heed to mine ancient manner of behavior, ever since my
departure from England, thou have known me to be the very ramper and refuge of
all afflicted persons. But now my destenies be turned contrary. I have now
more need of counsel than any other living creature. And having no person
about me worthy to understand my misfortune, my first and last refuge is to
thee alone. Of whom I hope to receive consolation in a matter which touches
me no less than my life and honor. And then the Duchess declared unto her
privily, that since the departing of the Lady Isabell she had had no rest in
her mind, and how she was enamoured of a Knight whom she never saw, whose
beauty and good grace had touched her so near, that being altogether unable
any longer to resist her misfortune, she knew not to whom to have recourse,
but to the fidelity of her counsel. Adding thereunto for conclusion, that she
loved him not dishonestly, or for hope she had to satisfy any lascivious
appetite, but only to have a sight of him. Which (as she thought) should bring
unto her such contentation, as thereby her grief should take end. Emilia
who ever loved her maystresse as she did her own heart, had great compassion
upon her, when she understood the light foundation of her strange love.
Nevertheless desiring to please her even to the last point of her life, said
unto her. Madame if it will please you to recreate your self from these your
sorrows, and to respite me only two days, I hope to provide by some good
means that you shall shortly see him, who undeservedly does work you all this
evil. The Duchess nourished with this hope, desired her effectually to think
upon it: Promising unto her, that if her words came to good effect she would
make her such recompense as she her self should confess she had not done
pleasure to an ingrate or unthankful woman. Emilia which had the brute to be
one of the most subtle and sharp witted dames of all Thurin, slept not during
the time of her prescription. But after she had searched an infinite number of
means to come to that which she desired, there was one that seemed most
expedient for that purpose and of least peril above other. And her tune of
delay expired, she went to Madame the Duchess, and said. Madame, God knows
how many troubles my mind has sustained, and how much I have striued with
mine own conscience to satisfy your commandment, nevertheless, after I had
debated things so substantially as was possible, I could devise nothing more
worthy your contentacion, than that which I will now declare unto you, if it
will please you to hear me. Which to be short is, that for the execution of
this our enterprise, it behooves you to feign your self to be sick, and to
suffer your self to be trained into such maladies, as there shall rather
appear in you, token of death, than hope of life. And being brought into such
extremity, you shall make a vow (your health recovered) to go within a
certain time to Saint James on pilgrimage, which you may easily obtain of
the Duke your husband. And then may you make your voyage liberally with ye Lady
Isabell, who will pass this way upon her return, without discovering your
affection unto her, and will not fail by reknowledging of the courtesy that
you have used toward her in these parts, to conduct you by her brothers
house, where you may see him at your ease, that makes you to suffer great
torment. And I will advertise you furthermore of one thing, which ever till
this time I have kept close. But for that we two togethers cannot without great
difficulty accomplish our business, it has seemed good unto me to know of
you, if you would that a third person shall be called thereunto, who is so
much at my commandment as I dare trust him like my self. It is Master
Fraunces Appian the Millanor, your Physician, who (to say the very truth unto
you) has been so affectioned to me, this year or two, that he has not
ceased by all means possible, to win me (but to honest love) for he
pretends to marry me. And because that hitherto I have made small account of
him, and have not used any favor toward him, nor good entertaynment
otherwise: I assure my self seeing the great amity that he bears me, that if
I did but favorably behold him five or six times with plesaunt lokes, adding
thereunto a few kisses, he would hazard a thousand lives for my sake if he had
them, to content me. And forasmuch as I know him to be a diligent man, learned,
and of great reputation, and one that may stand us to great stead in this
business: I thought good not to co^ceale or keep from your knowledge my advise
herein. The Duchess understanding all this pretty discourse, so apt for her
affections (ravished with great joy) embraced hard Emilia, and said unto her.
Emilia my dear friend, if thou did know in what wise I do esteem thee,
and what I mean in time to come, to bestow upon thee, I am well assured, albeit
thou have hitherto sufficiently showed thy good will, yet thou will hereafter
do me great pleasure promising thee, by the faith of a Princess, that if our
enterprise do well succeed, I will not use thee as a servant, but as my
kinswoman and ye best beloved friend I have. For I hold my self so satisfied
with that thou have said unto me, that if Fortune be on our side, I see no
manner of impediment that may let our enterprise. Go thy way and entertain thy
Physician, as thou think best, for it is very expedient that he be a party,
and for ye rest, let me alone. For never was there any Lazar that better could
dissemble his impotency, tha^ I know how to counterfayt to be sick. The
Duchess being departed from Emilia, began to plain her self bitterly,
fayning sometime to feel a certain pain in her stomach, sometime to have a
disease in her head, in such sort, that after diverse womanly playntes (propre
to those that feel themselves sick) she was in the end constrained to lay her
self down, and knew so well how to dissemble her sickness, that (after she
had certain days kept her bed) there was much doubt of her health. And during
this time Emilia had laid so many amorous baytes to feed her Physician, yt he
which knew very well the most happy remedies for the body, could not now
find any to heal the malady of his own mind. Emilia having noseled Master
Appian with amorous toys, began to make him understand the original of the
Duchess sickness, the effects of her passion, the order that she had used
during the furious course of the same. Adding thereunto for conclusion, that if
he would keep the matter secret, and aid them with his counsel, she would
by and by promise him marriage by words, for the present time, and that from
thence forth she would never deny him any favor or priuitie. That only
reserved which no man can honestly demand, til the marriage be solemnized in
the face of the Church. In witness whereof she kissed him with great affection.
The Physician more eased there withal, than if he had seen his Hippocrates or
Galen, raised again fro death, promised rather to lose his life, tha^ she
should want his help. And for the better beginning of this enterprise, they
went presently to visit the Duchess. In whom they found her pulse so to
beat, the tongue so charged, the stomach so weakened by a continual suffocation
of the matrice, that the pacient was in very great peril of death. Whereunto
every man did easly give credit for the reputation and great experience of the
Phisician. And master Appian having commanded all the chamber to be voyded,
made the Duchess to understand in few words, how it behooved her to govern her
self. And the better to cloak her cause, he brought her at that instant a
little perfume, by receiving the savor whereof, she should often times fall
into certain little Soundings, and by often using the perfume, it would eat
away her color for a time, that it should seem, as though she had not gone
out of her bed in half a year. Nevertheless it should do her no other
displeasure, and that in three or four days, with certain other drugges, he
would restore her color as lively as it was before. Which ye Duchess lyked
best of any thing in the world. And they three together played their parts so
well ye the common brute throughout at the city was, that the Duchess would
dye. The Duke being advertised of these things, caused all the Physicians of
Thurin to assemble, to provide for the health of the Duchess: Who being come
together with the Duke into her bedcha^ber, a little after she had received
Master Appians perfumes: and seeing her to sown diverse times before them, were
in great despair of her health. And after they had somewhat debated the matter
with Master Appian, not knowing whereupon to resolve, they said unto the Duke,
that it behooved him to provide for her soul, for that they saw in her the
ordinary tokens and messangers of death. The poor Duke being sorrowful
beyond measure, for that he loved the Duchess entierlie, sent for the
Suffragane of the Bishop of Thurin, a man of very holy life, to the intent he
might give her good council. To whom she confessed her self with a voice so
feeble, yt it seemed to be more than half dead. Her talk was not long, but yet
she made him believe that nature failed her, and that by little and little she
drew toward her end: Desiring him to have her in remembrance, and her
poor soul in his orisons and prayers. The Suffragane being gone, the Duke and
others, with a great number of Gentlemen and Ladies, went into the chamber. But
she began then to enter into so great rauing, that every body was afeard of
her. And after that she had tossed her self in her bed, like a senseless
creature, her speech failed her. Whereat those present, stricken with no small
wonder, thinking the soul would straight ways have departed the body, some of
them cried upon her. Madame remember Jesus, some other saint Barbara. But
wily Emilia more privy of her counsel than the rest, taking her tenderly by ye
arm, cried upon her with a loud voice. Madame call upon saint James, who has
so often succored you in your adversities. And with that the Duchess awaked
as it were out of a heavy sleep, and rolling her eyes to and fro, with a
strange trembling of al her members, began to pronounce with an interrupted
voice. O glorious Apostle, in whom from my tender youth, I have ever had my
steadfast trust and hope, be now mine intercessor in this cruel assault of
death, to Jesus Christ. And I make a vow now to thee, that if I may recover
my health, I will my self in person, go honor thy sacred body, in the proper
place where it reposeth. And having ended her feigned Prayer, she cou^terfayted
a sleep, and so continued the space of.ij. or.iii. hours, which caused all
the company to withdraw themselves, except the poor Duke, who would not
depart from her, until she waked, and in the mean time ceased not to pray to
God for the health of his loyal spouse. After she had so well played this
Pageaunt by the space of an hour or two, fayning then to awake, she began to
stretch forth her arms and legs with such force, that whosoever had heard
the noise, would easily have judged that she was delivered from some great
torment. And beholding the Duke her husband, with a pitiful eye (who had
leaned his head nere unto hers in the bed) she cast her stretched arms
negligently upon his neck, and kissing him said. Now may I safely kiss you my
Lord that wtin these three hours was in such pitiful plight, as I thought my
self for ever deprived of that benefit. Thanks be given to god and that good
saint, to whom I made my vow. I am presently so well eased, yt if I feel my
self no worse, I will yet deteine you (husband) a while from marriage. But the
poor Duke altogether ravished with joy, having his white bearde all tempered
with tears, knew not what answer to make, but beheld her with such
admiration, that he seemed to be besides himself. And in the mean time
certain which were at the door, hearing them speak, entered the chamber, who
finding the Duchess somewhat better than she was, published the same
incontinently through all the city, whereof the Citizens being advertised
(because they loved her dearly) made processions and other thanks giuings to
God, as in cases like has been accustomed. With in a while after, the Duchess
began by little and little to taste her meats, and to use such diet that she
had recovered her former health. Except the new plague, which she felt at her
heart for the Lord Mendozza, which she could not cure but by the presence of
him that bare the ointment box for that sore. And so long she continued in
these amorous thoughts, til the Lady Isabell returned from her pilgrimage, who
came to the castle according to her promise. And after friendly greetings one
of another, the Duchess made her to understand, how since her departure she
had never almost commen out of her bed, for that she had been afflicted with
a most grievous sickness. Nevertheless by the help of God, and the
intercession of good S. James (to whom she had vowed her self) she had
recovered health. And if she could obtain leave of the Duke her husband, she
would think her self happy to make a voyage thither in her company. Which the
Spanishe Lady persuaded by all means possible, showing unto her many
commodities, which she should find in Spain, and the honorable company of
gentlemen and Ladies, who at her arrival there (if it would please her to do
them so much honor as to visit them in passing by) would leave nothing undone
for the best manner of entertaynment that possible might be devised. And by
this mean ye Lady Isabell thought to prick her forward, who was in deed but
to quick of the spur already, and thinking every hour.vij. determined one
morning to move the Duke her husband thereunto. To whom she said. My Lord I
believe that you do sufficiently well remember my trouble past, and the extreme
martyrdom that I suffered in my late sickness, and namely of ye vow which I
made for recovery of my health. Now finding my self whole and strong, my
desire is that with your license I might accomplish my voyage, specially with
so good opportunity. For the noble woman of Spain of whom I have heretofore
told you, is returned, and it should be a great ease to us both to go in
company together. And for so much as it is a matter of necessity, and that
early or late I must adventure to pay my vowed debte, it is best both for my
commodity and also for mine honor, to go in her company. Whereunto the good
Duke did willingly accord. Who never had any manner of suspicion that such a
treason was lodged in the heart of so great a Princess. And having given order
for all things requisite for her departing, she took a certain number of
gentlemen and damsels, amongst which, Master Appian and Emilia were not
forgotten, and being all apparelled in Pilgrims weeds, by long travail and
weary journeys, after they had passed the cold Alps, they came into the county
of Rossilion, and entered into Spain. And then the Duchess feling her self to
approach the place where her heart of long time had taken hold, desired the Lady
Isabell and her company earnestly, not to make it known to any person what
she was. And so trauayling by small iorneyes and devising of diverse matters,
they arrived within two little days iorneyes of the place where the Lord of
Mendozza kept his ordinary household. For which cause the Spanish Lady
entreated the Duchess not to be offended, if she sent some one of her men
before to give advertisement of their coming, which the Duchess granted.
And the messanger finding the the Lord of Mendozza ready to receive them, and
having done him to understand of the coming of the Duchess, of the first
talk between her and his sister, of the great entertaynment that she had given
them, Of the singular beauty with the which she was adorned: He was not so
gross but that he knew by and by, that the Duchess at those years, had not
ben so liberal of her labor, to make such a voyage on soote, without some
other respect. And dissembling what he thought, caused thirty or forty of his
gentlemen incontinently to make them ready. To whom making as though he would
go hunt the Hare, he went to meet the Duchess: and having discovered them a
far of in a field, the Lady Isabell did forth with know them. Who advertised
the Duchess that he which rydde upon the white Ienet of Spain, was the Lord
of Mendozza her brother, and the other, certain of his servants. The Prince
then after he had made his horse to vaute three or four times alofte in the
air, with an excellent grace and meruellous dexterity lighted from his horse,
and kissing her hand, said unto her. Madame, I believe that if ye wandering
knights of old time, who have eternized there memory, by an infinite number of
renowned victories, had had so much good luck, as many times in there
adventures to meet with such pilgrims, as you be, that they would willingly
have abandoned the Lance and the Murrion, to take the Staff and the Scrippe.
The Duchess then being comparable with any Lady of her time, for her educacion
and comely talk, assailed with joy, fear, and shame, that no lack of duty
might be found in her, said unto him. And in deed my Lord like as if the
knights of whom you speak, had tasted of some good hap, (as you term it) by
meeting with such Pilgrims: So also we hope that the Saint to whom we be
vowed, in the honor of whom we have enterprised this perilous voyage, will
receive us in good part. Otherwise our pain were altogether lost, and our
journey evil employed. And after they had given this first amorous atteint,
the Lord of Mendozza taking her by the arm, conducted her unto his castle,
devising of pleasant matters. And he was greatly astonned, to see so rare a
beauty, as appeared in the Princess: Which neither the weariness of the way,
nor the parching beams of the Sun, could in any wise so appaire, but that
there rested enough, to draw unto her the very hearts of the most cold, and
frosen men of the world. And albeit the Lord of Mendozza, took great
pleasure and admiration in beholding her, yet was it nothing in respect of the
Duchess: who after she had advised and well marked the beauty, excellency,
and other gifts of grace, in the Lord of Mendozza, she confessed that all
that which she had heard of his sister, was but a dream in comparison of the
proof, which discovered it self upon the first view: Seming unto her by good
judgment, that all the beauties of the world were but paintings, in respect
of the perfection of that which she saw with her eyes. Wherein she was not
deceived, albeit that her fervent love might have bewitched her senses. For all
the Histories in Latin, Spanishe, and Italien, the which make mention of
Mendozza, give unto him the first place in beauty of all the Princes and
Lords that were in his time. The poor Duchess, after she had manifested by
outward gestures, and countenances, to the Lord of Mendozza, that which was in
the inward part of her heart, without receiving the full satisfaction of his
sight, which she desired, determined (having soiourned three days in his
Castle) to depart the next morning, (unawares to the Knight,) to perform her
voyage. And so soon as the light of the day began to appear, she went to the
chamber of the Lady Isabell, whom she thanked affectuously, as well for her
good company, as for the great courtesy, and humanity, that she had received
in her house. And having taken leave of her, departed with her train. The
Knight Mendozza, about an hour or two after her departure, advertised thereof,
was greatly troubled, what the matter might be that she was gone without taking
leave of him. And after that he had a little thought thereupon, he easily
perceived, that all the fault thereof was in himself. And yt this great
Princess had abandoned her country, of purpose by all judgment to visit
him, and that he had showed himself very slack for her satisfaction, in that
he had not offered her his service. Whereat being justly grieved, she did not
vouchsafe to give him a farewell. And so accusing himself, he determined to
follow after her, accompanied only with two Pages. And for that he was on
horseback, it was not long before he espied her in the high way to S. James,
where lighting from his horse, he walked two miles with her, seasoning the
matter without intermission: desiring her amongs other things, to let him
understand what displeasure she had conceived in his house, that caused so
spedy and secret a departure: adding thereunto, that if her pleasure were, he
would accompany her to the place whither she was vowed: and would also
reconduct her in his own person to Thurin, in so honorable sort, that she
should have cause to be contented. Then passing further, with sighs said unto
her. Madame, Fortune had done me a great benefit, if when my sister made her
vow to go to Rome, I had lost the battle against mine enemies, and that her
vow had been without effect. For it might have been that I should have
remained quiet by the loss of some of my people. But alas I feel now, since
your coming into this country, a battle so cruel, and assault so furious
in my heart, as not being able any longer to resist it, I find my self
vanquished, and caught captive, in such sort, that I know not to whom to
complain, but to you, which is the motion of all my disquietnesse. And yet,
which grieueth me most, you dissemble as though you did not understand it. And
to bring me to my last end, you are departed this day out of my house, not
dayning to see me, or to appease me with one farewell, which has so further
inflamed my passion, that I dye a thousand times in a day. Beseching you for
the time to come, to entreat me more favorably, or you shall see me, in that
state, wherein you would be loath to see your enemy: Which is, most cruel
death. And in deed, he showed sufficiently, how great the grief was that pressed
him, and how well the passion that he felt, was agreeable to the words which he
spoke. For in pronouncing his words he sighed so in his tale, and changed his
color so often, and had his face so besprent with tears, that it seemed his
soul attached with superfluous sorrow, would at that very instant have
abondoned his body. Which the Princess perceiving, touching at ye quick the
very spring of al his evil, said unto him. Seigniour Mendozza, I know not
what you would that I should do more for you, nor for what occasion you do
pretend, that I should be the cause of your death. For if the occasion thereof
should happen through my default, my life by strength or ability could not
endure one hour after, for the sorrow I should conceive thereof. Think me to be
yours, and be not offended, I beseech you, if openly I do no longer talk with
you. For I would not to win al ye goods in the world, yt any of this train
which does accompany me, should perceive any one spark of the great kindled
fire, wherein my heart burns day and night for your sake, being assured yt if
you had felt one hour of my pain, in place to accuse me of cruelty, your self
co^playning, would pity ye grief which I have sustained for your long
absence. For without the continual presence of your person, representing it
self in the eyes of mine understanding, with a firm hope once to have seen
you: it had been impossible for me, to resist the long and hard assault, where
with love has every hour assailed me. But one thing I must needs confess
unto you, that by reason of ye cold welcome which you made me in the beginning,
I thought it proceeded of some evil opinion conceived of me, or peradventure,
that you had thought me over liberal of mine honor, to have left the
country where I command, to render my self subject to your good grace,
which caused me without leave to depart your house. But now that I do know by
your countenance and tears, the contrary: I acknowledge my fault, and desire
you to forget it. With full promise, that at my return from my voyage of S.
James I will make you amends, in the very same place, where I committed the
fault. And remaining your prisoner for a certain time, I will not depart from
you, until I have satisfied, by sufficient penance ye greatness of my
trespass. In ye mean time you shall content your self with my good will: and
without passing any further return again home to your Castle, for fear least
some suspicious person in my company should conceive that in me, which all the
days of my life I never gave occasion, so much as once to thinck. To whom the
Lord of Mendozza obeyed, more to content her, than otherwise, for he had the
beauties and good behauiours of the Princess, so imprinted in the most
pleasant place of his heart, that he would have desired never to have departed
her company. But like as they determined iocundly, to employ and satisfy
their desires, at her return from her voyage: even so Fortune in the mean
while did beset the same, and so fully brake the threde of their enterprises,
that ye issue had not so good success, as was their prefixed hope. Now leave
we the Duchess, to perform her voyage, and the Lord of Mendozza to
entertayne his amorous passions, and let us digress to the Duke, who about.x.
or.xii. days after the Duchess his wife was departed, began to feel her
absence, which not being able to sustain for ye great love that he bare unto
her, and specially knowing ye great fault that he had committed (being the
sister of a King and wife of such a Prince) so to let her go, like an
unfeathered shafte, in so long a voyage: determined with himself (for fear
least if any misfortune should happen unto her, the same should touch his
honor) to call together his counsel, and to provide some remedy. The counsel
assembled, and the cause proponed, every of them told the Duke that he had
over lightly consented to the will of the Duchess, and that if she should
happen to fall into any inconvenience, all men would impute it to his reproach,
whereof they would have advertised him, at ye beginning, saving for fear they
had to displease him: Adding for conclusion, that it was most expedient the
Duke should put himself on the sea to go and seek her in Galisia. Which he
did, and embarked himself with a great company of gentlemen, to whom the
wind was so favorable, yt he arrived at S. James before her. And having made
inquiry for her, understood she was not come. Nevertheless he was advertised
by certain pilgrims, that it could not be long before she would be there, for
that they had left her not past three or.iiii. days journey from thence:
travailing with her train, by small journeys, whereof the Duke was exceeding
glad, and sent certain of his gentlemen to meet her upon the way, as she
came, who travailed not far before they met the Duchess with her company,
and did her to understand of the Dukes arrival and of the cause of his coming
from Thurin. Which tidings was not very joyful to her, and by her will would
have wished that he had not taken so much pains. Nevertheless, preferring
honor before affection, she made the more have to see him, and at her arrival,
seemed to be glad of his coming, and to lament the pain that he had taken, by
committing himself in so many dangers for her sake. Afterward they entered
into the church with great devotion, where when the Duchess had made certain
particular prayers, she began to perceive that God had withstanded her
lascivious will, and pitying the good Duke her husband, whould not permit him
to be deceived in such disloyal sort, repentantly bewayling her forepassed
fault. And seling her self pressed even at the very soul with a certain
remorse of conscience, she was so victorious over her affections, yt she
determined wholly to forget Mendozza and his beauty. Praising God
nevertheless that it had pleased him to grant her the grace so well to
dispose her matters, that her affections had not exceeded the bonds of honor:
Determining from thenceforth, not only to put Mendozza in utter oblivion, but
also for ever clearly to cut of his amorous practice: and therefore would not
so much as did him once farewell, nor yet to let him in any wise understand
those news. And so settled in this deliberatio^, solicited her husband very
instantly to depart, which he did, and all things prepared to the sea, they
took again their course to Thurin, and had ye wind so prosperous, yt from
thence in few days they arrived at Marsellis. And weary of the seas, he
caused horses to be prepared to ride from thence to Thurin by land, where he
and his wife lived together in right great joy and amity. The Lord of
Mendozza greatly payned with the long absence of the Duchess, sent a gentleman
of purpose to Galisia, to know ye occasion of her long tarying. Who brought
certain news that the Duke was comen in person, to fetch his wise, and that
he had carried her away with him by sea. Where withal he was maruellously out
of patience, determining nevertheless one day when his affairs were in good
order, to go visit her at Thurin. During the time that these things remained
in this estate, as well of the one side, as of the other: the Almaines prepared
a great army, and entered into France where they wasted and burned all the
country as they passed. The King being advertised hereof, sent for the Duke of
Sauoie to go meet them with the men of arms of France. But before his
departure from Thurin, he left for his Lieutenant general, the Earl of
Pancalier, by the advice and counsel of whom he intended that all the
affairs of the Duchy should be ruled and governed in his absence, and that he
should in so ample wise be honored and obeyed, as his own propre person. This
Earl of Pancalier being a noble man, very prudent in his doings, and knew
right well how to govern the common wealth, seeing ye he had the whole
country at his commandment, and himself many times in presence of the
Duchess, and viewing her so fair and comely, could not so well rule his
affections, but that by little and little he fell in love with the Duchess, in
such wise as that he forgot him self, making no conscience to offer his
service unto her. But the Princess who was resolved to live a good woman,
abhorred al his lascivious orations, requiring him to be better advised another
time, before he presumed to utter such talk, except to such as were his
equals. Telling him that a man ought not to be so unshamefast to offer his
service to any great Lady, or to make other suit unto her, before he had
first known by her gesture or words, some likelyhode of love: which he could
not deem in her, for so much as she neither to him or to any other had ever
(till ye day in all her life) showed such favor, as other suspicion could be
conceived, than that which was conuenable and meet for her honor. Which when
the County of Pancalier vnderslode, he took his leave of her, ashamed of that
he had done. But he following the custom of lovers, not thinking himself cast
of for the first refuse, eftsoon renewed his requests. And framing a loving
style, besought her to have pity upon him, and to respect the greatness of
his passion: and that he could not long prolong his life without the favor
of her good grace, who only was the very remedy of his evil. The Duchess
pestred with such like talk, said unto him. Sir County, me think you ought
to have satisfied your self with my first refusal, without further continuance
in the pursuing of your rash enterprise. Have you forgotten the place that you
keep, and the honor whereunto my Lord the Duke my husband has exalted you? Is
this now the loyal reward that you render unto him for creating you his
Lieutenant over all his lands and seigniories, to demand the pre-eminence of
his bed? Assure your self for final warning, that if ever hereafter you shall
again fall into like error, I swear unto you by the faith of a Princess, that
I will make you to be chastised in such sort, as all semblable Traitors and
disloyal servant shall take example. The Earl seeing him self refused, and
thus rebuked, and in doubt that the Princess would make her husband to
understand his enterprise upon his return, changing this great love into an
hate more than mortal, determined whatsoever should come thereof, to invent
all means possible, utterly to destroy the Duchess. And after that he had
fansied diners things in his mind, he devised by the instinct of the devil)
to cause one of his Nephews, being of the age only of xviij. or.xx. years,
which was his heir apparent, for that he had no children, one of the fairest
and best condicioned Gentlemen of all Thurin, to sort that deuilish attempt to
purpose.m And finding opportunity, one day he said to the young man (that
depended wholly upon him) these words. Nephewe, thou know that all the hope
thou have in this world lies in me alone, making account of thee as of my
child. And for that it pleased God to give me no children, I have constituted
and ordained thee my sole and only heir with full hope that from henceforth
thou will account thy self most bound unto me, and therefore obedient in all
things which I shall command thee, specially in that which may be most for
thine advancement. The Duke as thou know, is absent, old, and crooked and at
al hours in the mercy of death through dangers of the wars. Now if he
should chance to dye, my desire is to mary thee with some great Lady: Yea and
if it were possible with the Duchess, her self, which God knows what profit
it would bring both to thee and thine, and in my judgment an easy matter to
compass, if you wilt despose thy self after my counsel, or at least wise, if
thou can not come to the title of husband, thou may not fail to be
received as her friend. Thou art a comely Gentleman, and in good favor with the
Duchess, as I have oftentimes perceived by her communication, albeit that
holding fast the bridle of her honor she has been afraid hitherto to open her
self unto thee. Spare not my goods, make thy self brave from henceforth
whatsoever it cost, and be diligent to please her in all that thou may, and
time shall make thee know that which thy tender years has hitherto hidden
from thee. The poor young man, giving says to the unfaithful inventions of
his uncle (whom he counted as his Father) began often to frequent the presence
of the Duchess, and shamefastlye to solicit her by looks and other offices
of humanity, as nature had taught him, continuing that order by the space of a
month. Which perceived by the Duchess, she was diligent for her part to
accept the honest and affectionate service that the young man daily did unto
her, and showed unto him likewise a certain courteous favor always, more than
to the rest of the Pages, as well for the birthe and beauty where withal
nature had enriched him, as for that she fawe him inclined to do her service
more than the rest, not thinking of any dishonest appetite in the young man,
nor of the malice of his uncle, who having none other felicity in the world,
but in revenge of the Duchess his enemy, not able to bear the cruel
vengeance rooted in his heart, determined to play double or quitte. And
calling his Nephewe before him he said unto him. My child, I do perceive and
see that thou art one of the most happiest gentlemen of all Europe, if thou
knew how to follow thine own good luck. For the Duchess not only is
amorous of thee, but also consumes for earnest love which she bears to thee.
But as thou know women be shamefast and would be sued unto in secret, and
do delight to be deceived of men, to the end it might seem how with deceit or
force they were constrained to grant that unto them, which of their own
minds they would willingly offer, were it not for a little shame fastness
that withdraws the^. And thereof assure thy self, for I have oftentimes
experimented the same, to my great contentacio^. Wherefore cre dit my Council,
and follow mine advise. And thou thy self shall confess unto me, before to
morrow at this time, that thou art the happyest man of the world. I will,
then that this night when thou see convenient time, thou shall convey thy
self secretly into the chamber of the Duchess, and to hide thy self a good
way under the bed, for fear of being perceived by any creature: where thou
shall remain until an hour after midnight, when all men be in the depth of
their sleep. And when thou perceiuest every man at rest, thou shall closely
rise, and approaching the Duchess bed, thou shall tell what thou art, and I
am sure for the earnest love which she bears thee, and for the long absence
of her husband, she will courteously receive thee between her arms, and feast
thee with such delicate pleasures, as amorous folk do their lovers. The
simple young man giving faith to the words of his uncle that was honored as a
King (thinking perhaps that it proceeded by ye persuasion of the Duchess)
followed his commandment, and obeyed wholly his traiterous and abominable
request. And opportunity found, accomplished from point to point, that which
his cruel uncle had commanded, who a little before midnight, fearing least
his treason should be discovered, took with him three Counselors, and
certain other of the Guarde of the Castle. Whereunto as Lieutenant to the Duke,
he might both enter and issue forth at all times when he lift, and without
declaring his enterprise, went straight to the portal of the Duchess chamber,
and knocking at the door, said that the Duke was come. Which being opened, he
entered in with a number of lights, accompanied with the Guarde, having a
rapier ready drawn in his hand, like a furious man besides himself, began to
look round about, and under the bed of the Duchess, from whence he caused his
own propre Nephewe to be drawn. To whom without giving him leisure to speak
one word for fear lest his mischief should be discovered, he said. O
detestable villain, thou shall dye, and there withal" he thrust the rapier
into him, up to the hard hiltes, and doubling the blow to make him fail of his
speech, he gave him another overthwart the throat, so fiercely that the pore
innocent after he had a little reeled to and fro, fell down stark dead to the
ground. When he had put up his rapier, he turned toward the Counselors, and
said unto them. My friends, this is not the first time that I have espied the
lascivious and dishonest love between this my locherous Nephewe and the
Duchess, whom I have caused to die, to honorably in respect of his desert.
For by the very rigor of the law, he deserved to have been burnt quick, or
else to be torn in pieces with.iiij. horses. But my Lady the Duchess I mean
not to punish, or to provide chastisement for her: For you be not ignorant,
that the ancient custom of Lombardie and Sauoie requires, that every woman
taken in adultery shall be burned alive, if with in a year and a day she find
not a Champion to fight the combase for her innocence. But for the bounden
duery that I dear to my Lord the Duke, and for respect of the estate which he
has committed to my charge, I will to morrow dyspatche a Poaste, to make him
understand the whole accident as it is come to pass. And the Duchess shall
remain in this Chamber, with certayue of her maids, under sure keeping and
safeguard. All this time the Duchess who had both judgment and spirit so good
as any Princess that raygned in her time, suspected straightwayes the treason
of the Earl. And with a pitiful eye beholding the dead body of her Page,
fetching a deep sighe, cried out. Oh innocent soul which sometime gave life
to this body that now is but earth, thou art now in place where thou see
clearly the iniquity of the murderer, that lately did put thee to death. And
having made an end of this exlamation with her arms a cross, she remained as in
a sown without moving either hand or foot. And after she had continued a
while in that estate, she desired the Counselors to cause the body to be
buried, and to restore it to ye earth whereof it had the first creation. For
(quoth she) it has not deserved to be tied to the gibet, and to be fode for
birds of the air. Which they granted not without a certain grievous
suspicion between her and the Page. For so much as she excused not her self,
but the innocence of him, without speaking any word of her own particular
justification. This pitiefull adventure was out of hand published through all
the city, with so great sorrow and murmr of the people, that it seemed as
though the enemies had sacked the town. For there was not one, from the very
least to the greatest of all, but did both love and reverence the Duchess, in
such sort that it seemed unto them, that this misfortune was fallen upon every
one of their children. The Earl of Pancalier did nothing all that day, but
dispatch the Poastes. And having caused all the whole matter to be registered as
it was seen to be done: he commanded, the Counselors, and them of the Guard,
to subscribe his letters. And all the matter being put in order he sent away two
Currors with diligence, the one into England to advertise the King her
brother, and the other to the Duke. Who being, arrived, each man in his place,
presented their charges. Whereunto both the brother and the husband gave full
credit without any manner of difficulty: persuaded principally thereunto by
the death of the Nephewe. Who (as it was very likely) had not been put to death
by his own uncle, and of whom he was also the very heir, without his most
grievous fault, praising greatly the fidelity of the Earl, that had not
pardoned his own propre blood, to conserve his duty and honor so his
sovereign Lord. And it was concluded between them, by deliberate advise and
counsel, as well of those of the King of England, as by a great number of
learned men of France, whom the french king made to assemble for that respect
in favor of the Duke that ye custom should be inuiolably kept, as if it were
for the most simple damsel of all the country: to the end that in time to
come, great Lords and Ladies which be as it were lamps to give light to
others, might take example. And that from thenceforth they should not suffer
their virtues to be obscured by the clouds of such execrable vices. The King
of England to gratify the Earl of Pancalier: who (in his judgment) had
showed himself right noble in this act, sent him an excellent harness, with
a sword of the self same trampe by the Currour, with letters of answer
written with his own hand, how he understood the manner of his procedings.
And the messanger used such diligence, that within few days he arrived at
Thurin. Shortly after yt the King of England had sent back the Currour, the
Duke of Sauoie returned his, whom he stayed so much the longer, because ye
matter touched him more nere. And he would that it should be debated by most
grave and deliberate counsel. And when he had resolved, he wrote to the
counselors and other Magistrates of Thurin, above all things to have respect
that the custom should be inuiolablie kept, and that they should not in any
case favor the adultery of his wife, upon pain of death. Then in particular,
he wrote his letters to the Earl, whereby he did greatly allow his fidelity,
for the which he hoped to make him such recompense, as both he and his, should
taste thereof during their lives. The Currour of the Duke arrived, and the
matter proponed in counsel, it was judged, that (following the ancient
custom) a pillar of Marble should be placed in the fields near Thurin: which
is between the bridge of the river Poo and the city, whereupon should be
written the accusation of the Earl of Pancalier against the Duchess. Which
the Duchess understanding (having none other company but Emilia, and a young
damsel) dispoiled her self of her silken garments, and did put on mourning
wede, martired with an infinite number of sundry torments, seeing her self
abandoned of al worldly succor, made her complaints to God: beseching him with
tears to be protector of her innocence. Emilia who understood by her, that
she was unjustly accused, and seeing the iminent peril that was prepared for
her, determined by her accustomed prudence to provide therefore. And after she
had a little comforted her, she said unto her. Madame, the case so requires
now, that you should not consume time, in tears and other womanish plaintes,
which can nothing diminishe your evil. It seems most expedient unto me, that
you fortefie your self against your enemy, and to find some mean to send
Master Appian in poast to the Duke of Mendozza, one of the best renowned in
prowess of al ye Knights in Spain, who being advertised of your misfortune,
will provide so well for your affairs, (that your honor being recovered) your
life shall remain assured. Wherefore if you will follow mine advise, you
shall write him an earnest letter (as you know right well how to indite) which
Appian shall present on your behalf. For if you follow not this counsel, I
know none other as the world goes now, that will hazard his life under the
condition of so strange a lot as yours is, specially having respect to the
renown and magnanimity of the Earl, who as you know, is in reputation to be
one of the most valiant men and most happy in arms that is in all Sauoie or
Lombardie. My dear friend (quod the Duchess) do what thou will. For I am so
resolved and confirmed in my sorrow, that I have no care either of death or
life, no more than if I had never been borne. For neither in the one, nor in
the other, can I foresee any remedy for mine honor already lost. Madame (quod
Emilia) let us for this time leave the care of honor in the hands of God, who
knows both how to keep it, and restore it, as shall seem good unto him. And
let us give order for our part, that there be no want of diligence, for fear
of being overtaken. And having made an end of her tale, she gave her yncke and
paper, saying unto her. Now Madame I shall see at this pinch, if your heart
will serve you at a need or no. The Duchess withdrew her self a part and
after she had long discoursed in her mind of that which was past between the
knight and her, she wrote unto him as follows.

My Lord Mendozza, I do not write these letters unto you, upon any hope to be
delivered by your mean from the poinaunt prick of fierce death which does
besiedge me, knowing death always to be the true port and sure refuge of all
afflicted persons in my case. For since that God wills it, nature permits
it, and my heavy Fortune consents to it, I will receive it with a right good
will, knowing that the Grave is none other but a strong rampire and impregnable
castle, wherein we close our selves against the assaults of life, and the
furious storms of fortune. It is far better (as appears manifestlye by me)
with eyes shut, to wait in ye Grave, than longer to experiment life (the eyes
being open) living with so many troubles upon earth. But gladly would I bring
to remembrance, and set before your eyes how sometime I abandoned the place,
which was no less dear unto me than mine own country where I was borne, and
delicately nourished in honor and delights, to extend my self into an
infinite number of perilles, contrary to the duty of those that be of mine
estate, losing the name of a princess to take ye title of a caytise pilgrim,
for the only fervent and unmeasured love which I bare you, before I did ever
see you, or by any means bound thereunto by any your proceeding benefits. The
remembrance whereof (as I think) ought now to deliver such an hard
enterprise, to the port of your conscience, that breaking the veil of your
tender heart, you should therefore take pity and compassion of my strange and
cruel Fortune. Which is not only reduced to the mercy of a most dolorous
prison, and rests in the power of a bloody and merciless Tirant: But (which
is worse) in the continual hazard of a shameful death. Which I do not much
lament having long desired to accelerate the same with mine own hands, to
find rest in an other world: were it not that by death I should leave an
eternal blotte to my good name, and a perpetual heritage of infamy to my
house and kindred. Wherefore if it so be, that friendship looks for no reward,
and that she cannot be paid, but by the tribute of another friendship, make me
now to taste the ancient fruit of my friendship. And if pity be the sole and
only key of Paradise, display it now on the behalf of her, who (forsaken of
all human succor) attends but the fatal hour to he thrown into the fire
as a pore innocent lamb in sacrifice. And for that the bearer shall make you
understand the rest by mouth (whom it may please you to credit as mine own
self) I will make an end of my heavy letter. Beseching God to give a good
life unto you and to me an honorable death.

The letter closed and seated up with the seal of the Duchess, she commanded
Emilia to deliver it to Appian, and to require him to use diligence, not
ceassing to ride day and night until he come to the place where they left the
knight Mendozza, giving charge to make him understand (at length) her
innocence and false accusation. Appian being dispatched, was so affected to
please his maistresse, and so desirous to see her delivered of her
imprisonment, that he ceased not to travail day and night, till he came
within the Frontiers of Spain. And after that he had ridden yet two or three
days journey: approaching nere the place where he thought to find the Knight
Mendozza, he began to inquire of the host of the Inn where he lay that night,
as well of his good health, as of his other affairs, who made him answer, that
it went even so evil with him at that present, as with the most porest
gentleman of al Spain. Although yt he were in deed a very great Lord. For
(qudo he) with in these few months past, his enemies of Tolledo, whom he
has diverse times vanquished, have so well allied themselves together out of
all parts of Spain, that they have brought a great army to the field. And
Fortune of the war has been so favorable unto them, that they discomfited
Mendozza and all his army. Who has retired himself, with those few of his
people that he could save alive, into a little town of his, where yet to this
present he is besiedged. And so it is, (as every man says,) that he does his
endeavor meruellously well, in such sort that his enemies can not enter the
town. Master Appian then demanded of him, if the town besiedged, were far
of. And he answered, that it was about.vij. or.viij. poastes. Then without
making any longer inquiry, he took a guide that accompained him even almost to
the camp. And when he saw the town a far of, he sent the guide back
again, and went the same day, to offer his service to a certain Captain of
light horsemen, who received him into wages, and then he bought armor to serve
the purpose. And Master Appian besides his learning was a wise and pollitike
man, and determined so sone as any skirmish did begin, to be foremost, and in
deed he used the matter so well, that he suffered himself to be taken prisoner
and to be carried into ye town. And being within, he desired those that had
taken him, to conduct him to the Lord of Mendozza their Chieftaine. Who knew
him by and by, for that in the voyage which the Duchess made into Spain, he
saw him ever more nere her, than any other of her gentlemen. And after that
the Lord of Mendozza had demanded of him by what means he entered the town.
Upon his answer, he perceived that he was a man of good experience, and well
affected to the service of his Maistresse, that durst hazard his life in such
wise, to obey her desire. Incontinently Master Appian delivered unto him the
Duchess letter. Which when he had readde, he retired into his chamber with
Master Appian, having his face all bedewed with tears. And because that the
letter did importe credit, he prayed Master Appian to declare his charge. Who
said unto him. My Lady the Duchess which is at this day the most afflicted
Princess under the coape of Heaven, commends her self unto your honor, and
does humbly beseech you, not to be offended for that at her last being in
Galisia, she departed without accomplishing her promise made unto you. Praying
you to impute the fault upon the importunity of the Duke her husband. Who^
being constrained to obey, she could not satisfy the good will that she bare
unto you. Then he began to declare in order how the Earl of Pancalier was
enamoured of her, and not being able to obtain his desire, caused his Nephewe
to hide him under her bed: and how he had slain him with his own hands.
Finally, the imprisonment of the Duchess, and the judgment given against her.
Whereof the Lord of Mendozza was greatly astonned. And when he had heard the
whole dyscourse, he began to conceive some evil opinion of the Duchess.
Thinking it to be incredible, that the Earl of Pancalier would so forget
himself, as to murder his own propre Nephew and adopted son, to be revenged
of a selie woman. Nevertheless, he dissembled that which he thought, in the
presence of Master Appian, and said unto him. Appian my friend, if mine
adverse Fortune did not speak sufficiently for me, I could tell thee here a
long tale of my miseries. But ye see into what extremity I am presently
reduced, in sort that I am utterly unable to succor thy maistresse, I my self
still attending the hour of death. And all yt which presently I am able to do
for thee, is to set thee at liberty, from the peril prepared for us. And
without longer talk, he caused a hot skirmish to be given to his enemies, to
set Appian at large: who being issued forth, made certain of his men to
conduct him to place of surety. Appian seeing no way for Mendozza to abandon
his city for peril of death prepared for him and his, thought his excuse
reasonable. And to attempt some other Fortune, he used such diligence, that he
in short time was returned to Thurin, where having communicated the whole
matter to Emilia, she went straight to the Duchess, to whom she said. Madame
God give you the grace to be so constant in your adversities, as you have
occasion to be miscontented with the heavy news that Appian has brought you.
And then she began to recount unto her the mysfortune of Mendozza, the
thraldom whereunto his enemies had brought him, and for conclusion, that there
was no hope of help to be expected at his hands. Which when the Duchess
understood she cried out. Oh poor unhappy woman amongst all the most
desolate and sorrowful: Thou may well now say that ye light of thy life from
henceforth begins to extinguish and grow to an end: seeing, the succor of
him, upon whom depended thine assurance, is denied thee. Ah ingrate Knight.
Now know I right well (but it is to late) that of the extreme love that I have
borne thee, sprung ye first root of all mine evil, which came not by any
accident of Fortune, but from celestial dispensacion and divine providence of
my God. Who now does permit that mine Hypocrisy and counterfayt devotion
shall receive condign chastisement for my sin. And then Emilia, seeing her so
confounded in tears, said unto her. Madame it does evil become a great and
wise Princess, (as you hitherto have ever been reputed) for to torment her
self: since that you know how all the afflictions which we receive from
heaven, be but proves of our fidelity, or as your self confesses by your
complayntes, to be just punishment for our sins. Now then be it the one or
the other, you ought to fortify your self against the hard assault of your
sorrow. And to remitte the whole to the mercy of God, who of his abundant
grace, will deliver you of your trouble, as he has done many others, who when
they thought themselves forsaken of al help, and caused certain drops of his
pity, to rain down upon them. Alas dear heart (quod the Duchess,) how
easy a matter it is for one that is hole, to comfort her that is sick. But if
thou feltest my grief, thou would help me to complain. So grievous a
matter it is unto me, with life to lose mine honor. And I must confess unto
thee, that I sustain a very cruel assault, both against death and life, and I
cannot either with the one or with the other, have peace or truce in my self.
Ne yet do know how to dissemble my sorrow, but that in ye end the same will
be discovered by the fumes of mine ardent sighs, which thinking to constrayne
or retain, I do nothing else but bury my self wtin mine own body: Assuring
thee, that greater is one drop of blood that swells the heart within, than
all the tears that may be wept in the whole life without. Wherefore I pray thee
leave me a little to complain my dolor, before I go to the place from whence I
shall never return. Emilia that willingly would have sacrificed her self to
redeem the Princess from peril, not being able any longer to endure the hard
attempt where with pity constrained her heart, was forced to go forth and to
withdraw her self, into another chamber, where she began to lament after so
strange manner, that it seemed it had been she, that was destened to death.
Whiles that these Ladies continued thus in their sorrows, the Knight Mendozza
take no rest by day or night, ne ceased continually to think upon the
misfortune of the Duchess. And after that he had well considered ye same, he
accused himself for failing her at that her great need, saying. Now do I well
know that I am for ever hereafter utterly unworthy to bear arms, or to have
ye honorable title of a Knight, since ye same order was given unto me, with
charge to succor afflicted persons, specially Ladies, whose force only
consists in tears. And yet nevertheless, I (like a caitise) have so
shamefully neglected my duty toward the chief person of the world, to
whom I am greatly bounden, that I dye a thousand times, that day wherein I
think upon the same. It behooves me then from henceforth to establish new
laws to my deliberation, and that I break the gate of mine ancient rigor:
loving much better to die in honor, pore, and disinherited, than to live,
puissant, unhappy, and a cowarde. Wherefore let fortune work her will. Since
the Duchess did forsake her country, to come to see me in her prosperity, I
may no less do now, but visit her in her adversity. Pressed and solicited
inwardly with this new desire determined with him self, hap what hap might,
to go to her rescue. And having given order to all that was necessary for the
defense of the City, putting his confidence in the fidelity of those that were
within: caused all his Captains to be called before him: Whom he did to
understand, how he was determined to go seek succor, to levy the siedge of
his enemies. During which time he constituted his nere kynsman, his lieutenaunt
general, and the next morning before the day appeared he gave a great al arm
to his enemies, wherein he escaped unknown. Being mounted upon a Ienet of
Spain and perceiving him self out of all peril, he took post horse, and made
such expedition that he arrived at Lions, where he provided himself of the
best armoure that he could get for money, and of two excellent good horses,
whereof one was a courser of Naples. And having gotten a certain unknown
Page, took his way to Thurin, where being arrived, he lodged him self in the
subvrbes, demanding of his host if their dwelt any Spaniards in the town, who
made him answer, that he knew none but one, which was a good old religious
father, that for the space of.xx. years was never out of Thurin, a man of
virtuous life, and well-beloved of all the Citizens, and had the charge of a
certain convent. Nevertheless his lodging was apart from his brethren, to
solace him self, and to avoid the incommoditie of his age. The Knight having
learned of his host the place were this good father dwelled, went with
diligence, betimes in the morning, to see him, and said unto him in the
Spanish tongue. Father God save you. I am a Spaniard comen hither into this
country for certain mine affairs, toward whom you might do a charitable
deed, if it would please you to suffer me to remain with you for four or
five days only, craving nothing else but lodging: For my servant shall
provide for other necessaries, which the good father willingly granted, much
maruelling at his goodly personage. And whiles the Servant was gone to the
town to bye victuals, the good father demauuded of him, of what country in
Spain he was, which the knight frankly confessed. And the fatherly man then
having his face all be sprent with tears said. Praised be the name of God,
that he has given me the grace before I die, to see so great a Lord in my
poor house, of whom I am both the subject and neighbor. And then he began to
tell him how for devotion he had forsaken his native country and had bestowed
himself there, the better to withdraw him from worldly vanity. Nevertheless
he said, that he knew his father, his mother, and his graundfather. Desiring
him to use his house at commandment, where he should be obeyed as if he were
in his own. And the^ the Lord of Mendozza said unto him, that he was
departed from Spain, of purpose to see France, and there to make his abode
for a time. And ye passing by Lions, one advertised him of the unfortunate
chance of the Duchess, whom if he thought to be innocent of the crime whereof
she was accused, he would defend her to the sheading of the last drop of his
blood. Nevertheless he would not hazard his life or soul, to defend her,
if he knew she were culpable. Which words the good man greatly allowed, saying
unto him. My Lord, touching her innocence, I believe there is at this day no
man living, but her self and the Earl, her accuser, that can judge. But of
one thing I can well assure you, that we here, do deem her to be one of the
best Princesses, that ever reigned in this country, specially for that about
a year past, she went on foot to S. James, with such denotio^ and humility,
that there was no man but pityed to see her so mortified for her soul health.
And to combat with the Earl of Pancalier, you seem unto me very young. For
besides the continual exercise yt he has always had in arms, he is withal
esteemed, to be one of the strongest, readiest and most redoubted knights of
all Lombardie. The victory notwithstanding is in the hand of God, and he can
give it, to whom he pleases: Which he made manifest in the young infant David,
against the monstrous Giant Golias. To whom the knight answered. Father I
have devised a way how to provide against the scruple of my conscience,
touching the doubt conceived by me, whether the combat that I shall take in
hand against the Earl of Pancalier, be just or not, which is, that I under
the color of confession, might understand of the Duchess, the truth of the
matter. And so likewise if you think good, I may cause my head and beard to be
shaven, and apparelling my self in such habit as you do wear, we may easily
(as I think) with the leave of her keepers, go into the Duchess chamber, to
exhort her to patience: for about this time of the year the day is expired.
Whereunto ye good Father without any great difficulty, consented, as well for
respect of his good zeal, as for his reverent duty to the nobility of the
stock whereof she came. And so all things provided, they went together, toward
the Castle of the Duchess. And he that then had seen the Knight Mendozza in
his Friars apparel, would uneaths have discerned him, to be so great a Lord
as he was. For besides the dissembled gestures, and countenaunces, wherewith he
knew right well how to behave him self, he was so lean and pore, as well for
the care of the battle he lost, and overthrow of his people, as for the
myssehay of the Duchess and the peril of his life at hand, by reason of the
combat between the Earl and him, that he resembled rather a holy Saint
Hierome, mortified in some desert, than a Lord, so noble and valiant as he
was. Arrived at the Castle, the old father addressed himself to the Guarde
and said. Masters because the time for the death of the miserable Duchess
does approach, we be come hither to give her such spiritual comfort, where
with God has inspired us, hoping that he will this day give us the grace to
induce her to dye patiently, to the intent that by loss of the body, her soul
may be saved. Whereunto they accorded willingly, and caused the chamber to be
opened unto the^. Those which were which her in the chamber went forth
incontinently, thinking that the Gouernoure had caused those good fathers to
come to hear the last confession of the poor Duchess, who was so sorrowefull
and pensife that she was forced to keep her bed: which came very well to pass.
For the knight Mendozza being nere to her bed, with his face toward her, so
counterfayted himself in the day, that he could not in any manner of wise be
known. And good old father Friar tarried in a corner of the chamber a far of,
that he might hear none of their talk. And as the Lord of Mendozza leaned him
upon her bedside, he said unto her in the Italian tongue, which was so
familiar to him, as the Spanish. Madame the peace of our Lord be with you.
Whereunto the Lady answered. Father why speak you of peace, sith I am in
continual war, deprived of all contentation, and do but attend the last
end of all my calamity, which is a most cruel and shameful death, without
desert. And then the Lord of Mendozza, who had consumed the most part of his
youth in good letters, said unto her. I believe Madame you be not ignorant that
miseries and tribulations which come upon people, fall not by accident or
fortune, but by the providence or dispensacion of God, before whom one little
sparrow only is not forgotten, as the prophet Amos does manifest unto us, when
he says: There is none evil in the City that I have not sent thither. Which
is also apparent in Job, whom the devil could not afflict, before he had
first obtained license of GOD. And it is necessary for you to know, that
tribulation and affliction be tokens of the fore chosen and elected people of
God, and the true marks of our salvation. So that if you consider the order of
all the Scriptures, since the beginning of the world until our time, you shall
find that those whom God has always best loved and cherished, he has
commanded to drink of the cup of his passion, and to be more afflicted than
others: examples whereof be common in the Scriptures. As when Abell was
afflicted by Caine his brother, Isaak by his brother Ismaell, Joseph by his
brethren, Dauide by Absolon his son, the children of Israel (the elect
people of God) by Pharao. Which things being profoundly considered by S. Paul,
he said. If we had not another hope in Jesus Christ, than in the life present,
we might well say that we were the most miserable of all others. And yet
moreover says he, it is little or nothing that we endure, in respect of that
which Jesus Christ has suffered. Who (although he he framed the whole work of
the world) was called the Carpenters son for preaching, he was sclaundered,
he was carried up to a mountain to be thrown down, he was called Glotton,
Dronkarde, lover of Publicanes and sinners, Samaritane, Seducer, Devil:
saying, that in the name of Beelzebub he did cast out Devils. But let us
consider Madame, a little further, what things were done unto him, he was naked
to clothe us, prisoner and bound to unbind us from the chain of the Devil,
made a sacrifice to cleanse us of all our inward filth, we do see that he
suffered his side to be opened, to close up Hell from us, we see his hands
which in so comely order made both Heaven and Earth for the love of us, pierced
with pricking nails, his head crowned with three sharped thorns to crown us
with Heavenly glory. Let us waygh that by his dolor came our joy, our health
grew of his infirmity, of his death was derived our life: and should we be
ashamed to have our head touched with a few thorns of trouble? Strengthen
your self then (Madame) in the name of God, and make you ready to receive
death in the name of him that was not ashamed to endure it for you. Is his
strong hand any thing weakened? Is it not in him to overthrow the fury of
your enemy, and so to humble your adversary yt he shall never be able to be
relieved? How many poor afflicted persons have there been seen to be
abandoned of all succor, whom he has beheld with his pitiful eye, and
restored to greater ease and contentacion, than ever they were in before?
Learn then from henceforth, to comfort your self in God, and say as the
great Doctor holy Ignatius said in his Epistle to the Romans. I desire that
the fire, the gallows, the beasts, and all the torments of the Devil might
exercise, their cruelty upon me, so as I may have fruition of my Lord God.
And after that the Knight had made an end of his consolation, the Duchess was
so rapt in contentation, that it seemed her soul had already tasted of the
celestial delights, and would fly even up into heaven. And then feeling her
self lightened like one that had escaped some furious tempest of the seas, she
began to confess her self unto him from point to point, without omitting any
thing of that which she thought might grieve her conscience. And when she came
to the accusation of the Earl, she prayed God not to pardon her sins, if she
had committed in deed or thought, any thing contrary to the duty of
marriage, except it were one dishonest affection that she had borne to a knight
of Spain, whom under pretense of a feigned devotion, she had visited in
Spain, not committing any thing saving good will which she bare unto him. Which
makes me think (quod she) that God being moved against mine hypocrisy, has
permitted this false accusation to be raised against me by the Earl of
Pancalier, which I will patiently suffer, since his will is so. Her confession
finished, she plucked of a rich Diamond which she had upon her finger saying.
Good father, albeith I have heretofore been a rich Princess as you know, yet
they have now taken away al my goods from me (this Diamond except) which my
brother the King of England gave me, when I was married to the Duke of Sauoie.
And because I cannot otherwise do you good, I give it unto you, praying you to
remember me in your prayers, and to keep it. For it is of a greater price than
you think, and may serve one day to supply the necessity of your convent. The
confession ended and the Diamond received, the two Friars returned home to
their conue^t. And so sone as they were arrived there, the Lord of Mendozza
said unto him. Father, now do I know certainly, that this pore woman is
innocent, wherefore I am resolved to defend her so long as life does last. And I
feel my self so touched and pressed in mind, that I think it long till I be
at the combat. Wherefore I pray you if it chance that fortune be contrary
unto me, after my death, make it to be openly known what I am, and chiefly
that the Duchess may understand it, for special purpose. And if it chance
that I escape with life, (which can not be but by the death of the Earl) be
secret unto me in these things which I have declared under the veil of
confession. The good father promised so to do. And having passed all that day
and night in prayers and supplicacions, he armed himself, and made ready his
courser. And when the dawning of the day began to appear, he went in his
armor to the gates of the city, and calling one of the Guard, said unto him.
Good fellow I pray theee go bid the Count of Pancalier to prepare him
self, to mayntaine the false accusation, which he has made against the
Duchess of Sauoie. And further tell him, that there is a knight here, that
will make him to deny that accusation before he part the field, and will in
the presence of all the people cut out that perjured tongue, which durst commit
such treason against an innocent Princess. This matter was in a moment
published throughout all the city, in such sort, that you might have seen the
Churches full of men and women, who prayed to God for the redemption of their
maistresse. During the time that ye Guard had done his Embassage, the Lord of
Mendozza went toward the pillar where the accusation was written, atte^ding
when the accuser should come forth. The Earl of Pancalier advertised hereof,
began incontinently to feel a certain remorse of conscience, which inwardly
gript him so near, that he endured a torment like to very death. And being
unable to discharge himself thereof, would willingly have wished that he had
never committed the same. Nevertheless to the intent he might not seem
slack, he sent word to the knight, that he should write his name upon the
pillar, to whom Mendozza made answer, that he might not know his name, but
the combat he would make him feel before the day went down. The Earl of
Pancalier made difficulty at the combat, if first and foremost he knew not the
name of him with whom he should have to do. The matter well advised, it was
clearly resolved by the Judges, that the statuts made no mention of the name,
and therefore he was not bound thereunto, but that the statute did expressly
favor the defendant, gyuing unto him the election of the armor, and semblably
it was requisite that the person accused, should be brought forth in the
presence of the two Champions. Which things understood by the Earl, albeit
that he trusted not his quarrel, yet making a virtue of necessitye, and not
unlearned in the order of such conflictes, forthwith armed himself, and came
into the place ordained for ye camp, where he found his enemy armed, in a
black armor, in token of mourning. Immediately after, they sent for the
Duchess, who ignorant of the matter, wondered much, when she understood there
was a knight in the field armed all in black, seeming to be a noble man, that
promised some great matter by his dexterity and bold countenance, and
would also maintain against the Earl of Pancalier, his accusation to be
false. The pore Duchess then not being able to imagine what he should be,
greatly troubled in her mind, and coming forth of the Castle, was conducted
in a litter covered with black cloth, accompanied with more than two hundred
Ladies and damsels, in semblable attire, unto the place, where the Judges, the
people, and the two Knights were, who did but attend her coming. And after
they had wayghted her going up to a little stage ordained for that purpose, the
Deputies, for the assurance of the camp, demanded of her these words,
saying. Madame For that you be accused of adultery by the Earl of Pancalier
here present, and the custom requires that you present a Knight with in the
year and day, by force of arms to try your right: are you determined to
accept him that is here present, and to repose your self upon him, both for
your fault and innocence? The Duchess answered, that she committed all her
right into the mercy of God, who knew the inward thoughts of her heart, and
to the manhood of the Knight, albeit she thought that she had never seen him.
And when she had ended those words, she fell down upon her knees, then lifting
up her eyes all blubbered with tears toward heaven, she said. O Lord God
which art the very verity it self, and know the bitterness that I feel in
my heart, to see my self falsely accused, show forth now the treasure of thy
grace upon me wretched Princess. And as thou did deliver Susanna from her
trouble, and Judith from Holosernes, deliver me from the hand of a Tirant. Who
like a Lion hungry for my blood, deuoureth both mine honor and life. And
having made an end of her prayer, she remained immovable as if she had been
in a trance. And now the Knight Mendozza, offended to see the Earl to
praunce his horse up and down the camp, making him to vaute and leap, with a
countenance very furious said unto him. Traitoure Count, because I am
certain that the accusation which thou have forged against this Princess, is
invented by the greatest villainy of the world, I do maintain here before al
these people, that thou have falsely accused her, and that thou lie in thy
Throat, in all that thou have contrived against her, and that ye have deserved
to be put into a sack, to be cast into ye river for yt murder that thou have
committed upon thy Nephewe, the innocent blood of whom, does now cry for
vengeance to be taken for thy sin before god. And scarce had he made an end
of his words, but ye Earl answered him with a meruellous audacity. Infamous
villain, which hidest thy name for fear lest thy vices should be known, thou
art now foully deceived by thinking to warrant her, who has offended against
the Duke her husband, by her whoredom and adultery. And for that thou have
parled so proudely, and wilt not be known, I can not otherwise think but that
thou art some one of her ruffians. And therefore I do mayntaine, that thou thy
self do lie, and that thou deseruest to be burnt in the same fire with her,
or else to be drawn with four horses by the cross paths of this town, to
serve for an example in the worlds to come, not only for all lascivious Ladies
and Da^sels, but also for such mischeuous whoremongers, as be like to thy
self. Incontinently after, the Harraulde of arms began to make the accustomed
cry, and the Knights to put their Lances in their restes, they let run their
Horses with such violence, that joining themselves, their shieldes, their
bodies and heads together, they brake their staves, even to their hard
Gauntlets, so roughlye, that they fell both down to the ground without
losing, nevertheless the raynes of the bridles. But the heat of the heart,
and desire to vanguish, made them readily to get up again, and having cast
away the troncheons of the staves, laid hands on their swords, and there
began so strange and cruel a stir between them, that they which were the
beholders were affighted to see them able to endure so much. For they were so
fleshed one upon another, and did so thick bestow their strokes without
breathing, that the lookers on confessed never to have seen any combat in
Piemonte between two single persons, so furious, nor better followed than that
of the Earl and of the Knight Mendozza. But the Spanish Knight encoraged with
the Justice of his quarrel, and the reward of his fight, seemed to redouble his
force. For even then when every man thought that power must needs fail him,
it was the hour wherein he did best behave himself. In such sort, that his
enemy, not being able any longer to endure his puissaunte strokes, being
wounded in diverse parts of his body, did now no more but defend himself,
and bear of the blows which were bestowed without intermission upon all the
parts of his body. Which the Spanish knight perceiving, desirous to make an
end of the combat, made so full a blow with all his force upon the top of his
helmet, that he wounded his head very sore. Wherwithall the heart of the Earl
began very much to faint, and staggering here and there like a dronken man or
troubled in his senses, was constrained to fall down from his horse. And then
the Lord of Mendozza dismounting himself, and taking hold upon the corpse of
his shield, plucked it so rudely to him that he ouerturned him on his other
side. Then with the pomel of his sword he did so swetely bumbast him, that he
made his helmet to fly of his head. And serting his foot upon his throat,
made as though with the point of his sword he would have killed him, saying.
Count, the hour is now come that thou must go make an account with God of
thine untruth and treason which thou have committed against the Duchess. Ah
sir knight (quod the Earl) have pity upon me, and kill me not I beseech thee
before I have a little bethought me of my conscience. Uillayne (quod the
Spaniarde) if I had any hope of thine amendment, I would willingly give thee
delay of life. But being a traitor as thou art, thou will never cease to
afflict innocents. Nevertheless if thou will acknowledge thy fault publicly,
and require pardon of the Duchess, I will willingly leave thee to the mercy of
the Duke, although that if I did observe the rigor of the law, I should
cause thee presently to receive the pain prepared for ye Duchess. To whom he
obeyed for safegarde of his life, and kneeling on his knees before the Duchess
in the presence of all the people made a long discourse of his love toward
her, of the repulse that she gave him, and that for revenge, he aided himself
with his Nephewe, thinking to overthrow her chastity. Finally, how he had
slain his Nephew, to induce the Duke to judge her to be culpable of ye
adulterry. And then tourning his face toward the Duchess, said unto her.
Madame it behooves me to confess yt the loss of this one life is to little to
pay the tribute of the curelesse fault that I have committed against you. Yet
since it is so, I beseech you by preferring pity and mercy before the rigor of
your justice, you will permit that I may live yet certain days to make a
view of my life paste, and to provide for the scruple of my conscience. Then
new joy approached to garnishe the spirit of the Duchess, and both the soul
and the heart began to show themselves joyful, in such wise, that she was a
long time without power to speak, and did nothing else but join her hands
and lift up her eyes to Heaven, saying. O Lord God, praised be thy holy name,
for that thou have caused the bright beams of thy divinity, to shine upon the
darkness, of my sorrowful life, enforcing so well the mind of this traitor
the murderer of mine honor by the pricks of thy rigorous justice, openly to
acknowledge before all men, the injury that he has done me. And without
speaking any more words, she turned her face for fear lest she should make him
any other answer. Then all the people began to laud and magnify God, and to
sing Psalms for joy of the deliuerau^ce of their Duchess, who was brought
back and reconducted into the city, with so great triumph, as if she had made
a second entry. Whilst these things were a doing, the deputies for the
surety of the camp caused the wounded Earl to be borne to prison. The knight
Mendozza stale secretly away, and after that he had in the next village
dressed certain small wounds that he had received in the combat, he took his
way to Spain. In ye mean time, the Duchess caused him to be sought for in
every place, but it was not possible to know any more news of him, than if he
had been never seen. Whereat being grieved beyond measure, she made her moan to
Emilia, to know wherefore he should so absent himself from her. Madame (quod
Emilia) he is sure some French knight or else it may be some kinsman of your
own, who is come out of England into these parts for certain other
affairs. And fearing least he should be stayed here, will not be known,
reserving the manifestacion of himself til another time more apt for his
purpose. Let him be what he may be (said the Duchess) for so long as my soul
shall remain within my body, I will do him homage during my life. For the
which I am so duly bound debtour unto him, as never subject was to his
sovereign Lord. In this time, whilst these matters went thus at Thurin, the
Duke of Sauoie, who was Lieutenant general for the King against the Almaines,
encountering with his enemies in a skirmishe, by fortune was slain. Whereof
the King of England being advertised, and specially of the delivery of his
sister, desirous to have her about him, sent for her to marry her again, and
to leave unto her the entier government of his household. And to grateste her
at her first arrival, he gave the rule of his daughter unto her, which was of
the age of.xvi. or.xvij. years, with whom by certain means there was a
marriage practiced for the Prince of Spain.

Let us now leave the Duchess to live in honor with her brother, and return
we to the Lord of Mendozza, who being arrived near unto his city, understood
incontinently that they which had besiedged it had levied their camp. For that
they of the town had so well done their endeavor, that not only their enemies
were not able to enter: But also they had in a certain skirmish taken the Lord
Ladulphe their Chieftaine prisoner, who was yet to that present detained:
because means were made for peace to be concluded on all sides. Nevertheless
they durst do nothing without him. Whereat the Lord of Mendozza, being
replenished with great joy to see his affairs prosper so well in all parts
entered the city. And the articles of the peace communicated unto him, he
found them very profitable for him. And being concluded and approved by him,
he began to solace himself in his own house, without taking care for any thing
save only from thenceforth to think by what mean he might go to see the
Duchess, and recount unto her the issue of his affairs. But fortune prepared
him a more ready occasion than he thought of. For the King of Spain being
advertised of certain talks that had been bruted of the marriage of his son
with the daughter of the King of England, determined with speed; to send a
great company of noble men thither, to demand his daughter in marriage. Of
the which the Lord of Mendozza, as well for his nobility, as for the
knoweledge which he had in languages, and other good disciplines, was elected
chief, with special commission to accord the marriage in case it should so
please the King. The Ambassadors used such expedition, that they arrived at
London where the King for ye present made his abode. Who advertised of their
coming, gave commandment to the Princess his daughter, and to the Duchess
his sister, to prepare themselves to receive a great company of Lords of
Spain, which that day would come to his court to treat of the aforesaid
marriage. And God knows if ye Ladies spared ought of that which they thought
might augment their beauty. The King also for his part, to do them more honor,
went to meet them in person, and at their arriual, gave them a most friendlye
welcome. But sodaynely as they presented themselves to do their reverence to
the Ladies: the Duchess who incontinently knew the Lord of Mendozza, began so
to detest him, that she was not able to rule her self, but (with a sudden
mutacion of color) she must needs abandon the company. The Lord of
Mendozza, knowing the original of her grief, left not his duty undone
toward the Princess, and other Ladies, which accompanied her, dissembling to
have taken no regard to thabsence of the Duchess. And Emilia, who had followed
her mystresse into the chamber, fearing least there were some sudden
mischaunce happened, demanded of her, wherefore she was retired from a company
so honorable: and said that she did great wrong to her own estimation. To
whom the Duchess (with extreme choler) made answer. Why Emilia, think
thou that I have the heart to suffer my hand to be kyssed, by that most
traiterous and cowardely Knight of the world, who made no conscience to
abandon me in the most greatest necessity of my life? whereas I contrary to
the duty of all the laws of honor, and contrary to my sex, did so much
abase my self, as to visit him in Spain. Nay, rather my days shall cease
their course, than mine affection shall ever revive in him: He shall never
receive any other favor of me, but as of his most cruel and mortal enimye.
And then Emilia smiling, said unto her. In good earnest Madame, I thought that
the sharpness of your imprisonment, with the other torments paste, which you
have endured, might have put all these matters quite in oblinion, and would so
have mortifyed you, that you had wholly lost all desire of revenge. But so
far as I can perceive, I am deceived of mine account, seeing that suddenly, so
sone as you beheld the knight Mendozza, you began to fly, as if your ghostly
enemy had come before you, in his most hideous and horrible form. Yet could
not Emilia persuade her, to show her self abroad before dinner, till the King
sent for her, with word that if she came not, he would himself fetch her.
And then a little shamefast color, began to renew her Alablaster cheeks,
which rendered her so ruddie and fair, that the Spaniardes confessed, never to
have seen in any part of the world, where they had been; one so fair and
beautiful a wyddowe. The tables covered for dinner, the king took his place,
and for their more honorable entertaynement, caused them to be set at his own
table: and made the Lord of Mendozza, to be placed face to face with the
Duchess his sister: Who was so inflamed and moved with choler, that she durst
not lift up her eyes for fear least upon the sudden she should be perceived:
Which eyes sparkling sometimes with great ire, resembled properly two stars
of the night, that shoot forth their brightness upon the earth, when al
things be in silence. And all this time the Lord of Mendozza, conceived such
pleasure at these pretty toys, that he would not have changed his joy for the
best city in all England. And as the Duchess in this order did firmly fix
her eyes, she saw by fortune a rich Diamonde that Mendozza ware upon his
finger: Whereupon having oftentimes cast her eyes, she sodaynely knew that it
was the very same that she had given to the good father that confessed her at
Thurin, the day before she was leadde to the pillar: and began then to imagine
with her self, how it might be that he could come by the same. And not
knowing what to say immediately after she had dyned, and the tables taken up,
she caused Master Appian her Physician to be called unto her: whom she desired
to know of the Lord of Mendozza, by what means he came by the Diamonde that
he ware upon his finger. Which Appian did. And after he had talked with the
knight of certain common matters, he said unto him. My Lord, you have a very
fair Diamonde theee, which as I think, I have seen before this time,
wherefore Sir I pray you tell me where you had it. To whom the Lord of
Mendozza answered in laughing wise. Master Appian, where I had the ring, is
to secret for you to know, but tell my Lady the Duchess, that the knowledge
thereof only appartayneth unto her. Which answer Appian declared to ye
Duchess. And albeit that she took no great pleasure in the answer: Yet
nevertheless very desirous to understand the truth, she repaired to the
knight which the same time walked alone in a Gallerie, who after he had kissed
her hands, began to discourse of his fortunes past, declaring unto her, that
he repented, of the refusal that he made to Master Appian for her succor,
and how within a while after he rode to Thurin: adding the devise whereby he
had heard her confession: and how the Diamonde came into his hands, putting
her in remembrance from word to word, of all his talk with her, during the
time that he was in Friars weed, then finally his victory against the Earl,
his secret flight, and all the whole as before has been declared. Whereat the
Duchess no less abashed than rapt with joy and admiration, fell down in a
swoune between his arms, holding her mouth so fast closed against his, that
it seemed she would draw the soul out of his body, to join and unite with
hers. And after she had remained a while in this trance, she cried out. O pore
heart so long time plagued. Which have for the space of a year now passed,
bene-tossed with so many tempests and diverse assaults of Fortune. Receive at
this present the medicine apt for thy health, since thou enioyest him
between thine arms, that by the price of his blood, valiant force, and extreme
trauayles, has raised thee from death to life. Let fortune from henceforth do
her will in that she is able to devise against me. And yet will I for this
only benefit, confess my self this day to be eternally bound unto her.
Madame (quod the Knight) I pray you let us not renew the memory of our former
griefs: wherein if by any mean, I have done you good, I was but the organe or
instrumente thereof. For God, who is the righter of all wrong, did never suffer
justice without his due vengeance, how long so ever he tarried. So (you not
being in any wise culpable) if I had never enterprised the combat whereunto I
was bound: Our lord God would have raised some other to achieue the same. Well
then my Lord ( q the Duchess) since it pleases you not, that I renew my
dolors paste, which have taken end by your mean: I shall humbly beseech you
to excuse me, if this day I have not given you that honor and good
entertainment which you deserved: Assuring you that before you shall depart
this country, I will make you amends according unto your own discretion.
Madame (quod the Knight) for all the wrongs that ever you did unto me, (if
they may be called wrongs) the courtesy, favor and gentleness which already I
have received, does at one instant acquit and recompense. Neuerlesse if it may
please you to receive me for your second husband, since it has pleased God to
call your first out of this life into another: that is and shall be the
fullness of all the felicity that I look for in this world. My Lord Mendozza
(said the Duchess) the recompense which you demand of me, is very little in
respect of the amends and satisfaction which I ought to make you. But of one
thing I can well assure you, that if I had the whole world at my
commandment, and that I were the best Princess of the earth, in all kind of
beauties and gifts of grace, I would willingly submit my self unto you, in
consideration of your worthynesse, and benefits bestowed upon me with so
willing a mind, as presently I do yield unto your request. And I must needs
confess, that I am now greatly bound to Fortune, that has delivered me into
your hands, from whom I hope never to be severed, so long as my soul shall
rest within my body: being predestined as I believe, to no other end, but to
serve and obey you. And as they thought to make a longer discourse of their
talk, Emilia told them, that the King was in counsel, and that the other Lords
of Spain attended his coming. Who with his company, being come before the
king, and having done their reverence unto him, he began to declare his charge,
and how they were of purpose sent to his majesty, in the behalf of the King
of Spain, to demauud ye Lady his daughter in marriage, for his son ye prince
of Spain: Which he had chosen as well to have his alliance, (a matter by him
only desired) as for the beauty and good grace, for the which she was
specially recommended. And if so be, he had willed to have chosen his match
elsewhere, that there was not at that day, any Prince in all Europa, that
would not willingly have accorded unto him. To whom the king answered, My
friends, I feel my self so much honored, for that it has pleased the King
to send unto me, as if he had not prevented me, I had thought to have sent
unto him for the same purpose. And albeit that, herein he has vanquished me in
civility and courtesy: yet I will not fail if I can to surmount him in
amity. For he has bound me during life, in such wise, that he and my Lord
his son, may boldly vaunte themselves, to have a King of England and a
realm, from henceforth at their commandment. The marriage concluded, ye
Duchess diligently made suit to talk with the king alone, to communicate unto
him, the agreement between the Lord of Mendozza and her. And perceiving that
the king was gone into his chamber, she went unto him, and being alone with
him, having her face all bedewed with tears, kneeling, she said unto him. My
Lord, when I consider my miseries past, and the cruel assaults yt I have
received of Fortune, being not only committed to the mercy of a most cruel
prison: but (which is more) at the very last point of a shameful death: I am
so afflicted, that the only remembrance of those miseries terrifieth me, and
causes a certain extreme bitterness to rise in my heart. And when on the
other side, I think of the great goodness that almighty God has showed unto
me, by stretching forth his mighty hand to deliver me out of that peril:
chiefly to make me tryumphe, over the death of mine enemy. I feel such
comfort of mind, that all the delights of the world, be but griefs, in
respect of the joy, pleasure and contentacion, that I receive. Wherein nothing
offends me so much as hitherto that I have not acknowledged the benifit
received of him, who was elected of God to be my deliverer: nevertheless sir,
by your only word, you may both satisfy him, and content me, yea and (as it
were) prolong the days of my life. The King, who loved his sister no less
than his daughter, seeing her pitiful complaynt and tears, and to speak with
such affection, took her up, and holding her by the arm, said unto her. Dear
sister and friend, if I have not to this present, satisfied him that was the
cause of your deliverance, I can not be accused of ingratitude, for that
hitherto I have not known him, ne yet your self does know what he is, (as you
have oftentimes told me:) But of one thing you may be assured: and I swear
unto you at this present, by my Scepter, that, so sone as I shall understand
what he is, I will use him in such wise, as he shall think himself satisfied
and contented, though it did cost me the one half of my kingdom. For the
pleasure which he has done unto you, byndeth not you alone, but me also, to be
partaker of that band, both our honors being jointly bound thereunto. Alas
my Lord (said the Duchess) it is the knight Mendozza, chief of this
Ambassade, to whom, if it please you to give your consent that we two might
marry, all ancient bands and debtes shall remain extinct, and so, by a
small reward, you shall restore life to two persons, almost dead, for the
excessive love which one bears to the other. And therwithall she began to
declare to the King, thoriginall and process of the whole discourse. First the
voyage of the sister of Mendozza into Piemont, her own peregrination to S.
James, the honest amity between her and Mendozza the message of master Appian
to Mendozza, his refusal of that request, his return after to Thurin, her
confession, the Diamonde known again, finally, how all the whole had passed
between them, the counterfayte devotion to Saint James, only reserved) which
for her honors sake she would not tell him. The king understanding this
strange discourse, was so rapt with joy, and appalled with gladness, that he
could not for a long time, make any answer. When his passion was moderated,
he said to his sister. But be you well assured, that he will receive you for
his wife? Yea my Lord (quod she) I ought well to be assured of it, since he
himself has made the request. And truly (qoud the king,) God forbid that I
should be the cause, to break so holy an accord. For if the Lord of Mendozza
were inferior in quality, nobility, and goods, than he is: yet has he so
much done, both for you and me, as we may not honestly refuse him. How much
more then be we bound, to him: being a great Lord as he is, issued of noble
and famous families of Spain, rich in goods, and having hazarded his life
for the conservation of your honor: and there withal seeks mine alliance.
Go your ways, (dear sister and friend) go your ways, make much of him, and
entreat him, as you think best. And when I have walked two or three tornes
here, I will come unto him, to communicate more amply of these matters. Scarce
had the Duchess leisure to advertise the Lord of Mendozza of that which was
concluded between the king and her, but he came down into the Hall, where the
most part of the Spanishe Gentlemen walked, and with a very joyful countenance
went to the knight. To whom he said. My Lord Mendozza, I pray you to
embrace me. For, so far as I see, I have a better interest in you than I
thought. And the Lord of Mendozza, thinking to embrace him, his knee upon the
ground, was immediately desired to stand up. Whom the king cleping about the
neck, said unto him, so loud that every man might hear. Sir knight, by the
God of heaven, since that I might command in the realm of England, I have not
entertained gentleman, nor Prince, to whom I have been more endebted than to
you: nor never was there any dearer unto me, than you, for the great gratitude
and kindness, wherewith you have bound me, whereby I shall not from henceforth
be satisfied, until I have in some thing acknowledged the bond wherein I am
bound unto you. When he had spoken those words, he began to declare from
point to point, in the presence of all the assembly, the contents of the whole
before declared history. Whereat, there was none in all the company, but that
was greatly astonned at the prudence of Mendozza, by so well dissembling, and
accomplishing so great enterprises, without making them manifest. And the King
of England, commanded that the marriage of him and his sister should be
published through out his realm, that all his nobility might be assembled.
And for his greater honor, the King did from thenceforth constitute him his
high Cunstable of England, and reposed himself in him, as upon a firm
pillar, for the administration of the wayghtiest affairs of his realm. And
the marriage solemnized and consummate with the Duchess, he returned into
Spain, to accompany the Prince into England, whose marriage was celebrated at
London, in the King of Englandes daughter, with such pomp, and solempnitie,
as semblable Princes be commonly accustomed to do in like cases.

The Countess of Salesburie
A King of England, loved the daughter of one of his noble men, which was
Countess of Salesburie, who after great suit to achieue that he could not
win, for the entire love he bare unto her, and her great constancy, made her
his Queen and wife.

The.xlvj. Novel.
This History ensuing, describing the perfect figure of woma^hode, the
natural quality of Love incensing the hearts indifferently of all Natures
children, the lively image of a good condicioned Prince, the zealous love of
parents, and the glorious reward yt chastity co^duceth to her imbracers, I
deem worthy to be annexed to the former Novel, wherein as you have heard, be
contained the strange adventures of a fair and innocent Duchess. Whose life
tried like gold in ye furnace, glittereth at this day, like a bright starry
planet, shining in the firmament with most sple^dent brightness above all the
rest, to the eternal praise of feminine kind. And as a noble Duke of Sauoie,
by heat of Loves rage, pursued the loving trace of a King of Englandes sister
married into Spain, even so a renowned and most victorious Prince (as the
Aucthor of them both affirms through the fury of that passion, which (as
Apuleus says) in the first heat is but small, but abounding by increase, does
set all men on fire) makes earnest suit by discourse of words, to a Lady her
self, a Countess, and Earls daughter, a beautiful and fair wight, a
creature incomparable, the wife of a noble man his own subject: who seeing her
constant forte to be impregnable, after pleasant suit and mild request,
attempteth by undermining to invade, and when with siege prolixe, he perceives
no ingenious devise can achieue that long and paynefull work, he threateth
might and main, dire and cruel assaults, to win and get the same, and
last of all surrendered into his hands, and the prisoner crying for mercy, he
mercifully is contented to mitigate his conceived rigor, and pitifully to
release the Lady, whom for her womanly stoutnesse and coragious constancy, he
imbraceth and entertaigneth for his own. This great and worthy king, by the
first view of a delicate Lady, through the sap of Love soaked into his noble
heart, was transported into many passions, and rapt into infinite pangues,
which afterward, bredde him great disquietnesse. This worthy Prince (I say)
who before that time like an Alexandre, was able to conquer and gain whole
kingdoms, and made all France to quake for fear, at whose approach the gates
of every City did fly open, and fame of him provoked each Frenchmans knee to
bow, whose helmet was made of manhodes trampe, and mace well steeled with
stout attemptes, was by the weakest stay of dame Natures frame, a woman:
(shaped with no visage stern or ugly look) affrighted and appalled, whose
heart was armed with no lethall sword or deadly lance, but with a Curat of
honor and weapon of womanhode, and for all his glorious conquests, she durst by
singular co^bat to give refusal to his face. Which singular perseueration in
defense of her chastity inexpugnable, esclarisheth to the whole flock of
womankynde, the bright beams of wisdom, virtue, and honesty. No prayers,
entreaty, suplication, tears, sobbes, sighs, or other like human actions,
poured forth of a Princess heart, could withdraw her from the bounds of
honesty. No promise, present, practice, devise, suit, friend, parent, letter,
or counselor, could make her to straye out of the limits of virtue. No
threate, menace, rigor, fear, punishment, exile, terror, or other cruelty,
could divert her from the siedge of constancy. In her youthly time, till her
marriage day, she delighted in virginity, From her marriage day during her wydow
state, she rejoiced in chastity. The one she conserved like a hardy Cloelia,
the other she kept like a constant Panthea. This notable history therefore I
have purposed to make common, as well for encouragement of Ladies to embrace
Constancy, as to imbolden the^ in ye refusal of dishonest suits, for which if
they do not acquire semblable honor, as this Lady did, yet they shall not be
frustrate of the due reward incident to honor, which is, fame, and immortal
praise. Gentlemen may learn by the success of this discourse, what torments
be in Love, what travails in pursuit, what passions like ague fittes, what
disconueniences, what lost labor, what playntes, what griefs, what unnatural
attemptes be forced. Many other notorious examples be contained in the same, to
the great comfort and pleasure, as I trust, of the well advised reader. And
although the aucthor of the same, perchance has not rightly touched the
propre names of the Aucthors of this tragedy, by perfect appellations: as
Edward the third for his eldest son Edward ye Prince of Wales (who as I
read in Fabia^) married the Countess of Salesburie, which before was Countess
of Kent, and wife unto sir Thomas Holand: and whose name, (as Polidore says)
was Jane, daughter to Edmund Earl of Kent, of whom the same Prince Edward,
begat Edward that dyed in his childish years, and Richard that afterward was
King of England the second of that name, and for that she was kin to him,
was deuorced, whose said father married Phillip, daughter to ye Earl of
Henault, and had by her.vij. sons: And AElips for ye name of ye said
Countess, being none such amongs our vulgar terms, but Frosard reme^breth
her name to be Alice, which in deed is common amongs us: and the Castle of
Salesberic where there is none by that name, upon the Frontiers of Scotland
albeit the same Frosard does make mention of a castle of ye Earl of
Salesburies, given unto him by Edward the third when he was Sir William
Mountague, and married the said Lady Alice, for his service and prowess
against the Scotts: and Rosamburghe for Roxboroughe: and that the said
Edward when he saw that he could not by love and other persuasions attain the
Countess, but by force, married the same Countess, which is altogether untrue,
for that Polydore and other aucthors, do remember but one wife that he had,
which was the said virtuous Queen Phillip, with other like defaultes: yet the
grace of the History for all those errors is not diminished. Whereof I thought
good to give this advertisement. And waying with my self that by the
publishing hereof, no dishonor can redound to the illustre race of our noble
Kings and Princes, ne yet to the blemishing of the fame of that noble king,
eternized for his victories and virtues in the ancient annals, Chronicles and
monuments, foreign and domestical, (because all natures children be thrall and
subject to the infirmities of their first parents,) I do with submission
humbly refer the same, to the judgment and correction of them, to whom it
shall appertain. Which being considered, the Novel does begin in this form
and order.

THere was a King of England named Edward, which had to his first wife, the
daughter of the Count of Henault, of whom he had children, the eldest whereof
was called also Edward, the renowned Prince of Wales, who besides Poictiers
subdued ye french men, took John the French King prisoner, and sent him into
England. This Edward father of the Prince of Wales, was not only a capital
enemy of the French men, but also had continual wars with the Scotts his
neighbors, and seeing himself so disquieted on every side, ordained for his
Lieutenant upon the frontiers of Scotland, one of his captains, named William
Lord Montague. To whom because he had fortified Roxboroughe, and addressed
many enterprises against the enemies, he gave the Earldom of Salesburie, and
married him honorably with one of the fairest Ladies of England. Certain
days after, King Edward sent him into Flaundres, in the company of the Earl
of Suffolk, where Fortune was so contrary, that they were both taken
prisoners, by the French men, and sent to the Louure at Paris. The Scotts
hearing tell of their discomfiture, and how the marches were destitute of a
governor, they speedely sent thither an army, with intent to take the
Countess prisoner, to raise her Castle and to make booty of the riches that
was there. But the Earl of Salesburie before his departure, had given so good
order, that their success was not such as they hoped. For they were so lively
repelled by them that were within, that not able to endure their fury, in
stead of making their approches, they were constrained to go further of. And
having intelligence by certain spies, that the King of England was departed
from London, with a great army, to come to succor the Countess, perceiving
that a far of, they were able to do little good, they were fame shortly to
retire home again to their shame. King Edward departed from London, trauayling
by great iourneyes with his army toward Salesberic, was aduertized, that the
Scotts were discamped, and fled again into Scotland. Albeit they had so
spoiled the Castle in many places, that the marks there, gave sufficient
witness, what their intent and meaning was. And although the King had
thought to return back again upon their retire, yet being aduertized of the
great battrie, and of the hot assault that they had given to the Castle, he
went forth to visit the place. The Countess whose name was AElips,
understanding of the kings coming, causing al things to be in so good
readiness, as ye shortness of the time could serve, furnished her self so
well as she could with a certain number of Gentlewomen and soldiers that
remained, to issue forth to meet the King, who besides her natural beauty,
for the which she was recommended above all the Ladies of her province, was
enriched with the furniture of virtue and courtesy. Which made her so
incomparable, that at one instant, she ravished ye hearts of all the Princes
and Lords that did beheld her, in such wise, that there was no talk in all
the army, but of her graces and virtue, and specially of her excellent and
surpassing beauty. The king having made reverence unto her, after he had well
viewed al her gestures and countenaunces, thought that he had never seen a
more goodlier creature. Then rapt with an incredible admiration he said unto
her. Madame Countess, I do believe, that if in this attire and furniture
wherein you now be, accompanied with so rare and excellent beauty, ye had been
placed upon one of the rampires of your Castle, you had made more breaches with
the looks and beams of your sparkling eyes, in the hearts of your enemies,
than they had been able to have done in your Castle, with their thundering
Ordinance. The Countess somewhat shamefast and abashed, to hear her self so
greatly praised of a Prince so great, began to blushe and taint with roseall
color, the whiteness of her alablaster face. Then lifting up her bashefull
eyes, somewhat toward the king, she said unto him. My soueraygne Lord, your
grace may speak your pleasure. But I am well assured, that if you had seen
the number of shot, which by the space of.xij. hours were bestowed so thick
as hayle, upon every part of the Forte, you might have judged what good will
the Scotts did bear unto me and my people. And for my self I am assured,
that if I had made proof of that which you say, and submitted my self to
their mercy, my body now had been dissolved into dust. The king astonned
with so sage and wise an answer, changing his mind, went toward the
Castle: where after interteignement and accustomed welcome, he began by little
and little, to feel himself attached with a new fire. Which the more he
labored to resist, the more it inflamed. And feling this new mutacion in
himself, there came into his mind, an infinite nu^bre of matters, balancing
between hope and fear, sometimes determining to yield unto his passions, and
sometimes thinking clearly to cut them of, for fear least by committing
himself to his affections, the urgent affairs of the wars, wherewith he was
inuolued, should have ill success. But in the end vanquished with Love, he
purposed to prove the heart of the Countess, and the better to attain the
same, he took her by the hand, and prayed her to show him the commodities of
the Forteresse. Which she did so well, and with so good grace, interteigning
him all that while with infinite talk of diverse matters, that the little
griftes of Love which were scarcely planted, began to grow so far, as the
roots remained engraven in the depth of his heart. And the King not able any
longer to endure such a charge in his mind, pressed with grief, devised by
what means he might enjoy her, which was the cause of his disquiet. But the
Countess seeing him so pensife, without any apparaunt occasion, said unto him.
Sir I do not a little marvel, to see you reduced into these alterations. For
(me think) your grace is maruellously changed with in these two or three hours,
that your highness vouchsaued to enter into this Castle for my succor and
relief in so good time, that all the days of my life, both I and mine be
greatly bound unto you, as to him which is not only content eliberallie to
have bestowed upon us, the goods which we possess, but also by his
generositie, does co^serue and defend us from the incursions of the enemy.
Wherein your grace does deserve double praise, for a deed so charitable. But I
cannot tell nor yet devise, what should be the occasion that your highness is
so pensife and sorrowful, sith without great loss on your part, your enemies
understanding of your stout approach, be retired, which ought, as I suppose, to
drive away the melancholy from your stomach, and to revoke your former joy, for
so much as victory acquired without effusion of blood, is always most
noble and acceptable before God. The King hearing this Aungelles voice, so
amiably pronouncing these words, thinking that of her own accord she came to
make him merry, determined to let her understand his grief, upon so convenient
occasion offered. Then with a trembling voice he said unto her. Ah Madame, how
far be my thoughts far different from those which you do think me to
have, I feel my heart so oppressed with care, that it is impossible to tell you
what it is, howheit the same has not been of long continuance, being attached
there withal, since my coming hither, which troubles me so sore, that I
cannot tell whereupon well to determine. The Countess seeing the King thus
moved, not knowing the cause why, was uncertain what answer to make. Which
the king perceiving, said unto her, fetching a deep sigh from the bottom of
his stomach. And what say you Madame thereunto, can you give me no remedy?
The Countess, which never thought that any such dishonestie could take place
in ye kings heart, taking things in good part, said unto him. Sir, I know not
what remedy to give you, if first you do not discover unto me the grief. But
if it trouble you, that the Scottish king has spoiled your country, the loss
is not so great, as wherewith, a prince so mighty as you be, need to be
offended: since by the grace of God, the vengeance lies in your hand, and
you may in time chasten him, as at other times you have done. Whereunto, the
king seeing her simplicity, answered. Madame the beginning of my grief rises
not of that, but my wound rests in the inward part of my heart, which
pricketh me so sore, that if I desire from henceforth to prolong my life, I
must open the same unto you, reserving the cause thereof, so secret that none
but you and I must be partakers. I must now then confess unto you, that in
coming to your Castle, and casting down my head to behold your celestial
face, and the rest of the graces, wherewith the Heavens have prodigally endewed
you, I have felt (unhappy man as I am) such a sudden alteration, in all the
most sensible parts of my body, that knowing my forces diminished, I can not
tell to whom to make my complaint of my liberty lost (which of long time I
have so happyly preserved) but only to you, that like a faithful keeper and
only Treasorer of my heart, you may by some shining beam of pity, bring
again to his former mirth and joy, that which you desire in me: and by the
contrary, you may procure to me a life more painful and grievous, than a
thousand deaths together. When he had ended these words, he held his peace,
to let her to speak, attending none other thing by her answer, but the last
decree either of death or life. But the Countess with a gravity, conformable
to her honesty and honor, without other moving, said unto him. If any other
besides your grace, had been so forgetful of himself to enter in these
terms, or to use such talk unto me, I know what should be mine answer,
and so it might be, that he should have occasion not to be well contented, but
knowing this your attempt to proceed rather from the pleasantness of your
heart, than for other affection, I will believe from henceforth, and persuade
my self, that a Prince so renowned and gentle as you be, does not think, and
much less mean, to attempt any thing against mine honor, which is a thousand
times dearer unto me than life. And I am persuaded, that you do not so little
esteem my father, and my husband, who is for your service prisoner in the
hands of the French men, our mortal enemies, as in their absence to procure
unto them such defamation and slander. And by making this request, your grace
does swerve from the bounds of Honesty very far, and you do great injury
to your fame, if men should know what terms you do use toward me. In like
manner, I purpose not to violate the faith, which I have given to my husband,
rather I intend to keep the same unspotted, so long as my soul shall be
carried in the Chariot of this mortal body. And if I should so far forget my
self, as willingly to commit a thing so dishonest, your grace ought for the
loyal service of my father and husband toward you, sharply to rebuke me,
and to punish me according to my deserte. For this cause (most dradde
sovereign Lord) you which are accustomed to vanquishe and subdue other, be
now a conqueror over your self, and thoroughly bridle that concupiscence (if
there be any) under the raines of Reason, that being quenched and overcome,
they may no more revive in you, and having lively resisted the first assaults,
the victory is but easy, which shall be a thousand times more glorious and
gainefull for you, than if you had conquered a kingdom. The Countess had
scarce made an end of her tale, but one came to tell them that the Tables were
covered for dinner, the King well fed with Love, dyned for that time very
soberlye, and not able to eat but upon amorous dishes, did cast his lokes
inconstantly here and there, and still his eyes threw the last look upon that
part of the table, where the Countess satte, meaning thereby to extinguishe
the boiling flames, which incessantly did burn him, howbeit by thinking to
cool them, he further plondged himself therein. And wandering thus in diverse
cogitations, the wise answer that the Countess made, like a vaunte curreur,
was continually in his remembrance, and was well assured of her invincible
chastity. By reason whereof, seeing that so hard and enterprise, required a
longer abode, and that a heart so chaste, could not so quickly be removed from
purpose, careful on the other side, to give order to the weighty affairs of
his realm, disquieted also on every side, through the turmoile of wars,
determined to depart the next day in the morning, reserving till another time
more convenient, the pursuit of his Love. Having taken order for his departure,
in ye morning he went to seek the Countess, and taking his leave of her, he
prayed her, to think better of the talk made unto her the day before, but
above all, he besought her to have pity upon him. Whereunto the Countess
answered, that not only she prayed God incessantly to give him victory over
his outward enemies, but also grace, to tame that carnal passion, which did
so torment him. Certain days after that King Edward was arrived at London,
which was the place of his ordinary abode, the Countess of Salesburie was
advertised, that the Earl her husband, being out of prison, consumed with
grief and sickness, died by the way homewardes. And because they had no
children, the Earldom returned to ye King, which first gave the same unto
him. And after she had lamented the death of her husband the space of many
days, she returned to her fathers house, which was Earl of Warwick. And for
so much as he was one of the Kings privy Counsel, and the most part of the
affairs of the realm passed by his advise and counsel, he continued at
London, that he might be more nere unto the Kings person. The King aduertized
of the coming of the Countess, thought that fortune had opened a way to bring
his enterprise to desired effect, specially for that the death of her
husband, and the witness of his earnest good will, would make her more
tractable. The king seeing all thing (as he thought) to succeed after his
desire, began to renew his first affections, seeking by all means to practice
the good will of the Countess, who then was of the age of.xxvi. years.
Afterward he ordained many triumphs at the Tilte and Torney, Maskes,
Momeries, feasts, banquets, and other like pastimes, whereat Ladies
accustomably do assemble, who made much of them all, and secretly talked with
them. Notwithstanding he could not so well disguise and counterfeit his
passions, but that he still showed himself to bear best good will to the
Countess. Thus the king could not use such discretion in love, but that from
his secret fire, some evident flames did issue out: But the Countess which was
a wise and courteous Lady, did easily perceive, how the king by changing the
place, had not altered his affection, and that he still prosecuted his talk
begone at Salesberic. She despising all his amorous countenaunces, continued her
firm and chaste mind. And if it chanced that sometimes the king, made more
of her, than discretion required, suddenly might have been discried a certain
palenesse in her face, which declared the little pleasure that she took in his
toys, with a certain rigor appearing, that yielded to the king, an assured
testimony that he labored in vain. Nevertheless she, to cut of all means
of the Kings pursuit, kept still her fathers house, showing her self, in no
place where the king might see her. The king offended, seeing himself deprived
and banished her presence, whom he esteemed as the comfort of his life, made
his secretary privy to the whole matter, whose fidelity he had well proved in
matters dangerous, with mind to pursue her by other way, if it chanced that
she persisted in her wonted rigor and refusal. Howbeit before he proceeded any
further, since he could not secretly talk with her, he purposed to send her a
letter, the Tenor whereof insueth.

MAdame,
if you please by good advise to consider the beginning of my Love, the
continuance of the same, and then the last issue whereunto it is brought, I am
assured that laying your hand upon your heart, you will accuse your self, not
only of your cursed and froward stomach hitherto appearing, but also of that
new ingratitude, which you show unto me at this hour, not contented to be
bathed and plondged by you in the missehap of my pain paste, but yet by a new
onset, you abandon your felfe from my presence, as from the sight of your
mortal enemy: wherein I find that heaven and al his influences, do cry out
for mine overthrow, whereunto I do agree, since my life taking no vigor and
increase, being only sustained by the favor of your divine graces, can not be
maintained one only minute of a day, without the liberal help of your
sweetness and virtue: beseching you, that if the hearty prayers of any
mortal tormented man, may ever have force and power to move you to pity, it
may please you miraculously to deliver from henceforth, this my poor miserable
afflicted mind, either from death or martyrdom.

He that is more yours than his own, Edward the desolate King of England.


The letter written with his own hand, and sealed with his seal, he
commanded the Secretary to go to the Countess, at her fathers house, and
secretly to deliver the same, which he did. And the Countess having read and
perused it, said to the Secretary. My friend, you shall tell the king, that I
do beseech him most humbly, to send me no more letters or messages touching
the matters, whereof he has written. For I am in such wise resolved in the
answer, which I made him in my Castle, that I will persist immutable, to the
end of my life. The Secretary retorning, and having recited the answer of
the Countess, the King rapte with an impacient and extreme choler, would
again attempt an other new way: and consuming by little and little in this
amorous fire, began to sort out of the limits of Reason. And almost out of his
wits, demanded of his Secretary. Do you think it expedient, that I make
request to her father, because I want counsel in other things? To whom the
Secretary boldly said, that he thought it unreasonable to seek aid at a
fathers hands to corrupt his daughter: faithfully telling to the King, ye
reproach and infamy that would follow thereof, as well for the old service,
that her father had done to his ancestors, as for his great prowess in arms,
for which he was so greatly commended. But Love, the mortal enemy of all good
council, so blinded the eyes of the king, that without any further
deliberation, he commanded the Secretary to go seek the father, to demand
help of him for matters of importance: which the Earl understanding, obeyed
incontinently, where the King alone in a chamber, lying upon a bed, after he
had commanded him to shut the door and to sit down by him, said these
words. My Lord, I have caused you to come hither for a certain occasion,
which touches me so nighe, as the loss or preservation of my life. For never
through any assault of Fortune (the sharpness whereof I have often felt) have
I been vanquished with so great envy and malice, as now. For I am so vexed
with my passions, that being overcome by them, I have none other refuge, but a
most unhappy death that ever man can suffer, if presentely I be not helped.
Know ye therefore, that I deem him only to be happy, that by Reason can rule
his wits, not suffering himself to be carried into vain desires: In which
point we do differ from beasts, who being lead only by natural order, do
indiffenretly run head long, whether their appetie does guide them: But we
with the measure of Reason, ought to moderate our doings with such providence,
as with out straying we may choose the right way of equity and justice. And if
at any time, the weak flesh does faint and give over, we have none to blame
but our selves. Who deceived by the fading shadow and false appearance of
things, fall into the ditch by our selves prepared. And that which I do
allege, is proved, not without manifest reason, whereof I now do feel
experience, having let slip the raines of the bridle to far over my disordinate
affections, being drawn from the right hand, and traitorously deceived. And
nevertheless I cannot tell how to retire to take ye right way, or how to turn
my back from yt which does me hurt. Wherefore now (unfortunate and miserable
that I am) I acknowledge my self to be like unto him, that follows his game
in the thicket of a woodde, rushing through thick and thin at all adventures,
not knowing how to find the way he entered in, but rather the more he desires
to follow the trace, the more in the end he is wrapped in the bushes. So it
is my Lord, that I cannot and may not for all my foresaid allegacions, so
color my fault, or purge mine error, but yt I must confess and acknowledge it
to be in me. But I speak to this end, that seeking a far of the original
of my grief, you would help me to complain, and to take pity upon me. For
to tell you the truth, I am so intricated in the Labarinthe of my unbridled
will, that the more I do aspire to the better (alas) the worsse I am. Have not
I good cause to complain my Lord, that after so many famous victories
achieued by sea and land, wherewith I have renowned the memory of my name in
all places, am now bound and vanquished with an appetite so outrageous, that
I can not help my self, whereby mine own life or rather death, is consumed in
such anguishe and mortal pain, that I am become the very mansion of all
mischiefs, and only receptacle of all miseries? What sufficient excuse for my
fault may I henceforth allege, that in the end will not display it to be both
unprofitable and void of Reason? But what shall be the buckler of my shame, if
not my youthly age, which pricketh me forward to leave like a sharp needle?
the force whereof I have so often repelled, that now being vanquished, I have no
place for rest, but in thy mercy, who in my fathers days, did liberally
spend thy blood, in many notable enterprises in his service, which afterward
thou have so well continued, that in many dangerous affairs, I have diverse
times proved the fidelity of thy Counsel, whereby I have brought to pass
things of great importance, and therein hitherto never found thee slack and
unfaithful. Which when I remember, do provoke me to be bold to declare unto
you mine intent, which by your only word you may procure, the fruit whereof
being gotten, you shall win the heart of a King, whom you may use as you
list all the days of your life. And the more the thing shall seem hard,
difficult or paynefull, the greater your merit shall be, and the more firmly
shall he be bound, which does receive it. Consider then my Lord, how
profitable it is, to have a king at your commandment. You have also four
sons, whom you cannot honorably advance without my favor: swearing unto you
by my regal Scepter, that if you comfort me in my troubles, I will endue ye
three youngest, with so large possessions, yt they shall have no cause to be
offended with their eldest brother. Remember likewise, what rewards I have
bestowed upon them that serve me. And if you have known how liberal I have
been toward other, think then I pray you, how bountifully you bind me
toward you, upon whom my life and death depends. The king ending his
sorrowful complaynt, stopped by sobbes and sighs, held his peace. And ye
Earl who tenderly loved his prince, hearing this pitiful discourse, (the
faithful witness of his inward passion) and not able to conjecture the
occasion, was maruellously troubled in himself, and without longer advise,
overcome with pity, he made a liberal and very sudden offer to the king of
his life, his children, and of all that he was able to do. Command, my
sovereign Lord (quod he with weeping tears) what it shall please you to have
me to do, if it be, even to bestow mine own life for your sake. For by the
faith and foaltie that I do owe to God and to your grace, I swear, that many
days and years paste I have bound my self inuiolably, and all mine ability
without exception, so long as my tongue is able to stir, and my breath shall
remain within this body, faithfully and truly to serve your Majesty, not
only for that my duty binds me, but if it were for your sake, to
transgress and exceed the bounds of mine honor. But the good old Earl,
which never thought that a request so unjust and dishonest, would have
proceeded out of the mouth of a King, with frank and open heart, offered that
liberal grant. The king then thinking that he had sounded the depth of the
Earls affection, changing color, his eyes fixed on the ground, said unto
him. Your daughter the Countess of Salesburie, (my Lord) is the only
medicine of my trauayles, whom I do love better than my own life, and do
feel my self to inflamed with her Heavenly beauty, that without her grace and
favor, I am not able hereafter to live, for this consideration, sith you
desire to do me service, and to preserve my life, I pray you to deal so with
her, that she with compassion may look upon me. Craving this request at your
hands, not without extreme shame, considering as well your honorable state, as
your ancient merits employed upon me and my progenitoures. But according to
your modesty and accustomed goodness, impute the fault upon amorous love,
which in such wise has alienated my liberty, and confounded my heart, that
now ranging out of the bounds of honor and reason, I feel my self tormented
and vexed in mind. Whereby I am provoked to make this request, and not able to
expel the mortal poison out of my heart, which has diminished my force,
intoxticated my sense, and has deprived my mind from all good counsel, that
I can not tell what to do but to seek to you for help, having no kind of
rest, but when I see her, when I speak of her, or think upon her. And I am at
this present reduced into so pitiful state, that being not able to win her
by entreaties, offers, presents, suits, ambassages and letters, my only and
last refuge and assured port of all my miseries, rests in you, either by
death to end my life, or by force to obtain my desire. The Earl hearing the
vneiuile and beastlye demand of his sovereign Lord, blushing for shame, and
thoroughly astonned, filled also with a certain honest and virtuous disdain,
was not able to dissolve his tongue to render a worthy answer to the
afflicted Prince. Finally like one awaked from his dead sleep, he said unto
him. Sir, my wits fail, my virtue reuolteth, my tongue is mute, at those
words that proceed from your mouth, whereby I feel my self brought into two so
strange and perilous points, that passing either by one or other, I must
needs fall into very great danger. But to resolve my self upon that which is
most expedient, having given unto you my faith in pledge, to succor and help
you even to the abandoning of honor and life, I will not be contrary to my
words. And touching my daughter, for whom you have made request, I will
reveal unto her the effect of your demand: yet of one thing I must tell you
sir, power I have to entreat her, but none at all to force her. Inoughe it is
that she understand of me, what heart and affection you bear unto her. But I
do marvel, yea and complain of you, pardon me (most dradde sovereign) and
suffer me without offense to discharge my grief before your presence, rather
than to your shame and mine eternal infamy, it should be manifested and
published abroad by other. I say that I marvel sir, what occasion moved you
to commit such reproach in my stock and blood, and by an act so shameful and
lascivious, to dishonor the same: Which never disdayned to serve both you and
yours, to the uttermost of their powers. Alas unhappy father that I am, is this
the guerdon and recompense that I and my children shall expect for our trusty
and faithful services? Oh sir for Gods sake, if you list not to be liberal of
your own, seek not to dishonor us, and to inflict upon our race, such
notable infamy. But who can look for worse at the hands of his mortal and
cruel enemy? It is you, even you it is, (most noble Prince) that does rauishe
my daughter of her honor, dispoyle me of my contentation, ye take from my
children hardiness to show their faces, and from all our whole house, the
ancient fame and glory. It is you that has obscured the clearenesse of my
blood, with an attempt so dishonest and detestable: that the memory thereof
shall never be forgotten. It is you that does constrain me to be the infamous
minister of the total destruction of my progeny, and to be a shameless
Pandarus of my daughters honor. Think you sir, that you mean to help and
succoure me, when others shall attempt to object before my face this slander
and reproach? but if your self do hurt me, where shall I hereafter seek
relief and succor. If the hand which ought to help me, be the very same that
does give me the wound, where shall the hope be of my recovery? For this
cause, may it please your Majesty, whether justly I do make my complaynt, and
whether you give me occasion to advance my cries to the heavens, your self
shall be the Judge. For if like a Judge in deed you do give over your
disordinate affection: I then appeal to the judgment of your invincible
mind, accomplished with all courtesy and gentleness. On the other side, I do
lamente your Fortune, when I think upon the reasons which you have alleged,
and the greater cause I have to complain, because I have known you from your
youth, and have always deemed you at liberty and free from such passions,
not thrall or subject to the flames of Love, but rather given to the exercise
of arms. And now seeing you to become a prisoner of an affection unworthy your
estate: I can not tell what to think: the novelty of this sudden chance
seems to be so strange. Remember sir that for a little suspicion of
adultery, you caused Roger Mortimer to be put to death. And (being skarce able
to tell it without tears) you caused your own mother miserably to die in
prison. And God knows how small your accusacions were and upon how light
ground your suspicion was conceived. Do not you know how wonderfully you be
molested with wars, and that your enemies travel day and night to
circumuent you, both by sea and land? Is it now time then to give your self
to delights, and to captiuate your mind in the pleasures of Ladies? Where is
the ancient generositie and nobility of your blood? Where is the magnanimity
and valor, wherewith you have astonned your enemies, showed your self amiable
to your friends, and wonderful to your subjects? Touching the last point,
whereby you threaten, that if my daughter do not agree to your desire, you will
forcibly enjoy her, I will never confess, that to be the fact of a valiant
and true king, but of a vile, cowardly, cruel and libidinous tyrant. I trust
it be not the pleasure of God, that now at the age you be of, you will begin
to force Gentlewomen that be your humble subjects, which if you do, this Island
shall lose the name of a Realm, and hereafter shall be deemed none other, but
the receptacle of Thieves and murderers. If then, (to conclude this my
sorrowful and heavy complaint) you may, or can by your flatteries, promises
and presents, persuade my daughter to obey your unbridled appetites, I shall
have occasion to bewail her dishonestie, and to deem her, as an incontinent
daughter, degenerated from the virtues of her progenitors. But touching your
own person, I have nothing to say, but that herein you do follow the common
sort of men, that be suitors to Ladies, willing to please their fancies. There
rests only now for me to answer the favor, which in time to come you
promise to me and my children. I covet not after any thing reproachful to me
or my children, or to any of our posterity, that may make us ashamed, knowing
in what contempt and reputation they be, which being borne of base parentage,
be arrived to goods and honor, by gratifiyng and obeying Princes and Kings in
their dishonest lusts and appetites. Remember sir, that within these few
days, being in camp against the Scotts, you vpbraided a certain man (which
shall be namelesse) for being a minister of your fathers Love, who was from the
state of a Barber, aduau^ced to the degree of an Earl, and how you said, that
if in time to come he amended not his manners, you would send him to the shop
again. And for my part, I am of opinion, that honest poverty has ever been
the ancient and greatest inheritance amongs the noble Romans, which if it be
condemned by the ignorant multitude, and if we therefore do give place to the
same, making greater account and estimation, of richesse and treasures, than of
virtue: I will say for mine own part, by the grace of God, that I am so
abundantly provided, for the maintenance of me and mine, not like an ambicions
man or covetous, but as one satisfied with the good will of Fortune, I do most
humbly then beseech you (sir) for conclusion, to take in good part, that
which my duty and honor do constrain me to speak. And so by your graces
leave, I will depart toward my daughter, to let her understand from point to
point your Majesty's pleasure. And without tarying for other reply of the
King, he went his way discoursing diverse things in his mind, upon that which
had passed between the King and him. The reasons which the Earl had made, so
pierced the affections of ye passionate king, that uncertain what to say, he
condemned himself, knowing very well, that the Earl not only upon right
and just cause, had pronounced those words: but also that he had done the
office of a faithful servant and trusty counselor, in such sort, that
feling his conscience touched at the quick, he could not excuse himself, from
committing a dishonest charge to a father so commendable and virtuous in the
behalf of his daughter. Thus he determined to change his opinion. Afterward
when he had thrown forth many sighs, he spoke these words to himself. O
miserable man, cut of this amorous practice, how art thou defrauded of thy
right sense to cast thy mind upon her, whom thou ought to use with such
reverence, as thou would do thine own proper sister, for the service,
which thou and thy progenitors, have received of the good Earl her father?
Open the eyes of thine understanding, and know thy self, give place to
Reason, and reform thy vnshamefull and disordinate appetites. Resist withal
thy power, this wanton will, which does enuiron thee. Suffer not this tiraunt
Love to bewitch or deceive thee. Sodaynely after he had spoken those words,
the beauty of the Countess representing it self before his eyes, made him to
alter his mind again to the contrary, and to reject that which he before
allowed: saying thus. I feel in my mind the cause of mine offense, and thereby
do acknowledge the wrong, but what shall I do? sith I am not able any longer
to withstand Beauty that cruel murderer, which does force and master me so
much, let Fortune then and Love do what they list, the fair Countess shall
be mine, chance what chance may. Is it a notable vice in a King to love his
subjects daughter? Am I the first upon whom such inconvenience has come?
This talk ended, he deluded himself, and thinking upon the contrary, he
accused himself again, and then from this he altered again to the other. And
being in this perplexity, he passed day and night, with such anguish and dolor,
as every man doubted his health. And floting thus between hope and despair,
he resolved in the end to attend the fathers answer. The Earl then being
gone out of the Kings chamber, aggrauated with sorrowful thoughts, full of
rage and discontentation, thought good to delate the matter to the next day,
before he spoke to his daughter: and then calling her unto him, and causing her
to sit against him, he reasoned the matter in this wise. I am assured dear
daughter, that yon will no less marvel than be astonned, to hear that which
I shall say unto you, and so much the more, when you do perceive, how far
my tale shall exceed the order of Reason. But for so much as of two evils the
least is to be chosen, I doubt not, but like a sage and wise woman, which I
have always known you to be, you will stay upon that which I have
determined. Touching my self, since it has pleased God to give me knowledge of
good and ill, hitherto I have still preferred honor before life because (after
mine opinion) it is a less matter to dye innocently, than to live in the
dishonor and shame of the whole world. But you know what liberty he has,
which is under ye power of another, being sometimes constrained to make fair
weather, of things not only clean contrary to his mind, but also (which is
worsse) against his own conscience, being oftentimes forced according to the
quality of the time, and pleasure of the state, to change his manners, and to
put on new affections. Whereof I have thought good to put you in remembrance,
because it touches the matter, which I purpose to tell you. Thus it is (dear
daughter) that yesterday after dinner, the King sent for me, and being come
before him, with a very instante and pitiful prayer, he required me (his eyes
full of tears) to do a thing for him, that touched his life. I which (besides
that I am his subject and servant) have always borne a particular affection
to his father and him, without deliberation what the matter should be,
betroched to him my faith to obey his request, if it cost me the price of mine
honor and life. He seeing himself assured of my liberal promise, after many
words joined with an infinite number of sighs, discovering unto me the
secret of his heart, he told me, that the torment which he endured, proceeded
no where else but of the fervent Love that he bare unto you. But O immortal
God, what man of any discretion, would have thought that a King could be so
impudent and unshamefast, as to commit to a father a charge so dishonest,
toward his own daughter? The Earl having recited in order the history past
between him and the King, said thus unto her. Consider you sweet daughter,
mine unadvised and simple promise, and the unbridled mind of an amorous
king, to whom I made answer, that entreat you thereunto I was able, but force
you I could not. For this cause (dear daughter,) I do pray you at this
instant for all, that you will obey the kings pleasure, and thereby to make a
present to your father of your honest chastity, so dearly esteemed and
regarded by you, specially, that the thing may so secretly be done, that the
fault be not bruted in the ears of other. Nevertheless, the choice rests in
you, and the key of your honor is in your own hands, and that which I have
said unto you; is but to keep promise with the King. The Countess all the
while that her father thus talked, changed her color with a comelye
shamefastness, inflamed with a virtuous disdain, that he which had behold
her then, would have thought her rather some celestial goddess, than a human
creature. And after long silence, with an humble gravity, she began thus to
make her answer.

Your words have so confounded me, and brought me into such admiration (my
Lord and right honorable father) that if all the parts of my body were
converted into tongues, they could not be sufficient worthily to express the
least part of my sorrow, and unquietness. And truly very justly may I
complain of you, for the little estimation you have of me, which am your own
flesh, blood and bone. And for the ransom of the frail and transitory life,
which you have given me upon earth, you will for recompense now defraude me of
mine honor. Whereby I do perceive that not only all natures laws, be
cancelled and mortified in you, but which is worsse, you do exceed therein
the cruelties of beasts, who for all their brutishness, be not so unnatural
to do wrong to their own young ones, or to offer their fruit to the mercy of
another, as you have done yours, to the pleasure of a King. For notwithstanding
the straight charge and authority, which you have over me, to command me
being your right humble and very obedient daughter, yet you ought to think and
remember, that you have never seen in me, any act, motion, sign, or word,
to incite you to move such dishonest talk. And although the king many times,
with infinite number of prayers, presents, messages and other such allurements
of persuasion, has displayed and uttered all the art of his mind, to seduce
and corrupt me, yet he was never able to receive other answer of me, but that
honor was a thousand times dearer unto me than life, which still I meant to
keep secret from your knowledge, even as I have done from other of mine
alliance, for fear least you should be induced, to commit some trespass, or
conspire any thing against our king, foreseing the strange accidents, which
have chanced for like matters, to the ruin of many cities and provinces. But
good God, my doubt is nothing to purpose, since that your self, is the
shameless Post of an act to dishonest. And to conclude in few words,
although that daily I have good hope, that the king seeing me at a point, still
to conserve my chastity inviolable, he will give over to pursue me any longer,
and will suffer me hereafter, to live in quiet, with mine equals, but if so be
he so do continue obstinate in his old folly, I am determined rather to dye,
than to do the thing that shall hurt me and pleasure him. And for fear that
he take from me by force, yt which of mine own accord I will not grant,
following your counsel, of two euilles, I will choose the least, thinking it
more honorable to distroy and kill my self with mine own hands, than to
suffer such blot or shame to obscure the glory of my name, being desirous to
commit nothing in secret, that sometime hereafter being published, may make me
ashamed and change color. And where you say that you have sworn and gaged
your faith to the king, for the assurance of your promise, it as very ill
done, before you did consider, what power fathers have over their children,
which is so well defined by the law of God, that they be not bound to their
parents, in that which is against his divine commandments. Much less may
they bind us to things incestuous and dishonest, which specially and
strayghtly be enjoined us not to perform, if we thereunto be required. And it
had been far more decent, and excusable before God, if when you made that
foolish promise to the king, you had promised him, rather to strangle me with
your own hands, than to consent to let me fall into a fault so abominable.
And to the end I may tell you ye last determinacion, and conclusion of that which
I am determined to do by good advise and immutable counsel: thus it is. You
shall tell the king, that I had rather lose my life, after yt most cruel and
shameful manner that may be devised, than to consent to a thing so dishonest,
having of long time fyxed this saying in my mind, That honest death, does
honor and beautify the forepasled life. The Father hearing the wise answer
of the daughter, gave her his blessing, in his heart praising her Codlee mind,
beseching God to help her, and to keep her under his protection, and to
confirm her in that holy and virtuous determination. Then feeling him greatly
comforted, he repaired to the King, to whom he said. Pleases your grace to
the intent I might observe my promise, I swear by the faith the I do owe to God
and you, that I have done what I can with my daughter, disclosing unto her your
whole mind and pleasure, and exhorting her to satisfy your request, but for a
resolute answer she says, that rather she is contented to suffer most
cruel death, than to commit a thing so contrary to her honor. You know (sir)
what I said unto you still, that I might entreat her, but force her I could
not. Having then obeyed your commandment, and accomplished my promise, it may
please you to give me leave to go home to one of my Castles, from henceforth to
incline my self to quietness, and to ease my decrepite and feeble age. Which
the king willingly granted. The same day, he departed from the Court with his
sons, and went home to his Country, leaving at London his wife and daughter,
and the rest of his household, thinking thereby to discharge himself of things
without the kings displeasure. The king on the other side was no sooner
advertised of the Earls departure, and that he had left his daughter behind
him at London, but he knew the fathers mind and purpose, and fell in such
despair of his love, yt he was like to have run out of his wits for
sorrow. The nights and days were all one to him, for he could take no
rest, giving over use of arms, administration of justice, hunting and
hauking, wherein before that time, he had great delight. And all his study was,
many times to pass and repasse before the gate of the Countess, to prove if
he might attain to have some sight of her. And things were brought to so
pitiful state, yt within few days, the Citizens and other gentlemen, began
to perceive the raging love of their Prince, every of them with common voice
blaming the cruelty of the Countess, that was unmarried, who the more she
proved the king inflamed with her love, the more squeymishe she was of her
beauty. The Peers and noble men, seeing their king reduced to such extremity,
moved with pity and compassion began secretly to practice for him, some with
threatenings, some with flatteries and persuasions, some went to the mother,
declaring unto her, the eternal rest and quiet prepared for her and al her
friends, if she would persuade her daughter to incline to the kings mind,
and contrariwise the danger iminent over her head. But all these devises were
in vain, for the Countess moved no more, than a hard rock beaten with
diverse tempests. Notwithstanding at length, seeing that every man spoke
diversely, as their affections did lead them, she was so troubled and penfife
in heart, that fearing to be taken, and that ye king vanquished with his strong
passion, by succession of time would use his force, and violently oppress her,
found means to get a great sharp knife, which she carried about her
secretly under her gowns, of purpose, that if she saw her self in peril to be
defloured, she might kill her self. The Courtyers offended with ye martyrdom
of their Master, and desirous to gratify him, and to seek means to do him
pleasure, conspired all in general against the Earls family, letting the king
to understand, that it were most expedient, since that things were out of hope,
to cause AElips to be brought to his Palace, to use her by force. Whereunto the
king (being drunk in his own passion) did willingly agree. Notwithstanding,
before he passed any further for that he faythfullye loved the Countess, he
determined to advertise the mother of the Countess, of that which he intended
to do, and commanded his Secretary to go seek her with diligence, and
without concealing any thing from her knowledge, to instruct her of the whole.
The Secretary finding the mother of the Countess, said unto her. Madame the
King has willed me to say unto you that he has done what he can, and more
than his estate requires, to win the grace and Love of your daughter, but
seeing that she has despised his prayers, disdained his presence, and abhorred
his griefs and complaints, knowing not what to do any more, his last refuge
is in force, letting you to understand hereof, to the intent that you and she
may consider what is to be done in this behalf. For he has determined whether
you will or no, to fetch her out openly by force, to the great dishonor,
slander and infamy of al your kin. And where in time past, he has loved
and favored the Earl your husband, he trusts shortly to make him
understand what is the effect of the just Indignation of such a Prince as he
is. The good Lady hearing this sudden and cruel message, was asto^ned in such
wise, that she thought how she saw her daughter already trained by the hears
of the head, her garments haled and torn in pieces, with a rufull and
lamentable voice crying out to him for mercy. For this cause, with blubbering
tears, trembling for fear she fell down at the Secretaries feet, and
straightly embracing his knees, said unto him. Master Secretary, my dear and
loving friend: Beseech the King in my name, to remember the pain and service
done unto him by mine Anncestors. Entreat him not to dishonor my house in the
absence of the Earl my husband. And if you be not able by your persuasion to
molifie his hard heart, desire him for a while to take patience, until I have
advertised my daughter of his will and pleasure, whom I hope so to persuade,
that she shall satisfy the kings request. When she had made this answer, the
Secretary declared the same to the King, who mad with anger and Love, was
content, and nevertheless, commanded his gentlemen to be in a readynesse to
seek the Countess. In the mean time the mother of fair AElips went to her
daughters chamber, and after she had commanded all her maids, which
accompanied her, to withdraw themselves out of the chamber, she began in few
words to recite unto her the message done unto her by the Secretary. Finally
with sobbing sighs she said unto her. The days have been (dear daughter)
that I have seen thee to keep thy state among the chiefest of all the
Ladies of the Realm. And I have counted my self happy that ever I did bear
thee in my womb, and thought by means of thy beauty and virtue, one day to
see thee to become the joy and comfort of all thy friends. But now my
cogitacions be turned clean contrary, through thine unlucky fate: Now I
think thee to be borne not only for the universal ruin of all our family,
but also (which grieueth me most) to be an occasion and instrument of my death,
and the desolation of al thy friends. But if thou will somewhat moderate thy
rigor, all this heaviness shortly shall be turned into joy. I or our King and
sovereign Lord is not only in Love with thee, but for the ardent affection
and amity that he bears unto thee, is out of his wits, and now does
conspire against us, as though we were Traitors and murderers of our Prince.
In whose hands (as thou know) does rest, the life, honor and goods both of
thy self and us all. And what glory and tryumphe shall be reported of thee to
our posterity, when they shall know that by thy obstinate cruelty, thou have
procured the death of thine old father, the death of thy hoar headed mother,
and the destruction of thy valiant and coragious brethren, and dispoyled the
rest of thy blood, of their possessions and ability? But what sorrow and
grief will it be, to see them wander in the world like vagaboundes, banished
from their livings, and remain in continual poverty, without place and
refuge in their misery? who in stead of blessing or praising the hour of thy
birth, will curse thee in their mind a thousand times, as the cause of all
their overthrow and ill fortune. Think, and consider upon the same (dear
daughter) for in thee alone consists the coseruation of our lives, and hope
of al our friends. This lamentable discourse ended, the afflicted Countess,
not able any longer to resist that pangue, but that her heart began to wax so
faint that with her arms a cross she fell down half dead upon her daughter:
who seeing her without moving and without any apparaunce of life, and all the
parts of her body to ware cold, she quickly laid her down, and then with
help and other things apt for sownings, she made her come to her self
again, and thinking wholly to recover her, she earnestly promised her to do
what she would have her, and then said unto her. Do away your tears (Madame)
moderate your self a little from your torments, revoke your former joy, and be
of good chere, for I am disposed to obey you God defend that I should be the
cause of the pain which I see you to suffer. Now I am ready to go with you
to the King, where it shall please you, we two without other company will do
our own errande and attempt the beginning of our enterprise. The mother full
of joy, lifting up her hands to the heavens, tenderly embraced her daughter,
and many times did kiss her, and after she had commanded her Coche to be made
ready, she went forth with her daughter, accompanied only with two
Gentlewomen, her Damoselles, to the Kings Palace. When they were come thither,
they sent word to the Secretarye, that brought her the message, who conducted
them to the Kings chamber, and presenting them before the King said. Sir,
behold the company which you have so long time desired? They be come to do
your grace humble reverence. The King greatly astonnied, came to mete them, and
with joyful countenance said. Welcome Lady Countess, and your long desired
company. But what good fortune conducted you hither now. The Countess having
made her obeisance, yet alfryghted with fear, answered him. Behold here my
Lord your fair AElips so long time wished for, who taking repentance for her
former crueltye and rigor, is come to render her self at your commandment.
Then the King beholding the young Countess trembling for fear, like a leaf
shaken with the wind (with her eyes fixed on the ground) approaching nere her,
took her by the hand, and kissing her, said. Welcome, my life and soul. But
she no" more moved than a fierce Lion environed with cruel beasts, stood
still and held her peace, her heart so constrained for sorrow and dispite,
that she was not able to answer a word. The King, who thought that such
passion proceeded of shame, commanded that the gentlewomen, that were come in
her company, shaulde depart the chamber, saving the mother, which brought her
to the entry of the kings chamber. Then wythdrawing her self back, she left
her to the mercy of love and the King. So sone as the King was entered the
chamber, he shut the door after him. Which AEllps perceiving, began to feel a
furious combat between her honor and life, fearing to be defloured, and seeing
her abandoned of all humayne succor, falling down prostrate at his fete, she
said unto him. Gracious and redoubted Prince, sith that my heavy fortune has
brought me hither, like an innocent lamb to the sacrifice, and that my parents
amazed through your fury, as rauishers of me against my will, and contrary to
the duty of their honor, have delivered me into your hands, I humbly
beseech your majesty, if there remain in your noble personage any spark of
virtue and Princely affection, before you pass any further to satisfy your
desire, to let me prove and understand by effect, if your Love be such, as
oftentimes by letters and mouth you have declared unto me. The request which I
will make unto you, shall be but easy, and yet shall satisfy me more than all the contentation of the world. Otherwise (sir) do not think that so long as
my life does continue, I am able to do any thing, that can content your
desire. And if my suit shall seem reasonable, and grounded upon equity,
before I do open and declare the same more at large, assure the performaunce
thereof unto me by oath. The King hearing her prayer to be so reasonable,
whereunto rather than to refuse it, he swore by his Scepter, taking God to
witness and all the heavenly powers, for confirmation of that which he
pretended to promise: then he said unto her. Madame the only maistresse and
keeper of my loving heart, sith that of your grace and courtesy, you have
vouchsafed to come to my Palace, to make request of my only favor and good
will, which now I irreuocably do consent, and grant, swearing unto you by
that honorable sacrament of Baptism, whereby I was incorporated to the Church
of God, and for the Love that I bear you (for greater assurance I can not
give) I will not refuse any thing, that is in my power and ability, to the
intent you may not be in doubt whether I do love you, and intend hereafter to
employ my self to serve and pleasure you: for otherwise I should falsify my
faith, and more fervently I cannot bynd my self if I should swear by all the
oaths of the world. The fair Countess sitting still upon her knees, although
the King many times prayed her to rise up, reverently took the King by the
hand, saying. And I do kiss this royal hand, for loyal testimony of the
favor which your grace does show unto me. Then plucking out a sharp knife,
which she had under her kirtle, all bathed and washed in tears, reclining her
pitiefull eyes toward the King, that was astonned and appalled with that
sight, she said unto him. Sir, the gift that I require, and wherefore your
faith is bound, is this. I most humbly desire you, that rather than to dispoyle
me of mine honor, with the sword girded by your side, you will vouchsafe to
end my life, or to suffer me presently, with this sharp poynted knife in my
hand, to thrust my self to the heart, that mine innocent blood, doing my
funeral honor, may bear witness before God of my undefiled chastity, being
so resolved honorably to dye, and that before I do lose mine honor, I may
murder my self before you, with this blade and knife in my hand. The king
that burned with amorous heat, beholding this pitiful spectacle, and
considering the invincible constancy and chastity of the Countess, vanquished
with remorse of conscience, joined with like pity, taking her by the hand,
said. Rise up Lady and live from henceforth assured: for I will not ne yet
pretend all the days of my life, to commit any thing in you against your will.
And plucking the knife out of her hand, exclamed. This knife hereafter, shall be
the Pursiuant before God and men of this thine expugnable chastity, the force
whereof wanton Love was not able to endure, rather yelding place to Virtue,
which being alienated from me, has made me at one instante victorious over my
self, which by and by I will make you to understand, to your great
contentacion and greater marvel. For assurance whereof, I desire none other
thing of you, but a chaste kiss. Which received, he opened the door and caused
the Countess to come in with the Secretary and the gentlewomen, and the same
time he caused the Courtiers and Pieres of the Realm, which were then in the
base Court of the Palace, among whom was the Archbishop of York, a man of
great reputation and singular learning, to whom with the knife in his hand,
he recyted particularly the discourse of his Love. And after he took the
Countess by the hand, and said unto her. Madame the hour is come that for
recompense of your honest chastity and virtue, I will and consent to take you
to Wife, if you can find in your heart. The Countess hearing those words,
began to recolour her bleake and pale face, with a vermelion teint and Roseal
rudde, and accomplished with incredible joy and contentacion, falling down at
his fete said unto him. My Lord, forasmuch as I never looked to be advanced to
so honorable state as Fortune now does offer, for merit of a benefit so
high and great, which you present unto me, vouchsauing so much to abase your
self to ye espousal of so pore a Lady, your Majesty's pleasure being such,
behold me ready at your commandment. The King taking her up from the ground,
commanded the Bishop to pronounce with a high voice the usual words of
Matrimony. Then drawing a rich Diamond from his finger, he gave it to the
Countess, and kissing her, said. Madame you be Queen of England, and
presently I do give you thyrty thousand Angels by the year for your
revenue. And the Duchy of Lancastre being by confiscation fallen into my
hands, I give also unto you, to bestow upon your self and your friends. All
which enrolled according to the manner, the King accomplishing the marriage,
rewarded the Countess for the rigorous interestes his so long Love, with such
hap and contentation, as they may judge which have made assay of like pleasure,
and recovered the fruit of so long pursuit. And the more magnificently to
solemnize the marriage, the King assembled all the Nobility of England, and
somoned them to be at London the first day of July, to beautify and assiste
the Nupcialles and coronation of the Queen. Then he sent for the Father and
brethren of the Queen, whom he embraced one after an other, honoring the Earl
as his father, and his Sons as his brethren, whereof the Earl wonderfullye
rejoiced, seeing the conceived hope of his Daughters honor sorted to so happy
effect, as well to the perpetual fame of him and his, as to the euerlaseing
advancement of his house. At the appointed day the Queen was brought from her
fathers house, apparelled with Royal vestures, even to the Palace, and
conducted with an infinite number of Lords and Ladies, to the Church, where
when service was done the King was married (again) openly, and the same
celebrated, she was conveyed up into a public place, and proclaimed Queen of
England, to the exceeding gratulation and joy incredible of all the Subjects.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
AFter these tragical Nouelles and dolorous Histories of Bandello, I have
thought good for recreatio^ of the readers, to refresh their minds with some
pleasant devises and disportes. Least their spirits and senses should be
appalled and asto^ned with the sundry kinds of cruelties remembered in the.vij.
of the former Nouelles. Which be so strange and terrible as they be able to
affright the stoutest. And yet considering that they be very good lessons for
avoiding of like inconveniences and apt examples, for continuation of good, and
honest life, they be the better to be borne with, and may with less
asto^nishment be read and marked. They that follow be mitigated and swetened
with pleasure, not altogether so sower as the former be. Praying thee most
heartely, patiently to bear with all thing that shall occur, either in these
that follow, or in the other that be past before.

Galgano.
A Gentleman called Galgano, long time made suit to Madonna Minoccia, her
husband Sir Stricca (not knowing the same) diverse times praised and commended
Galgano, by reason whereof, in the absence of her husband, she sent for him,
and yielded her self unto him, telling him what words her husband had spoken
of him, for recompense whereof he refused to dishonest her.

The.xlvij. Nouel.
IN the city of Siena in Italy there was a rich young Gentleman called
Galgano, borne of noble birth, active, and well trained up in all kind of
exercise, valiant, brave, stout, and courteous, in the manners and orders of all
cuntries very skillful. This Galgano loved a Gentlewoman of Siena named Madonna
Minoccia, the wife of sir Stricca a comely knight, and wore in his apparel the
color and devises of his Lady, bearing the same upon his helmet and armoure,
in all Iustes, Tourneyes and triumphs, observing noble feasts and banquettes
for her sake. But for all those costly sumptuous and noble practices, this Lady
Minoccia in no wise would give ear unto his suits. Wherefore Galgano at his
wits end, was void of advise what to do or say, seeing the great cruelty
and rigor reigning in her breast, unto whom he daily prayed for better
success and fortune, than to himself. There was no feast, banquet, triumph,
or marriage, but Galgano was there, to do her humble service, and that day his
mind was not pleased and contented, wherein he had not seen her that had his
loving heart in full possession very many times (like a Prince yt coueted
peace) he sent ambassadors unto her, with presents and messages, but she (a
proud and scornful Princess) dayned neither to hear them or receive them.
And in this state, stood this passionat Lover a long time, tormented with the
exceeding hot Love and fealty that he bare her. And many times making his
reverent complaints to Love, did say. Ah Love, my dear and sovereign Lord,
how cruel and hard hearted art thou, how vumercifully dealest you with me,
rather how deaf be thine ears, that can not recline, the same to my nightly
complaints, and daily afflictions? How chances it that I do in this manner
consume my joyful days with pyning plaintes? Why do thou suffer me to
Love, and not to be beloved? And thus oftentimes remembering the cruelty of
Love, and his Ladies tyranny, he began in manner like a wight replete with
despair. But in fine, he determined patiently to abide the good time and
pleasure of Love, still hoping to find mercy. And daily gave himself to
practice and frequent those things, that might be acceptable and pleasant to
his Lady. But she still persisted inexorable. It chanced that sir Stricca and
his fair wife, for their solace and recreation, repaired to one of their
houses hard by Siena. And upon a time, Galgano passed by the same with a
Sparhauke on his fist, making as though he went a Hauking, but of purpose
only to see his Lady. And as he was going by the house, sir Stricca espied
him, and went forth to meet him, and familiarly taking him by the hand,
prayed him to take part of his supper with his wife and him. For which
courtesy Galgano gave him thanks and said. Sir I do thank you for your
courteous request, but for this time I pray you to hold me excused, because I
am going about certain affairs very requisite and necessary to be done. Then
said sir Stricca. At least wise drink with me before you depart: but giving
him thanks he bad him fare well. Master Stricca seeing that he could not cause
him to tarry, took his leave, and returned into his house. Galgano gone from
Master Stricca, said to himself. Ah beast that I am, why did not I accept his
offer? Why should shamefastness, let me from the sight of her, whom I love
better than all the world besides. And as he was thus pensife in complaints,
his spaniells sprung a Partrich, whereat he let go his Hawk, and the Partrich
flying into sir Stricca his garden, his Hawk pursued and seassed upon the
same. Master Stricca and his Lady hearing that pastime, ran to the garden
window, to see the killing of the Partrich. And beholding the valiant skirmish
between the foul and the Hawk, the Lady asked whose Hawk it was. Her
husband made answer that he knew well enough the owner, by the goodness and
hardiness of the same. For the owner of this hanke (quod he) is the trimmest
and most valiant gentleman in all Siena, and one endued with best qualities.
The Lady demanded what he was. Master Galgano (said her husband) who even
now passed by the gate, and I prayed him very earnestly to supper, but he
would not be entreated. And truly wise, he is the comeliest gentleman, and
most virtuous personage, that ever I knew in my life. With those words they
went from the window to supper. And Galgano, when he had lured his Hawk
departed away. The Lady marked those words and fixed them in mind. It fortuned
within a while after, that sir Stricca was by the state of Siena, sent in
embassage to Perugia, by reason whereof, his Lady at home alone, so sone as her
husband had taken his journey, sent her most secret and trusty maid, to
entreat Master Galgano, to come and speak with her. When the message was done
to Galgano, (if his heart were on a merry pin, or whether his spirits dulled
with continual sorrow were again revived, they know, that most have felt
the paynefull pangues of Love, and they also whose flesh have been pierced
with the amorous arrows of the little boy Cupide. He made answer that he
would willingly come, rendering thanks both to the maystresse and maid, the one
for her pain, and the other for her good remembrance. Galgano understanding
that sir Stricca was gone to Perugia, in the evening at convenient time,
repaired to the house of her whose sight he loved better, than his own eyes.
And being come before his Lady, with great submission and reverence he saluted
her (like those whose hearts do throbbe, as foretelling the possession of good
tournes and benefits, (after which with long suit and travail they have
aspired) wherewith the Lady delighted, very pleasantly, took him by the hand,
and embracing him, said. Welcome mine own sweet Galgano, a hundred times I
say welcome. And for the time with kisses, making truce with their affections,
the Lady called for confictes and wine. And when they had dronk and refreshed
themselves, the Lady took him by the hand and said. My sweet Galgano night
begins to pass away, and the time of sleep is come, therefore let us yield
our selves to the service and commandment of our very good Lady Madame
Cytherea, for whose sake I entreated you to come hither. Galgano answered,
that he was very well contented when it were her pleasure. Being within the
chamber, after much pleasant talk and loving discourse between them, the Lady
did put of her clothes, and went to bed. Galgano being somewhat bashful, was
perceived of the Lady, unto whom she said. Me think Galgano that you be
fearful and shamefast. What do you lack? Do I not please you? Does not my
personage content you? Have you not the thing which you desire? Yes Madame
said Galgano. God himself could not do me a greater pleasure, than to suffer
me to be cleped within your arms. And reasoning in this sort, he put of his
clothes also, and laid him self by her, whom he had coueted and desired of
long time. Being in the bed, he said. Madame, I beseech you grant me one
request. What is that Galgano (quod she.) It is this Madame, said Galgano. I do
much marvel, why this night above all other, you have sent for me: considering
how long I have loved you, and although I have prosecuted my suit by great
expense and travail, yet you would never yield before this time. What has
moved you now thus to do? The Lady answered. I will tell you sir. True it is,
yt not many days a go, passing by this house, with your Hawk on your fiste,
my husband told me that so sone as he saw you, he went out to meet you, of
purpose to entreat you to supper, but you would not tarry: Then your Hawk
pursued a Partrich, even into my garden, and I seeing the Hawk so egrely
seassing upon the same, demanded of my husband whose Hawk it was. He told
me that the Hawk did belong to the most excellent young man of all Siena: and
that he never in all his life knew a gentleman better accomplished with all
virtues and good qualities, and there withal gave unto you singular praise and
commendacion. Whereupon hearing him in such wise to praise you, and knowing
right well your affectionat mind and disposicion toward me, my heart attached
with love, forced me to send for you that I might hereafter avoid disdain
and other skornefull demeaner, to impeach or hindre your love. And this briefly
is the cause. Is this true said Galgano? Most certain and true, answered the
Lady. Was there no other occasion? No verily said the Lady. God defend (quod
Galgano) that I should recompense the courtesy and good will of so noble a
gentleman (as your husband is) with reproach and villainy. Is it meet that good
tournes should be requited with unkindness? If ever man had cause to defend
the honor of his unknown friend, cause have I right good and apt. For now,
knowing such a friend, that would by virtuous reports have advanced me to
higher matters, than whereof I am in possession, should I reward with
pollucion of his stock and wife? No, no, Lady: My raging suit by Love, is by
virtue quenched. Virtue only has staunched the flames of vile affections.
Seek another friend, to giut thy lecherous mind. Find out some other
companion, to cool thy disordinate love. Shall I be disloyal to him, that
has been faithful unto me? Shall I be Traitor to him, that friendly has
commended me? What can be more required of humane hearts, or more desired of
manlike mind, but will full bente, and fixed to do him good, that never erst
by just desert, deserved the same. With which words suddenly he lept out of
the bed, And when he had furnished him self again with his apparel, he also
put upon him virtuous friendship, and took his leave of the Lady, and never
after that time he gave him self to those affairs. And Master Stricca he
co^tineallie observed both with singular love and duetifull frendshippe.
Whereby it is uncertain whether was most singular in him, his continency at
the very instant by refrayning that vehement heat of love, which so long time
with great travail and cost he had pursued, or his regard of friendship to Sir
Stricca upon words of commendacion spoken behind his back. Both no doubt
be singular virtues meet of all men to be observed: but the subduing of his
affections surmounted and passed.

Of a Duke of Venice
Bindo a notable Architecte, and his son Ricciardo, with all his family,
from Florence, went to dwell at Venice, where being made citizens for diverse
monuments by them done there, through inordinate expenses were forced to rob
the Treasure house. Bindo being slain by a policy devised by the Duke and
the State. Ricciardo by fine subtelties delivers himself from four
dangers. Afterward the Duke (by his own confession) understanding ye
sleightes, gives him his pardon, and his daughter in marriage.

The.xlviij. Novel.
IN the noble City of Venice, there was once a Duke, that was very stout,
and rich, and therewithal of great experience and wisdom, called Valeriano
di messer Vannozzo Accettani. In the chiefest Church of which City called San
Marco, there was a steeple, which was very fair, sumptuous, and of greatest
fame of any thing at that time that was in Venice, which steeple was like to
fall down by reason of certain faults and decays in the foundation.
Wherefore the Duke caused to be searched through out all Italy, some cunning
workman that would take in hand the reparation and amendment of the same.
With promise of so much money as he would demand, for doing thereof. Whereupon
an excellent Architect of Florence, named Bindo, hearing tell of this offer,
determined to go to Venice, for the accomplishment of that work, and for that
purpose with his only son and wife, he departed Florence. And when he had
seen and surueyed the steeple, he went straight to the Duke, and told him
that he was come thither to offer his service for reparing of the same; whom
the Duke courteously interteygned, and prayed him, that he would so sone as he
could, begin ye work. Whereunto Bindo accorded, and with such diligence, and
small time, he finished the same, in better form and surety than it was at
the first. Which greatly pleased the Duke, and gave Bindo so much money as he
demanded, making him besides, a citizen of Venice, for the mayntenaunce of
whole state, he allotted him a sufficient stripende: Afterward the Duke called
him unto him, and declared that he would have a Treasure house made, wherein
should be disposed and laid up, all the Treasure, and common ornaments for the
furniture of the whole City, which Bindo by and by took upon him to do, and
made it of such singular beauty, as it excelled all the monumentes of the
city, wherein all the said treasure was bestowed. In which work he had framed
a stone by cunning, that might be removed in and out at pleasure, and no man
perceive it: Meaning thereby to go into ye chamber when he list: Whereunto none
in all the world was privy but himself. When this Palace and Treasure house
was done, he caused all the furnitures of silks, hangings wrought with gold,
canapees, clothes of state, rich chayres, plate, and other ornaments of gold
and silver to be carried thither, which he called La Turpea del doge, and was
kept under five keys, whereof four were delivered to four of the chief
citizens, deputed to that office, and were called Chamberlaynes of the Treasure
house, and the fifth key ye Duke himself did keep, so that the chamber could
not be opened except they were all five present. Now Bindo and his family
dwelling at Venice, and he being a Citizen of the same, began to spend
liberally, and to live a rich and welthy life, and his son Ricciardo
consumed disordinately, whereby in space of time, they wanted apparel to
furnishe their bodies, which they were not able to maintain for their
inordinate expenses. Wherefore the father upon a night called his son unto
him, and got a ladder, and a certain iron instrument made for the purpose,
taking also with him a little lime, and went to the hole, which Bindo
artificially had made in that chamber, and taking out the stone, went in, and
took out a fair cup of Gold, which was in a closet, and afterward he went
out, and placed the stone again in his due place. And when they were come
home, they brake the cup in pieces, and caused it to be sold by piece meal, in
certain cities of Lombardie. And in this sort, they maintained their
disordinate life begone. It chanced not long after, that a Cardinal arrived at
Venice, about affairs with the Duke, and the State, who the more honorably to
receive him, opened the Treasure house to take out certain furnitures within,
as plate, clothes of state, and other things. When the door was opened, and had
taken out the said necessaries, they found a cup less than ought to be
wherewith the chamberlaines contended among themselves, and went to the Duke,
telling him that there wanted a cup. Whereat the Duke marvelled, and said
that amongs them it must needs be gone. And after many denials, and much talk,
he willed them to say nothing, till the Cardinal was departed. The Cardinal
came, and was received with honorable interteignement, and when he was
departed, the Duke sent for the four Chamberlaynes, being desirous to know
how the cup was gone: And commanded them not to depart the Palace, before
the same was found, saying that amongs them it must needs be stolen. These
four persons being together, and debating amongs themselves, how and by what
means the cup should be taken away, were at their wits end. At length one
of them said. Let us consider whether there be any coming into the chamber in
any place else, besides the door, and viewing the same they could not perceive
any entry at all. And to prove the same more effectually, they strawed the
chamber about with fine chafe, and did set fire on the same, which done,
they shut fast the windows and doors, that the smoke and smoulder might not
go out. The force of which smoke was such as it issued through the hole that
Bindo made, whereby they perceived the way how the robbery was committed, and
went to the Duke to tell him what they had done. The Duke understanding the
fact, willed the^ to say nothing, for that he would devise a way to take the
thief, who caused to be brought into the chamber a caldron of pitche, and
placed it directly under the hole, and commanded that a fire should be kept
day and night, under the caldron, that the same might continually boil. It
came to pass that when the money was spent, which the father and the son had
received for the cup, one night they went again to the hole, and removing
the stone, the Father went in as he did before, and fell into the caldron of
pitche (which continually was boiling there) up to ye waste, and not able to
live any longer, he called his son unto him, and said. Ricciardo mine own
sweet son, death has taken me prisoner, for half my body is dead, and my
breath also is ready to depart. Take my head with thee, and bury it in some
place that it be not known, which done, commend me to thy mother, whom I pray
thee to cherish and comfort, and in any wise take heed that warelie and
circumspectly thou do depart hence. And if any man do ask for me, say that
I am gone to Florence about certain business. The son lamentably began to
lament his fathers fortune, saying. Oh dear father what wicked fury, has thus
cruelly devised sudden death. Content thy self (my son) said the Father,
and be quiet, better it is that one should die, than two, and therefore do
what I have told thee, and farewell. The son took up his fathers head, and
went his way, and the rest of his body remained in the caldron, like a block
without form. When Ricciardo was come home, he buried his fathers head so
well as he could, and afterward told his mother what was become of his
father, who understanding the manner of his death, began piteously to cry out,
to whom her son holding up his hands, said. Good mother hold your peace, and
give over your weeping: for our life is in great peril and danger, if your
out cry be heard, and therefore quiet your self, for better it were for us
to live in poor estate, than to die with infamy, to the utter reproach and
shame of all our family. With which words, he appeased her. In the morning
the body was found and carried to the Duke, who marvelled at it, and could not
devise what he should be, but said. Surely there be two that committed this
robbery, one of them we have, let us imagine how we may take the other. Then
one of the four Chamberlaines said. I have found out a trap to catch the
other, if it will please you to hear mine advise, which is this. It ca^ not be
chosen, but this thief that is dead, has either wife, children, or some
kinsman in the Town, and therefore let us cause the body, to be drawn through
out the city, and give diligent heed whether any person do complain or
lament his death. And if any such be found, let him be taken and examined:
and this is ye next way as I suppose, to find out his companion. Which being
concluded, they departed. The body was drawn through out the city with a
guard of men attending upon ye same. As the execucioners passed by ye house of
Bindo, whose carcass lay upon the hardle, his wife stood at the window, and
seeing the body of her husband so used, made a great outcrye. At which noise the
son spoke to his mother and said. Alas mother what do you. And beholding"
his fathers corpse upon the hardle, he took a knife and made a great gashe into
his hand, that the blood abundantly issued out. The guarde hearing the noise
that the woman made, ran into the house, and asked the woman, what she
lacked. The son answered. I was caruing a piece of stone with this knife, and
by chance I hurt my hand, which my mother seeing cried out, thinking that I
had hurt my self more than I have. The guard seeing his hand al bloody and
cut, did believe it to be true, and went round about the liberties of the
city, and found none that seemed to lament or bewail that chance. And
returning to the Duke, they told him how all that labor was employed in
vain, whereupon he appointed them to hang up the dead body in the market
place, with secret watch in like manner, to epsy if any person by day or
night, would come to complain or be sorrowful for him. Which body was by the
feet hanged up there, and a continual watch appointed to keep the same. The
rumor hereof was bruted through out the city, and every man resorted thither
to see it. The woman hearing tell that her husbands carcass should be hanged
up in the market place, said diverse times to her son, that it was a very
great shame for him to suffer his fathers body in that shameful sort to be
used. To whom her son made answer, saying. Good mother, for gods sake be
contented for that which they do, is for none other purpose, but to prove me:
wherefore suffer a while, til this chance be past. The mother not able to
abide it any longer, brake out many times into these words. If I were a man, as
I am a woman, it should not be undone now: and if thou will not adventure thy
self, I will one night give an attempt. The young man seeing the froward
nature of his mother, determined to take away the body, by this policy. He
borrowed twelve friars frockes or cowles, and in the evening went down to the
haven, and hired twelve Mariners, and placed the^ in a back house, giving them
so much meat and drink as they would eat. And when they had well whitled and
tippled themselves, he put upon them those friars cowles, with visardes upon
their faces, and gave every of them in their hands a burning torche, seming as
though they had been devils of hell. And he him self, rode upon a horse all
covered with black, beset round about with monstrous and ugly faces, every of
them having a burning candle in his mouth, and riding before with a marvelous
hideouse visarde upon his head, said unto them: do as I do: And then
marched forward to the market place. When they came thither they ran up and
down making a great roaring, being then past midnight and very dark. When the
watch saw that strange sight, they were affrayde, thinking yt they had been
Devils of hell, and that he on horsbacke in that form, had been the great devil
Lucifer himself. And seeing him run toward the gibet, the watch took there
legs and ran away. The young man in the shape of the great Devil, took down
the body, and laid it before him on horseback, who calling his company
away, rode before in post. When they were come home, he gave them their money,
and uncasing them of their cowles, sent them away, and afterward buried the
body so secretly as he could. In ye morning, news came to the Duke that the
body was taken away, who sent for the Guarde to know what was become thereof.
To whom they said these words. Pleases your grace, about midnight last past,
there came into the market place a company of Devils, among whom we saw the
great Devil Lucifer himself, who as we suppose, did eat up the body, which
sight and terrible vision, made us to take our legs. The Duke by those words
perceived evidently, that the same was but a practice, to deceive them of their
purpose, not withstanding, he determined to devise some means in the end to
know the truth, and decreed a constitucion, that for the space of.xx. days,
no fresh meat should be sold in Venice. At which decree all the City
merueyled. Afterward he caused a very fair fat Calfe to be sold, seassing
the price of every pound at a Fiornio, which amounts to a French Crown or
there aboutes, and wylled him that sold it, to mark the^ that bought it.
Thinking with himself, that he which is a Thief is licorous of mouth, and
will not stick to give a good price although it cost him a French crown for
every pound. Making proclamation, that he which would buy any flesh meat,
should resort to the market place where was to be sold. All the Marchaunts
and Gentlemen, repaired to buy some of the Ueale, and understanding that every
pound would not be sold under a French Crown, they bought none at all. This
Calfe and the price was bruted in all places, and came to the knowledge of the
mother of this young man, who said unto her son. I have a mind to eat some
of the Ueale, now sold in the market. Ricciardo answered. Mother make no
have to buy it, but first let it be cheapened by other, and at length I will
devise a mean that you shall have it. For it is not wisdom for us to be the
first that shall buy the same. The mother like an ignorant and unskillful
woman, was importunate to have it. The son fearing that his mother would
send for some of the Ueale, by other, caused a Pie to be made, and prepared a
flagon full of wine, both which were intermixed with things to cause sleep,
and taking bread, the said pie, and the flagon of wine, when it was night,
putting on a counterfeit beard, and cloak, went to the stall where ye Ueale was
to be sold, which as yet was whole and unbought. And when he had knocked at
the shop door, one of the Guard asked who was there. To whom Ricciardo said.
Can you tell me where one Ventura does keep his shop? of whom one of them
demanded what Ventura? I know not his surname said Ricciardo, that I would he
had been hanged, when I came first to dwell with him: why, who sent thee said
one of ye guard? his wife (quod Ricciardo) and had me carry him this meat and
wine for his supper. But I pray you said Ricciardo, let me leave the same with
you, till I go home to know better, where he keeps his stall. And marvel not
I pray you, why I know not where his shop is, for it is not long since I
came to dwell in this city. And so leaving behind him the pie, and the bread
with the flagon of wine, he made have to depart, and told them that he would
come again by and by. When he was gone, one of them took the flagon, and
drank, and afterward gave it to his companion, and said. Drink, for thou
never did taste of better wine in all thy life. His companion drank, and
merrily co^muning of this matter, they fell a sleep. Ricciardo loking in at a
hole of the door, seeing them a sleep, went in, and took the calfe and carried
it home whole as it was, and said to his mother. Hold mother, there is your
lust, cut it out. And by and by she cut out a great piece. The Duke so sone as
he heard yt the calfe was stolen, and the manner how, did wonder very much, and
determined yet to know what he was. And caused a hundred poor people to come
before him, and taking their names, he said unto the^. Get ye to all the houses
in Venice, under color to beg alms. And mark if you see in any house,
flesh dressed, or any piece at the fire, which if you do, ye must be
importunate in begging, till they give you either flesh or broth. And he among
you all that shall bring me the first news, I will give him.xx. Crowns. These
beggars dispersed themselves into every corner of the city, demanding their
alms, amongs whom one of them asked his alms at the house of Ricciardo, and
approaching nere, espied openly flesh at the spitte, and asked a morsel
thereof for gods sake: to whom the vndescrete woman, seeing that she had
plenty, gave a little piece. The poor man thanked the good wife, and prayed God
to save her life. And as he was going down the steps of the door, Ricciardo
met him with the flesh in his hand. Wherewithal astonned, he willed him to
return in again, and said he would give him more. The beggar glad of
that, went in again, whom Ricciardo carried into his chamber, and when he was
within, he struck such a full blow upon his head, with an axe, that he
killed him, and threw him into a Iakes, shutting the door after him. In the
evening, these poor men returned to the Duke, according to their promise, and
said how they could find nothing. The Duke called the^ by their names, and
compting them, found one less than the number, whereat he marvelled. And
after he had well advised with himself, what should become of him that
"lacked, he said. Certainly the poor man is slain. Then causing the Council
to be assembled, he declared what he had done: and yet said that it were meet
the party were known. Whereunto one of the Senators said. Your grace has
duly made search by the belly and mouth, to find out this verlet: I think
it now necessary that trial be made, by Lechery, which commonly accompaneth
licorous mouths. Then it was concluded that the most riotous and lecherous
young men, such as the Duke had in greatest suspicion to the number of.xxv.
should be warned to appear before him, which accordinglye was done, amongs
whom was this Ricciardo. These young Roysters assembled in the Palace, every of
them marvelled wherefore the Duke had caused the^ to come thither. Afterward
the Duke commanded.xxv. beds to be made in one of his great chambers, to
lodge every of the said.xxv. persons by himself, and in the mids of the
chamber he commanded a rich bed of estate to be set up and furnished,
where was appointed to lie his own daughter, which was an exceeding fair
creature. And in the night when these young men were laid in their beds, many
gentlewomen, attendant upon ye Lady, came in to bring her to her lodging. And
her Father delivered to her a sawser full of black die, or stayning, and said
unto her. If any of these young men, that do lie here by thee, do offer to
come to thy bed, look that thou mark him in the face with this stayning
color, that he may be known. At which words all the young men marvelled, and
therefore durst not attempt to go unto her, but said one to another. Surely
this commandment of the Duke has some secret mystery in it.
Notwithstanding, Ricciardo determined about midnight to go to her bed. And when
ye candle was out, being awake of purpose, he rose up and went to the
gentlewomans bed, and began to embrace and kiss her. The maiden when she
felt him, sodaynelie dipped her finger in the color, and stained his face,
not perceived of him, when he had accomplished the thing he came for, he
returned to his bed. And then began to imagine upon the Dukes words, and
for what policy he spoke them. And lying a little while still, musing upon the
same, he went again to the ge^tlewomans bed, having disposed himself in the
pleasures of this paradise lamb. He perceived her when she dipped her finger
in the sawcer, and rubbed his face. Ricciardo marking the fame, took away the
sawcer from the beds head, and round about, bestowed the color upon ye
faces of every of his fellows, who were to fast a sleep that they did not feel
him. Some he marked with two spots, some with six and some with.x. himself he
painted but with four besides those wherewith already he was berayed by the
Gentlewoman. Which done, he set the saucer again upon the beds head, and when
he had bidden her farewell, fair and softly he returned again to his bed. In
ye morning betimes, the Damsels of the chamber came in to help the Lady to
make her ready, which done, they waited upon her to the Duke, who asked her
how the matter stood. She answered well, for she had done his commandment.
And told him how one came unto her three times, and every time she gave him a
taint in his face. The Duke by and by sent for them that were of his counsel.
To whom he said. Sirs I have found out this good fellow, and therefore I
have sent for you, that we al together may go to see him. They went all into
the chamber, and viewing them round about, they perceived all their faces
colored, whereat they fell into a great laughter. Then one of them said to a
another. Suerlie this fellow has the subtilest head that ever was known: and
concluded ye one of the company had set ye color in their faces. The young men
beholding one another, painted in that sort, brake into a great sport and
pastime. Afterward the Duke examined every of them, and seeing that he was
not able by any means to understand by whom it was done, he determined to
know the man before he departed, and promised to him that should confess the
truth, to give his daughter to him in marriage, and with her, a very great
dowry, and a general pardon. Wherefore Ricciardo understanding the Dukes
mind, took him aside, and told him the whole matter particularly from the
beginning to the end. The Duke embraced him, and gave him his pardon, and with
great joy and triumph he solemnized the marriage between him and his daughter.
Wherewithal Ricciardo encoraged, proved a very stout and valiant man, in
such wise almost, as the affairs of the whole state passed through his
hands. And lived a long time after, with the love and good will of the whole
cominaltie of Venice.

Philenio Sisterno.
Philenio Sisterno, a Scholar of Bologna, being mocked of three fair
Gentlewomen, at a banquet made of set purpose, he was revenged upon them all.

The.xlix. Novel.
AT Bologna, which is the noblest city of Lombardie, the mother of studies,
and accomplished with all things requisite for such a flourishing city, there
was a young scholar, a gentleman of the cuntrie of Crete, named Philenio
Sisterno, of very good grace and behauior. It chanced that in his time, there
was a great feast made in the city, whereunto were bidden the fairest dames,
and best of reputation there. There was likewise, many gentlemen and scholars
of Bologna, amongs whom was this Philenio: Who following the manner of young
men, dallying sometime with one, sometime with another: and perceiving them for
his purpose, determined to dau^ce with one of them. And coming to one which
was called Emerentiana, the wife of sir Lamberto Bentiuoglia, he prayed her to
dance. Who being very gentle, and of no less audacitie than beautiful,
refused not. Then Philenio leading forth the dance very softly, sometimes
wringing her by the hand, spoke somewhat secretly unto her, these words.
Madame your beauty is so great, that without doubt it surmounteth all that
ever I saw, and there is no woman in the world, to whom I bear so great
affection, as to your person, which if it were correspondent to me in love, I
would think my self the best contented man in the world, otherwise I shall in
short time be deprived of life, and then you shall be the cause of my death.
And loving you (Madame) as I do, and as my duty requires, you ought to take
me for your servant, using me and those little goods which I have, as your
own. And I do assure you, that it is impossible for me to receive greater
favor from heaven, than to see my self subject to such a gentlewoman as you
be, which has taken me in a net like a bird. Now Emerentiana which earnestly
had marked the sweet and pleasant words, like a wise gentlewoman, seemed to
give no ear thereunto, and made him no answer at all. The dance ended, and
Emerentiana being set down in her place, this young scholar went to take
another Gentlewoman by the hand, and began to dance with her: which was not so
sone begone, but thus he said unto her. It needs not Madame, that by words I
do express the fervent love which I bear you, and will so do, so long as my
poor spirit shall govern and rule my members: and if I could obtain you for
my maistresse and singular Lady, I would think my self the happiest man on
live. Then loving you as I do, and being wholly yours, as you may easily
understand, refuse me not I beseech you for your humble servant, since that my
life and all that I have depends upon you alone. The young gentlewoman, whose
name was Panthemia, perceiving his meaning, did not answer him any thing at
that time: but honestly proceeded in her dance: and the dance ended, smyling
a little, she sat down with the other dames. This done, amorous Philenio
rested not until he had taken the third by the hand (who was the gentlest,
fairest, and trimmest dame in all Bologna) and began to dance with her roming
abroad, to show his cunning before them that came to behold him. And before the
dance was finished, he said thus unto her. Madame it may so be, as I shall
seem unto you very malapert to manifest the secret love that I have and do
bear you at this instant, for which you ought not to blame me but your
beauty, which renders you excellent above all the rest, and makes me your
slave and prisoner. I speak not of your commendable behauior, of your
excellent and marvelous virtues, which be such and of so great effect, that it
would make the Gods descend down to conte^plate the same. If then your
excellent beauty and shape, so well favored by nature, and not by art, may
seem to content the immortal Gods, you ought not to be offended, if the same
do constrayne me to love you, and to enclose you in the privy cabane of my
heart. I beseech you then gentle Madame (the only comfort of my life) to
have pity upon him that dies a thousand times a day, for you. In so doing, my
life shall be prolonged by you, commending me humbly unto your good grace. This
fair gentlewoman called Simphorosia, understanding the sweet and pleasant
words uttered from the very heart of Philenio, could not dissemble her sighs:
but waying her honor, because she was married, gave him no answer at al. And
the dance ended, she returned to her place. Now it chanced, as these three
Ladies, did sit together in compass, socundly disposed to debate of sundry
merry talk, behold, Emerentiana, the wife of Seignior Lamberto, not for any
evil, but in sporting wise, said unto her companions. Gentlewomen, I have to
tell you a pleasant matter which happened to me this day. What is that said
the companions? I have gotten this night, said she) in dancing, a courteous
Lover, a very fair Gentleman, and of so good behavior as any in the world:
who said that he was so inflamed with my beauty that he took no rest day nor
night: and from point to point, rehearsed unto them, all that he had said.
Which Panthemia, and Simphorosia understanding, answered that the like had
chanced unto them, and they departed not from the feast, before each of them
knew him that was their Lover. Whereby they perceived yt his words proceeded
not of faithful love, but rather of folly and dissimulatio^, in such wise
that they gave so light credit thereunto, as of custom men use to do to the
words of them that be sick. And they departed not from thence, until al three
with one accord, had conspired every one for her part, to give him a mock
Philenio continuing thus in love, sometime with one, sometime with another, and
perceiving that every of them seemed to love him, he determined with himself,
if it were possible to gather of them the last fruit of his love. But he was
greatly deceived in his desire, for that all his enterprise was broken. And
that done, Emerentiana which could not any longer dissemble the love of the
folish scholar, called one of her maids, which was a fair and jolly wenche,
charging her that she should devise means to speak with Philenio, and to
give him to understand ye love which her maystresse bare unto him, and when it
were his pleasure, she willingly would one night have him at home at her
house. Which news when Philenio heard, he greatly rejoiced, and said to the
maid. Return to your maistresse fair maid, and commend me unto her,
telling her in my behalf, that I do pray her to look for me this evening, if
her husband be not at home. During which time, Emerentiana caused a certain
number of fagote of sharp thorns to be made, and laid under the bed, where
she lay, still waiting for her minion. When night was come, Philenio took his
sword, and went to the house of his enemy, and calling at the door with the
watchworde, the same incontinently was opened. And after that they had talked a
little while together, and banketted after the best manner, they withdrewe
themselves into the chamber to take their rest. Philenio had no sooner put of
his clothes to go to bed, but Seignior Lamberto her husband came home.
Which the maistresse of the house perceiving, made as though she had been at
her wits end, and could not tell whether to conueye her minion, but prayed him
to hide himself under the bed. Philenio seeing the danger, wherein both he
and the wife were, not taking with him any other garments, but only his
shirte, exept under the bed, where he was so cruelly pricked and scratched
with the thorns that there was no part of his body (from the top of the
head to the sole of the fore) free from blood, and the more he sought to
defend himself in that dark place, the more sharply and piteously he was
tormented, and durst not cry, for fear least seignior Lamberto would kill
him. I will leave to your consideration in what plight this poor wretch was
in, who by reason of his miserable being, as he was brechlesse in that terrible
purgatory, eue^ so was he speachlesse and durst not speak for his life. In
the morning when segnior Lamberto was gone forth, the poor scholar put on his
clothes so well as he could, and al bloody as he was, returning to his lodging,
was like to die. But being diligently cured by physicia^s, in short time he
recovered his former health. Shortly after, Philenio began to pursue again his
love toward the other two, yt is to say, Panthemia and Simphorosia, and found
convenient time one evening to speak to Panthemia, to whom he rehearsed his
griefs and continual torments, praying her to have pity upon him. The subtle
and wise wench Panthemia, fayning to have compassion upon him, excused her self
by lack of means to content his desire, but in the end vanquished with fair
supplications and marvelous sighs, she made him to come home to her house,
and being unready, dispoyled of his apparel to go to bed with his Lady, she
required him to go with her into a little closet, where all her sweet smelles
and perfumes were, to the intent he might well perfume him before he went to
bed. The young dolt not doubting the subtilty of this wicked woman, entered the
closet, and setting his foot upon a board vnnayled from the ioyst, fell so deep
into a store house where merchants use to lay there cotton and wol, that he
thought he had broken his neck, and his legs, notwithstanding, as fortune
would, he had no hurt. This pore scholar being in that dark place, began
to seek for some door or ladder to go out, and finding nothing for his
purpose, he cursed the hour and time that ever he knew Panthemia. When the
dauning of the day began to appear, the simple Sot perceived in one place of
the storehouse certain vents in the wall, which gave some light, because they
were old and covered over with moss, in such wise, that he began with
marvelous force, to pluck out the stones in the most decayed place of the wall,
and made so great a hole, that he went out. And being in a lane hard by the
great streate, barefote and barelegged, and in his shirte, he went home to his
lodging, unknown of any man. A little while after Simphorosia understanding of
ye deceits yt the other two had done to Philenio, attempted to give him the
third, which was not inferior to the other twain. And for that purpose, she
began a far of to cast her amorous lokes upon him, letting him to know that
she was in great distress for his Love. This poor soul having already
forgotten his fortune past, began to walk up and down before her house, like
a man altogether tormented any payned with Love. Then Simphorosia, seeing him
to be far in love with her, sent him a letter by an old woman, whereby she
aduertized him, that his beauty and good behauior, so puissantlie did govern
her affections that she could take no rest by night nor day, for the earnest
love that she bare him. Wherefore she prayed him if it were his pleasure, to
come and speak with her. Philenio receiving that letter, and perusing the
contents thereof, not considering the deceit prepared for him, ne yet any
longer remembering the injuries past, was more joyful and glad than ever he was
before. Who taking pen and paper, answered her again, that he for his part
suffered no less torments for her sake, yea and in respect of Love, that he
loved her far better than she did him, and at al times when she pleased, he
would be at her commandment to do her service. The answer readde, and
opportunity found, Simphorosia caused him to come home to her house, and after
many false sighs, she said unto him. My dear friend Philenio, I know none
other in all the world, that has brought me into this state and plight
wherein presently I am, but you, because your beauty, good grace, and pleasant
talk, have so set my heart on fire, that I feel it to kindle and burn like
dry wood. Which talk master Scholar hearing, thought assuredly that she
consumed for love of him. This pore Nodgecock, contriuing ye time with sweet
and pleasant words, with his dareling Simphorosia, the time approached that he
should go to bed with his fair Lady, who said unto him. My sweet friend
Philenio abide a while, and let us make some banquet and collation, and taking
him by the hand, she carried him into her closet adjoining, where was a table
ready furnished with exquisit conficts and wines of the best. This Gentlewoman
had made a composition in the wine, to cause this young Gallant to sleep for a
certain time. Phileneo thinking no hurt, took the cup and filled it with the
wine, and drank it up at one draught. His spirits revived with this
refreshing, after he had been very well perfumed and washed in sweet waters, he
went to bed, and within a while after this drink began to work, and the minion
slepte so soundely, that Canon shot, or the greatest gonnes of the world were
not able to wake him. Then Simphorosia perceiving the drink begin to work,
called one of her sturdy maids that well understood the game of this pageant.
Both which carrying this pore sleepy Scholar by the feet and arms, and
opening the door very softly, they fair and well bestowed him in the midst
of the streate, a good stones cast of from the house, where he lay all night.
But when the dawning of the day did appear, or an hour before, the drink
lost his virtue, and the pore Sot began to wake, and thinking that he had been
a bed with the Gentlewoman he perceived himself brechlesse and in his shirte,
more dead than alive, through the cold that he had endured, by lying stark
naked upon the earth. The pore wretch was not able to help him self, so much
as with his arms and legs, and could not stand upon his feet without great
pain: notwithstanding, through creping and sprawling, he got home to his
house, unseen of any man, and provided so well as he could for recovery of his
health. And had it not been for his youth, which did help him at that instant,
his sinews had been benommed for ever. In the end, having attained his former
health, and the state wherein he was before, he still remembered the injuries
past, and without showing any sign of anger or ill will, made as though he
loved them all three better than ever he did before, and sometime seemed to be
in love with the one, and sometime with the other. They again for their part,
nothing mistrusting the malice of Philenio, set a good face on the matter,
using amorous chere and countenance toward him, but when his back was
turned, with mockes and floutes they took their pleasure. He bearing in his
breast secret despite, was still desirous with his hand to mark them in the
face, but he like a wise man, wayed the natures of women, and thought it would
redound to great shame and reproach, if he did them any hurt. And therefore
restraining the heat of his choler, did let them alone. And yet by devising
and practicing, how he might be even with them and revenged, he was in great
perplexity. Uery shortly after, it chanced that the scholar had devised a
mean, easily to satisfy his desire, and so sone as he had determined upon the
same, Fortune also thereunto was favorable. Who hired in the city of Bologna a
very fair house, which had a large hall, and commodious chambers: and purposed
to make a great and sumptuous feast, and to inuit many Ladies and gentlewomen
to the same. Amongs whom these three were the first that should be bidden:
which accordingly was done. And when the feast day was come, the three
Gentlewomen that were not very wise at that instant, repaired thither
suspecting nothing. In the end, a little to recreate the gentlewomen, and to
get them a stomach, attending for supper time, the scholar took these his
three lovers by the hand, and led them friendly into a chamber, somewhat to
refreshe them. When these three innocent women were come into the scholars
chamber, he shut fast the door, and going toward them, he said. Behold the
time is come for me to be revenged upon you wicked and curssed creatures, and
to make you suffer the penance of the torment wherewith ye punished me for my
great love. The gentlewomen hearing those cruel words, rather dead than
alive, began to repent that ever they had offended him, and besides that, they
curssed themselves, for giving credit unto him whom they ought to have
abhorred. The scholar with a fierce and angry countenance, commanded them
upon pain of their lives to strippe themselves naked. Which sentence when
these three Goddesses heard, they began to look one upon another, weeping
and praying him, although he would not do it for their sakes, yet in respect
of his own courtesy and natural humanity, that he would save their honor
above all things. This Gallant rejoicing at their humble and pitiful requests
was thus courteous unto them, that he would not suffer them to stand with
their garments on, in his presence. The women casting themselves down at the
Scholars feet, wept bitterly, beseching him that he would have pity upon
them, and not to be the occasion of a slander so great and infamous. But he
whose heart was hardened as the Diamond, said unto them, yt this fact was not
worthy of blame, but rather of reuengement. The women dispoyled of their
apparel (and standing before him, so free from covering as ever was Eve before
Adam) appeared as beautiful in this their innocent state of nakedness, as
they did in their bravery: in so much that the young Scholar viewing from top
to toe, those fair and tender creatures, whose whiteness surpassed the Snow,
began to have pity upon them: but calling to his remembrance the injuries
past, and the danger of death wherein he was, he rejected all pity, and
continued in his hard and obstinate determination. Then he took all their
apparel, and other furnitures that they did wear, and bestowed it in a little
chamber, and with threatening words commanded al three to lie in one bed.
The women altogether astonned, began to say to themselves. Alas what fools
be we? What will our husbands and our friends say, when they shall
understand that we be found naked and miserably slain in this bed? It had
been better for us to have dyed in our cradelles, than apprehended and found
dead in this state and plight. The Scholar seeing them bestowed one by another
in the bed, like husband and wife, covered them with a very white and large
sheet, that no part of their bodies might be seen and known, and shutting
the chamber door after him, Philenio went to seek their husbands, which were
dancing in the Hall. And the dance ended, he brought them into the Chamber
where the three Muses lay in their bed, saying unto them. Sirs I have
brought you into this place to show you some pastime and to let you see the
fairest things that ever you saw in your lives. Then approaching nere the
bed, and holding a torche in his hand, he began fair and softlye to lift up
the sheet at the beds feet, discovering these fair Ladies even to the
knees. Ye should have seen then, how the husbands did behold their white
legs, and their well proporcioned feet, which done, he disclosed them even
to the stomach, and showed their legs and thighs far whiter than
alabaster, which seemed like two pillars of fine marble, with a round body so
well formed as nothing could be better. Consequently he turned up the sheet a
little further, and their stomachs, appeared somewhat round and plu^me, having
two round breasts, so firm and feate, that they would have constrained the
great God Jupiter, to embrace and kiss them. Whereat the husbands took so
great pleasure and contentacion, as could be devised. I omit for you to think
in what plight, these poor naked women were, hearing their husbands to make
them. All this while, they lay very quiet, and durst not so much as to hemme
or cough, for fear to be known The husbands were earnest with the Scholar
to discover their faces, but he wyser in other men's hurts, than in his own,
would by no means consent unto it. Not contented with this, the young Scholar
showed their apparel to their husbands, who seeing the same, were, astonned, and
in viewing it with great admiration, they said to themselves. Is not this the
gown that I once made for my wife? Is not this the Coyfe that I bought her? Is
not this ye Pendant that she uses about her neck? Be not these the rings that
she wears upon her fingers? Being gone out of the chamber, for fear to
trouble the feast, he would not suffer them to depart, but caused them to
tarry supper. The Scholar understanding that supper was ready. And that the
Master of the house, had disposed all things in order, he caused the geastes to
sit down. And whiles they were removing and placing the stools and chayres,
he returned into the chamber, where the three Daines lay, and uncovering the^,
he said unto them. Bonidur, fair Ladies, did you hear your husbands? They
whereby, and do earnestly tarry for you at supper. What do ye mean to do? Up
and rise ye Dormouses, rub your eyes, and gape no more, dispatche and make
you ready, it is time for you now to repair into the Hal, where the other
Gentlewomen do tarry for you. Behold now how this Scholar was revenged by
interteigning them after this manner. Then the poor desolate women, fearing
least their case would sort to some pitiful success, dispayring of their
health, and thus troubled and discomforted, rose up looking rather for death
than for any other thing. And tourning them toward the Scholar, they said
unto him. Master Philenio, you have sufficient revenge upon us: the best for
you to do now, is to take your sword, and to bereue us of our life, which
is more loathsome unto us than pleasant. And if you will not do us that good
turn, suffer us to go home to our houses unknown, yt our honors may be
saved. Then Philenio thinking that he had at pleasure used their persons,
delivered them their apparel, and so sone as they were ready, he let them out
at a little door, very secretlye, unknown of any man, and so they went home to
their houses. So sone as they had put of their fair furnitures, they folded
them up, and laid them in their chestes. Which done, they went about their
household business, till their husbands came home, when their husbands
returned, they found their wives sowing by the fire side in their chambers.
And because of their apparel, their ringes, and iewelles. which they had seen
in the Scholars chamber, it made them to suspect their wives, every of them
demanding his several wife, where she had been that night, and where their
apparel was. They well assured of themselves, answered boldly, that they were
not out of their house all the evening, and taking the keys of their cofers,
showed them their apparel, their rings, and other things, which their
husbands had made them. Which when their husbands saw, they could not tell
what to say, and forthwith rejected all the suspicion, which they had conceived
against them: telling them from point to point, what they had seen yt night.
The women understanding those words, made as though they knew nothing, and
after a little sport and laughter between them: they went to bed. Many times
Philenio met his Gentlewome^ in ye streates and said unto them. Which of you
was most afraid or worste entreated? But they holding down their heads,
passed forth not speaking a word. In this manner the Scholar was required so
well as he could, of the deceytes done against him, without any blow given.

A chaste Death.
The piteous and chaste death of one of the Mulcters wives of the Queen of
Navarre.

The.L. Novel.
IN the City of Amboise, there was a Muleter that served the Queen of
Navarre, sister to King Fraunces the first of that name, which was brought a
bed of a son at Blois: To which Town the said Muleter was gone to be paid
his quarters wages. Whose wife dwelled at Amboise beyond the bridges. It
chanced that of long time one of her husbands servants did so disordinatelye
love her, that upon a certain day he could not forbear but he must needs
utter the effect of his Love borne unto her. But she bring a right honest
woman, took her man's suit in very ill part, threatening to make her husband to
beat him, and to put him away, and used him in such wise, that after that
time he durst not speak thereof no more, no yet to make any sign or
semblance. And kept that fire covered within his breast, until his Master was
ridden out of the town, and that his maistresse was at euensong at Saint
Florentines, a church of the castle, far from her house. Who now being alone
in the house, began to ymagine how he might attempt that thing by force, which
before by no supplication or service he was able to attain. For which purpose,
he brake up a board between his maystresse chamber and his. But because the
curteyns of his master and maystresse bed, and of the servants of the other
side, covered and hid the walls between, it could not be perceived, nor yet
his malice discried, until such time as his maistresse was gone to bed, with
a little wenche of.xij. years of age. And so sone as the pore woman was fallen
into her first sleep, this varlet entered in at a hole which he had broken, and
so conveyed himself into her bed in his shirte, with a naked sword in his
hand. But so sone as she felt him laid down by her, she lept out of the bed,
going about to persuade him by such possible means as was mete for an honest
woman to do. And he endued with beastly Love, rather acquainted with the
language of his Mulets, than with her honest reasons, showed himself more
beastly than the beasts, with whom he had of long time been comiersant. For,
seeing her so often to run about the table that he could not catch her, and
also that she was so strong, that twice she overcame him, in despair that he
should never enjoy her a live, he gave her a great blow with his sword over
she raynes of the back, thinking that if fear and force could not make her
to yield her self, yet pain and smarte should cause her. Howbeit, it chanced
clean contrary. For like as a good man of arms when he sees his own
blood, is more chafed to revenge himself upon his enemies to acquire honor:
even so the chaste heart of this woman, did reenforce and fortefie her courage
in double wise, to avoid and escape the hands of this wicked varlet, devising
by all means possible by fair words to make the varlet to acknowledge his
fault. But he was so inflamed with fury, that there was no place in him to
receive good counsel. And eftsoon with his sword, gashed her tender body with
diverse and sundry strokes, for the avoiding whereof, so fast as her legs
could bear her, she ran up and down the chamber. And when through want of
blood she perceived death approach, lifting up her eyes unto heaven, and
joining her hands together, gave thanks unto God, whom she termed to be her
force, her virtue her patience and chastity, humbly beseching him to take in
good part the blood which by his commandment was sheadde in honor of that
precious blood, which from his own son did issue upon the Cross, whereby she
did believe firmly and steadfastly, that all her sins were wiped away defaced
from the memory of his wrath and anger, and in saying, Lord receive my soul
which was derely bought and redeemed with thy bounty and goodness, she fell
down to the ground upon her face where the wicked villayne inflicted her body
with manifold blows. And after she had lost her speech and the force of her
body: this most wicked and abominable varlet, took her by force, which had no
more strength and power to defend her self. And when he had satisfied his
cursed desire, he fled away in such have, as afterward for all the
pursuit made after him, he could not be found. The young wenche which lay with
her, for fear hid her self under the bed. But when she perceived the villayne
departed, she came unto her maistresse, and finding her speachelesse and
without moving, she cried out of the window unto the next neighbors to come
to succor her. And they which loved her, and esteemed her so well as any woman
in the Town, came presently unto her, and brought diverse Surgeons with them,
who finding upon her body.xxv. mortal wounds, they did so much as in them
lay to help her. But it was impossible Howbeit she lay one hour without
speech, making signs with her eyes and hands, declaring that she had not
lost her understanding being demanded by the priest, of the faith wherein she
died, and of her salvation, she answered by such evident signs, that her
speech and communicacion could not declare it better, how yt her trust and
confidence was in the death of Jesus Christ, whom she hoped to see in the
celestial city, and so with a joyful countenance, her eyes erected up to the
heavens, she rendered her chaste body to the earth, and her soul to her creator.
And when she was shrouded ready to the burial, as her neighbors were
attending to follow her to the church, her pore husband came home, and the
first sight he saw, was the body of his dead wife before his door, whereof
before that instante he had no news. And when he understood the order of her
death, he then doubled his sorrow, in such wise that he was also like to die.
In this sort was this martyr of Chastity buried in the Church of S.
Florentine, where all the honest dames and wives of the city endeavored
themselves to accompany her, and to honor her with such reverence as they were
able to do: accompting themselves most happy to dwell in that Town, where a
woman of such virtuous behavior did dwell. The folish and wanton persons seeing
the honor done to ye dead body, determined from that time forth, to renew
their former life and to change the same into a better.

A King of Naples.
A King of Naples, abusing a Gentleman's wife, in the end did were the horns
himself.

The.Lj. Novel.
IN the city of Naples, in the time of King Alphonsus, in whose reign
wantonness bare chiefest sway, there was a gentleman so honest, beautiful and
comely, as for his good conditions, an old Gentleman gave to him his daughter
in marriage, which in beauty and good grace was comparable to her husband. The
love was great between them, till it chanced upon a shoruetide, that the King
went a masking into the city, where every man endeavored himself to
interteigne him the best he could. And when he came to this gentleman's house,
he was best received of any place in all the town, as well for banketting, as
for musical songs, and the gentlewoman, the fairest that the King saw in all
the city to his contentation. And upon the end of the banquet, she sang a song
with her husband, with a grace so good that it greatly augmented her beauty.
The King seeing so many perfections in one body, conceived not so great
pleasure in the sweet accordes of her husband and her, as he did how to
devise, to interrupt and break them. And the difficulty for bringing that to
pass, was ye great amity that he saw between them. Wherefore he bare in his
heart that passion so couerte, as he possibly could. But partly for his own
solace and comfort, he feasted all the Lords and Ladies of Naples, where the
gentleman and his wife was not forgotten. And because man willingly believes,
that he does see, he thought that the lokes of that gentlewoman promised unto
him some grace in time to come, if the presence of her husband were not let
thereunto. And to prove whether his conjecture were true, he sent her husband in
commission to Rome, for.xv days or three weeks. And so sone as he was gone,
his wife which hitherto had not felt any long absence from her husband, made
great sorrow for the same, whereof she was recomforted by the King, many times
by sweet persuasions, by presents and gifts, in such sort, that she was
not only comforted, but contented with her husbands absence. And before the
three weeks were expired of his return, she was so amorous of ye King, that
she was no less sorrowful of his coming home, than she was for his departure.
And to the intent the Kings presence might not be lost, they agreed together,
that when her husband was gone to his possessions in the country, she should
send word to the King, that he might have safe repair unto her, and so
secretly, that his honor, (which he feared more than he did the fact) might
not be impaired. Upon this hope, this Ladies heart was set on a merry pin.
And when her husband was come home, she welcomed him so well, that albeit he
knew how the King made much of her in his absence, yet he would not believe
it. But by continuance of time, this fire that could not be covered, by little
and little began to kindle, in such wise, that the husband doubted much of
the truth, and watched the matter so near, that he was almost out of doubt.
But for fear, least he which did the wrong, should do him greater hurts,
if he seemed to know it, he determined to dissemble ye matter. For he thought
it better to live with some grief, than to hazard his life for a woman which
loved him not. Not withstanding, for this displeasure, he thought to be even
with the king if it were possible. And knowing that many times, despite makes
a woman to do that which Love can not do, specially those women that have
honorable hearts and stout stomakes, was so bold without blushing, upon a day
in speaking to the Queen, to say unto her, that he had pity upon her, for
that she was no better beloved of the king her husband. The Queen which heard
tell of the love between the king and his wife. I can not (quod she) both enjoy
honor and pleasure together, I know well that honor I have, whereof one
receives the pleasure, and as she has the pleasure, so has not she the honor
that I have. He which knew well by whom those words were spoken, said unto
her. Madame, honor waited upon you even at your birth, For you be of so good a
house, that to be a Queen or Empress, you can not augment your nobility, but
your beauty, grace, and honesty, has deserved so much pleasure, as she that
depriueth you of that which is incident to your degree, does more wrong to her
self, than to your person. For she for a glory that has turned her to shame,
has there withal lost so much pleasure, as your grace or any Lady in the
realm may have. And I may say unto you (Madame) that if the king were no king
as he is, I think that he could not excel me in pleasing of a woman. Being
sure, that to satisfy such a virtuous personage as you be, he might exchange
his complexion with mine. The Queen smiling, answered him. Although the king
be of more delicate and weaker complexion tha^ you be, yet the love that he
bears me, does so much content me, that I esteem the same above all things
in the world. The gentleman said unto her. Madame, if it were so, I would
take no pitle upon you, for I know well that the honest love of your heart,
would yield unto you great contentation, if the like were to be found in the
king. But God has foresene and prevented the same, least enjoying your own
desire, you would make him your God upon earth. I confess unto you (said the
Queen) that the love I bear him, is so great, that the like place he could
not find in no woman's heart, as he does in muse. Pardon me Madame (said the
Gentleman unto her if I speak more frankely, your grace has not sounded the
depth of each man's heart. For I dare be bold to say unto you, that I know
one that does love you in such wise, whose love is so great, that you love in
respect of his, is nothing. And for so much as he sees the Kings love to
fail in you, his does grow and increase, in such sort, that if your love
were agreeable unto his, you should be recompensed of all your losses. The
Queen as well by his words as by his countenance, began to perceive, that the
talk proceeded from the bottom of his heart, and called to her remembrance that
long time he had endeavored him self to do her service, with such affection, as
for love he was grown to be melancolike, which she thought before, to come
through his wives occasion, but now she assuredly believed that it was for her
sake. And thus the force of Love, which is well perceived when it is not
feigned, made her sure of yt, which was unknown to all the world. And
beholding the gentleman which was more amiable than her husband, and seeing
that he was forsaken of his wife, as she of the king, pressed with despite and
ialousie of her husband, and provoked with love of the gentleman, began to
say with finger in eye, and sighing sobbes. O my god, must vengeance get that
at my hand, which Love can not do? The gentleman well understanding her
meaning, answered. Madame vengeance is sweet unto him, which in place of
killing his enemy, gives life to a perfect friend. I think yt it is time that
troth should remove from you the folish love, that you bear unto him which
loves you not. And that just and reasonable love, should expel from you the
fear, which never can remain in a noble and virtuous heart. But now Madame,
omitting to speak of the greatness of your estate, let us consider that we be
both man and woman, the most deceived of the world, and betrayed of them which
we have most derely loved. Let us now revenge our selves (Madame) not only to
render unto them, as they have deserved, but to satisfy the love which for my
part I can no longer beat, except I should die. And I think, that if your
heart be not harder than Flint, or Diamont, it is impossible but you must
perceive some spark of fire, which increases more than I am able to
dissemble. And if pity of me which dies for your love, does not move you to
love me, at least wise let love of your self constrayne you, which being so
perfect a creature as you be, does deserve to enjoy the hearts of all the
honest men of the world. And let I say, the contempt and forsaking of him move
you, for whom you have disdayned all other persons. The Queen hearing those
words, was so ravished, that for fear to declare by her countenance ye
trouble of her spirit, leaning upon the Gentlema^s arm, went into a garden
hard by her chamber, where she walked a long time not able to speak a word.
But the Gentleman seeing her half won, when he was at the end of the Alley,
where non^e could see them, he certified her by effect, the love which so long
time he kept secret from her. And both with one consent rejoiced in revenge,
whereof the passion was importable. And there determined, that so often as he went
into the country, and the King from his Castle to ye City, he should
return to the Castle to see the Queen. Thus deceyuing the deceyuers, all
four were partakers of ye pleasure, which two alone thought to enjoy. The
accord made, they departed, the Lady to her chamber, and the Gentleman to his
house, with such contentacion, as they had quite forgotten all their troubles
past. And the fears that either of them had of the assembly of the King and of
the Gentlewoman, was turned to desire, which made the Gentleman to go more
often than he was wont to do into the Country, being not past half a mile of.
And so sone as the king knew thereof, he failed not to visit his Lady, and
the Gentleman the night following went to the Castle to salute the Queen, to
do the office of the Kings Lieutenant, so secretly as never any man did
perceive it. This voyage endured of long time, but the King because he was a
public person, could not so well dissemble his love, but all the world did
perceive it, and al men pityed the gentleman's state. For diverse light persons
behind his back would make horns unto him, in sign of mockery, which he
right well perceived. But this mockery pleased him so well, that he esteemed his
horns better than ye Kings Crown, who and the Gentleman's wife one day, could
not refrain (beholding a Stagges head set up in the Gentlema^s house) from
breaking into a laughter before his face, saying, how that head became the
house very well. The Gentleman that had so good a heart as he, wrote over that
head these words.

These horns I wear and bear for every man to view:
But I wear and bear them not in token they be true.
The King retourning again to this Gentleman's house, finding this
superscription newely written, demanded of the Gentleman the signification of
them. Who said unto him.

If Princes secret things, be from the horned Heart concealed:
Why should like things, of horned beasts, to Princes be revealed?
But content your self. All they that wear horns, be pardoned to wear their
cappes upon their heads. For they be so sweet and pleasant, that they
vncappe no man, and they wear them so light, that they think they have none at
all. The king perceived well by his words, that he knew something of his
doings, but he never suspected the Love between the Queen and him. For the
Queen was better contented with her husbands life, and with greater ease
dissembled her grief. Wherefore either parts lived long time in this love,
till age had taken order for dissolueio^ thereof. Behold Ladies ( q
Saffredante) this History, which for example I have willingly recyted unto
you, that when your husbands do make you horns as big as a Goat bears,
you may render unto him the monstrous head of a Stagge, peace ( q Emarsnite
smyling) no more words.

A Princess of Flaundres.
The rash enterprise of a Gentleman against a Princess of Flaundres, and of
the damage and shame which he received thereof.

The. Lij. Novel.
THere was in Flaundres a Lady of an honorable house, which had two husbands,
by whom she had no children that were living. During the time of her
widowhode, she dwelt within one of her brothers, that loved her very well, which
was a noble man, and had married a Kings daughter. This young Prince was much
given to pleasure, loving hunting, pastime, and the company of fair Ladies,
according as youth does require. He had a wife yt was cursed and troublesome,
whom the delectations of her husband in no wise did content and please.
Wherefore this noble man caused his sister daily to keep company with his
wife. This Gentlewoman his sister, was of pleasant conversation, and
therewithal very honest and wise. There was in the house of this noble man, a
Gentleman whose worship, beauty and grace, did surpass all the rest of his
companions. This Gentleman perceiving the sister of his Lord and Master to be
pleasant and of joyful countenance, thought to prove if the attempt of an
honest friend would be vouchsaued at her hands, but he found her answer to
be contrary to her countenance. And albe if that her answer was such as was
meet for a Princess and right honest Gentlewoma^, yet because she perceived
him to be a goodly personage, and courteous, she easily pardoned his bold
attempt, and seemed that she took it not in ill part when he spoke unto her.
Nevertheless she warned him, after that time, to move no such matter, which he
promised, because he would not lose his pleasure and honor that he conceived to
entertayne her. Notwithstanding, by process of time his affection increased so
much, that he forgot ye promise which he had made unto her, not hazarding his
enterprise by words: for he had to long against his will experimented her wise
and discrete aunsweres. But he thought if he could find her in some
convenient place (because she was a widow, young, of lusty years and good
complexion) it were possible she would take pity upon him, and of her self.
And that he might bring his purpose to effect, he said to his Master, that he
had besides his own house very goodly game, and that if it pleased him to kill
three or four Stagges in the month of May, he could never see better
pastime. The Lord as well for the love he bare to the Gentleman, as for the
pleasure he had in hunting, granted his request. And went to his house which
was so fair and well furnished, as the best Gentleman in all the Country had
not a better, and did lodge his Lord and Lady in one side of the house, and
in the other directly against it, her whom he loved better than himself. The
Chamber was so well hanged with Tapistrie, and furnished, and so trimly matted,
as it was impossible to perceive a falling door, which was by the beds side,
descending to the chamber where his Mother lay, which was an old Lady, that
was troubled with the Catarre or Rume. And because she had a Coughe, fearing to
disease the Princess which lay above her, she changed chambres with her
son. And every night the old Gentlewoman brought conflictes to the Lady for
her recreation, upon whom the Gentleman waited, who (for that he was well
beloved and very familiar with her brother) was not refused to be by her at her
rising and going to bed. Whereby he daily took occasion to increase his
love and affection. In such sort that one night, after he had caused the Lady
to sit up late, (she being surprised with sleep) he was forced to depart the
chamber, and to repair to his own. Where when he had put on the most brauest
perfumed shirt that he had, and his cap for the night so trimly dressed, that
there wa^ted nothing, he thought in beholding himself, that there was no Lady
in the world that could refuse his beauty and comeliness. Wherefore
promising himself a happy success in his enterprise, he went to his bed where
he purposed not long to abide, for the desire that he had to enter into an
other, which should be more honorable and pleasant unto him. And after he had
sent his me^ away, he rose to shut the door after them, and hearkened a good
while, whether he could hear any noise in the Ladies chamber above. And when
he was sure that every man was at rest, he began to take his pleasant journey,
and by little and little opened the falling door, which was so well trymmed
with cloth, that it made no noise at all, and went up to ye Ladies bed side,
which then was in her first sleep, and without respect of the bond and
promise that he made unto her, or ye honorable house whereof she came, without
leave or reverence, he laid him self down besides her, who felt him between
her arms before she perceived his coming. But she which was somewhat strong,
unfolded her self out of his hands, and in asking him what he was, began to
strike, to bite and scratch. In such wise, as he was constrained (for fear
least she should cry out) to stop her mouth with the couerlet, which was
impossible for him to do. For when she saw him to press withal his force to
despoile her of her honor, she spared no part of her might to defend and keep
her self, and called (so loud as she could) her woman of honor, that lay in
her chamber, which was a Gentlewoman right ancient and sober, who eue^ in her
smock, ran straight to her maistresse. And when ye gentleman perceived that
he was discovered, was so fearful to be known of the Lady, that so sone as
he could he shifted himself down by his trapdore. And when before he had
desire, hope and assurance to be welcome, now he was brought in despair for
retourning in so unhappy state. When he was in his chamber, he found his
glass and candle upon the table, and beholding his face al bloody with
scratchings and bitings, which she had bestowed upon him, the blood whereof
ran down his fair shirte which was more bloudled than gylted, he began to
moan himself in this wise. O beauty, thou art now paid thy deserte, for upon
thy vain promise have I adventured a thing impossible. And that which might
have been the augmenting of my contentation, is now the redoubling of my
sorrow. Being assured yt if she knew how contrary to my promise I have
enterprised this folish fact, I should utterly forgo the honest and common
conversation which I have with her above all other. That which my estimation,
beauty and good behavior do deserve, I ought not to hide in darkness. To
gain her love I ought not to assay her chaste body by force, but rather by my
service and humble patience, to wait and attend til love did vanguish. For
without love all the virtue and puissance of man is of no power and force. Even
thus he passed the night in such tears, griefs and playntes, as a man can
not well report and utter. In the morning, when he beheld his bloody face al
mangled and torn, he fained himself to be very sick, and that he could
abide no light, til the company were gone from his house. The Lady which thus
remained victorious, knowing that there was no man in all her brothers court,
that durst attempt a deed so wicked, but only he, which was so bold to
declare his love unto her, knew well that it was her host, And when she and
her woman of honor had searched all the corners of the chamber to know what he
was, and saw that she would not find him, she said unto her woman in a great
rage. Assure your self, it can be none other, but the Gentleman of the house,
whose villainous order I will declare to my brother in the morning, in such
sort, that his head shall be a witness and testimony of my chastity. Her
woman seeing her in that fury, said unto her. Madame I am right glad to see
the love and affection which you have to your honor, for the increase whereof,
you will not spare the life of one, which has adventured himself so much
forced with the love that he bears unto you. But many times such one
thinks by those means to increase his love, which altogether he does
diminishe. Wherefore (Madame) I humbly beseech you to tell me the truth of
this fact. And when the Lady had recompted the same at length, the woman of
honor said unto her. Your grace does say that he got no other thing of you,
but scratches and blows with your fistes. Do I assure you (quod the Lady) and
I am certain if he get him not a good surgeon, the marks will be seen to
morrow. Well Madame (quod the Gentlewoman) since it is so, me thinks you
have greater occasion to praise God, than to muse upon reuengement: For you may
believe, that fithens he had the courage to enterprise such a thing, and that
despite has made him to fail of his purpose, you can devise no greater death
for him to suffer, tha^ the same. If you desire to be revenged, let Love and
shaine alone to bring that to pass, who know better which way to torment him
than your self: and with greater honor to your person. Take heed Madame from
falling into such inconvenience as he is in. For in place of great pleasure
which he thought to have gained, he has received the most extreme anoyance,
that any Gentleman can suffer. And you Madame by thinking to augment your
honor, you may decrease and diminishe the same. And by making that complaint,
you shall cause that to be known, which no man knows. For of his part (you
may be assured) there shall never be any thing revealed. And when my Lord your
brother at your request, shall execute that justice which you desire, and that
the pore gentlemau shall be ready to dye, yet the brute will run that he has
had his pleasure upon you. And the greatest part will say, that it is a
difficult matter for a gentleman to do such an enterprise, except the Lady
minister some great occasion. Your grace is fair and young, frequenting your
life in pleasant company, there is none in all the Court, but sees and marketh
the good countenance you bear to that gentleman, whereof your self has some
suspicion. Which will make every man suppose that if he have done this
enterprise, it was not done with out some consent on your part. And your honor
which hitherto has borne your port a loft, shall be disputed upon in all
places where this history shall be remembered. The Princess understanding, and
waying the good reasons of her Gentlewoman, knew that she spoke the truth: and
that by most just cause she should be blamed: considering the familiarity and
good countenance which daily she bare unto the Gentleman. Wherefore she
inquired of her woman of honor, what was best to be done. Who answered her
thus. Madame since it pleases you to receive mine advise, by waying the
affection whereof it proceeds, me think you ought in your heart to rejoice,
that the goodliest, and most courteous Gentleman that lives, could neither by
love, nor force, dispoyle you of your great virtue and chastity. For which
(Madame) you are bound, to humble your self before God, acknowledging that it
is not done by your virtue, because many women walking in a more paynful and
more unpleasant trade than you do, have been humiliated and brought low by me^
far more unworthy of love, tha^ he which loves you. And ye ought now to
fear more than ever you did, to use any semblance and talk of amity, because
there have been many that have fallen the second time into dangers and perils,
which they have anoyded at ye first. Remember (Madame) that love is blind, who
darkeneth men's eyes in such sort, that where a man thinks the way most sure,
there he is most ready to fall. And I suppose Madame, that you ought not to be
known of this chance, neither to him, no yet to any man else, and when he
remembers any thing unto you, to make as though you did not understand his
meaning, to avoid two dangers. The one of vain glory for the victory which
you have had, the other to take pleasure in remembering things, that be so
pleasant to the flesh, which the most chaste have had much a do to defend them
selves from feeling of some sparks, although they do seek means to shun and
avoid them withal their possible power. Moreover Madame, to the end that he
think not by such hazard and enterprise to have done a thing agreeable to your
mind, mine adusse is, that by little and little, you do make your self
strange, and use no more your wonted grace unto him, that he may know how
much you despise his folly, and consider how great your goodness is, by
co^tenting your self with ye victory which God has given you, without seeking
any further v^tion or reuengement. And God grant you grace (Madame) to
continue that honesty which he has planted in your heart, and by
acknowledging that all goodness proceeds from him, you may love him and serve
him better than ever ye did. The Princess determined to credit the counsel
of her gentlewoman, slept with so great joy as the pore gentleman waked with
sorrow. On the morrow ye noble man ready to depart, asked for his host, unto
whom answer was made, that he was so sick, that he could not abide the
light, nor endure to hear one speak. Whereof the Prince was sore abashed, and
would have visited him, but that it was told him that he was a sleep, and was
very loath to wake him. Wherefore without bidding him farewell, he departed,
taking with him his wife and sister, who hearing the excuse of the Gentleman,
that would not see the Prince, nor yet his company, at their departure, was
persuaded that it was he, that had done her all that torment, and durst not
show the marks which she had signed in his face. And although his Master did
send oftentimes for him, yet came he not to the Court, until he was healed of
all his wounds, except that which Love and despite had made in his heart. When
he came to ye Court and appeared before his victorious enemy, he blushed for
shame of his overthrow. And he which was the stoutest of all the company, was
so astonned, that many times being before her, he could not tell which way to
look or turn his face. Wherefore she was assured that her suspicion was
certain and true, by little and little estraunging her self from him, but it
was not done so slightly or politikely, but that he perceived it well enough,
and yet he durst make no semblance thereof, for fear of worse adventure.
Notwithstanding he conserved both his love in his heart, and also patience of
mind, for the loss of his Ladies favor, which he had right well deserved.

Amadour and Florinda
The love of Amadour and Florinda. Wherein be contained many sleightes and
dissimuletions together, with the renowined chastity of the said Florinda.

The.Liij. Novel.
IN the County of Arande, in Aragon, there was a Lady, which in the best time
of her youth, continued the widdowe of the Earl of Arande, with one son and
one daughter, called Florinda. The said Lady brought up her children in all
virtue and honesty, meet and conuenable for all Lords and Gentlemen, in such
forte, that her house was renowned to be one of ye most honorable houses in all
ye Region of Spain. Many times she repaired to Tolledo, where the King of
Spain held his Court, and when she came to Sarragosa, which was hard
adjoining to the Court, she continued long with the Queen, and in the Court,
where she was had in so good estimation as any Lady might be. Upon a time going
toward the King, according to her custom, which was at Sarragosa, in his
Castle of Iasserie, this Lady passed by a village that belonged to the Uiceroy
of Cathalongne, who still continued upon ye frontiers of Parpignon, by reason
of the great wars yt were between the French King and him. Howbeit, at that
time peace being concluded, the Uiceroy withal his captains were come to do
reverence to ye King. The Uiceroy knowing that the Countess of Arande did
pass through his country, went to mete her, as well for ancient amity, as
also for the honor he bare unto her being allied to the King. Now this Uiceroy
had in his company diverse honest Gentlemen, which through the freque^tation
and continuance of the long wars had gotten such honor and fame, that every
man that might see them and behold them, did account themselves happy. But
among all the other, there was one called Amadour, who although he was
but.xviij. or.xix. years of age, yet he had such an assured grace, and a
wit so excellent, yt he was demed amongs a thousand persons worthy to have
the government of a common wealth, which good wit was coupled with a
marvelous natural beauty, that there was no eye, but did content it self
eftsoon to behold him. And this beauty so exquisite, was associated with
wonderful eloquence, that doubtful it was to say, whether of them merited
greatest honor, either his grace, his beauty or his excellent tongue, but that
which brought him into best reputation, was his great hardiness, whereof the
common report and brute, was nothing impeached or stayed for all his youth. For
in so many places he showed his marvelous chiualcie, that not only Spain,
but France and Italy, did singularly commend and set forth his virtue:
because in all the wars wherein he was present, he never spared himself for
any danger. And when his country was in peace and quiet, he sought to serve
in strange places, being loved and esteemed both of his friends and enemies.
This Gentleman for the love of his Captain was come into that country, where
was arrived the Countess of Arande, and in beholding the beauty and good
grace of her daughter, which was not then past.xij. years of age, he thought
that she was the fairest and most virtuous personage that ever be saw: and
that if he could obtain her good will, he should be so well satisfied as if
he had gained all the goods and pleasures of the world. And after he had a good
while viewed her, for all the impossibility that reason could devise to the
contrary, he determined to love her, although some occasion of that
impossibility, might rise through ye greatness of the house whereof she came,
and for want of age which was not able as yet to understand the passions of
love. But against the fear thereof he armed himself with good hope,
persuading with himself, that time and patience would bring happy end to his
travail. And from that time gentle Love which without any other occasion than
by his own force was entered the heart of Amadour, promised him favor and
help by all means possible to attain the same. And to provide for the
greatest difficulty, which was the far distance of the Country where he
dwelt, and the small occasion yt he had thereby any more to see Florinda, he
thought to marry against his determination made with the Ladies of Barlelone
and Parpignon, amongs whom he was so conversant by reason of the wars, that
he seemed rather to be a Cathelan, tha^ a Castillan, although he were borne by
Tolledo, of a rich and honorable house, but because he was a younger brother,
he inioyed no great patrimony or revenue. Not withstanding, Love and Fortune
seeing him forsaken of his parents determined to accomplish some notable
exployte in him, and gave him (by means of his virtue) that which the laws of
his country refused to give. He had good experience in factes of war, and was
so well beloved of all Princes and Rulers, that he refused many times their
goods, as a man that wayed not the same. The Countess of whom I spoke,
arrived thus at Sarragossa, was very well interteigned of the king, and of his
whole Court. The Governor of Cathalogne many times came thither to visit her,
who^ Amadour never failed to accompany, for the only pleasure he had to talk
with Florinda. And to make himself to be known in that company, he went to
Auenturade, which was the daughter of an old Knight that dwelt hard by ye
house, which from her youth was brought up with Florinda, in such familiar sort,
that she knew all the secrets of her heart. Amadour as well for the honesty yt he
found in her, as for the living of three thousand Ducats by the year which she
should have to her marriage, determined to give her such interteigneme^t, as
one that was disposed to marry her. Whereunto the Gentlewoman did willingly
recline her ear. And because that he was pore, and the father of the damosel
rich, she thought that her father would never accord to the marriage, except
it were by means of the Countess of Arande. Whereupon she went to Madame
Florinda, and said unto her. Madame, you see this Castillan Gentleman, which
so oftentimes talks with me, I do believe that his pretense is to marry me.
You do know what a father I have, who will never give his consent, if he be
not persuaded thereunto by my Lady your mother and you. Florinda which loved
the damsel as her self, assured her that she would take upon her to bring
that matter to pass, with so earneste travail as if the case were her own.
Then Auenturade brought Amadour before Florinda, who after he had saluted her,
was like to fall in a sown for joy, and although he were compted the most
eloquent person of Spain, yet was he now become mute and dumb before Florinda,
whereat she marvelled much. For albeit she was but. xv. years of age, yet she
understood that there was no man in Spain that had a better tongue or a more
conuenable grace than he. And seeing that he said nothing unto her, she spoke
unto him in this wise. The same which is bruted of you (sir Amadour) through
out the whole country of Spain, is such that it makes you known and esteemed
in this company, and gives desire and occasion to those that know you, to
employ themselves to do you pleasure. Wherefore if there be any thing wherein I
may gratify you, use me I beseech you. Amadour that gased upon the beauty of
that Lady, was rapt and surprised, not well able to render thanks unto her. And
although Florinda marvelled to see him without answer, yet she imputed the
same rather to bashfulnesse than to any force of love, and departed without any
further talk. Amadour knowing the virtue which in so tender years began to
appear in Florinda, said unto her whom he purposed to marry. Do not marvel,
though my talk do fail before Madame Florinda, for the virtues and wise
words, hidden in that young personage, did so amase me, that I wist not what to
say. But I pray you Auenturade (quod he) which knows all her secrets, to
tell me, if it be otherwise possible, but that she has the heart of all the
Lords and Gentlemen of the Court: for they which know her and do not love
her, be stones, or beasts. Auenturade which then loved Amadour more than all
the men in the world, and would conceal nothing from him, said unto him, that
Madame Florinda was beloved of the whole world: but for the custom of the
country, few men did speak unto her. And (quod she) as yet I see none that
make any semblance unto her, but two young Princes of Spain, which desired to
marry her, whereof the one is the son of the Infant Fortune, and the other of
the Duke of Cadouce. I pray you the^ (quod Amadour) to tell me which of them as
you think, does love her best. She is so wise said Auenturade, that she will
confess or grant her love to none, but to such as her mother pleases. But
so far as we can judge, she favors much better the son of the Infant
Fortune, tha^ the Duke of Cadouce. And for yt I take you to be a man of good
judgment, this day you shall have occasion to judge the truth. For the son
of the Infant Fortune is brought up in the court, who is one of the goodliest
and most perfect young gentlemen in all christendom. And if the marriage do
proceed, according to our opinion which be her maids, he shall be assured to
have Madame Florinda. And then shall be joined together the goodliest couple in
the world. And you must understand, that although they be both very young, she
of.xij. years of age, and he of.xv. yet it is three years past since their
love first began. And if you be disposed above other to obtain her favor,
mine advise is, that ye become friend and servant unto him. Amadour was very
joyful to hear tell that his Lady loved some man, trusting that in time he
should win the place, not of husband, but of servant. For he feared
nothing of all her virtue, but a lack of disposition to love. And after this
communication, Amadour bent himself to haunt the society of the son of the
Infant Fortune, whose favor he sone obtained. For all the pastimes which the
young Prince loved, Amadour could do right well. And above all other, he was
very cunning in ryding of horses, and in handling all kinds of arms and
weapons, and in all other pastimes and games meet for a young Gentleman. Wars
began in Languedoc, and Amadour must needs retire with the Governor, to his
great sorrow and grief. For he had there no mean to return to the place
where he might see Florinda. For which cause he spoke to his own brother which
was Stuarde of the King of Spaines householde, and declared unto him what
courtesy he had found in the house of the Countess of Arande, and of the
Damsel Auenturade, praying him that in his absence he would do his
endeavor, that the marriage might proceed, and that he would obtain for him
the credit and good opinion of the King and Queen, and of all his friends.
The Gentleman which loved his brother, as well for Natures sake, as for his
great virtues, promised him his travail and industry to the uttermost. Which
he did in such wise that the old man her father, now forgetting other
natural respect, began to mark and behold ye virtues of Amadour, which ye
Countess of Arande, and specially fair Florinda, painted and set forth unto
him, and likewise the young Earl of Arande, which began to grow to years, and
therewithal to love those that were virtuous, and given to honest exercise.
And when the marriage was agreed between the parents, the said Stuarde sent for
his brother whilst the truce endured between the two Kings. About this time,
the King of Spain retired to Madric, to avoid the evil air that was in many
places, where by the advice of diverse of his Counsel, and and at the request
of the Countess of Arande, he made a marriage between the young Duchess the
heir of Medina Celi, and the young Earl of Arande, as well for the union of
their house, as also for the love he bare to the said Countess. And this
marriage was celebrated in ye castle of Madric, whereunto repaired Amadour, who
so well obtained his suite, that he married her, of whom he was much better
beloved, than his small love toward her did deserve, saving that it was a
couerture and means for him to frequent the place where his mind and delight
incessantly remained. After he was married, he became so well acquainted and
familiar in the house of the Countess, that he was so conversant amongs the
Ladies, as if he had been a woman. And although he was then but.xxij. years of
age, he was so wise and grave, that the Countess imparted unto him all her
affairs, commanding her son and daughter to intertayne him, and to credit
all things wherein he gave counsel. Having won this great estimation, he
behaved himself so wise and politic, that even she whom he loved knew no
part of his affection. But by reason of the love that Florinda bare to the wife
of Amadour, whom she loved more than any other, she was so familiar with him,
that she dissembled no part of her thought, declaring unto him all the love
that she bare toward the son of the Infant Fortune. And he that desired
nothing more tha^ thoroughly to win her, ceased not from continuance of
talk, not waying whereof he spoke, so that he might hold her with long
discourse. Amadour had not after his marriage continued a month in that
company, but was constrained to retire to ye wars, where he remained more
than two years, without return to see his wife, who still abode in ye place
where she was brought up. During this time, Amadour wrote many letters unto his
wife, but the chiefest effect of the same, were commendations to Florinda, who
for her part failed not to render like unto him, many times writing some preue
poesy with her own hand, in the letter of Auenturade. Which made her husband
diligent many times to write again unto her, but in all this doing, Florinda
knew nothing, but that she loved him as if he had been her brother. Many times
Amadour went and came, but in the space of five years, he never saw Florinda
two months together in the whole time. Not withstanding, Love in despite of
their distaunce and long absence, ceased not to increase. And it chanced that
he made a voyage home to see his wife, and found the Countess far from the
Court, because the king of Spain was gone to Vandelousie, and had taken with
him the young Earl of Arande, which then began to bear arms. The Countess
was retired to a house of pleasure, which she had upon the frontiers of Arragon
and Navarre, and was right joyful when she saw Amadour, who almost three years
had been absent. He was very well received of every man, and the Countess
commanded that he should be used and entreated as her own son. During the
time that he soiorned with her, she communicated unto him all the affairs of
her house, and committed the most part thereof to his discretion, who wanne
such credit in the house, that in all places where he list, the doors were
opened unto him. Whose wisdom and good behavior made him to be esteemed, as
though he had been a Saint or Angel. Florinda, for the love and good will
which she bare unto his wife and him, made much of him in all places where she
saw him, knowing nothing of his intent. Wherefore she did not refrain her
self or take heed of any countenance, for that her heart as yet felt no
passion, but that she felt a great contentacion in her self, when she was in
ye presence of Amadour, of any other thing she thought not. Amadour to avoid
the judgment of them that have proved the difference of Lovers countenances,
was very ware and circumspect. For when Florinda came to speak unto him
secretly (like one yt thought no hurt) the fire hidden in his breast, burned so
sore, that he could not stay the blushing color of his face, nor the sparks
which flewe out of his eyes. And to the intent, that through long
frequentation, none might epsy the same, he interteigned a very fair Lady
called Paulina, a woman in his time accounted so fair, that few men which
beheld her, could escape her bonds. This Lady Paulina understanding how Amadour
used his love at Barselone and Parpignon, and how he was beloved of the fairest
and honest Ladies of the country, and above all of the Countess of Pallamons,
which in beauty was prised to be the fairest in all Spain, and of many other,
said unto him. That she had great pity of him, for that after so many good
fortunes, he had married a wife so foul and deformed. Amadour understanding
well by those words, that she had desire to remedy her own necessity, used
the best manner that he could devise, thinking that in making her believe a lie,
he should hyde from her the truth. But the subtle and well experimented in
love, contented not her self with talk, but perceiving right well that his
heart was not satisfied with her love, doubted that he could not serve his
Lady in secret wise, and therefore marked him so nere, that daily she had a
respect and watch unto his eyes, which he could so well dessemble, that she
was able to judge nothing, but by dark suspicion, not without great pain and
difficulty to the gentleman, to whom Florinda (ignorant of all their malice)
did resort many times in presence of Paulina, whose demeaner then was so
familiar, that he with marvelous pain refrayned his lokes, against his heart
and desire. And to avoid that no inconvenience should ensue, one day speaking
to Florinda, as they were both leaning at a window, said these words.
Madame, I beseech you to tell me whether is it better to speak or to die.
Whereunto Florinda answered readily, saying. I will still council my friends
to speak and not to die. For there be few words spoken but that they may be
amended, but the life lost cannot be recovered. Promise me then said Amadour,
that not only ye will accept those words which I will say, but also not to be
astonned or abashed, till ye hear the end of my tale. To whom she answered.
Say what it please you, for if you do affraye me, none other shall assure me.
Then he began to say unto her. Madame, I have not yet been desirous to
disclose unto you the great affection which I bear you, for two causes. The
one, because I attend by my long service, to show you the experience thereof.
The other, for that I doubted you would think a great presumption in me
(which am but a poor gentleman) to insinuate my self in place whereof I am
not worthy. And although I were a prince as you be, the loyalty yet of your
heart, will not permit any other, but him which has already taken possession
(the son I mean of the Infant Fortune) to use any talk of love with you.
But Madame, like as necessity in time of great war constrayneth men to make
hauoke of their own goods, and to consume the green corn, that the enemy
take no profit and relief thereof, even so do I hazard to advance the fruit,
which in time I hope to gather, that your enemies and mine may inioye thereof
none advantage. Know ye Madame, that from the time of your tender years, I
have in such wise dedicated my self to your service that I cease not still to
aspire the means to achieue your grace and favor. And for that occasion, I
did marry her who^ I thought you did love best. And knowing the love you bear
to the son of the Infant Fortune, I have endeavored my self to serve him as
you have seen. And all wherein I thought you did delight, I have accomplished
to the vttermoste of my power. You do see that I have gotten the good will of
the Countess your mother, of the Earl you brother, and of all those that do
bear you good will. In such sort as in this house I am esteemed, not like a
servant, but as a son. And all the labor which I have sustained these five
years past, was for none other cause, but to live all the days of my life
with you. And understand you well, that I am none of those which by these
means do pretend to receive of you any profit or pleasure, other than that
which is good and virtuous. I do know that I can never marry you, and if I
could I would not, to withstand the love that you bear unto him, whom I
desire to be your husband, likewise to love you in vicious sort, like them
that hope to recompense their service, with the dishonor of their Ladies, I am
so far of from that affection, that I had rather be dead than to see you by
desert worthy of less love, and that your virtue should by any means be
diminished for any pleasure that might happen unto me. I do pretend and crave
for the end and recompense of my service, but one thing. Which is, that you
would continue my loyal and faithful maystresse, that you will never
withdraw from me your good grace and favor, and that you will maintain me in
that estate and degree wherein I am. Reposing your trust and fidelity in me
more than in any other, making your self so assured of me, that if for your
honor or any cause touching your person, you stand in need of the life of a
Gentleman, the same shall right willingly be employed in your service. In like
manner all things virtuous and honest which ever I shall attempt, I beseech you
to think the same to be done only for the love of you. And if I have done for
Ladies of less reputation than you be, any thing worthy of estimation, be you
assured that for such a maystresse as you are, my enterprises shall increase
in such sort, that the things which I found difficult and impossible, shall
be easelie for me to accomplish. But if you do not accept me to be wholly
yours, I determine to give over arms, and to renounce valiance, because it
has not succored me in necessity. Wherefore Madame, I humbly beseech you
that my just request may not be refused, since with your honor and conscience
you cannot well deny the same. The young Lady hearing this unaccustomed suit,
began to change her color, and to cast down her eyes like an amassed woman,
not withstanding, as she that was wise and discrete, said unto him. If (
Amadour) your request unto me be none other than it is: wherefore have you
discoursed unto me this long oration? I am afraid that under this honest
pretense there lurketh some hidden malice to deceive the ignorance of my
youth, in such wise, that I am in great perplexity how to make you answer,
for to refuse the honest amity which you have offered, I shall do contrary
to that I have done hitherto, which have reposed in you more trust than in all
the men of the world. My conscience or mine honor can not gainesay your
demand, nor the love that I bear to the son of the Infant Fortune, which
is grounded upon marriage. Where you pretend nothing, I can not tell what thing
should let me to make you answer according to your request, but a fear that
I have in my heart, founded upon the small occasion that you have to use that
talk, for if you have that already which you demand, what does constrain
you to speak so affectuously? Amadour that was not with out an answer, said
unto her. Madame, you speak very wisely, and you do to me so much honor, for
the confidence and trust which according to your saying you do repose in me,
that if I do not content my self with such a benefit, I were the unworthiest
creature living. But understand Madame, that he which goes about to build a
perpetual mansion, ought to have regard to a sure and firm foundation.
Wherefore I which desire perpetually to remain in your service, do seek not
only the means to keep my self nere about you, but also to foresee that none
do understand ye great affection which I do bear you. For although my mind
be so virtuous and honest, that the same may disclose it self before the whole
world, yet there be some so ignorant and unskillful of lovers hearts, that
many times will judge contrary to the truth, whereof proceeds so ill brute and
report, as if the effects were wicked. The cause which has made me so bold
to say and declare unto you thus much, is the suspicio^ that Paulina has
conceived in her mind, for that I can not love her. Who does nothing else but
mark and epsy my countenance in every place, and when you use your familiar
talk with me before her, I am so afraid to show any sign whereby she may
ground or verify her judgment, that I fall into that inconvenience, which I
would willingly avoid. Wherefore I have thought good to beseech you (before
her and those which you do know to be so malicious) to abstain from talking
with me so suddenly, for I had rather dye, than any living creature should
have knowledge thereof. And had it not been for the love which I bear unto your
honor, I had not yet declared ye same unto you, for I do hold my self
sufficient happy and content of the love and affiance that you do bear me,
craving nothing else but the continuance of the same. Florinda so well
satisfied with this answer, began to feel in her heart a further thing to grow
than ever she did before. And hearing the honest reasons alleged by him,
said, that her honesty and virtue should make answer for her, and there
withal assented to his demand. Whereof whether Amadour were joyful, Lovers
need not doubt. But Florinda credited more his counsel, than he would have
had her. For she being fearful and timorous, not only before Paulina, but in
all other places, used far other countenance than she was wont to do. And
in this altenation of her former familiarity, she misliked the conversation
that Amadour had with Paulina, whose beauty was such, that she could not
otherwise believe, but that he loved her. And Florinda to pass over he
heaviness, daily used the company of Auenturade, that began meruellously to
be ialous between her husband and Paulina, whereof she made complaint many
times to Florinda, who comforted her so well as she could, like one attached
with the same disease. Amadour coniecturing by the countenance of Florinda,
that not only she was estraunged from him through his former advertisement,
but also that there was some other displeasure conceived, coming upon a time
from euensong out of the Monastery, he said unto her. Madame, what
countenance do you make me? Such as I think does please you best, answered
Florinda. Then Amadour suspecting a matter, to know whether it were true, began
to say. Madame, I have so used the matter, that Paulina begins to give over
her opinion of you. She answered him. Ye can not do a better thing either for
your self or for me. For in doing your self a pleasure, you do honor unto me.
Amadour judged by these words, yt she thought he took pleasure to talk of
Paulina, wherewith he became so desperate, yt he could not forbear to say
unto her in anger. Madame, you begin very sone to torment your servant. There
was never pain more grievous unto me, than to be forced to speak to her whom
I love not. And since all that which I do for your service, is taken in ill
part, I will never speak again unto her, whatsoever happen. And to dissemble
mine anger and contentacion, I will address my self to some place hereby,
till your fancy be past. But I hope I shall receive news from my Captain, to
return to the wars, where I will so long continue, that you shall know and
understand, that none other thing but you alone does force me to carry here.
And in saying so, without attending for her answer, he incontinently
departed, and she remained so sad and pensife as any woman could be. And
Love began to show his great force in such wise, as she knowing her wrong
incessantly, wrote to Amadour, praying him to return home, which he did
within few days after that his choler was past. And to tell you what
business there was, to interrupt and break the ialousie conceived, it were
superfluous. But in ye end, he wanne the field, so that she promised him, not
only to believe that he loved not Paulina, but also held her self assured
that it should be to him a martyrdom intolerable, to speak unto her, or
any other, except it were to do her service. After that Love had vanquished
this present suspicion, and that the two Lovers began to take more pleasure in
their mutual talk than ever they did before, news came that the King of
Spain was about to address his Army to Saulse, wherefore he that was wont
to be there with the first, was not like now to fail to augment his honor.
But true it is, that his grief was now more great, than at other times
before, as well for losing the pleasure which he enjoyed, as for fear to find
some mutation and change at his return, because he saw Florinda pursued by
great Princes and Lords, and already come to the age of.xv. years, thinking
that if she were married in his absence, he should never have occasion to see
her again, except the Countess of Arande would appoint his wife to wait upon
her. For accomplishment whereof he made such friends, that the Countess and
Florinda, promised him, yt into what so ever place she were married, his wife
Auenturade should attend upon her. And although it was in question that
Florinda should be married into Portugal, yet it was determined yt his wife
should never forsake her. And upon the assurance, not without unspeakable
sorrow, Amadour departed and left his wife with the Countess. When Florinda was
alone, after the departure of her servant, she gave her self to all things
good and virtuous, hoping thereby to attain the fame of a most perfect Lady,
and to be counted worthy the interteignement of such a servant. Amadour being
arrived at Barsalone, was banketted of the Ladies, after the old manner, but
they finding him so altered and changed, thought yt Marriage could never have
had such power upon man, as it had over him. For he seemed then to disdain
those things which sometime he greatly desired, and specially the Countess of
Palamons, whom he dearly loved, could devise no means to make him go alone
home to his lodging. Amadour tarried at Barsalone so little while as he could,
because he might not come late to the place where he should win and achieue
honor. And being arrived at Saulse, great and cruel wars was comenced
between the two kings, which I purpose not to recite, ne yet the noble
enterprises done by Amadour, whose fame was bruted above the rest of his
companions. The Duke of Nagyeres, arriving at Parpignon, had charge of two
thousand men, and prayed Amadour to be his Lieutenant, who with that band
served so well, that no cry was heard in all the skirmishes, other than
Nagyeres. It chanced that the king of Thunis, which of long time had war
with the Spaniardes, understanding how the kings of Spain and France were
together by ye ears at Parpignon and Narbone, thought that in better time he
could not anoy the king of Spain. Wherefore he sent a great number of Foysts
and other vessels, to rob and destroy those frontiers which were ill guarded
and kept. They of Barsalone seeing a number of Ships pass before the Town,
advertised the king that was at Saulse, who imediatly sent the Duke of Nagyeres
to Palamons. And when the Ships perceived that the place was well guarded,
they made as though they would pass further. But about midnight they
returned, and landed so many men, that the Duke of Nagyeres was taken
prisoner. Amadour which was very vigilant, hearing al arm, presently assembled
so many men as he could, and defended himself so well, that the force of his
enemies a long time could not hurt him. But in the end knowing that the Duke of
Nagyeres was taken prisoner, and that the Turks were determined to burn the
City of Palamons, and then to fire the house which he strongly had forced
against them, he thought it better to render him self, than to be cause of the
loss of so many good soldiers as were in his band, and also by putting
himself to rau^some, he hoped in time to come to see Florinda. The^ he
submitted himself to a Turk called Derlyn, the governor of ye king of Thunis,
who conveyed him home to his master, where he was well enterteigned, and
better kept. For they thought yt having him in their hands, they had gotten
the only Achilles of Spain. In this sort Amadour continued almost the space
of two years, in ye service of ye king of Thunis. News came into Spain of
this overthrow, whereof ye friends of the Duke of Nagyeres, were very
sorrowful. But they that loved the honor of their country, thought Amadour to
be the greatest loss. The brute whereof was noysed in the house of the
Countess of Arande, where at that time the pore Gentlewoman Auenturade lay
very sore sick. The Countess suspecting very much the affection that Amadour
bare unto her daughter, which he suffered and dissembled for his virtues sake,
called her daughter aside, and told her the pitious news. Florinda which
could well dissemble, said unto her, that it was a great loss for all their
house, but specially she pitied the state of his pore wife, because at that
time she was so sore sick. But seeing her mother weep so bitterly, she let fall
some tears to keep her company, least through to much dissimulation, her love
might be discovered. After that time, the Countess spoke to her many times,
but she could never perceive by her countenance, any cause of certain
suspicion. I will leave to speak of the voyages, the prayers, the
supplications and fastings, which Florinda did ordinarily make for ye safeguard
and prosperity of Amadour, who incontinently so sone as he was arrived at
Thunis, sent news to his friends, and by a sure messanger aduertized Madame
Florinda, that he was in good health and hope to return. Which news was to
the pore Lady, the only means to releue and ease her sorrow. And doubt ye
not, but the means of writing, was utterly debarred from Amadour, whereof
Florinda acquitted her self so dilygently, that by her letters and epistles, he
received great consolation and comfort. The Countess of Arande received
commandment from the King, to repair to Sarragosa, where he that time was
arrived. And there she found the young Duke of Cardonne, making suit to the
King and Queen, for marriage of her daughter. The Countess unwilling to
disobey the king, agreed, thinking yt her daughter being very young, had none
other affection, but that she had. When the accord was concluded, she said
unto her daughter, that she had chosen her that match which she thought best
worthy to join with her person. Her daughter seeing that in a thing already
done it was to late to take counsel, "said unto her, yt God was to be praised
in all things. And seeing her mother so far alienated from her intent, she
thought it better to show her self obedient, than to take pity upon her
self. And to comfort her in that sorrow, she understood that the Infant
Fortune was at the point of death. But before her mother or any other person,
she showed not so much as one sign or token thereof, strayning her self so
much, that the tears by force retiring to her heart, did cause the blood to
issue forth at her nose, in such abundance, that her life was in present
danger. And to recover her of that disease, she was married unto him, for whose
sake she had rather have changed her life for present death. After the
marriage, Florinda, went with her husband into the Duchy of Cardonne, and
with her Auenturade, to whom she secretly made her complaint, as well of her
mothers rigor, as also of the sorrow she conceived for the loss of the son
of the Infant Fortune. But of her grief for Amadour, she spoke never a word,
but by way of comforting her. This young Lady then determined to have God and
respect of honor before her eyes, and so well to dissemble her griefs, that
none should at any time perceive that she misliked her husband. In this sort
Florinda passed a long time, living a life no less pleasant than death. The
report whereof she sent to her good servant Amadour, who understanding her
great love, and well disposed heart, and the love she bare to the Infant
Fortune, thought that it was impossible she could live long, and lamented her
state more than his own. This grief augmented his pain of imprisonment,
wishing to have remained a slave all the days of his life, so that Florinda
had had a husband according to her desire, forgetting his own grief by
feeling that his friend did suffer. And because he understood by a friend
which he had gotten in the court of the King of Thunis, that the King was
minded to offer him the gibbet, or else to make him renounce his faith, for the
desire he had to retain him still, and to make him a good Turk, howbeit he
behaved himself so well, with him that took him prisoner, that he gave him leave
to depart upon his faith, taxing him at so great ransom, that he thought a
man of so small substance was never able to pay. And so without speaking to
the king his Master, he let him go upon his faith. After he had showed
himself at the court of the King of Spain, he departed incontinently to his
friends to get his ransom, and went straight to Barsalone, whether the young
Duke of Cardonne, his mother, and Florinda, was gone about certain affairs.
Auenturade, so sone as she heard tell that her husband was come, declared the
same to Florinda, who seemed for her sake greatly to rejoice thereat. But
fearing that the desire she had to see him would make her change
countenance, and that they which knew not the cause thereof, would conceive
some ill opinion, she stood still at a window to see him come a far of. And so
sone as she espied him, she went down a pair of stairs, which were so dark
that none could perceive if she changed color. When she had embraced
Amadour, she led him into her chamber, and from thence to her mother in law,
which had never seen him before. He had not continued there two days, but he
was so well beloved, as he was before in the house of the Countess of Arande.
I will omit the words and talk between Florinda and Amadour, and the
complaints which he made unto her of his ill adventure, that he had sustained
in his absence. And after many tears uttered by her, for the heaviness she
had taken, as well for the marriage against her will, as for the loss of him
that she loved so dearly, whom she thought never so see again, she
determined to take her consolation in the love and fidelity that she bare to
Amadour, which not withstanding she durst not open and declare. But he that
much doubted thereof, lost no occasion and time to let her know and
understand the great love he bare her. And even upon the point, that she was
ready to receive him, not as a servant, but for her assured and perfect
friend, there chanced a marvelous fortune. For ye king for certain matters
of importance, inco^tinently sent forth Amadour, whereof his wife conceived
such sorrow, that hearing those news, she sounded and fell from the stayres
where she stood, where with she hurt her self so sore, that never after she
revived. Florinda (that by the death of her had lost al comfort) made such
sorrow, as one that was destitute of good friends and kinssolke, but Amadour
took the same in worste part. For he had not only lost one of the most
honest women yt ever was, but also the means that he should never after that
time have occasion to visit Florinda. For which cause he fell into such a
sickness, that he was like to have died suddenly. The old Duchess of
Cardonne, incessantly did visit him, and alleged many philosophical reasons
to make him patiently to receive death, but it auayled nothing. For if Death of
the one side did torment him, Love of ye other side did augme^t his martyrdom.
Amadour seeing that his wife was buried, and that the king had sent for him,
(having no occasion of longer abode there) he entered into such despair, that
he seemed to be out of his wits. Florinda which in comforting him was almost
desolate, remained by him one whole afternone, using the most honest and
discrete talk that was possible, thinking thereby to diminishe the greatness
of his sorrow, assuring him that she would devise ways that he might visit
her more often than he did think for. And because he must depart the next
morning, and was so feeble and weak that he could not rise from his bed, he
entreated her to come and see him at night after every man was gone. Which she
promised to do, not knowing that Loves extremity was void of reason. And he
that saw no hope ever after that time to see her again whom so long time he
had served: and of whom he had never received other interteignement than that
you have heard, was so beaten and overcome with Love long dessembled, and of
the despair he conceived, that (all means to use her company taken away) he
purposed to play double or quitte, either to lose her or to win her favor,
and to pay himself at one instant, the thing which he thought he had right
well deserved. Wherefore he caused the Curtaynes of his bed to be drawn, that
they which came into the chamber might not see him, complaining of sickness
more than he was wont to do, whereby they of the house thought he would not
have lived.xxiiij. hours. After every one of the house had visited him at
night, Florinda (at the special request of her husband) came to see him,
thinking for his comfort, to utter unto him her affection, and how above all
other she would love him, so far as her honor did permit. And sitting down
in a chair at the beds head, she began to comfort him, and therewithal
poured out many tears. Amadour seeing her sorrowful and pensife, thought that
in her great torment he might easelie atteyne the effect of his intent: And
lifted himself up in his bed, which Florinda perceiving, she would have
stayed him, thinking that through weakness he was not able to move. And kneling
upon his knees, he said unto her. Must I for evermore forgo your sight mine
own dear Lady? And in saying so he fell down between her arms like one
that fainted for lack of strength. Then poor Florinda embraced him, and of
long time held him up, doing al yt was possible for his comfort. But the
medecin she gave him to case his sorrow, did rather increase ye same more
strong. For in fayning himself half dead, without speaking any word, he
attempted ye which yt honor of womanhode does defend. When Florinda perceived
his ill intent, she could scarce believe the same, considering his honest
requests made before time, and therefore asked him what it was that he
desired. But Amadour fearing to hear her answer which he knew well could
be none other but chaste and virtuous, without further talk, pursued his
purpose so earnestly as he could, wherewith Florinda being asto^ned did
suspect he had been out of his wits rather than believe that he went about
her dishonor. Wherefore with loud voice she called a Gentleman which she knew
well to be in the chamber. Which Amadour hearing, utterly in despair, threw
himself so sodaynely into his bed, that the Gentleman thought he had been
dead. Florinda rising out of the chair, said unto him. Go quickly and
fetch me some good vinegar. Which the gentleman did. Then Florinda began to
say unto him. Amadour what folly has inchaunted your wisdom? And what is
that which you would have done unto me? Amadour that through the force of love
had lost al reason, said unto her. Does my long service merit a recompense of
such cruelty? And where is the honesty then said Florinda, which so many
times you have preached unto me? Ah Madame said Amadour. I believe it is
impossible your self more faithfully to love your own honor than I do. For
when you were unmarried, I could so well subdue my heart and affection, that
you did never understand my will and desire. And now that you be married, to
the intent your honor may be in covert, what wrong do I to ask that which is
mine own? For by force of love I have won you. He that first inioyed your
heart, has so ill followed the victory of your body, that he has deserved to
lose altogether. He that possesses your body, is not worthy to have your
heart, wherefore your body is none of his, ne yet he has no title in the
same, But I Madame, these five or six years have sustained such pains and
travel for your sake, that you are not ignorant but to me appertains both
your body and heart, for whose sake I have utterly forgotten mine own. And if
you can find in your heart to defend me from my right, doubt ye not but they
which have proved the forces of Love, will lay the blame upon you, which has
in this sort robbed me from my liberty, and with your heavenly graces has
obscured my senses, yt not knowing hereafter what to do, I am constrained to
go without hope for ever yto see you again. Notwithstanding warrant your
self, that in what place so ever I am, you shall still possess my heart,
which shall continue yours for ever, be I upon ye land or water, or between
the hands of my most cruel enemies. But if I had before my departure, ye
surety of you which the greatness of my love deserves, I shall be strong
enough patiently to bear the griefs of long absence. And if it please you not
to grant me my request, you shall shortly hear tell that your rigor has
rendered unto me a most unhappy and cruel death. Florinda no less astonned than
sorry, to hear such words proceed from him, of whom she never had any such
suspicion weping said unto him. Alas Amadour, is this the meaning of those
virtuous words which since the beginning of my youth ye have uttered unto
me? Is this the honor of the conscience which you have many times persuaded me
rather to die than to lose the same? Have you forgotten the good examples
recyted unto me of virtuous dames that have resisted foolish Love? And is this
the contempt which ye daily made of Ladies that were foolish and vain? I can
not believe Amadour, that you are so mad, that God, your own conscience, and
mine honor, should be altogether out of your mind and memory. But if it so
be as you say, I do praise the goodness of God, which has prevented the
mishap that now I am fallen into, in showing me by your words, the heart which
I did not know. For having lost the son of the Infant Fortune, who not only
is married into another place, but also loved another, and I now married to him,
which I cannot love, I thought and determined wholly, with all mine heart and
affection to love you, founding the same upon that virtue which I knew to be
in you, which love by your means only I have conceived, and therefore did more
esteem my honor and conscience, than mine own life. Upon assurance of this
stone of honesty I am come hither thinking to build a most sure foundation.
But ( Amadour) in one moment thou have declared, that in place of a pure
foundation, thy building is reared upon a light sand, and unconstant ground,
or else upon a filthy and foul quamire. And where I began to erect a good part
of the lodgings of this building, hoping to dwell there for ever, suddenly thou
have overthrown the whole. Wherefore, you must immediately break in sunder
the hope and credit that evermore you have found in me, and determine that in
what place soever I be, not to seek after me, either by words, or
countenance. And do not think, that I can or will at any time hereafter
change mine opinion, which words I speak with great sorrow and grief. But
if I had made an oath of this perfect amity and love, I know mine heart would
have dyed upon this breach, although the astonishement in that I am deceived,
is so great yt I am well assured it will make my life either short or
sorrowful. And therefore I bid you farewell and that for ever. I purpose not
to tell you of the sorrow which Amadour felt by hearing these words. Because
it is impossible not only to write them, but also to think them, except it be
of such as have had experience of the like. And seeing that upon this cruel
conclusion she would have gone away, he caught her by the arm, knowing well
that if he did not remove that ill opinion, which by his own occasion she had
conceived, he should lose her for ever. Wherefore he said unto her with a
very faint there. Madame, all the days of my life I have desired to love a
woman endued with honesty and virtue. And because I have found so few, I
would feign have tried whether your person had been worthy of estimacion and
love, whereof now I am well assured, and humbly do praise God therefore,
because mine heart is addressed to such perfection, beseching you to pardon
this fond and bold enterprise, since you do see that the end does redounde to
your own honor and contentation. Florinda which began to know the malice of
men by him, like as she was hard to believe the evil where it was, even so she
was more difficile to credit the good where it was not, and said unto him. I
pray to God your words be true. Yet I am not so ignorant but yt the state of
marriage wherein I am, has made me evidently to perceive that the strong
passion of blind love has forced you to this attempt. For if God had losed my
hand, I am well assured you would not have plucked back the bridle. They that
attempt to seek after virtue, will not take the way that you do. But this is
sufficient if I have lightly believed any honesty in you, it is time for me
now to know the truth, that I may rid my self from you. And in saying so,
Florinda went out of the chamber, and all the night long, she never left
weeping, who felt such great grief in ye alteracion, that her heart had much
to do, to sustain the assaults of sorrow ye love had made. For although
reason thought never to love him again, yet the heart which is not subject
unto us, would not accord to that cruelty. For which consideracion, she loved
him no less than she was wont to do, and knowing that love was the cause of
that fault, she purposed for satisfaccion of Love, to love him with all her
heart, and yet through obedience and fealty due to her honor, she thought
never to make other semblance. In the morning, Amadour departed in this sort,
troubled as you have heard, nevertheless his coragious heart, entered not in
despair, but renewed a fresh hope once again to see Florinda, and to win her
favor. Then he took his journey toward the court of Spain (which was at
Tolledo) taking his way by the Countess of Arande, where late in an evening he
arrived, and found the Countess very sick for the absence of her daughter
Florinda. When she saw Amadour, she kissed and embraced him, as if he had been
her own child, as well for the love she bare unto him, as for the like which
she doubted that he bare to Florinda, of whom very earnestly she inquired for
news, who told her the best that he could devise, but not the whole truth, and
confessed unto her the love between Florinda and him (which Florinda had still
conceled and kept secret) praying her aid to bring him again into her
favor: and the next morning he departed. And after he had done his business
with the Queen, he repaired to the wars, so sad and changed in all his
conditions, that the Ladies, Captains, and all they that were wont to keep
him company, did not know him. His apparel was all black, mourning for the
death of his wife, whereby he covered the sorrow which was hid in his heart.
In this wise Amadour passed three or four years before he returned to the
Court. And the Countess of Arande which heard tell that Florinda was so sore
changed, that it would have moved any man's heart to behold her, sent for
her, hoping that she would have come, but her expectation was frustrate, for
when Florinda understood that Amadour had told her mother the good will between
them, and yt her mother being so wise and virtuous giving credit to Amadour,
did believe his words, she was in meruellous perplexity, because of the one
side she saw that her mother did esteem him so well, that if she declared unto
her the truth, Amadour might conceive some displeasure. Which thing she had
rather dye than to do: wherefore she thought her self strong enough to
chastise him of his folly, without help of her friends. On the other side she
perceived that by dissembling the evil which she knew by him, she should be
constrained by her mother and her friends, to speak unto him and to bear him
good countenance: whereby she feared his evil opinion would be the more
encoraged. But seeing that he was far of, she passed the less of ye matter. And
when ye Countess her mother did command her, she wrote letters unto him, but
they were such as he might well gather that they were written rather upon
obedience, than of good will, the reading whereof bred sorrow unto him in place
of that joy he was wont to co^ceyue in her former letters. Within ye term of
two or three years, after he had done so many noble enterprises that all the
paper of Spain could not contain them, he devised a new invention, not to
win and recover the heart of Florinda (for he deemed the same quite lost)
but to have the victory over his enemy, since she had used him in that
sort, and rejecting all reason and specially fear of death, into the hazard
whereof he hasted himself, he concluded and determined his enterprise in such
sort, that by reason of his behavior toward the Governor, he was deputed
and sent by him to treat with ye king of certain exploites to be done at
Locates, sparing not to impart his message to the Countess of Arande, before
he told the same to the king, to use her good advise therein. And so came in
post straight into the County of Arande, where he had intelligence in what
place Florinda remained, and secretly sent to the Countess one of his friends
to tell her of his coming, and to pray her to keep it close, and that he might
speak with her that night in such secret wise as no man might have knowledge
thereof. The Countess very joyful of his coming, told it to Florinda, and sent
her into her husbands chamber to put of her clothes, that she might be ready
when she should send for her after every man was gone to bed. Florinda which
was not yet well boldened by reason of her former fear, making a good face of
the matter to her mother, withdrewe her self into an orato rieor chapel, to
reco^mend her self to God, praying him to defend her heart from all wicked
affection, and considered how often Amadour had praised her beauty, which was
not impaired or diminished, although she had been sick of long time. Wherefore
thinking it better to do injury to her beauty by defacing it, than to suffer
the heart of so honest a personage by means thereof wickedly to be inflamed,
she took up a stone which was within the Chapel, and gave her self such a
great blow on the face, that her mouth, eyes and nose were altogether deformed.
And to the intent no man might suspect what she had done, when the Countess
sent for her, in going out of the Chapel, she fell down upon her face upon a
great stone, and there withal cried out so loud, that the Countess came in
and found her in that pitious state, who incontinently dressing her face, and
binding it up with clothes, conveyed her into her chamber, and prayed her to
go into her closet to enterteigne Amadour, til she were weary of his company.
Which she did, thinking that there had been some body with him. But finding him
alone, and the door shut upon her: Amadour was not so well pleased as she was
discontented. Who now thought either with love or force to get that, which he
had so long time desired. And after he had spoken a few words unto her, and
found her in that mind he left her, and that to die for it she would not
change her opinion, desperately he said unto her. By God Madame, the fruit of
my labor, shall not be thus taken from me, for scruples and doubts. And since
that Love, patience and humble desires can not prevail, I will not spare by
force to get that, which except I have it will be the cause of my destruction.
When Florinda saw his face and eyes so altered, that the fairest die and
color of the world was become so red as fire, and his most pleasant and
amiable look transformed horrible and furious, that very hot burning fire
seemed to sparkle within his heart and face: and in that fury with one of his
strong fiftes he griped her delicate and tender hands. On the other side she
seeing all her defenses to fail her, and that her fete and hands were caught
in such captivity that she could neither run away nor yet defend herself:
knew none other remedy, but to prove if he had yet remaining in him any
griftes of the former love, that for the honor thereof he might forget his
cruelty. Wherefore she said unto him Amadour if now you do account me for an
enemy, I beseech you for the honesty of ye love which at other times I have
found planted in your heart, to give me leave to speak before you do torment
me. And when she saw him reclining his ear, she pursued her talk in this
wise. Alas Amadour, what cause have you to seek after the the thing whereof you
shall receive no contentation, inflicting upon me such displeasure as there
can be no greater? You have many times proved my will and affection in the time
of my youthful days, and of my beauty far more excellent than it is now,
at what time your passion might better be borne with and excused, than now. In
such wise that I am amassed to see that you have the heart to torment me at
that age and great debility wherewith I am now endued. I am assured that you
doubt not but that my will and mind is such as it was wont to be. Wherefore
you cannot obtain your demand but by force. And if you saw how my face is
arraied, you would forget ye pleasure which once you received in me, and by no
means would forcibly approach nere unto me. And if there be left in you yet
any remnantes of love, it is impossible but that pity may vanguishe your
fury. And yt to pity and honesty whereof once I had experience in you, I do
make my plainte, and of the same I do demand grace and pardon, to the intent
that according to your persuasion and good advise, you may suffer me to live
in peace and honesty, which I have determined during my life. And if the love
which you have borne me be converted into hatred, and that more for reuengement
than affection, you do purpose to make me the most unhappy wight of the
world, I assure you, you shall not be able to bring your intent to pass,
besides that, you shall constrayne me against my determination, to utter and
reveal your villainy and disordinate appetite toward her, which did repose in
you an incredible affiance: by discovering whereof, think verily, that your
life cannot continue without peril. Amadour breaking her talk said unto her.
If I die for it, I will presently be acquieted of my torment. But the
deformity of your face (which I think was done by you of set purpose) shall
not let me to accomplish my will. For since I can get nothing of you but the
bones and carcass, I will hold them so fast as I can. And when Florinda saw
that prayers, reason, nor tears could not avail, but that with cruelty he
would needs follow his villainous desire, which she had still avoided by force
of resistance, she did help her self so long, til she feared the loss of her
breath, and with a heavy and pitious voice she called her mother so loud as
she could cry, who hearing her daughter calling with such rufull voice, began
greatly to fear the thing that was true. Wherefore she ran so fast as she
could into the warderobe^ Amadour not being so nere death as he said he was,
left of his hold in such good time, as the Lady opening her closet, found him
at the door, and Florinda far enough from him. The Countess demanded of him
saying, Amadour what is the matter? Tell me the truth. Who like one that was
never unprovided of excuse, with his face pale and wanne, and his breath
almost spente, said unto her. Alas Madame, in what plight is my Lady
Florinda? I was never in all my life in that amase wherein I am now. For as I
said unto you, I had thought that I had inioyed part of her good will, but now
I know right well that I have nothing at all. I think Madame, that since the
time she was brought up with you she was never less wise and virtuous than she
is, but she is very dangerous and squeimish in speaking and talking, and even
now I would have looked upon her, but she would not let me. And when I saw
that countenance, thinking yt it had been some dream or vision, I desired to
kiss her hand, according to ye fashion of the country, which she utterly
refused. True it is Madame, I have offended her, whereof I crave pardon of you,
but it chanced only for that I took her by ye hand, which I did in a manner by
force, and kissed the same demanding of her no other contentation. But she
like one (as I suppose) that has sworn my death, made an outery for you, as
you have heard, for what cause I know not, except yt she were affrayde that I
would have forced some other thing. Notwithstanding Madame, what so ever the
matter be, I protest unto you the wrong is mine, and albeit that she ought to
love all your honest servants, yet fortune so wills, that I alone, the most
affectioned of the^ all, is clearelye exempt out of her favor. And yet I
purpose still to continue toward you and her the same man I came hither,
beseching your good grace and favor, since that without my desert I have
lost hers. The Countess which partelye believed, and partelye mistrusted his
talk went unto her daughter, and demanded of her wherefore she cried out so
loud. Florinda answered that she was affrayd. And albeit the Countess
subtly asked her of many things, yet Florinda would never make other answer,
for yt having escaped the hands of her enemy, she thought it punishment enough
for him to lose his labor. After that the Countess had of long time co^muned
with Amadour, she left him yet once again to enter in talk with Florinda before
her, to see what cou^tenau^ce she would make him. To who^ he spoke few words
except they were thanks for yt she had not confessed the truth to her mother,
praying her at least wife that seeing he was dispossessed out of her heart, she
would suffer none other to receive his place. But she answering his former
talk, said. If I had had any other means wherewith to defend my self from you
than by crying out, she should never have heard me, and of me you shall never
hear worse, except you do constrayne me as you have done, and for loving any
other man, you shall not need to fear. For since I have not found in your
heart (which I esteemed the most virtuous in all the world) the good success
that I desired, I will never believe hereafter that virtue is planted in any
man. And this outrage shall make me free from all passions that Love can force,
and in saying so she took her leave. The mother which beheld her countenance,
could suspect nothing, and after that time, she knew well that her daughter bare
no more affection to Amadour, and thought assuredly that she was void of
reason, because she hated all those things which she loved. And from that time
forth there was such war between the mother and the daughter, that the
mother for the space of.vij. years would not speak unto her, except it were
in anger. Which she did at the request of Amadour. During which time, Florinda
converted the fear that she had to remain with her husband, into mere love,
to anoyde the rigor and checkes of her mother. Howebeit, seeing that nothing
could prevail she purposed to begyle Amadour, and leaving for a day or two
her ser strange countenance, she counseled Amadour to love a woman, which as
she said, did commonly talk of their love. This Lady dwelt with the Queen of
Spain, and was called Lorette, who was very joyful and glad to get such a
servant. And Florinda found means to cause a brute of this new love to be
spread in every place, and specially the Countess of Arande (being at the
Court) perceived the same, who afterward was not so displeased with Florinda,
as she was wont to be. Florinda upon a time heard tell that the Captain the
husband of Loret began to be ialous over his wife and determined by some means
or other he cared not how, to kill Amadour, Florinda notwithstanding her
dissembling countenance, could not suffer any hurt to be done to Amadour, and
therefore incontinently gave him advertisement thereof. But he retourning again
to his former sollyes, answered, that if it would please her to interteigne him
every day three hours, he would never speak again to Loret, whereunto by no
means she would consent. Then Amadour said unto her, if you will not have me
to live, wherefore go ye about to defend me from death? except ye purpose to
torment me alive in such wise that a thousand deaths can not do? But for so
much as death does fly from me, I will never leave to seek death, til I have
found him out, at whose approach only I shall have rest. Whilst they were in
these terms, news came that the King of Granado was about to enter into
great wars against the King of Spain: in such wise that the King sent
against him the Prince his son, and with him the Constable of Castille, and
the Duke of Albe, two ancient and sage Lords. The Duke of Cardonne and the
Count of Arande not willing to tarry behind, besought the King to give
either of them a charge. Which he did according to the dignity of their
houses, appointing Amadour to be their guide. Who during that war, did such
valiant factes that they seemed rather to be desperately than hardyly
enterprised. And to come to the effect of this discourse, his great valiaunce
was tried even to the death. For the Moors making a brag as though they
would give battle, when they saw the army of the Chistians, counterfaited a
retire, whom the Spaniardes pursued, but the old Constable and the Duke of
Albe doubting their policy, stood still, against the will of the Prince of
Spain, not suffering him to pass over the river, but the Count of Arande and
the Duke of Cardonne (although they were countremanded) did follow the chase,
and when the Moors saw that they were pursued with so small a number, they
returned, and at one recountrie killed the Duke of Cardo^ne, and the Count of
Arande was so sore hurt that he was left for dead in the place. Amadour
arriving upon this overthrow, invaded the battle of the Moors, with such
rage and fury, that he rescued the two bodies of the Duke and County, and
caused them to be conveyed to the Princes camp, who so lamented their chance,
as if they had been his own brethren. But in searching their wounds, the
County of Arande was found to be alive, and was sent home to his own house in
a horslitter, where of long time he was sick, and likewise was conveyed to
Cardonne the dead body of the young Duke. Amadour in rescuing those two bodies,
took so little heed to him self, that he was enclosed with a great number of
the Moors, and because he would be no more taken, as well to verify his faith
toward God, as also his vow made to his Lady, and also considering that if
he were prisoner to the King of Granado, either he should cruelly be put to
death, or else forced to renounce his faith, he determined not to make his
death or taking, glorious to his enemies. Wherefore kissing the cross of his
sword, and rendering his body and soul to the hands of almighty God, he
stabbed himself into the body with such a blow, that there neded no second
wound to rid him of his life. In this sort dyed pore Amadour, so much lamented
as his virtues did deserve. The news hereof was bruted throughout Spain, and
Florinda which then was at Barsalone, where her husband in his life time
ordained the place of his burial, after that she had done his honorable
obsequies, without making her own mother, or mother in law privy thereunto,
surrendered herself into the Monastery of Jesus, there to live a religious
life, receiving him for her husband and friend, which had delivered her from
the vehement love of Amadour, and from a displeasaunt life so great and unquiet
as was the company of her husband. In this wise she converted all her
affections, to love God so perfectly, yt after she had long time lived a
religious life, she yielded up her soul in such joy as the Bridgrome does when
he goes to visit his spouse

A Duke of Florence
The incontinencie of a Duke and of his impudency to attain his purpose, with
the just punishment which he received for the same.

The.Liiij. Novel.
IN the City of Florence, there was a Duke that married the Lady Margaret the
bastard daughter of the Emperor Charles ye fifth. And because she was very
young, it was not lawful for him to lie with her, but tarying til she was of
better years, he used her very gently. Who to spare his wife, was amorous of
certain other Gentlewomen of the city: Amongs whom he was in love, with a
very fair, wise and honest Gentlewoman, that was sister to a Gentleman, whom
ye Duke loved so well as himself, to whom he gave so much authority in his
house, that his word was so well obeyed and feared as the Dukes himself, and
there was no secret thing in the Dukes mind, but he declared the same unto
him, that he might full well have been called a second himself. The Duke
seeing his sister to be a woman of so great honesty, had no ways or means to
utter unto her the love that he bare her (after he had invented all occasions
possible) at length he came to this Gentleman which he loved so well, and said
unto him. My friend if there were any thing in all the world, wherein I were
able to (...) you, and would not do it at your request, I should be afraid
to declare unto you my fantasy, and much ashamed to crave your help and
assistance. But the love is such that I bear you, that if I had a wife,
mother, or daughter, which were able to save your life, I would rather imploye
them, than to suffer you to die in torment. And if you do bear unto me ye
affection which am your Master, think verily that I do bear unto you the
like. Wherefore I will disclose unto you such a secret and privy matter, that
the silence thereof has brought me into that plight which you see, whereof I
do look for none amendeme^t but by death or by the service which you may do
me, in a certain matter which I purpose to tell you. The Gentleman hearing the
reasons of his master and seeing his face not feigned, but all be sprent with
tears, took great compassion upon him and said. My Lord I am your humble
servant. All the goods and worship that I have does come from you. You may say
unto me as to your friend. Assure your self, that all which rests in my
power and ability, is already at your commandment. Then the Duke began to
tell him of the love that he bare unto his sister, which was of such force,
that if by his means he did not enjoy her, his life could not long continue.
For he said, that he knew right well that entreaty and presents were with
her of no reputacion. Wherefore he prayed him, that if he loved his life, so
well as he did his, to find means for him to receive that benefit, which
without him he was in despair never to recover. The brother which loved his
sister and honor of his kindred, more than the Dukes pleasure, made a certain
reverence unto him, humbly beseching him to use his travail and pain in all
other causes saving in that, because it would be a suit so slanderous and
infamous, as it would purchase dishonor to his whole family, adding further,
that neither his heart and honor would not serve him, to consent to do that
service. The Duke inflamed with an unspeakable fury, put his finger between
his teeth, and biting of the nail, said unto him in a great rage. Well then
sith I find in the no friendeship I know what I have to do. The Gentleman
knowing the cruelty of his Master, being sore afraid, said unto him. My
Lord, for so much as your desire and pleasure is vehement and earneste, I
will speak unto her and bring you answer thereof. And as he was departing
the Duke said unto him. See that thou tender my life as thou will that I shall
love thine. The Gentleman understanding well what that word did mean,
abse^ted himself a day or twain to advise with him self what were best to
be done. And amongs diverse his cogitations, there came to his remembrance the
bounden duty which he did owe to his master, and the goods and honors which
he had received at his hands, on ye other side he considered the honor of his
house, the good life and chastity of his sister, who (he knew well) would
never consent to that wickedness, if by subtlety she were not surprised, or
otherwise forced, and that it were a thing very strange and rare, that he
should go about to defame himself and the whole stock of his progeny.
Wherefore he concluded, ye better it were for him to die, than to commit such a
mischief unto his sister which was one of the honestest women in all Italy.
But rather he considered how he might deliver his country from such a Tirant,
which by force would blemish and spotte the whole race of his house. For he
knew right well that except the Duke were taken away, the life of him and his
affinity could not be in security and safegarde. Wherefore without mocion
made to his sister of that matter, he devised a way to save his life and the
reproach that should follow thereof. At the two days end, he came unto the
Duke, and told him in what sort he had practiced with his sister, and
although the same in the beginning was hard and difficult, yet in the end he
made her to consent, upon condition that he would keep the same so secret as
none but himself and he might know it. The Duke desirous and glad of those
news, did sone believe him, and embracing the messanger, promised to give him
whatsoever he would demand, praying him with all speed that he might inioye
his desired purpose. Whereupon they appointed a time. And to demand whether
the Duke were glad and joyful of the same, it were superfluous. And when yt
desired night did approach, wherein he hoped to have the victory of her whom he
thought invincible, he and the Gentleman alone withdrewe themselves together,
not forgetting his perfumed coif and sweet shirte wrought and trimmed after the
best manner. And when every man was gone, both they repaired to the appointed
lodging of his Lady, where being arrived they found a chamber in decent and
comely order. The Gentleman taking of the Dukes night gown, placed him in the
bed, saying unto him. My Lord, I will now go seek her which can not enter
into this chamber without blushing, howebeit I trust before to morrow morning
she will be very glad of you. Which done, he left the Duke, and went into his
own chamber, where he found one of his servant alone, to whom he said. Have
thou the heart to follow me into a place where I shall be revenged upon the
greatest enemy that I have in the world? Yea sir answered his man. Whereupon ye
gentleman took him with him, so suddenly yt he had no leisure to arm him self
with other weapon but with his only dagger. And when the Duke heard him come
again, thinking he had brought her with him yt he loved so greatly, he drew
the curteyne, and opened his eyes to behold and receive that joy which he had
so long looked for, but in place of seeing her which he hoped should be ye
conservation of his life, he saw the acceleration of his death, which was a
naked sword yt the Gentleman had drawn, and there withal did strike the Duke,
which was in his shirte void of weapon, although well armed with courage, and
setting up in his bed, grasped the Gentleman about the body, and said. Is
this thy promise which thou have kept? and seeing that he had no other weapon
but his teeth and his nails, he bitte the Gentleman in the arm, and by force
of his own strength he so defended himself, that they both fell down into
the flower. The Gentleman fearing the match, called for his man. Who finding
the Duke and his Master fast together, yt he wist not whether to take, he
drew them both by the feet into the midst of the place, and with his dagger
assayde to cut the Dukes throat. Who defended himself, till such time as the
loss of his blood made him so weak and feeble that he was not able to
contend any longer. Then the Gentleman and his man laid him again into his
bed, where they accomplished the effect of that murder. Afterward drawing
the curteyne, they departed and locked the dead body in the chamber. And when
he saw that he had gotten the victory of his enemy, by whose death he thought
to set at liberty the commonwealth, he supposed his fact to be imperfect if he
did not the like to five or six of them which were nerest to the Duke, and best
beloved of him. And to atteyne the perfection of that enterprise, he bad his
man to do ye like unto them one after another, that he had done to the Duke.
But the servant being nothing heard or coragious, said unto his master. Me
think sir that for this time ye have done enough, and that it were better for
you now to devise how to save your own life, than to seek means to murder any
more. For if we do abide so long time to kill every of the^ as we have done in
murdering of the Duke, the day light will discover our enterprise before we have
done, although we find them naked and without defense. The Gentleman whose
evil conscience made him fearful, did believe his servant, and taking him
alone with him, went to a bishop that had in charge the gates of the city, and
the use of the Posts, to whom he said. This evening (my Lord) news came unto
me that mine own brother lies at the point of death and craving license of
the Duke to go see him he has given me leave. Wherefore I beseech you
command the posts to deliver me two good horse, and send word to the porter
that the gates may be opened. The bishop which esteemed no less his request
than the commandment of the Duke his master, incontinently gave him a
billet, by virtue whereof both the gates were opened and the horse were made
ready according to his demand. And under color and pretense of visiting his
brother, he rode to Venice, where after he had cured himself of the Dukes
bitings fastened in his flesh, he trauayled into Turkey. In the morning the
Dukes servants seeing the time so late before their master returned,
suspected that he was gone forth in visitation of some Lady, but when they saw
he tarried so long, they began to seek for him in every place. The pore Duchess
into whose heart the love of her husband strongly did invade understanding that
he could not be found, was very pe^sife and sorrowful. But when the Gentleman
which he so dearly loved was not likewise seen abroad, search was made in his
chamber, where finding blood at the chamber door, they entered in, but no man
was there to tell them any news, and following the tracte of the blood, the
poor servants of the Duke went to the chamber door, where he was, which door
they found fast locked, and incontinentely brake open the same. Who seeing the
place all bloody, drew the curteyne, and found the wretched carcass of the
Duke lying in the bed, sleeping his endelesse sleep. The sorrow and
lamentacion made by the Dukes servants, carrying the dead body into his palace,
is easy to be coniectured. Whereof when the Bishop was aduertized, he repaired
thither, and told how the Gentleman was gone away in the night in great have,
under pretense to go to see his brother. Whereupon it was evidently known that
it was he that had committed the murder. And it was proved that his poor
sister was never privy to ye fact, who although she was astonned with the
sudden chance of that adventure, yet her love toward her brother was far
more increased, because he had delivered her from a Prince so cruel, the
enemy of her honesty. For doing whereof he did not stick to hazard his own
life. Whereupon she perseuered more and more in virtue, and although she was
poor by reason her house was confiscate yet both her sister and she matched
with so honest and rich husbands as were to be found in all Italy: and
afterward lived in good and great reputation.

Of Frauncis the French King.
One of the french Kings called Frauncis the first of that name, declared his
gentle nature to Count Guilaume, that would have killed him.

The.Lv. Novel.
IN Digeon a Town of Burgundy there came to the service of King Frauncis,
(which was father to Henry the second of that name, that was killed by Mou^sier
Mongomebrie, in a triumph at the Tilt, and Graundfather to Charles the ix. that
now reigns in France) an Earl of Allemaigne called Guillaume, of the house
of Saxon, whereunto the house of Sauoie is so greatly allied, as in old time,
they were but one. The Count for so much as he was esteemed to be so comely and
hardy a Gentleman, as any was in Allemaigne, was in such good favor with the
King, that he took him not only into service, but used him so nere his person,
as he made him of his privy chamber. Upon a day the Governor of Burgundy, ye
Lord Trimouille (an ancient knight and loyal servant of the King) like one
suspicious and fearful of evil and hurt of his Master, had daily espies
about his enemy, to know what he did, and used the matter so wisely, that very
few things were concealed from him. Among other aduertisementes, one of his
friends wrote unto him that the Count Guillaume had received certain somes
of money, with promise of more, if by any means he could devise which way to
kill the King. The Lord of Trimouille hearing of this, failed not to come to
the King to give him knowledge thereof, and disclosed it likewise to Madame
Loyse of Sauoie his mother, who forgetting her amity and alliance with the
Almaigne Earl, besought the king forthwith to put him away. The king prayed
his mother to speak no more thereof, and said, that it was impossible that so
honest a gentleman would attempt to do a deed so wicked. Within a while after,
there came other news of that matter, confirming the first. Whereof the
Governor for the entire love he bare to his Master craved license either to
expel him the cuntrie, or to put him in ward. But the king gave special
commandment that he should not make any semblance of displeasure, for that
he purposed by some other means to know the truth. Upon a time when he went a
hunting, he girded about him the best sword that he could find, to serve for
all arms and assayes, and took with him the Count Guillaume, whom he
commanded to wait upon him, the first and chiefest next his own person. But
after he had followed the heart a certain time, the King seeing that his train
was far from him, and no man near him saving the Count, he turned himself
round about. And when he saw that he was alone, in the midde of the Forest,
drawing out his sword, he said to the Count. How say you (Sir Count) is
not this a fair and good sword. The Connte feling it at the point, and well
viewing the same, said, that he never saw a better in his life. You have
reason said the king. And I believe that if a gentleman were determined to kill
me, and did know the force of mine arms, and the goodness of my heart
accompanied with this sword, he would be twice well advised before he attempted
ye enterprise. Not withstanding I would account him but a cowarde, we being
alone without witnesses, if he did not attempt that, which he were disposed to
do. The Count Guillaume with bashful and astonned countenance, answered.
Sir, the wickedness of the enterp^ise were very great, but the folly in the
execucion, were no less. The King with those words fell in a laughter, and
put the sword into the skaberd again. And hearing that the chase drew nere
him, he made to the same so fast as he could, when he was come thither, he
said nothing of that which had passed between him and the Count, and verily
thought that Count Guillaume although yt he was so strong and stout a
gentleman as was in that time, yet he was no man to do so great an enterprise.
But the Count Guillaume, fearing to be bewraied or suspected of the fact,
next day morning repaired to Robertet, the Secretary of the Kings revenues,
and said that he had well wayed the gifts and annuities which the king would
give him to tarry, but he perceived that they were not sufficient to
interteigne him for half a year, and that if it pleased not the king to double
ye same, he should be forced to depart, praying the said Robertet to know his
graces pleasure so sone as he could, who said unto him, that he himself
could without further commission could disbirsse no more unto him but gladly
whithout further delaie he would presentlye repair to the king, which he did
more willingly, because he had seen the aduertisements of the Governor
aforesaid. And so sone as the king was awake, he declared the matter unto him
in the presence of Mo^sier Trimouille and Monsier Bouiuet Lord Admiral, who
were utterly ignorant of that which the king had done. To whom the king said.
Lo, ye have been miscontented for that I would not put away the Count
Guillaume, but now ye see he puts away himself. Wherefore Robertet tell
him, that if he be not content with the state which he received at his first
entry into my service, whereof many Ge^tlemen of good houses would think
themselves happy, it is mete that he seek his better fortune, and tell him that
I would be loath to hinder him, but will be very well contented, that he seek
where he may live better, accordingly as he deserves. Robertet was so diligent
to bear this answer to the Count, as he was to present his suit to ye king.
The Count said that with his license he would gladly go forthwith. And like
one that fear forced to depart, was not able to bear his abode.xxiiij.
hours. And as the King was sitting down to dinner, fayning to be sorye for
his departure, but that necessity compelled him to lose his presence, he took
his leave. He went likewise to take leave of the kings mother, which she gave
him, with so great joy, as she did receive him, being her nere kinsman and
friend. Then he went into his Country. And the king seeing his mother and
servants astoned at that his sudden departure, declared unto them the Al Arm,
which he had given him, saying that although he was innocent of ye matter
suspected, so was his fear great enough, to depart from a master with whose
conditions hitherto he was not acquainted.

A strange punishment.
A punishment more rigorous than death, of a husband toward his wife that had
committed adultery.

The.Lvj. Novel.
KIng Charles, of France the.viij. of that name, sent into Germany a Gentleman
called Bernage, Lord of Cyure besides Amboise. Who to make speed, spared
neither day nor night for execution of his Princes commandment. In such wise
that very late in an evening he arrived at the castle of a Gentleman, to
demand lodging, which very hardly he obtained. Howbeit, when the gentleman
understood that he was the servant of such a king, he prayed him not to take
in ill part the rudeness of his servant, because upon occasion of certain
his wives friends that loved him not, he was forced to keep his house so
straight. At what time Bernage told him the cause of his journey, wherein the
Gentleman offered to do to the King his Master al service possible. Leading
him into his house where he was feasted and lodged very honorably. When supper
was ready, the Gentleman conveyed him into a parler well hanged with fair
Tapistrie. And when the meat was set upon the table, he perceived a woman
coming forth behind the hanging, which was so beautiful as might be seen,
saving that her head was all shaven, and apparelled in Almaine black. After
both the Gentlemen had washed, water was brought to ye gentlewoman, who when
she had washed she sat down at the table, without speaking to any man or any
word spoken unto her. The Lord Bernage beholding her well, thought her to be one
of the fairest Ladies yt ever he saw, if her face had not been so pale, and
her countenance so sad. After she had eaten a little, she called for drink,
which one of the servants brought unto her in a strange cup. For it was the
head of a dead man trimmed with silver. Whereof she drancke twice or thrice.
When she had supped and washed her hands, making a reverence to the Lord of
the house, she returned behind the hangings without speaking any word.
Bernage was so much amazed at that strange sight, that he waxed very heavy
and sad. The gentleman that marked him, said unto him. I see well that you be
astonned at that you saw at the table. But seeing your hnoest demeanor, I will
not keep the thing secret from you, because you shall not note that cruelty to
be done without great occasion. This gentlewoman which you see, is my wife,
whom I loved bettter than any gentleman could love his wife. In such sort that
to marry her I forgot all fear, and brought her hither in dispite of her
parents. She likewise showed unto me such signs of love, that I attempted a
thousand ways to place her here for her joy and mine, where we lived a long
time in such rest and contentation, that I thought my self the happiest
Gentleman in Christendom. But in a journey which, I made, which to attempt
mine honor forced me, she forgot both her self, her conscience, and the love
which she bare toward me, and fell in love with a Gentleman, that I brought
up in this house, which upon my return I perceived to be true. Notwithstanding
the love that I bare her, was so great, that I had no mistrust in her, til such
time as experience did open mine eyes, and saw the thing that I feared more
than death. For which cause love was turned into fury and despair, in such
wise that I watched her so nere, that upon a day fayning my self to go abrod,
I hid my self in the chamber where now she remains. Into the which sone
after my departure she repaired, and caused the gentleman to come thither,
Whom I did behold to do that thing, which was altogether unmeet for any man
to do to her, but my self. But when I saw him get up, upon the bed after
her, I stepped forth and took him between her arms, and with my dagger
immediately did kill him. And because the offense of my wife seemed to be so
great, that like death was not sufficient to punish her. I devised a torment
which in mine opinion is worsse unto her than death. I do lock her up in the
chamber wherein she accustomed to use her delights, and in the company of him
that she loved far better than me. In which chamber I have placed the anatomy
of her friend, reserving the same in a little closet as a precious Jewel. And
to the end she may not forget him at meals, at the table before my face, she
uses the head of that verlet, in stead of a cup to drink, to the intent she
may behold him alive, in the presence of him whom through her own fault she
has made her mortal enemy, and him dead and slain for her sake, whose love
she preferred before mine. And so beholds those two things at dinner and
supper which ought to displease her most, her enemy living, and her friend
dead, and al through her own wickedness howbeit I do use her no worse than my
self, although she goes thus shaven: for the ornament of the hear does not
appertain to an adultresse, nor the veil or other furniture of the head to
an unchaste woman. Wherefore she goes so shaven, in token she has lost her
houestie. If it please you sir to take the pain to see her, I will bring you
to her. Whereunto Bernage willingly assented. And descending into her chamber
which was very richely furnished, they found her sitting alone before the fire.
And the Gentleman drawing a Curteyne, which was before the Closet, he saw the
anatomy of the dead man hanging. Bernage had a great desire to speak unto the
Lady, but for fear of her husband he durst not. The Gentleman perceiving the
same said unto him. If it please you to say any thing unto her, you shall
understand her order of talk. Therewithal Bernage said unto her. Madame if
your patience be correspondent to this torment, I deem you to be he happiest
woman of the world. The Lady with tears trickling down her eyes, with a
grace so good and humble as was possible, spoke thus unto him. Sir I do
confess my fault to be so great, that all the affliction and torment that the
Lord of this place (for I am not worthy to call him husband) can do unto me,
be nothing comparable to the sorrow I have conceived of mine offense. And in
saying so she began pitifully to weep. Therewithal the Gentleman took Bernage
by the hand, and led him forth. The next day morning he departed about ye
business which the king had sent him. Notwithstanding, in bidding the
gentleman farewell, he said unto him. Sir the love which I bear unto you, and
the honor and secrets wherewith you have made me privy, does force me to say
unto you how I do think good (seeing the great repentance of the poor
Gentlewoman your wife) that you do show her mercy. And because you be young
and have no children, it were a very great loss and detriment to lose such a
house and ligneage as yours is. And it may so come to pass, that your enemies
thereby in time to come may be your heirs, and inioye the goods and patrimony
which you do leave behind you. The Gentleman which never thought to speak unto
his wife, with those words paused a great while, and in the end confessed his
words to be true, promising him that if she would continue in that humility,
he would in time show pity upon her, with which promise Bernage departed.
And when he was returned toward the king his master, he recompted unto him
ye success of his iourneyes. And amongs other things he told him of the
beauty of this Lady, who sent his Painter called John of Paris, to bring him
her counterfaicte: which with the consent of her husband, he did. Who after
that long penance, for a desire he had to have children, and for the pity he
bare to his wife which with great humbleness received that affliction, took
her unto him again and afterward begat of her many children.

A President of Grenoble
A President of Grenoble advertised of the ill ouernement of his wife, took
such order, that his honesty was not diminished, and yet revenged the fact.

The.Lvij. Novel.
IN Grenoble (the chief city of a Country in France called Daulphine which
city otherwise is named Gratianopolis) there was a President that had a very
fair wife, with whom quietly and very lovingly he led his life. She
perceiving her husband to begin to wax old, began to love a young man that was
his Clarke, a very fair and comely personage. Upon a time when her husband in
a morning was gone to the palace, the Clarke entered his chamber and took his
Masters place, which thing one of the Presidents servant, that faithfully
had served him the space of.xxx. years, like a trusty servant perceiving,
could not keep it secret, but told his Master. The President which was a wise
man, would not believe it upon light report, but said that he did it of purpose
to set discord between him and his wife, not withstanding if the thing were
true as he said, he might let him see the thing it self, which if he did not,
he had good cause to think that he had devised a lie to break and dissolve
the love between him and his wife. The servant did assure him that he would
cause him to see the thing whereof he had told him. And one morning so sone as
the the President was gone to the Court, and the Clarke entered into his
chamber, the servant sent one of his companions to tell his Master that he
might come in good time, to see the thing that he declared unto him, he himself
standing still at the door to watch that the Clarke might not go out. The
President so sone as he saw the sign that one of his made unto him, fayning
that he was not well at ease, left the audience, and speedely went home to his
house where he found his old servant watching at the chamber door, assuring
him for truth that the Clarke was within, and that he should make no more a do
but presently to go in. The President said to his servant. Do not tarry at
the door, for ye know there is no other going out or coming in but this
except, it be a little closet whereof I alone bear the key. The President
entered the chamber, and found his wife and the Clarke a bed together, who in
his shirt fell down at ye Presidents fete, craving pardon, and his wife on the
other side began to weep. To whom ye President said. For so much as the
thing which thou have done is such, as thou may well consider, that I cannot
abide my house (for thee) in this sort to be dishonored and the daughters which
I have had by thee to be disaduau^ced and abased. Therefore said he, leave of
thy weeping, and mark what I shall do. And thou Nicolas (for that was his
Clarks name) hide thy self here in my closet, and in any wise make no noise:
when he had so done, he opened the door, and called in his old servant, and
said unto him. Did not thou warrant and assure me that thou would let me
see my Clark and wife in bed together? And upon thy words I am come hither,
thinking to have killed my wife, and have found nothing to be true of that
which thou did tell me. For I have searched the chamber in every place ^ I
will show thee. And with that he caused his servant to look under the beds,
and in every corner. And when the servant found him not, thoroughly astonned,
he said to his master. Sir I saw him go into the chamber, and out he is not
gone at the door: And so far as I can see he is not here. Therefore I think
the Devil must needs carry him away. Then his master said unto him. Thou
art a very villain, to set such division between my wife and me, wherefore I
do discharge thee from my service, and for that which thou have done me, I
will pay thee thy duty, with ye advantage. Therefore get thee hence and take heed that thou do not tarrye in this town past.xxiiij. hours. The
President for that he knew him to be an honest and faithful servant, gave
him five or six years wages, and purposed otherwise to prefer him. When the
servant (with ill will and weping tears) was departed, the President caused
his Clarke to come out of his Closet. And after he had declared to his wife and
him, what he thought of their ill behavior, he forbad them to show no
likelyhode of any such matter, and commanded his wife to attire and dress her
self in more gorgeous apparel, than she was wont to wear, and to haunt and
resort to company and feasts, willing the Clarke to make a better
countenance of the matter than he did before, but whenever he rounded him in
ye ear and bad him to depart, he charged him after ye commandment not to
tarry.iiij. hours in ye town. And when he had thus done, he returned to the
palace, as though there had no such thing chanced. And the space of.xv. days
(contrary to his custom) he feasted his friends and neighbors, and after
the banquet, he caused the ministrels to play, to make the Gentlewomen dance.
One day, seeing that his wife did not dance, he commanded his Clarke to take
her by the hand, and to lead her forth to dance, who thinking the President
had forgotten the trespass paste, very joyfully daunced with her. But when ye
dance was ended, the President fayning as though he would have commanded him
to do some thing in his house badde him in his ear to get him away and never
to return. Now was the Clarke very sorrowful to leave his Lady, but yet no
less joyful he was that his life was saved. Afterward when the President
had made all his friends and kinsefolkes, and all the country, believe what
great love he bare to his wife: Upon a fair day in the month of May, he went
to gather a sallade in his garden, of such herbs, that so sone as she had
eaten of them, she lived not past.xxiiij. hours after, whereof he
counterfayted such sorrow, as no man could suspect the occasion of her death.
And by that means he was revenged of his enemy, and saved the honor of his
house

I will not by this Novel (said Emarsuitte) praise the conscience of the
President, but herein I have declared the light behauior of a woman, and the
great patience and prudence of a man. Praying you good Ladies all, not to be
offended at the truth. If al women (quod Parlamente) that love their Clerks or
servants, were forced to eat such sallades, I believe they would not love
their gardens so well as they do, but would tear and pluck up all the herbs
both root and rind to avoid those things that by death might advance the
honor of their stock and ligneage. If sallades be so costly ( q Hircan) and so
dangerous in May, I will provoke appetite with other sawses, or else hunger
shall be my chiefest.

Of a Ialous Gentleman.
A Gentleman of Perch, suspecting injury done unto him by his friend,
prouaked him to execute and put in proof the cause of his suspicion.

The.Lviij. Novel.
BEsides the cuntry of Perch, there where two Gentlemen, which from the time
of their youth lived in such great and perfect amity, that there was between
them but one heart, one bed, one house, one table, and on purse. Long time
continued this perfect friendship: between whom there was but one will and
one word, no difference in either of them. In so much as they not only seemed
to be two brethren, but also they appeared in all semblances to be but one man.
One of them chanced to marry. Notwithstanding they gave not over their
friendship, but perseuered in their usual amity as they were wont to do. And
when they happened to be strayned to straight lodging, ye married gentleman
would not stick to suffer his friend to lie with him and his wife. But yet
you ought for friendship sake to consider that the married man lay in the
mids. Their goods were common between them, that for all the marriage no cause
did hinder their assured amity. But in process of time, the felicity of this
world (which carries with it a certain mutabilitie) could no continue in the
house, which was before right pleasant and happy. For the married man
forgetting of the faithful fidelity of his friend, without any occasion
conceived a great suspicion between him and his wife, from who^ he could not
dissemble the case, but sharply told her his mind. She therewithal was
wonderfully amazed. Howbeit he commanded her to do all things (one thing
excepted) and to make so much of his companion as of himself. Nevertheless
he for bad her to speak unto him except it were in ye presence of many. All
which she gave her husbands companion to understand, who would not believe
her, knowing that he had neither by thought or deed done any thing whereof his
companion had cause to be offended. And likewise because he used to keep
nothing secret from him, he told him what he had said, praying him to tell him
the truth of ye matter, because he purposed neither in that, ne yet in any
other thing, to give occasion of breach of ye amity which of long time they
had embraced. The married Gentleman assured him that he never thought it, and
how they which had sown that rumor, had wickedly belied him. Whereunto his
companion answered. I know well enough that Ialosie is a passion so
intolerable as love it self. And when you shall conceive that opinion of
Ialousie, yea and it were of my self, I should do you no wrong, for you your
self should not be able to keep it. But of one thing which is in your power I
have occasion to complayn, and that is because you would concele from me, your
maladye, since there was no passion or opinion which you conceived, that before
this time you kept secret from me. Likewise for my own part if I were amorous
of your wife, you ought not to impute it as a fault unto me, because it is a
fire which I bear not in my hands, to use at my pleasure. But if I keep it to
my self from you, and endeavor to make your wife know it by demo^stracion of
my love, I might then be accounted ye wicked friend that ever lived. And for me
I assure most you that she is an honest and a good woman, and one that my
fancy does lest favor (although she were not your wife) of all them that ever
I saw. But now since there is no occasion, I do require you that if you
perceive any suspicio^, be it never so little, to tell me of it, because I
would so use my self, as our friendeship which has endured so long, might
not be broken for a woman. And if I did love her above any thing in the world,
yet surely I would never speak word unto her, because I do esteem our
friendship above any other thing. His companion swore unto him very great
oaths, that he never thought it, praying him to use his house as he had done
before. Whereunto he answered. Since you will have me so to do, I am content.
But I pray you if hereafter you do conceive any simstre opinion of me, not to
dessemble the same, which if you do I will never continue longer in your
company. In process of time, living together according to their custom, the
married gentleman entered again into more suspicion than ever he did,
commanding his wife to bear no more that countenance toward him that she
was wont to do. Which commandment she told to her husbands companion,
praying him after that time to forbear to speak unto her, for that she was
commanded to do the like unto him. The Gentleman understanding by words and
by certain counternaunces, that his companion had not kept promise, he said
unto him in a great choler. To be ialous (my companion) is a thing natural.
But because thou did swear unto me by oaths not to dissemble with me, I
can by no means forbear any longer. For I did ever think that between thy
heart and mine there could be no let and interrupcion: but to my great grief
and without any fault on my part, I do see the contrary. For as much as thou
art not only very ialous between thy wife and me, but also thou would
dissimulate and cover the same, so that in the end thy malady and diease has
continued so long, that it is altered into a mere malice: and like as our love
has been ye greatest that has been seen in our time, even so our displeasure
and hatred is now most mortal. I have done so much as lies in me to avoid
this inconvenience, but since thou have inspected me to be an ill man, and I
have still showed my self to be the contrary, I do swear, and therewithal
assure thee by my faith, that I am the same thou think me to be, and
therefore from hence forth take heed of me. For since suspicio^ has separated
thee from my love and amity, dispite shall divide me from thine. And albeit
that his companion would have made him believe the contrary, and that he
mistrusted him nothing at all, yet he withdrewe his part of his moueables and
goods that before were common between them, so that now both their hearts
and goods were so far separated, as before they were united and joined
together. In such wise as the unmarried Gentleman never ceased till he had
made his companion Cockold, according to his promise.

A Miracle at Lions.
The simplicity of an old woman, that offered a burning candle to Saint John
of Lions.

The. Lix. Novel.
IN the Church of saint John at Lions, there was a very dark chapel, and
within the same a Tomb made of stone, erected for great personages, with
pictures lively wrought, and about ye same tomb there do lie many worthy
gknihts of great valiance. Upon a hot esommers day, a souldior walking up and
down the Church, had great delight to sleep, and beholding that dark chapel
which was cold and fresh of air, thought to go sleep upon the Tomb as other
did, besides whom he laid him down to sleep. It chanced that a good old
woman very devout, came thither when the souldior was in the depth of his
sleep. And after she had said her devotions, with a wax candle in her hand,
she would have sticked the same upon the Tomb, and repairing nere the place
where the souldior lay, desirous to sick it upon his forhead, thinking it had
been of stone, the wax would not cleave. The old woman, which thought the
cause that her candle would not stick was the coldness of the Image, went
about to warm the forhead with the flame of ye candle, to make it cleave. But
the Image which was not insensible, began to cry out, whereat the pore woman
was so afraid, that like one straught of her wits, she brake into exclamation
crying. A miracle, A miracle. They within the Church hearing an outcry of a
miracle," ran in heaps as though they had been mad, some to ring the
belles, and some to see the miracle. And the good wife brought them to see the
Image, which was removed. Whereat many began to laughe. But diverse priests
could not so content themselves, but determined greatly to esteem that Tomb,
thereof to get money.

Of a Doctor of the Laws.
A Doctor of the laws bought a cup, who by the subtlety of two false verlets,
lost both his money and the cup.

The. Lx. Novel.
TO conclude our number of Nouels, I have thought good (gentle reader) to bring
in place a Doctor and his wife, to give thee a merry farewell: because thou have
hitherto so friendly and patiently suffered thy self to be stayed in reading of
ye rest: Wherefore with a pleasant ( Valete et Plaudite) in a short and merry
tale, which discloseth the subtlety of two false knaves to begile a pore
Doctor and his wife, I mean to end. And therefore do say, that in the city of
Bologna in Italy, there was a worshipful Doctor of the Law, called Master
Florien, which in other things saving his profession, was but filthy,
beastly, and of so ill behavior as none of his faculty the like. Who by
saving of many crustes, had laid up so good store of Crowns, that he caused
to be made a very great and costly Cup of silver, for payment of which Cup he
went to the Goldsmithes house, and after he had paid for the silver, the
guilt, and for the fashion, having not his Clarke with him to carry it home, he
prayed the Goldsmith to lend him his man. By chance there were newly come to
the city, two young men that were Romans, which ranged up and down the
streets with their ears upright, viewing and marking every thing done in the
same, bearing about them counterfaicts Jewels and lingots guilt of Saint
Martines touch, to deceive him that would play the fool to buy them. One of
them was called Liello, and the other Dietiquo. These two merchants being at
good leisure to go up and down the streates, beholding the passangers to and
fro, by fortune espied the Goldsmithes man, who (to set forth the workmanship
and making of the cup) carried the same open. These Gallants bearing a spite to
the cup, more for the silver than for other malice, purposed to invent some
slight to get the same, and a far of with sly pase, followed the
Goldsmithes man, of whom they craftily inquired of ye owner of the cup, and
where he had left master Florien, when they had concluded upon their
enterprise. Liello (the finest boy of them both) went straight way to buy a
Lamprey of great price, and hiding the same under his cloak, repaired straight
to master Doctors house. Where finding his wife of semblable wit and behauior
that her husband was, with unshamefast face and like grace, said unto her.
Mystresse, Master Florien your husband has sent you a fish, and prays you
to dress it, and to make dinner ready, because he brings a company of other
Doctors with him. In the mean time he requires you, to send him the cup
again, which he sent you this morning, by the Goldsmithes man, because he had
forgotten to mark his arms upon it. The woman receiving the fish, frankly
delivered him the cup, and went about to prepare dinner. Liello (which hunted
after game but better caught his pray) hied him a pace, and conveyed himself
with speed, to the house of one of his Countriemen, and there rejoiced with his
companions, attending for the coming of the Royster Dietiquo, who tarried in
the Town, waiting and viewing what pursuit was made after his fellow. Sone
after Master Florien returned to his house, and finding his dinner more
delicate than it was wont to be, was astonned, and asked his wife who was at
all that cost. His wife very scornefully answered: Why you have forgotten, that
you sent me word this morning, that you would bring home with you diverse
gentlemen to dinner? What (quod ye Doctor I think you be a fool. I am not
(said she) and for more witness you sent me this fish, that I would you had
been better advised before you had bestowed such cost. I assure the (quod he)
I sent the no fish, but belike it was some folish knave that had forgotten his
arra^t and mistaken the house. But how soever it was wife, we at this time will
be content to fare well at other men's charge. Why sir (said his wife) call your
self to better remembrance. For he yt brought the Lamprey, came to me for your
cup by this token, yt you would have your arms engraven upon the same. At
those words the poor Doctor, after he had discharged three or four canons
laden with haileshot of scolding words, went out into the street, running
hither and thither, demau^ding of al the^ he met, if they saw none carry a
Lamprey home to his house. And you would have said if you had seen him with
his hode hanging at one side, that the goodman had been out of his wits.
Dietiquo stood still in a corner, and beheld the Doctors frantike order, and
albeit that he was sure that the stealing of the cup by Liello his companion
was impossible to be known, yet being sorry that the La^prey cost so much,
determined also to play his part, and seeing the Doctor stayed from making
further complaints, he went home to the Doctors house, where smiling with a
good grace and bold countenance, said to the Doctors wife. Mistress Doctor,
good news, the cup is found. One who^ you know, caused the same to be done in
sport, to bring your husband Master Florien in a choler, who now is amongs
diverse of his friends, jesting at ye pleasant deceyt, and has sent me to fetch
their dinner, wherein they pray you to remember the Lamprey, and to come your
self to take part of the same, because they purpose to be merry. The woman
joyful of those news, began somewhat to complain of the grief which she had
taken for loss of ye cup, and delivered to Dietiquo the roasted Lamprey with
the sause between two platters, who innontinentlie hid the same under his
cloak, and with so much speed as he could, went to seek out his companion
Liello, and their countriemen, which all that while had tarried for him. And
God knows whether those good fellows did laugh and mock the poor Doctor
and his wife or not. And when she had made her self gaye and trim to go
eat part of the Lamprey, as she was going out she met Master Florien loking
lowringlie upon the matter, to whom she said (smiling like a frumentie pot)
how now sir, come they hither to dinner? I have sent you ye lamprey ready
dressed. Then Master Doctor after fair talk, began to discharge his double
Canons, calling his wife, Bitche, Beast and stinking Goat, and understanding
that he was twice begiled and could not tell by whom, for spite and despair he
tare of his beard and the hear of his head. Which bruted and known in the
City, the Iesters and pleasant fellows bent themselves, to find occasion, to
laugh and devise pastime at the poor begiled Doctor and his wife.

FINISH.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Leaf. side. line. Faults. Correction. 11. 1 17. ignomie ignominy 11. 2 14.
Cluilas Cluilias 19. 2 12. Canduales Candaules 22. 2 31. to his with his 33. 1
2. best lest 36. 2 6. descried desired 40. 1 1. the same the City. 61. 2 1.
and so he did which he did 61. 2 9. celled called 63. 2 23. find fail 64. 1
8. sometime somewhat 64. 2 23. Pompinea Pampinea 88. 2 33. Phisians Phisicians
107. 2 22. spoi spoil 110. 1 12. Cliectans Cilicians 112. 2 24. and had he had
113. 1 30. formed forced 119. 1 1. the other his other 123. 1 3. besse blissed
131. 1 34. out one 135. 2 31. sewing seming 206. 1 1. their father her father
206. 2 23. began begins 220. 1 1. vedure verdure 212. 2 10. abroad a bed
229. 1 24. should would 241. 1 10. so his to his 258. 2 4. in the with the 272.
2 26. I have I had 272. 2 28. he will would 272. 2 29. will suffer would have
suffered 276. 2 9. Aelips Aelips 286. 1 30. Fiornio Fiorino. 286. 2 4. flesh
meat fresh meat 323. 1 16. that to pity to that pity 327. 1 24. know knew

Words superfluous in the print.
Leaf. side. line. Superfluous 41. 2 31. she 42. 1 5. into 76. 2 3. with 108. 2
32. unto him 110. 1 6. shall 132. 2 18. then 245. 1 18. and 262. 1 7. an 272. 2
16. although that 272. 2 30. so 286. 1 32. it

Words lacking in the print.
Leaf. side. line. Lacking. 12. 1 5. that 25. 1 1. us 56. 1 10. is 63. 1 3. a
91. 2 1. of 98. 1 20. she 212. 1 14. of 117. 2 15. so 124. 2 34. more 129. 1
15. the 135. 2 1. about 140. 1 14 the 207. 2 10. a 273. 2 21. those 278. 1 22.
of

Other faults by small advise and less pain may by waying the discourse be
easily amended or lightly passed over.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham, for Richard Tottell and William Jones.

Anno Domini. 1566. January. 26.

These Books are to be sold at the long shop at the Weast end of Paul's.


